after enter at break of day the inner roadstead of the Port of 
 Toulon , exchange several loud hail with one of the guardboat of the 
 Fleet , which direct he where he be to take up his berth , 
 Master - Gunner Peyrol let go the anchor of the sea - worn and battered ship 
 in his charge , between the arsenal and the town , in full view of the 
 principal quay . the course of his life , which in the opinion of any 
 ordinary person might have be regard as full of marvellous incident 
  only he himself have never marvel at they , have render he 
 undemonstrative to such a degree that he do not even let out a sigh of 
 relief at the rumble of the cable . and yet it end a most anxious six 
 month of knock about at sea with valuable merchandise in a damaged 
 hull , most of the time on short ration , always on the lookout for 
 english cruiser , once or twice on the verge of shipwreck and more than 
 once on the verge of capture . but as to that , old Peyrol have make up his 
 mind from the first to blow up his valuable charge - unemotionally , for 
 such be his character , form under the sun of the Indian Seas in 
 lawless contest with his kind for a little loot that vanish as soon 
 as grasp , but mainly for bare life almost as precarious to hold 
 through its up and down , and which now have last for fifty - eight year . 
 
 while his crew of half - starve scarecrow , hard as nail and ravenous as 
 so many wolf for the delight of the shore , swarm aloft to furl the 
 sail nearly as thin and as patch as the grimy shirt on their back , 
 Peyrol take a survey of the quay . group be form along its whole 
 stretch to gaze at the new arrival . Peyrol note particularly a good 
 many man in red cap and say to himself - " here they be . " amongst 
 the crew of ship that have bring the tricolour into the sea of the 
 East , there be hundred profess sans - culotte principle ; boastful 
 and declamatory beggar he have think they . but now he be behold 
 the shore breed . those who have make the Revolution safe . the real thing . 
 Peyrol , after take a good long look , go below into his cabin to make 
 himself ready to go ashore . 
 
 he shave his big cheek with a real english razor , loot year ago 
 from an officer 's cabin in an English East Indiaman capture by a ship 
 he be serve in then . he put on a white shirt , a short blue jacket 
 with metal button and a high roll - collar , a pair of white trouser 
 which he fasten with a red bandana handkerchief by way of a belt . with 
 a black , shiny low - crown hat on his head he make a very creditable 
 prize - master . he beckon from the poop to a boatman and get himself 
 row to the quay . 
 
 by that time the crowd have grow to a large size . Peyrol 's eye range 
 over it with no great apparent interest , though it be a fact that he 
 have never in all his man 's life see so many idle white people mass 
 together to stare at a sailor . he have be a rover of the outer sea ; he 
 have grow into a stranger to his native country . during the few minute 
 it take the boatman to row he to the step , he feel like a navigator 
 about to land on a newly discover shore . 
 
 on put his foot on it he be mob . the arrival of a prize make by 
 a squadron of the Republic in distant sea be not an everyday 
 occurrence in Toulon . the wild rumour have be already set fly . 
 Peyrol elbow himself through the crowd somehow , but it continue to 
 move after he . a voice cry out , " where do you come from , citoyen ? " 
  - " from the other side of the world , " Peyrol boom out . 
 
 he do not get rid of his follower till the door of the Port Office . 
 there he report himself to the proper official as master of a prize 
 take off the cape by Citoyen Renaud , Commander - in - chief of the 
 Republican Squadron in the Indian Seas . he have be order to make for 
 Dunkerque but , say he , have be chase by the sacrs Anglais three 
 time in a fortnight between Cape Verde and Cape Spartel , he have make up 
 his mind to run into the Mediterranean where , he have understand from a 
 danish brig he have meet at sea , there be no english man - of - war just 
 then . and here he be ; and there be his ship 's paper and his own 
 paper and everything in order . he mention also that he be tired of 
 roll about the sea , and that he long for a period of repose on 
 shore . but till all the legal business be settle he remain in Toulon 
 roam about the street at a deliberate gait , enjoy general 
 consideration as Citizen Peyrol , and look everybody coldly in the eye . 
 
 his reticence about his past be of that kind which start a lot of 
 mysterious story about a man . no doubt the maritime authority of 
 Toulon have a less cloudy idea of Peyrol 's past , though it need not 
 necessarily have be more exact . in the various office connect with 
 the sea where his duty take he , the wretched scribe , and even some 
 of the chief , look very hard at he as he go in and out , dress 
 very neatly , and always with his cudgel , which he use to leave outside 
 the door of private office when call in for an interview with one or 
 another of the " gold - laced lot . " have , however , cut off his queue 
 and get in touch with some prominent patriot of the Jacobin type , 
 Peyrol care little for people 's stare and whisper . the person that 
 come near to try his composure be a certain naval captain with a 
 patch over one eye and a very threadbare uniform coat who be do some 
 administrative work at the Port Office . that officer , look up from 
 some paper , remark brusquely , " as a matter of fact you have be the 
 good part of your life skim the sea , if the truth be know . you 
 must have be a deserter from the Navy at one time , whatever you may 
 call yourself now . " 
 
 there be not a quiver on the large cheek of the gunner Peyrol . 
 
 " if there be anything of the sort it be in the time of king and 
 aristocrat , " he say steadily . " and now I have bring in a prize , 
 and a service letter from Citizen Renaud , command in the Indian Seas . 
 I can also give you the name of good republicans in this town who know 
 my sentiment . nobody can say I be ever anti - revolutionary in my life . 
 I knock about the Eastern sea for forty - five year - that be true . 
 but let I observe that it be the seaman who stay at home that let 
 the English into the Port of Toulon . " he pause a moment and then 
 add : " when one think of that , citoyen Commandant , any little slip I 
 and fellow of my kind may have make five thousand league from here and 
 twenty year ago can not have much importance in these time of equality 
 and fraternity . " 
 
 " as to fraternity , " remark the post - captain in the shabby coat , 
 " the only one you be familiar with be the Brotherhood of the Coast , I 
 should say . " 
 
 " everybody in the Indian Ocean except milksop and youngster have to 
 be , " say the untroubled Citizen Peyrol . " and we practise republican 
 principle long before a republic be think of ; for the Brothers of 
 the Coast be all equal and elect their own chief . " 
 
 " they be an abominable lot of lawless ruffian , " remark the 
 officer venomously , lean back in his chair . " you will not dare to 
 deny that . " 
 
 Citizen Peyrol refuse to take up a defensive attitude . he merely 
 mention in a neutral tone that he have deliver his trust to the Port 
 Office all right , and as to his character he have a certificate of civism 
 from his section . he be a patriot and entitle to his discharge . after 
 be dismiss by a nod he take up his cudgel outside the door and 
 walk out of the building with the calmness of rectitude . his large 
 face of the roman type betray nothing to the wretched quill - driver , 
 who whisper on his passage . as he go along the street he look as 
 usual everybody in the eye ; but that very same evening he vanish from 
 Toulon . it be not   that he be afraid of anything . his mind be as calm 
 as the natural set of his florid face . nobody could know what his forty 
 year or more of sea - life have be , unless he tell they himself . and of 
 that he do not   mean to tell more than what he have tell the inquisitive 
 captain with the patch over one eye . but he do not   want any bother for 
 certain other reason ; and more than anything else he do not   want to be 
 send perhaps to serve in the fleet now fit out in Toulon . so at dusk 
 he pass through the gate on the road to Frjus in a high two - wheel 
 cart belong to a well - know farmer whose habitation lie that way . his 
 personal belonging be bring down and pile up on the tailboard of 
 the cart by some ragamuffin patriot whom he engage in the street for 
 that purpose . the only indiscretion he commit be to pay they for 
 their trouble with a large handful of assignat . from such a prosperous 
 seaman , however , this generosity be not so very compromising . he 
 himself get into the cart over the wheel , with such slow and ponderous 
 movement , that the friendly farmer feel call upon to remark : " ah , we 
 be not so young as we use to be - you and I. " - " I have also an 
 awkward wound , " say Citizen Peyrol , sit down heavily . 
 
 and so from farmer 's cart to farmer 's cart , get lift all along , 
 jog in a cloud of dust between stone wall and through little 
 village well know to he from his boyhood 's day , in a landscape of 
 stony hill , pale rock , and dusty green of olive tree , Citizen Peyrol 
 go on unmolested till he get down clumsily in the yard of an inn on 
 the outskirt of the town of Hyres . the sun be set to his right . 
 near a clump of dark pine with blood - red trunk in the sunset , Peyrol 
 perceive a rutty track branch off in the direction of the sea . 
 
 at that spot Citizen Peyrol have make up his mind to leave the high road . 
 every feature of the country with the darkly woode rise , the barren 
 flat expanse of stone and sombre bush to his left , appeal to he 
 with a sort of strange familiarity , because they have remain unchanged 
 since the day of his boyhood . the very cartwheel track score deep 
 into the stony ground have keep their physiognomy ; and far away , like a 
 blue thread , there be the sea of the Hyres roadstead with a lumpy 
 indigo swell still beyond - which be the island of Porquerolles , but 
 he really do not know . the notion of a father be absent from his 
 mentality . what he remember of his parent be a tall , lean , brown 
 woman in rag , who be his mother . but then they be work together 
 at a farm which be on the mainland . he have fragmentary memory of she 
 shake down olive , pick stone out of a field , or handle a manure 
 fork like a man , tireless and fierce , with wisps of greyish hair fly 
 about her bony face ; and of himself run barefoote in connection 
 with a flock of turkey , with hardly any clothe on his back . at night , 
 by the farmer 's favour , they be permit to sleep in a sort of 
 ruinous byre build of stone and with only half a roof on it , lie side 
 by side on some old straw on the ground . and it be on a bundle of straw 
 that his mother have toss ill for two day and have die in the night . 
 in the darkness , her silence , her cold face have give he an awful 
 scare . he suppose they have bury she but he do not   know , because he 
 have rush out terror - strike , and never stop till he get as far as a 
 little place by the sea call Almanarre , where he hide himself on board 
 a tartane that be lie there with no one on board . he go into the 
 hold because he be afraid of some dog on shore . he find down there a 
 heap of empty sack , which make a luxurious couch , and be exhaust 
 go to sleep like a stone . some time during the night the crew come on 
 board and the tartane sail for Marseilles . that be another awful 
 scare - being haul out by the scruff of the neck on the deck and be 
 ask who the devil he be and what he be do there . only from that 
 one he could not run away . there be water all around he and the whole 
 world , include the coast not very far away , wobble in a most alarming 
 manner . three bearded man stand about he and he try to explain to 
 they that he have be work at Peyrol 's . Peyrol be the farmer 's name . 
 the boy do not   know that he have one of his own . moreover , he do not   know 
 very well how to talk to people , and they must have misunderstood he . 
 thus the name of Peyrol stick to he for life . 
 
 there the memory of his native country stop , overlay by other 
 memory , with a multitude of impression of endless ocean , of the 
 Mozambique Channel , of Arabs and negro , of Madagascar , of the coast of 
 India , of island and channel and reef ; of fight at sea , row on 
 shore , desperate slaughter and desperate thirst , of all sort of ship 
 one after another : merchant ship and frigate and privateer ; of 
 reckless man and enormous spree . in the course of year he have learn 
 to speak intelligibly and think connectedly and even to read and write 
 after a fashion . the name of the farmer Peyrol , attach to his person 
 on account of his inability to give a clear account of himself , acquire 
 a sort of reputation , both openly , in the port of the East and , 
 secretly , amongst the Brothers of the Coast , that strange fraternity 
 with something masonic and not a little piratical in its constitution . 
 round the Cape of Storms , which be also the Cape of Good Hope , the word 
 Republic , Nation , Tyranny , Liberty , Equality , and Fraternity , and the 
 cult of the Supreme Being come float on board ship from home , new 
 cry and new idea which do not upset the slowly develop 
 intelligence of the gunner Peyrol . they seem the invention of 
 landsman , of whom the seaman Peyrol know very little - nothing , so to 
 speak . now , after nearly fifty year of lawful and lawless sea - life , 
 Citizen Peyrol , at the yard gate of the roadside inn , look at the late 
 scene of his childhood . he look at it without any animosity , but a 
 little puzzled as to his bearing amongst the feature of the land . 
 " yes , it must be somewhere in that direction , " he think vaguely . 
 decidedly he would go no far along the high road . . . . a few yard 
 away the woman of the inn stand look at he , impress by the good 
 clothe , the great shaven cheek , the well - to - do air of that seaman ; and 
 suddenly Peyrol notice she . with her anxious brown face , her grey 
 lock , and her rustic appearance she might have be his mother , as he 
 remember she , only she be not   in rag . 
 
 " H ! La mre , " hail Peyrol . " have you get a man to lend a hand with 
 my chest into the house ? " 
 
 he look so prosperous and so authoritative that she pip without 
 hesitation in a thin voice , " Mais oui , citoyen . he will be here in a 
 moment . " 
 
 in the dusk the clump of pine across the road look very black against 
 the quiet clear sky ; and Citizen Peyrol gaze at the scene of his young 
 misery with the great possible placidity . here he be after nearly 
 fifty year , and to look at thing it seem like yesterday . he feel for 
 all this neither love nor resentment . he feel a little funny as it be , 
 and the funniest thing be the thought which cross his mind that he 
 could indulge his fancy   if he have a mind to it   to buy up all this land 
 to the furthermost field , away over there where the track lose itself 
 sink into the flat border the sea where the small rise at the end 
 of the Giens peninsula have assume the appearance of a black cloud . 
 
 " tell I , my friend , " he say in his magisterial way to the farmhand 
 with a tousled head of hair who be await his good pleasure , 
 " do not   this track lead to Almanarre ? " 
 
 " yes , " say the labourer , and Peyrol nod . the man continue , 
 mouth his word slowly as if unused to speech . " to Almanarre and 
 far too , beyond the great pond right out to the end of the land , to 
 Cape Esterel . " 
 
 Peyrol be lend his big flat hairy ear . " if I have stay in this 
 country , " he think , " I would be talk like this fellow . " and 
 aloud he ask : 
 
 " be there any house there , at the end of the land ? " 
 
 " why , a hamlet , a hole , just a few house round a church and a farm 
 where at one time they would give you a glass of wine . " 
 
 
 Citizen Peyrol stay at the inn - yard gate till the night have swallow 
 up all those feature of the land to which his eye have clung as long as 
 the last gleam of daylight . and even after the last gleam have go he 
 have remain for some time star into the darkness in which all he 
 could distinguish be the white road at his foot and the black head of 
 pine where the cart track dip towards the coast . he do not go 
 indoor till some carter who have be refresh themselves have 
 depart with their big two - wheel cart pile up high with empty 
 wine - cask , in the direction of Frjus . the fact that they do not remain 
 for the night please Peyrol . he eat his bit of supper alone , in 
 silence , and with a gravity which intimidate the old woman who have 
 arouse in he the memory of his mother . have finish his pipe and 
 obtain a bit of candle in a tin candle - stick , Citizen Peyrol go 
 heavily upstairs to rejoin his luggage . the crazy staircase shake and 
 groan under his foot as though he have be carry a burden . the 
 first thing he do be to close the shutter most carefully as though he 
 have be afraid of a breath of night air . next he bolt the door of the 
 room . then sit on the floor , with the candlestick standing before 
 he between his widely straddle leg , he begin to undress , fling off 
 his coat and drag his shirt hastily over his head . the secret of his 
 heavy movement be disclose then in the fact that he have be wear 
 next his bare skin - like a pious penitent his hair - shirt - a sort of 
 waistcoat make of two thickness of old sail - cloth and stitch all 
 over in the manner of a quilt with tarred twine . three horn button 
 close it in front . he undo they , and after he have slip off the two 
 shoulder - strap which prevent this strange garment from sag down 
 on his hip he start roll it up . notwithstanding all his care there 
 be during this operation several faint chink of some metal which 
 could not have be lead . 
 
 his bare torso throw backwards and sustain by his rigid big arm 
 heavily tattooed on the white skin above the elbow , Peyrol draw a long 
 breath into his broad chest with a pepper - and - salt pelt down the 
 breastbone . and not only be the breast of Citizen Peyrol relieve to 
 the full of its athletic capacity , but a change have also come over 
 his large physiognomy on which the expression of severe stolidity have 
 be simply the result of physical discomfort . it be not   a trifle to have 
 to carry girt about your rib and hang from your shoulder a mass of 
 mixed foreign coin equal to sixty or seventy thousand franc in hard 
 cash ; while as to the paper money of the Republic , Peyrol have have 
 already enough experience of it to estimate the equivalent in cartload . 
 a thousand of they . perhaps two thousand . enough in any case to justify 
 his flight of fancy , while look at the countryside in the light of 
 the sunset , that what he have on he would buy all that soil from which 
 he have spring : house , wood , vine , olive , vegetable garden , rock 
 and salt lagoon - in fact , the whole landscape , include the animal 
 in it . but Peyrol do not care for the land at all . he do not want to 
 own any part of the solid earth for which he have no love . all he want 
 from it be a quiet nook , an obscure corner out of man 's sight where he 
 could dig a hole unobserve . 
 
 that would have to be do pretty soon , he think . one could not live 
 for an indefinite number of day with a treasure strap round one 's 
 chest . meantime , an utter stranger in his native country the landing on 
 which be perhaps the big adventure in his adventurous life , he 
 throw his jacket over the roll - up waistcoat and lay his head down on 
 it after extinguish the candle . the night be warm . the floor of the 
 room happen to be of plank , not of tile . he be no stranger to that 
 sort of couch . with his cudgel lay ready at his hand Peyrol sleep 
 soundly till the noise and the voice about the house and on the road 
 wake he up shortly after sunrise . he throw open the , shutter , welcome 
 the morning light and the morning breeze in the full enjoyment of 
 idleness which , to a seaman of his kind , be inseparable from the fact of 
 be on shore . there be nothing to trouble his thought ; and though 
 his physiognomy be far from be vacant , it do not wear the aspect of 
 profound meditation . 
 
 it have be by the mere accident that he have discover during the 
 passage , in a secret recess within one of the locker of his prize , two 
 bag of mixed coin : gold mohur , dutch ducat , spanish piece , English 
 guineas . after make that discovery he have suffer from no doubt 
 whatever . Loot big or little be a natural fact of his freebooter 's 
 life . and now when by the force of thing he have become a master - gunner 
 of the Navy he be not go to give up his find to confound landsman , 
 mere shark , hungry quill - driver , who would put it in their own 
 pocket . as to impart the intelligence to his crew   all bad 
 character , he be much too wise to do anything of the kind . they would 
 not have be above cut his throat . an old fighting sea - dog , a 
 Brother of the Coast , have more right to such plunder than anybody on 
 earth . so at odd time , while at sea , he have busy himself within the 
 privacy of his cabin in construct the ingenious canvas waistcoat in 
 which he could take his treasure ashore secretly . it be bulky , but his 
 garment be of an ample cut , and no wretched custom - guard would dare 
 to lay hand on a successful prize - master go to the Port Admiral 's 
 office to make his report . the scheme have work perfectly . he find , 
 however , that this secret garment , which be worth precisely its weight 
 in gold , try his endurance more than he have expect . it weary his 
 body and even depress his spirit somewhat . it make he less active 
 and also less communicative . it remind he all the time that he must 
 not get into trouble of any sort - keep clear of row , of intimacy , 
 of promiscuous jollity . this be one of the reason why he have be 
 anxious to get away from the town . once , however , his head be lay on 
 his treasure he could sleep the sleep of the just . 
 
 nevertheless in the morning he shrink from put it on again . with a 
 mixture of sailor 's carelessness and of old - stand belief in his own 
 luck he simply stuff the precious waistcoat up the flue of the empty 
 fireplace . then he dress and have his breakfast . an hour later , mount 
 on a hire mule , he start down the track as calmly as though set 
 out to explore the mystery of a desert island . 
 
 his aim be the end of the peninsula which , advance like a colossal 
 jetty into the sea , divide the picturesque roadstead of Hyres from the 
 headland and curve of the coast form the approach of the Port of 
 Toulon . the path along which the sure - foot mule take he   for Peyrol , 
 once he have put its head the right way , make no attempt at steering  
 descend rapidly to a plain of and aspect , with the white gleam of the 
 salin in the distance , bound by bluish hill of no great elevation . 
 soon all trace of human habitation disappear from before his roam 
 eye . this part of his native country be more foreign to he than the 
 shore of the Mozambique Channel , the coral strand of India , the 
 forest of Madagascar . before long he find himself on the neck of the 
 Giens peninsula , impregnate with salt and contain a blue lagoon , 
 particularly blue , dark and even more still than the expanse of the 
 sea to the right and leave of it from which it be separate by narrow 
 strip of land not a hundred yard wide in place . the track run 
 indistinct , present no wheel - rut , and with patch of efflorescent 
 salt as white as snow between the tuft of wiry grass and the 
 particularly dead - look bush . the whole neck of land be so low that 
 it seem to have no more thickness than a sheet of paper lay on the 
 sea . Citizen Peyrol see on the level of his eye , as if from a mere raft , 
 sail of various craft , some white and some brown , while before he his 
 native island of Porquerolles rise dull and solid beyond a wide strip of 
 water . the mule , which know rather well than Citizen Peyrol where it 
 be go to , take he presently amongst the gentle rise at the end of 
 the peninsula . the slope be cover with scanty grass ; crook 
 boundary wall of dry stone run across the field , and above they , here 
 and there , peep a low roof of red tile shade by the head of 
 delicate acacias . at a turn of the ravine appear a village with its 
 few house , mostly with their blind wall to the path , and , at first , no 
 living soul in sight . three tall platane , very ragged as to their bark 
 and very poor as to foliage , stand in a group in an open space ; and 
 Citizen Peyrol be cheer by the sight of a dog sleep in the shade . 
 the mule swerve with great determination towards a massive stone trough 
 under the village fountain . Peyrol , look round from the saddle while 
 the mule drank , could see no sign of an inn . then , examine the ground 
 near to he , he perceive a ragged man sit on a stone . he have a 
 broad leathern belt and his leg be bare to the knee . he be 
 contemplate the stranger on the mule with stony surprise . his dark 
 nut - brown face contrast strongly with his grey shock of hair . at a 
 sign from Peyrol he show no reluctance and approach he readily 
 without change the stony character of his stare . 
 
 the thought that if he have remain at home he would have probably 
 look like that man cross unbidden the mind of Peyrol . with that 
 gravity from which he seldom depart he inquire if there be any 
 inhabitant besides himself in the village . then , to Peyrol 's surprise , 
 that destitute idler smile pleasantly and say that the people be out 
 look after their bit of land . 
 
 there be enough of the peasant - bear in Peyrol , still , to remark that he 
 have see no man , woman , or child , or four - footed beast for hour , and 
 that he would hardly have think that there be any land worth look 
 after anywhere around . but the other insist . well , they be work 
 on it all the same , at least those that have any . 
 
 at the sound of the voice the dog get up with a strange air of be 
 all backbone , and , approach in dismal fidelity , stand with his nose 
 close to his master 's calf . 
 
 " and you , " say Peyrol , " you have no land then ? " 
 
 the man take his time to answer . " I have a boat . " 
 
 Peyrol become interested when the man explain that his boat be on the 
 salt pond , the large , deserted and opaque sheet of water lie dead 
 between the two great bay of the live sea . Peyrol wonder aloud why 
 any one should want a boat on it . 
 
 " there be fish there , " say the man . 
 
 " and be the boat all your worldly good ? " ask Peyrol . 
 
 the fly buzz , the mule hang its head , move its ear and flap 
 its thin tail languidly . 
 
 " I have a sort of hut down by the lagoon and a net or two , " the man 
 confess , as it be . Peyrol , look down , complete the list by 
 say : " and this dog . " 
 
 the man again take his time to say : 
 
 " he be company . " 
 
 Peyrol sit as serious as a judge . " you have not   much to make a living 
 of , " he deliver himself at last . " however ! . . . be there no inn , 
 caf , or some place where one could put up for a day ? I have hear up 
 inland that there be some such place . " 
 
 " I will show it to you , " say the man , who then go back to where he 
 have be sit and pick up a large empty basket before he lead the 
 way . his dog follow with his head and tail low , and then come Peyrol 
 dangle his heel against the side of the intelligent mule , which 
 seem to know before - hand all that be go to happen . at the corner 
 where the house end there stand an old wooden cross stick into a 
 square block of stone . the lonely boatman of the Lagoon of Pesquiers 
 point in the direction of a branching path where the rise terminate 
 the peninsula sink into a shallow pass . there be lean pine on the 
 skyline , and in the pass itself dull silvery green patch of olive 
 orchard below a long yellow wall back by dark cypress , and the red 
 roof of building which seem to belong to a farm . 
 
 " will they lodge I there " ask Peyrol . 
 
 " I do not   know . they will have plenty of room , that be certain . there be 
 no traveller here . but as for a place of refreshment , it use to be 
 that . you have only get to walk in . if he be not   there , the mistress be 
 sure to be there to serve you . she belong to the place . she be bear on 
 it . we know all about she . " 
 
 " what sort of woman be she ? " ask Citizen Peyrol , who be very 
 favourably impress by the aspect of the place . 
 
 " well , you be go there . you shall soon see . she be young . " 
 
 " and the husband ? " ask Peyrol , who , look down into the other 's 
 steady upward stare , detect a flicker in the brown , slightly fade 
 eye . " why be you star at I like this ? I have not   get a black skin , 
 have I ? " 
 
 the other smile , show in the thick pepper - and - salt growth on his 
 face as sound a set of tooth as Citizen Peyrol himself . there be in his 
 bear something embarrassed , but not unfriendly , and , he utter a 
 phrase from which Peyrol discover that the man before he , the lonely , 
 hirsute , sunburnt and barelegge human being at his stirrup , nourish 
 patriotic suspicion as to his character . and this seem to he 
 outrageous . he want to know in a severe voice whether he look like a 
 confound landsman of any kind . he swear also without , however , lose 
 any of the dignity of expression inherent in his type of feature and in 
 the very modelling of his flesh . 
 
 " for an aristocrat you do not   look like one , but neither do you look 
 like a farmer or a pedlar or a patriot . you do not   look like anything 
 that have be see here for year and year and year . you look like 
 one , I dare hardly say what . you might be a priest . " 
 
 Astonishment keep Peyrol perfectly quiet on his mule . " do I dream ? " he 
 ask himself mentally . " you be not   mad ? " he ask aloud . " do you 
 know what you be talk about ? be not   you ashamed of yourself ? " 
 
 " all the same , " persist the other innocently , " it be much less than 
 ten year ago since I see one of they of the sort they call bishop , who 
 have a face exactly like your . " 
 
 Instinctively Peyrol pass his hand over his face . what could there be 
 in it ? Peyrol could not remember ever have see a bishop in his life . 
 the fellow stick to his point , for he pucker his brow and murmur : 
 
 " other too . . . . I remember perfectly . . . . it be not   so many year 
 ago . some of they skulk amongst the village yet , for all the chasing 
 they get from the patriot . " 
 
 the sun blaze on the boulder and stone and bush in the perfect 
 stillness of the air . the mule , disregard with republican austerity 
 the neighbourhood of a stable within less than a hundred and twenty 
 yard , drop its head , and even its ear , and doze as if in the 
 middle of a desert . the dog , apparently change into stone at his 
 master 's heel , seem to be doze too with his nose near the ground . 
 Peyrol have fall into a deep meditation , and the boatman of the lagoon 
 await the solution of his doubt without eagerness and with something 
 like a grin within his thick beard . Peyrol 's face clear . he have solve 
 the problem , but there be a shade of vexation in his tone . 
 
 " well , it can not   be help , " he say . " I learn to shave from the 
 English . I suppose that be what be the matter . " 
 
 at the name of the English the boatman prick up his ear . 
 
 " one can not   tell where they be all go to , " he murmur . " only three 
 year ago they swarm about this coast in their big ship . you see 
 nothing but they , and they be fight all round Toulon on land . then 
 in a week or two , crac ! - nobody ! clear out devil know where . but 
 perhaps you would know . " 
 
 " oh , yes , " say Peyrol , " I know all about the English , do not   you 
 worry your head . " 
 
 " I be not trouble my head . it be for you to think about what be good 
 to say when you speak with he up there . I mean the master of the farm . " 
 
 " he can not   be a well patriot than I be , for all my shaven face , " say 
 Peyrol . " that would only seem strange to a savage like you . " 
 
 with an unexpected sigh the man sit down at the foot of the cross , and , 
 immediately , his dog go off a little way and curl himself up amongst 
 the tuft of grass . 
 
 " we be all savage here , " say the forlorn fisherman from the lagoon . 
 " but the master up there be a real patriot from the town . if you be 
 ever to go to Toulon and ask people about he they would tell you . he 
 first become busy purvey the guillotine when they be purify the 
 town from all aristocrat . that be even before the English come in . 
 after the English get drive out there be more of that work than the 
 guillotine could do . they have to kill traitor in the street , in 
 cellar , in their bed . the corps of man and woman be lie in heap 
 along the quay . there be a good many of his sort that get the name of 
 drinker of blood . well , he be one of the good of they . I be only just 
 tell you . " 
 
 Peyrol nod . " that will do I all right , " he say . and before he 
 could pick up the rein and hit it with his heel the mule , as though it 
 have just wait for his word , start off along the path . 
 
 in less than five minute Peyrol be dismount in front of a low , long 
 addition to a tall farmhouse with very few window , and flank by wall 
 of stone enclose not only the yard but apparently a field or two 
 also . a gateway stand open to the left , but Peyrol dismount at the 
 door , through which he enter a bare room , with rough whitewash wall 
 and a few wooden chair and table , which might have be a rustic caf . 
 he tap with his knuckle on the table . a young woman with a fichu 
 round her neck and a striped white and red skirt , with black hair and a 
 red mouth , appear in an inner doorway . 
 
 " Bonjour , citoyenne , " say Peyrol . she be so startled by the unusual 
 aspect of this stranger that she answer he only by a murmur 
 " bonjour , " but in a moment she come forward and wait expectantly . 
 the perfect oval of her face , the colour of her smooth cheek , and the 
 whiteness of her throat force from the Citizen Peyrol a slight hiss 
 through his clenched tooth . 
 
 " I be thirsty , of course , " he say , " but what I really want be to 
 know whether I can stay here . " 
 
 the sound of a mule 's hoof outside cause Peyrol to start , but the 
 woman arrest he . 
 
 " she be only go to the shed . she know the way . as to what you say , 
 the master will be here directly . nobody ever come here . and how long 
 would you want to stay ? " 
 
 the old rover of the sea look at her searchingly . 
 
 " to tell you the truth , citoyenne , it may be in a manner of speak 
 for ever . " 
 
 she smile in a bright flash of tooth , without gaiety or any change in 
 her restless eye that roam about the empty room as though Peyrol have 
 come in attend by a mob of Shades . 
 
 " it be like I , " she say . " I live as a child here . " 
 
 " you be but little more than that now , " say Peyrol , examine she 
 with a feeling that be no long surprise or curiosity , but seem to 
 be lodge in his very breast . 
 
 " be you a patriot ? " she ask , still survey the invisible company 
 in the room . 
 
 Peyrol , who have think that he have " do with all that damned 
 nonsense , " feel angry and also at a loss for an answer . 
 
 " I be a Frenchman , " he say bluntly . 
 
 " Arlette ! " call out an aged woman 's voice through the open inner door . 
 
 " what do you want ? " she answer readily . 
 
 " there be a saddle mule come into the yard . " 
 
 " all right . the man be here . " her eye , which have steady , begin to 
 wander again all round and about the motionless Peyrol . she move a step 
 near to he and ask in a low confidential tone : " have you ever 
 carry a woman 's head on a pike ? " 
 
 Peyrol , who have see fight , massacre on land and Sea , town take by 
 assault by savage warrior , who have kill man in attack and defence , 
 find himself at first bereft of speech by this simple question , and 
 next move to speak bitterly . 
 
 " no . I have hear man boast of have do so . they be mostly 
 braggart with craven heart . but what be all this to you ? " 
 
 she be not listen to he , the edge of her white even tooth press 
 her low lip , her eye never at rest . Peyrol remember suddenly the 
 sans - culotte - the blood - drinker . her husband . be it possible ? . . . 
 well , perhaps it be possible . he could not tell . he feel his utter 
 incompetence . as to catch her glance , you might just as well have 
 try to catch a wild sea - bird with your hand . and altogether she be 
 like a sea - bird - not to be grasp . but Peyrol know how to be patient , 
 with that patience that be so often a form of courage . he be know for 
 it . it have serve he well in dangerous situation . once it have 
 positively save his life . nothing but patience . he could well wait now . 
 he wait . and suddenly as if tame by his patience this strange 
 creature drop her eyelid , advance quite close to he and begin to 
 finger the lapel of his coat - something that a child might have do . 
 Peyrol all but gasp with surprise , but he remain perfectly still . he 
 be disposed to hold his breath . he be touch by a soft indefinite 
 emotion , and as her eyelid remain lower till her black lash 
 seem to lie like a shadow on her pale cheek , there be no need for he 
 to force a smile . after the first moment he be not even surprised . it 
 be merely the sudden movement , not the nature of the act itself , that 
 have startle he . 
 
 " yes . you may stay . I think we shall be friend . I will tell you about 
 the Revolution . " 
 
 at these word Peyrol , the man of violent deed , feel something like a 
 chill breath at the back of his head . 
 
 " what be the good of that ? " he say . 
 
 " it must be , " she say and back away from he swiftly , and without 
 raise her eye turn round and be go in a moment , so lightly that 
 one would have think her foot have not touch the ground . Peyrol , 
 star at the open kitchen door , see after a moment an elderly woman 's 
 head , with brown thin cheek and tie up in a coloured handkerchief , 
 peep at he fearfully . 
 
 
  " a bottle of wine , please , " he shout at it . 
 
 
 the affectation common to seaman of never be surprised at anything 
 that sea or land can produce have become in Peyrol a second nature . 
 have learn from childhood to suppress every sign of wonder before 
 all extraordinary sight and event , all strange people , all strange 
 custom , and the most alarming phenomenon of nature   as manifest , for 
 instance , in the violence of volcano or the fury of human being , he 
 have really become indifferent - or only perhaps utterly inexpressive . he 
 have see so much that be bizarre or atrocious , and have hear so many 
 astounding tale , that his usual mental reaction before a new experience 
 be generally formulate in the word , " J'en ai vu bien d'autres . " the 
 last thing which have touch he with the panic of the supernatural have 
 be the death under a heap of rag of that gaunt , fierce woman , his 
 mother ; and the last thing that have nearly overwhelm he at the age of 
 twelve with another kind of terror be the riot of sound and the 
 multitude of mankind on the quay in Marseilles , something perfectly 
 inconceivable from which he have instantly take refuge behind a stack of 
 wheat sack after have be chase ashore from the tartane . he have 
 remain there quake till a man in a cocked hat and with a sabre at 
 his side   the boy have never see either such a hat or such a sabre in 
 his life   have seize he by the arm close to the armpit and have haul 
 he out from there ; a man who might have be an ogre   only Peyrol have 
 never hear of an ogre   but at any rate in his own way be alarming and 
 wonderful beyond anything he could have imagine - if the faculty of 
 imagination have be develop in he then . no doubt all this be enough 
 to make one die of fright , but that possibility never occur to he . 
 neither do he go mad ; but be only a child , he have simply adapt 
 himself , by mean of passive acquiescence , to the new and inexplicable 
 condition of life in something like twenty - four hour . after that 
 initiation the rest of his existence , from fly fish to whale and 
 on to black man and coral reef , to deck run with blood , and thirst 
 in open boat , be comparatively plain sailing . by the time he have hear 
 of a Revolution in France and of certain Immortal Principles cause the 
 death of many people , from the mouth of seaman and traveller and 
 year - old gazette come out of Europe , he be ready to appreciate 
 contemporary history in his own particular way . Mutiny and throw 
 officer overboard . he have see that twice and he be on a different 
 side each time . as to this upset , he take no side . it be too far - too 
 big - also not distinct enough . but he acquire the revolutionary jargon 
 quickly enough and use it on occasion , with secret contempt . what he 
 have go through , from a spell of crazy love for a yellow girl to the 
 experience of treachery from a bosom friend and shipmate   and both those 
 thing Peyrol confess to himself he could never hope to understand , 
 with all the graduation of varied experience of man and passion 
 between , have put a drop of universal scorn , a wonderful sedative , into 
 the strange mixture which might have be call the soul of the 
 return Peyrol . 
 
 therefore he not only show no surprise but do not feel any when he 
 behold the master , in the right of his wife , of the Escampobar Farm . the 
 homeless Peyrol , sit in the bare salle with a bottle of wine before 
 he , be in the act of raise the glass to his lip when the man 
 enter , ex - orator in the section , leader of red - capped mob , hunter of 
 the ci - devant and priest , purveyor of the guillotine , in short a 
 blood - drinker . and Citizen Peyrol , who have never be near than six 
 thousand mile as the crow fly to the reality of the Revolution , put 
 down his glass and in his deep unemotional voice say : " Salut . " 
 
 the other return a much fainter " Salut , " star at the stranger of 
 whom he have hear already . his almond - shape , soft eye be noticeably 
 shiny and so be to a certain extent the skin on his high but rounded 
 cheekbone , colour red like a mask of which all the rest be but a 
 mass of clipped chestnut hair grow so thick and close around the lip 
 as to hide altogether the design of the mouth which , for all Citizen 
 Peyrol know , might have be of a quite ferocious character . a careworn 
 forehead and a perpendicular nose suggest a certain austerity proper 
 to an ardent patriot . he hold in his hand a long bright knife which he 
 lay down on one of the table at once . he do not   seem more than thirty 
 year old , a well - make man of medium height , with a lack of resolution 
 in his bearing . something like disillusion be suggest by the set of 
 his shoulder . the effect be subtle , but Peyrol become aware of it 
 while he explain his case and finish the tale by declare that he 
 be a seaman of the Republic and that he have always do his duty before 
 the enemy . 
 
 the blood - drinker have listen profoundly . the high arch of his 
 eyebrow give he an astonished look . he come close up to the table and 
 speak in a trembling voice . 
 
 " you may have ! but you may all the same be corrupt . the seaman of the 
 Republic be eat up with corruption pay for with the gold of the 
 tyrant . who would have guess it ? they all talk like patriot . and 
 yet the English enter the harbour and land in the town without 
 opposition . the army of the Republic drive they out , but treachery 
 stalk in the land , it come up out of the ground , it sit at our 
 hearthstone , lurk in the bosom of the representative of the people , 
 of our father , of our brother . there be a time when civic virtue 
 flourish , but now it have get to hide its head . and I will tell you 
 why : there have not be enough killing . it seem as if there could never 
 be enough of it . it be discourage . look what we have come to . " 
 
 his voice die in his throat as though he have suddenly lose confidence 
 in himself . 
 
 " bring another glass , citoyen , " say Peyrol , after a short pause , 
 " and let us drink together . we will drink to the confusion of traitor . 
 I det treachery as much as any man , but . . . " 
 
 he wait till the other have return , then pour out the wine , and 
 after they have touch glass and half empty they , he put down his 
 own and continue : 
 
 " but you see I have nothing to do with your politic . I be at the 
 other side of the world , therefore you can not   suspect I of be a 
 traitor . you show no mercy , you other san - culotte , to the enemy of 
 the Republic at home , and I kill her enemy abroad , far away . you 
 be cut off head without much compunction . . . . " 
 
 the other most unexpectedly shut his eye for a moment , then open they 
 very wide . " yes , yes , " he assent very low . " pity may be a crime . " 
 
 " yes . and I knock the enemy of the Republic on the head whenever I 
 have they before I without inquire about the number . it seem to I 
 that you and I ought to get on together . " 
 
 the master of Escampobar farmhouse murmur , however , that in time like 
 these nothing could be take as proof positive . it behove every patriot 
 to nurse suspicion in his breast . no sign of impatience escape Peyrol . 
 he be reward for his self - restraint and the unshaken good - humour with 
 which he have conduct the discussion by , carry his point . Citizen 
 Scevola Bron   for that appear to be the name of the master of the 
 farm , an object of fear and dislike to the other inhabitant of the 
 Giens peninsula , might have be influence by a wish to have some one 
 with whom he could exchange a few word from time to time . no villager 
 ever come up to the farm , or be likely to , unless perhaps in a body 
 and animate with hostile intention . they resent his presence in 
 their part of the world sullenly . 
 
 " where do you come from ? " be the last question he ask . 
 
 " I leave Toulon two day ago . " 
 
 Citizen Scevola strike the table with his fist , but this manifestation 
 of energy be very momentary . 
 
 " and that be the town of which by a decree not a stone upon another 
 be to be leave , " he complain , much depressed . 
 
 " Most of it be still stand , " Peyrol assure he calmly . " I do not  
 know whether it deserve the fate you say be decree for it . I be 
 there for the last month or so and I know it contain some good 
 patriot . I know because I make friend with they all . " Thereupon 
 Peyrol mention a few name which the retire sans - culotte greet with 
 a bitter smile and an ominous silence , as though the bearer of they have 
 be only good for the scaffold and the guillotine . 
 
 " come along and I will show you the place where you will sleep , " he 
 say with a sigh , and Peyrol be only too ready . they enter the 
 kitchen together . through the open back door a large square of sunshine 
 fall on the floor of stone flag . outside one could see quite a mob of 
 expectant chicken , while a yellow hen posture on the very doorstep , 
 dart her head right and leave with affectation . all old woman hold 
 a bowl full of broken food put it down suddenly on a table and star . 
 the vastness and cleanliness of the place impress Peyrol favourably . 
 
 " you will eat with we here , " say his guide , and pass without 
 stop into a narrow passage give access to a steep flight of 
 stair . above the first land a narrow spiral staircase lead to the 
 upper part of the farmhouse ; and when the sans - culotte fling open the 
 solid plank door at which it end he disclose to peyrol a large low 
 room contain a four - poster bedstead pile up high with fold 
 blanket and spare pillow . there be also two wooden chair and a 
 large oval table . 
 
 " we could arrange this place for you , " say the master , " but I do not  
 know what the mistress will have to say , " he add . 
 
 Peyrol , strike by the peculiar expression of his face , turn his head 
 and see the girl stand in the doorway . it be as though she have 
 float up after they , for not the slight sound of rustle or footfall 
 have warn Peyrol of her presence . the pure complexion of her white 
 cheek be set off brilliantly by her coral lip and the band of 
 raven - black hair only partly cover by a muslin cap trim with lace . 
 she make no sign , utter no sound , behave exactly as if there have be 
 nobody in the room ; and Peyrol suddenly avert his eye from that mute 
 and unconscious face with its roam eye . 
 
 in some way or other , however , the san - culotte seem to have 
 ascertain her mind , for he say in a final tone : 
 
 " that be all right then , " and there be a short silence , during which 
 the woman shoot her dark glance all round the room again and again , 
 while on her lip there be a half - smile , not so much absent - minded as 
 totally unmotived , which Peyrol observe with a side glance , but could 
 not make anything of . she do not seem to know he at all . 
 
 " you have a view of salt water on three side of you , " remark 
 Peyrol 's future host . 
 
 the farmhouse be a tall building , and this large attic with its three 
 window command on one side the view of Hyres roadstead on the first 
 plan , with further blue undulation of the coast as far as Frjus ; and on 
 the other the vast semicircle of barren high hill , break by the 
 entrance to Toulon harbour guard by fort and battery , and end in 
 Cape Cpet , a squat mountain , with sombre fold and a base of brown 
 rock , with a white spot gleam on the very summit of it , a ci - devant 
 shrine dedicate to our Lady , and a ci - devant place of pilgrimage . the 
 noonday glare seem absorb by the gemlike surface of the sea 
 perfectly flawless in the invincible depth of its colour . 
 
 " it be like be in a lighthouse , " say Peyrol . " not a bad place for 
 a seaman to live in . " the sight of the sail dot about cheer his 
 heart . the people of landsman with their house and animal and 
 activity do not count . what make for he the life of any strange 
 shore be the craft that belong to it : canoe , catamaran , ballahous , 
 praus , lorcha , mere dug - out , or even raft of tie log with a bit of 
 mat for a sail from which naked brown man fish along stretch of 
 white sand crush under the tropical skyline , sinister in its glare and 
 with a thunder - cloud crouch on the horizon . but here he behold a 
 perfect serenity , nothing sombre on the shore , nothing ominous in the 
 sunshine . the sky rest lightly on the distant and vaporous outline of 
 the hill ; and the immobility of all thing seem poise in the air 
 like a gay mirage . on this tideless sea several tartane lie becalm in 
 the Petite Passe between Porquerolles and Cape Esterel , yet theirs be 
 not the stillness of death but of light slumber , the immobility of a 
 smile enchantment , of a Mediterranean fair day , breathless sometimes 
 but never without life . whatever enchantment Peyrol have know in his 
 wandering it have never be so remote from all thought of strife and 
 death , so full of smile security , make all his past appear to he 
 like a chain of lurid day and sultry night . he think he would never 
 want to get away from it , as though he have obscurely feel that his old 
 rover 's soul have be always root there . yes , this be the place for 
 he ; not because expediency dictate , but simply because his instinct of 
 rest have find its home at last . 
 
 he turn away from the window and find himself face to face with the 
 sans - culotte , who have apparently come up to he from behind , perhaps 
 with the intention of tap he on the shoulder , but who now turn 
 away his head . the young woman have disappear . 
 
 " tell I , patron , " say Peyrol , " be there anywhere near this house a 
 little dent in the shore with a bit of beach in it perhaps where I could 
 keep a boat ? " 
 
 " what do you want a boat for ? " 
 
 " to go fishing when I have a fancy to , " answer Peyrol curtly . 
 
 Citizen Bron , suddenly subdue , tell he that what he want be to be 
 find a couple of hundred yard down the hill from the house . the coast , 
 of course , be full of indentation , but this be a perfect little pool . 
 and the Toulon blood - drinker 's almond - shape eye become strangely 
 sombre as they gaze at the attentive Peyrol . a perfect little pool , he 
 repeat , open from a cove that the English know well . he pause . 
 Peyrol observe without much animosity but in a tone of conviction that 
 it be very difficult to keep off the English whenever there be a bit 
 of salt water anywhere ; but what could have bring english seaman to a 
 spot like this he could not   imagine . 
 
 " it be when their fleet first come here , " say the patriot in a 
 gloomy voice , " and hang round the coast before the anti - revolutionary 
 traitor let they into Toulon , sell the sacred soil of their country for 
 a handful of gold . yes , in the day before the crime be consummate 
 english officer use to land in that cove at night and walk up to this 
 very house . " 
 
 " what audacity ! " comment Peyrol , who be really surprised . " but 
 that be just like what they be . " still , it be hard to believe . but 
 be not   it only a tale ? 
 
 the patriot fling one arm up in a strained gesture . " I swear to its 
 truth before the tribunal , " he say . " it be a dark story , " he cry 
 shrilly , and pause . " it cost her father his life , " he say in a low 
 voice . . . " her mother too - but the country be in danger , " he add 
 still low . 
 
 Peyrol walk away to the western window and look towards Toulon . in 
 the middle of the great sheet of water within Cape Cici a tall 
 two - decker lay becalm and the little dark dot on the water be her 
 boat try to tow her head round the right way . Peyrol watch they 
 for a moment , and then walk back to the middle of the room . 
 
 " do you actually drag he from this house to the guillotine ? " he 
 ask in his unemotional voice . 
 
 the patriot shake his head thoughtfully with downcast eye . " no , he 
 come over to Toulon just before the evacuation , this friend of the 
 English . . . sail over in a tartane he own that be still lie here 
 at the Madrague . he have his wife with he . they come over to take home 
 their daughter who be live then with some skulk old nun . the 
 victorious Republicans be close in and the slave of tyranny have to 
 fly . " 
 
 " come to fetch their daughter , " muse Peyrol . " strange , that guilty 
 people should . . . " 
 
 the patriot look up fiercely . " it be justice , " he say loudly . 
 " they be anti - revolutionist , and if they have never speak to an 
 Englishman in their life the atrocious crime be on their head . " 
 
 " H'm , stay too long for their daughter , " mutter Peyrol . " and so 
 it be you who bring her home . " 
 
 " I do , " say the patron . for a moment his eye evade Peyrol 's 
 investigate glance , but in a moment he look straight into his face . 
 " no lesson of base superstition could corrupt her soul , " he declare 
 with exaltation . " I bring home a patriot . " 
 
 Peyrol , very calm , give he a hardly perceptible nod . " well , " he say , 
 " all this will not   prevent I sleep wery well in this room . I always 
 think I would like to live in a lighthouse when I get tired of rove 
 about the sea . this be as near a lighthouse lantern as can be . you will 
 see I with all my little affair to - morrow , " he add , move towards 
 the stair . " Salut , citoyen . " 
 
 there be in Peyrol a fund of self - command amounting to placidity . there 
 be man live in the East who have no doubt whatever that Peyrol be a 
 calmly terrible man . and they would quote illustrative instance which 
 from their own point of view be simply admirable . but all Peyrol have 
 ever do be to behave rationally , as it seem to he in all sort of 
 dangerous circumstance without ever be lead astray by the nature , or 
 the cruelty , or the danger of any give situation . he adapt himself to 
 the character of the event and to the very spirit of it , with a profound 
 responsive feeling of a particularly unsentimental kind . sentiment in 
 itself be an artificiality of which he have never hear and if he have 
 see it in action would have appear to he too puzzle to make 
 anything of . that sort of genuineness in acceptance make he a 
 satisfactory inmate of the Escampobar Farm . he duly turn up with all 
 his cargo , as he call it , and be meet at the door of the farmhouse 
 itself by the young woman with the pale face and wander eye . nothing 
 could hold her attention for long amongst her familiar surrounding . 
 right and left and far away beyond you , she seem to be look for 
 something while you be talk to she , so that you doubt whether she 
 could follow what you say . but as a matter of fact she have all her wit 
 about she . in the midst of this strange search for something that be 
 not there she have enough detachment to smile at Peyrol . then , 
 withdraw into the kitchen , she watch , as much as her restless eye 
 could watch anything , Peyrol 's cargo and Peyrol himself pass up the 
 stair . 
 
 the most valuable part of Peyrol 's cargo be strapped to his person , 
 the first thing he do after be leave alone in that attic room which 
 be like the lantern of a lighthouse be to relieve himself of the 
 burden and lie it on the foot of the bed . then he sit down and lean 
 his elbow far on the table he contemplate it with a feeling of complete 
 relief . that plunder have never burden his conscience . it have merely on 
 occasion oppress his body ; and if it have at all affect his spirit 
 it be not by its secrecy but by its mere weight , which be 
 inconvenient , irritate , and towards the end of a day altogether 
 insupportable . it make a free - limbed , deep - breathing sailor - man feel 
 like a mere overloaded animal , thus extend whatever there be of 
 compassion in Peyrol 's nature towards the four - footed beast that carry 
 man 's burden on the earth . the necessity of a lawless life have teach 
 Peyrol to be ruthless , but he have never be cruel . 
 
 sprawl in the chair , strip to the waist , robust and grey - haired , 
 his head with a roman profile prop up on a mighty and tattooed 
 forearm , he remain at ease , with his eye fix on his treasure with 
 an air of meditation . yet Peyrol be not meditate   as a superficial 
 observer might have think   on the good place of concealment . it be 
 not that he have not have a great experience of that sort of property 
 which have always melt so quickly through his finger . what make he 
 meditative be its character , not of a share of a hard - won booty in 
 toil , in risk , in danger , in privation , but of a piece of luck 
 personally his own . he know what plunder be and how soon it go ; but 
 this lot have come to stay . he have it with he , away from the haunt of 
 his lifetime , as if in another world altogether . it could not   be drunk 
 away , gamble away , squander away in any sort of familiar 
 circumstance , or even give away . in that room , raise a good many foot 
 above his revolutionize native land where he be more of a stranger 
 than anywhere else in the world , in this roomy garret full of light and 
 as it be surround by the sea , in a great sense of peace and 
 security , Peyrol do not   see why he should bother his head about it so 
 very much . it come to he that he have never really care for any plunder 
 that fall into his hand . no , never for any . and to take particular care 
 of this for which no one would seek vengeance or attempt recovery would 
 have be absurd . Peyrol get up and open his big sandalwood chest 
 secure with an enormous padlock , part , too , of some old plunder 
 gather in a chinese town in the Gulf of Tonkin , in company of certain 
 brother of the Coast , who have board at night a portuguese schooner 
 and send her crew adrift in a boat , have take a cruise on their own 
 account , year and year and year ago . he be young then , very young , 
 and the chest fall to his share because nobody else would have anything 
 to do with the cumbersome thing , and also for the reason that the metal 
 of the curiously work thick hoop that strengthen it be not gold 
 but mere brass . he , in his innocence , have be rather pleased with the 
 article . he have carry it about with he into all sort of place , and 
 also he have leave it behind he - once for a whole year in a dark and 
 noisome cavern on a certain part of the Madagascar coast . he have leave it 
 with various native chief , with Arabs , with a gambling - hell keeper in 
 Pondicherry , with his various friend in short , and even with his 
 enemy . once he have lose it altogether . 
 
 that be on the occasion when he have receive a wound which lay he 
 open and gush like a slash wine - skin . a sudden quarrel break out in 
 a company of Brothers over some matter of policy complicate by personal 
 jealousy , as to which he be as innocent as a babe unborn . he never 
 know who give he the slash . another Brother , a chum of his , an English 
 boy , have rush in and haul he out of the fray , and then he have 
 remember nothing for day . even now when he look at the scar he 
 could not understand why he have not die . that occurrence , with the 
 wound and the painful convalescence , be the first thing that sober 
 his character somewhat . many year afterwards , when in consequence of 
 his altered view of mere lawlessness he be serve as quartermaster on 
 board the Hirondelle , a comparatively respectable privateer , he catch 
 sight of that chest again in Port Louis , of all place in the world , in 
 a dark little den of a shop keep by a lone Hindoo . the hour be late , 
 the side street be empty , and so Peyrol go in there to claim his 
 property , all fair , a dollar in one hand and a pistol in the other , and 
 be entreat abjectly to take it away . he carry off the empty chest 
 on his shoulder , and that same night the privateer go to sea ; then 
 only he find time to ascertain that he have make no mistake , because , 
 soon after he have get it first , he have , in grim wantonness , scratch 
 inside the lid , with the point of his knife , the rude outline of a skull 
 and cross - bone into which he have rub afterwards a little chinese 
 vermilion . and there it be , the whole design , as fresh as ever . 
 
 in the garret full of light of the Escampobar farmhouse , the grey - haired 
 Peyrol open the chest , take all the content out of it , lay they 
 neatly on the floor , and spread his treasure - pocket downward - over 
 the bottom , which it fill exactly . busy on his knee he repacke the 
 chest . a jumper or two , a fine cloth jacket , a remnant piece of 
 Madapolam muslin , costly stuff for which he have no use in the world - a 
 quantity of fine white shirt . nobody would dare to rummage in his 
 chest , he think , with the assurance of a man who have be fear in 
 his time . then he rise , and look round the room and stretch his 
 powerful arm , he cease to think of the treasure , of the future and 
 even of to - morrow , in the sudden conviction that he could make himself 
 very comfortable there . 
 
 
 in a tiny bit of a look - glass hang on the frame of the east window , 
 Peyrol , handle the unwearable English blade , be shave himself - for 
 the day be Sunday . the year of political change end with the 
 proclamation of Napoleon as Consul for life have not touch Peyrol 
 except as to his strong thick head of hair , which be nearly all white 
 now . after put the razor away carefully , Peyrol introduce his 
 stockinge foot into a pair of sabot of the very good quality and 
 clatter downstairs . his brown cloth breech be untie at the knee 
 and the sleeve of his shirt roll up to his shoulder . that sea - rover 
 turn rustic be now perfectly at home in that farm which , like a 
 lighthouse , command the view of two roadstead and of the open sea . he 
 pass through the kitchen . it be exactly as he have see it first , 
 sunlight on the floor , red copper utensil shin on the wall , the 
 table in the middle scrub snowy white ; and it be only the old woman , 
 Aunt Catherine , who seem to have acquire a sharp profile . the very 
 hen manuvre her neck pretentiously on the doorstep , might have be 
 stand there for the last eight year . Peyrol shoo she away , and 
 go into the yard wash himself lavishly at the pump . when he 
 return from the yard he look so fresh and hale that old Catherine 
 compliment he in a thin voice on his " bonne mine . " manner be 
 change , and she address he no long as citoyen but as Monsieur 
 Peyrol . he answer readily that if her heart be free he be ready to 
 lead she to the altar that very day . this be such an old joke that 
 Catherine take no notice of it whatever , but follow he with her eye 
 as he cross the kitchen into the salle , which be cool , with its 
 table and bench wash clean , and no live soul in it . Peyrol pass 
 through to the front of the house , leave the outer door open . at the 
 clatter of his clog a young man sit outside on a bench turn his 
 head and greet he by a careless nod . his face be rather long , 
 sunburnt and smooth , with a slightly curved nose and a very well - shape 
 chin . he wear a dark blue naval jacket open on a white shirt and a black 
 neckerchief tie in a slip - knot with long end . white breech and 
 stocking and black shoe with steel buckle complete his costume . a 
 brass - hilte sword in a black scabbard wear on a cross - belt be lie on 
 the ground at his foot . Peyrol , silver - headed and ruddy , sit down on the 
 bench at some little distance . the level piece of rocky ground in front 
 of the house be not very extensive , fall away to the sea in a 
 declivity frame between the rise of two barren hill . the old rover 
 and the young seaman with their arm fold across their chest gaze 
 into space , exchange no word , like close intimate or like distant 
 stranger . neither do they stir when the master of the Escampobar Farm 
 appear out of the yard gate with a manure fork on his shoulder and 
 start to cross the piece of level ground . his grimy hand , his 
 roll - up shirt sleeve , the fork over the shoulder , the whole of his 
 working - day aspect have somehow an air of be a manifestation ; but the 
 patriot drag his dirty clog low - spiritedly in the fresh light of the 
 young morning , in a way no real worker on the land would ever do at the 
 end of a day of toil . yet there be no sign of debility about his 
 person . his oval face with rounded cheek - bone remain unwrinkled 
 except at the corner of his almond - shape , shiny , visionary 's eye , 
 which have not change since the day when old Peyrol 's gaze have meet they 
 for the first time . a few white hair on his tousled head and in the 
 thin beard alone have mark the passage of year , and you would have have 
 to look for they closely . amongst the unchangeable rock at the extreme 
 end of the Peninsula , time seem to have stand still and idle while the 
 group of people poise at that southernmost point of France have go 
 about their ceaseless toil , win bread and wine from a stony - hearted 
 earth . 
 
 the master of the farm , star straight before he , pass before the 
 two man towards the door of the salle , which Peyrol have leave open . he 
 lean his fork against the wall before go in . the sound of a distant 
 bell , the bell of the village where year ago the return rover have 
 water his mule and have listen to the talk of the man with the dog , 
 come up faint and abrupt in the great stillness of the upper space . the 
 violent slamming of the salle door break the silence between the two 
 gazer on the sea . 
 
 " do that fellow never rest ? " ask the young man in a low 
 indifferent voice which cover the delicate tinkling of the bell , and 
 without move his head . 
 
 " not on Sunday anyhow , " answer the rover in the same detach 
 manner . " what can you expect ? the church bell be like poison to he . 
 that fellow , I verily believe , have be bear a san - culotte . every 
 ` dcadi " he put on his good clothe , stick a red cap on his head and 
 wander between the building like a lost soul in the light of day . a 
 Jacobin , if ever there be one . " 
 
 " yes . there be hardly a hamlet in France where there be not   a 
 sans - culotte or two . but some of they have manage to change their skin 
 if nothing else . " 
 
 " this one will not   change his skin , and as to his inside he never have 
 anything in he that could be move . be not   there some people that 
 remember he in Toulon ? it be not   such a long time ago . and yet . . . " 
 Peyrol turn slightly towards the young man . . . " and yet to look at 
 he . . . " 
 
 the officer nod , and for a moment his face wear a troubled expression 
 which do not escape the notice of Peyrol who go on speak easily : 
 
 " some time ago , when the priest begin to come back to the parish , 
 he , that fellow " - Peyrol jerk his head in the direction of the salle 
 door - " would you believe it ? - start for the village with a sabre 
 hang to his side and his red cap on his head . he make for the church 
 door . what he want to do there I do not   know . it surely could not have 
 be to say the proper kind of prayer . well , the people be very much 
 elated about their reopen church , and as he go along some woman 
 spy he out of a window and start the alarm . ` eh , there ! look ! the 
 jacobin , the san - culotte , the blood - drinker ! look at he . " out rush 
 some of they , and a man or two that be work in their home patch 
 vault over the low wall . pretty soon there be a crowd , mostly woman , 
 each with the first thing she could snatch up - stick , kitchen knife , 
 anything . a few man with spade and cudgel join they by the 
 water - trough . he do not   quite like that . what could he do ? he turn and 
 bolt up the hill , like a hare . it take some pluck to face a mob of 
 angry woman . he run along the cart track without look behind he , and 
 they after he , yell : ` a mort ! a mort le buveur de sang ! " he have be 
 a horror and an abomination to the people for year , what with one story 
 and another , and now they think it be their chance . the priest over 
 in the presbytery hear the noise , come to the door . one look be 
 enough for he . he be a fellow of about forty but a wiry , long - legged 
 beggar , and agile - what ? he just tuck up his skirt and dash out , 
 take short cut over the wall and leap from boulder to boulder 
 like a blessed goat . I be up in my room when the noise reach I 
 there . I go to the window and see the chase in full cry after he . I 
 be begin to think the fool would fetch all those fury along with 
 he up here and that they would carry the house by boarding and do for 
 the lot of we , when the priest cut in just in the nick of time . he could 
 have trip Scevola as easy as anything , but he let he pass and 
 stand in front of his parishioner with his arm extend . that do it . 
 he save the patron all right . what he could say to quieten they I do not  
 know , but these be early day and they be very fond of their new 
 priest . he could have turn they round his little finger . I have my head 
 and shoulder out of the window - it be interesting enough . they would 
 have massacre all the accursed lot , as they use to call we down 
 there - and when I draw in , behold there be the patronne stand 
 behind I look on too . you have be here often enough to know how 
 she roam about the ground and about the house , without a sound . a leaf 
 do not   pose itself lighter on the ground than her foot do . well , I 
 suppose she do not   know that I be upstairs , and come into the room just 
 in her way of always look for something that be not   there , and 
 notice I with my head stick out , naturally come up to see what I be 
 look at . her face be not   any paler than usual , but she be claw 
 the dress over her chest with her ten finger - like this . I be 
 confound . before I could find my tongue she just turn round and go 
 out with no more sound than a shadow . " 
 
 when Peyrol cease , the ringing of the church bell go on faintly and 
 then stop as abruptly as it have begin . 
 
 " talk about her shadow , " say the young officer indolently , " I 
 know her shadow . " 
 
 Old Peyrol make a really pronounce movement . " what do you mean ? " he 
 ask . " where ? " 
 
 " I have get only one window in the room where they put I to sleep last 
 night and I stand at it look out . that be what I be here for - to look 
 out , be I not ? I wake up suddenly , and be awake I go to the window 
 and look out . " 
 
 " one do not   see shadow in the air , " growl old Peyrol . 
 
 " no , but you see they on the ground , pretty black too when the moon be 
 full . it fall across this open space here from the corner of the house . " 
 
 " the patronne , " exclaim Peyrol in a low voice , " impossible ! " 
 
 " do the old woman that live in the kitchen roam , do the village 
 woman roam as far as this ? " ask the officer composedly . " you ought 
 to know the habit of the people . it be a woman 's shadow . the moon 
 be to the west , it glide slant from that corner of the house and 
 glide back again . I know her shadow when I see it . " 
 
 " do you hear anything ? " ask Peyrol after a moment of visible 
 hesitation . 
 
 " the window be open I hear somebody snore . it could not   have be 
 you , you be too high . moreover , from the snoring , " he add grimly , 
 " it must have be somebody with a good conscience . not like you , old 
 skimmer of the sea , because , you know , that be what you be , for all 
 your gunner 's warrant . " he glance out of the corner of his eye at old 
 Peyrol . " what make you look so worried ? " 
 
 " she roam , that can not be deny , " murmur Peyrol , with an 
 uneasiness which he do not attempt to conceal . 
 
 " evidently . I know a shadow when I see it , and when I see it , it do 
 not frighten I , not a quarter as much as the mere tale of it seem to 
 have frighten you . however , that san - culotte friend of yours must be 
 a hard sleeper . those purveyor of the guillotine all have a first - class 
 fireproof republican conscience . I have see they at work up north when 
 I be a boy run barefoot in the gutter . . . . " 
 
 " the fellow always sleep in that room , " say Peyrol earnestly . 
 
 " but that be neither here nor there , " go on the officer , " except 
 that it may be convenient for roam shadow to hear his conscience 
 take its ease . " 
 
 Peyrol , excited , lower his voice forcibly . " Lieutenant , " he say , 
 " if I have not see from the first what be in your heart I would have 
 contrive to get rid of you a long time ago in some way or other . " 
 
 the lieutenant glance sideways again and Peyrol let his raise fist 
 fall heavily on his thigh . " I be old Peyrol and this place , as lonely 
 as a ship at sea , be like a ship to I and all in it be like shipmate . 
 never mind the patron . what I want to know be whether you hear 
 anything ? any sound at all ? Murmur , footstep ? " a bitterly mock smile 
 touch the lip of the young man . 
 
 " not a fairy footstep . could you hear the fall of a leaf - and with 
 that terrorist cur trumpet right above my head ? . . . " without 
 unfold his arm he turn towards Peyrol , who be look at he 
 anxiously . . . . " you want to know , do you ? well , I will tell you what 
 I hear and you can make the good of it . I hear the sound of a stumble . 
 it be not   a fairy either that stub its toe . it be something in a 
 heavy shoe . then a stone go roll down the ravine in front of we 
 interminably , then a silence as of death . I do not   see anything move . 
 the way the moon be then , the ravine be in black shadow . and I do not  
 try to see . " 
 
 Peyrol , with his elbow on his knee , lean his head in the palm of his 
 hand . the officer repeat through his clenched tooth : " make the good 
 of it . " 
 
 Peyrol shake his head slightly . after have speak , the young officer 
 lean back against the wall , but next moment the report of a piece of 
 ordnance reach they as it be from below , travel around the 
 rise ground to the left in the form of a dull thud follow by a 
 sighing sound that seem to seek an issue amongst the stony ridge and 
 rock near by . 
 
 " that be the English corvette which have be dodge in and out of Hyres 
 Roads for the last week , " say the young officer , pick up his sword 
 hastily . he stand up and buckle the belt on , while Peyrol rise more 
 deliberately from the bench , and say : 
 
 " she can not   be where we see she at anchor last night . that gun be near . 
 she must have cross over . there have be enough wind for that at 
 various time during the night . but what could she be fire at down 
 there in the Petite Passe ? we have well go and see . " 
 
 he stride off , follow by Peyrol . there be not a human being in sight 
 about the farm and not a sound of life except for the lowing of a cow 
 come faintly from behind a wall . Peyrol keep close behind the quickly 
 move officer who follow the footpath mark faintly on the stony 
 slope of the hill . 
 
 " that gun be not shot , " he observe suddenly in a deep steady voice . 
 
 the officer glance over his shoulder . 
 
 " you may be right . you have not   be a gunner for nothing . not shot , 
 eh ? then a signal gun . but who to ? we have be observe that corvette 
 now for day and we know she have no companion . " 
 
 he move on , Peyrol follow he on the awkward path without lose his 
 wind and argue in a steady voice : " she have no companion but she may 
 have see a friend at daylight this morning . " 
 
 " Bah ! " retort the officer without check his pace . " you talk now 
 like a child or else you take I for one . how far could she have see ? 
 what view could she have have at daylight if she be make her way to 
 the Petite Passe where she be now ? why , the island would have mask 
 for her two - third of the sea and just in the direction too where the 
 English inshore squadron be hover below the horizon . funny blockade 
 that ! you can not   see a single english sail for day and day together , 
 and then when you least expect they they come down all in a crowd as if 
 ready to eat we alive . no , no ! there be no wind to bring she up a 
 companion . but tell I , gunner , you who boast of know the bark of 
 every english piece , what sort of gun be it ? " 
 
 Peyrol growl in answer : 
 
 " why , a twelve . the heavy she carry . she be only a corvette . " 
 
 " well , then , it be fire as a recall for one of her boat somewhere 
 out of sight along the shore . with a coast like this , all point and 
 bight , there would be nothing very extraordinary in that , would there ? " 
 
 " no , " say Peyrol , step out steadily . " what be extraordinary be 
 that she should have have a boat away at all . " 
 
 " you be right there . " the officer stop suddenly . " yes , it be 
 really remarkable , that she should have send a boat away . and there be 
 no other way to explain that gun . " 
 
 Peyrol 's face express no emotion of any sort . 
 
 " there be something there worth investigate , " continue the officer 
 with animation . 
 
 " if it be a matter of a boat , " Peyrol say without the slight 
 excitement , " there can be nothing very deep in it . what could there be ? 
 as likely as not they send she inshore early in the morning with line 
 to try to catch some fish for the captain 's breakfast . why do you open 
 your eye like this ? do not   you know the English ? they have enough cheek 
 for anything . " 
 
 after utter those word with a deliberation make venerable by his 
 white hair , Peyrol make the gesture of wipe his brow , which be barely 
 moist . 
 
 " let we push on , " say the lieutenant abruptly . 
 
 " why hurry like this ? " argue Peyrol without move . " those heavy 
 clog of mine be not adapt for scramble on loose stone . " 
 
 " be not   they ? " burst out the officer . " well , then , if you be tired 
 you can sit down and fan yourself with your hat . good - bye . " and he 
 stride away before Peyrol could utter a word . 
 
 the path follow the contour of the hill take a turn towards its 
 sea - face and very soon the lieutenant pass out of sight with startling 
 suddenness . then his head reappear for a moment , only his head , and 
 that too vanish suddenly . Peyrol remain perplexed . after gaze in 
 the direction in which the officer have disappear , he look down at 
 the farm building , now below he but not at a very great distance . he 
 could see distinctly the pigeon walk on the roof ridge . somebody 
 be draw water from the well in the middle of the yard . the patron , 
 no doubt ; but that man , who at one time have the power to send so many 
 luckless person to their death , do not count for old Peyrol . he have 
 even cease to be an offence to his sight and a disturber of his 
 feeling . by himself he be nothing . he have never be anything but a 
 creature of the universal blood - lust of the time . the very doubt about 
 he have die out by now in old Peyrol 's breast . the fellow be so 
 insignificant that have Peyrol in a moment of particular attention 
 discover that he cast no shadow , he would not have be surprised . 
 below there he be reduce to the shape of a dwarf lug a bucket away 
 from the well . but where be she ? Peyrol ask himself , shade his eye 
 with his hand . he know that the patronne could not be very far away , 
 because he have a sight of she during the morning ; but that be before he 
 have learn she have take to roam at night . his grow uneasiness 
 come suddenly to an end when , turn his eye away from the farm 
 building , where obviously she be not , he see she appear , with nothing 
 but the sky full of light at she back , come down round the very turn 
 of the path which have take the lieutenant out of sight . 
 
 Peyrol move briskly towards she . he be not   a man to lose time in idle 
 wonder , and his sabot do not seem to weigh heavy on his foot . the 
 fermire , whom the villager down there speak of as Arlette as though she 
 have be a little girl , but in a strange tone of shocked awe , walk 
 with her head droop and her foot   as Peyrol use to say   touch the 
 ground as lightly as fall leaf . the clatter of the clog make she 
 raise her black , clear eye that have be smite on the very verge of 
 womanhood by such sight of bloodshed and terror , as to leave in her a 
 fear of look steadily in any direction for long , lest she should see 
 come through the empty air some mutilate vision of the dead . Peyrol 
 call it try not to see something that be not there ; and this 
 evasive yet frank mobility be so much a part of she be that the 
 steadiness with which she meet his inquisitive glance surprise old 
 Peyrol for a moment . he ask without beat about the bush : 
 
 " do he speak to you ? " 
 
 she answer with something airy and provoke in her voice , which also 
 strike Peyrol as a novelty : " he never stop . he pass by as though 
 he have not see I " - and then they both look away from each other . 
 
 " now , what be it you take into your head to watch for at night ? " 
 
 she do not expect that question . she hang her head and take a pleat of 
 her skirt between her finger , embarrassed like a child . 
 
 " why should I not , " she murmur in a low shy note , as if she have two 
 voice within she . 
 
 " what do Catherine say ? " 
 
 " she be asleep , or perhaps , only lie on her back with her eye shut . " 
 
 " do she do that ? " ask Peyrol with incredulity . 
 
 " yes . " Arlette give Peyrol a queer , meaningless smile with which her 
 eye have nothing to do . " yes , she often do . I have notice that 
 before . she lie there tremble under her blanket till I come back . " 
 
 " what drive you out last night ? " Peyrol try to catch her eye , but 
 they elude he in the usual way . and now her face look as though it 
 could not   smile . 
 
 " my heart , " she say . for a moment Peyrol lose his tongue and even all 
 power of motion . the fermire have lower her eyelid , all her life 
 seem to have go into her coral lip , vivid and without a quiver in 
 the perfection of their design , and Peyrol , give up the conversation 
 with an upward fling of his arm , hurry up the path without look 
 behind he . but once round the turn of the path , he approach the 
 lookout at an easy gait . it be a piece of smooth ground below the 
 summit of the hill . it have quite a pronounce slope , so that a short and 
 robust pine grow true out of the soil yet lean well over the edge 
 of the sheer drop of some fifty foot or so . the first thing that 
 Peyrol 's eye take in be the water of the Petite Passe with the 
 enormous shadow of the Porquerolles Island darken more than half of 
 its width at this still early hour . he could not see the whole of it , 
 but on the part his glance embrace there be no ship of any kind . the 
 lieutenant , lean with his chest along the incline pine , address 
 he irritably . 
 
 " Squat ! do you think there be no glass on board the Englishman ? " 
 
 Peyrol obey without a word and for the space of a minute or so 
 present the bizarre sight of a rather bulky peasant with venerable 
 white lock crawl on his hand and knee on a hillside for no visible 
 reason . when he get to the foot of the pine he raise himself on his 
 knee . the lieutenant , flatten against the incline trunk and with a 
 pocket - glass glue to his eye , growl angrily : 
 
 " you can see she now , can not   you ? " 
 
 Peyrol in his kneeling position could see the ship now . she be less 
 than a quarter of a mile from he up the coast , almost within hail 
 effort of his powerful voice . his unaided eye could follow the 
 movement of the man on board like dark dot about her deck . she have 
 drift so far within Cape Esterel that the low project mass of it 
 seem to be in actual contact with her stern . her unexpected nearness 
 make Peyrol draw a sharp breath through his tooth . the lieutenant 
 murmur , still keep the glass to his eye : 
 
 " I can see the very epaulette of the officer on the quarter - deck . " 
 
 
 as Peyrol and the lieutenant have surmise from the report of the gun , 
 the english ship which the evening before be lie in Hyres Roads have 
 get under way after dark . the light air have take she as far as the 
 Petite Passe in the early part of the night , and then have abandon she 
 to the breathless moonlight in which , bereft of all motion , she look 
 more like a white monument of stone dwarf by the darkle mass of 
 land on either hand than a fabric fame for its swiftness in attack or 
 in flight . 
 
 her captain be a man of about forty , with clean - shaven , full cheek and 
 mobile thin lip which he have a trick of compress mysteriously before 
 he speak and sometimes also at the end of his speech . he be alert in 
 his movement and nocturnal in his habit . 
 
 directly he find that the calm have take complete possession of the 
 night and be go to last for hour , Captain Vincent assume his 
 favourite attitude of lean over the rail . it be then some time after 
 midnight and in the pervading stillness the moon , rid on a speckless 
 sky , seem to pour her enchantment on an uninhabited planet . Captain 
 Vincent do not mind the moon very much . of course it make his ship 
 visible from both shore of the Petite Passe . but after nearly a year of 
 constant service in command of the extreme lookout ship of Admiral 
 Nelson 's blockade fleet he know the emplacement of almost every gun of 
 the shore defence . where the breeze have leave he he be safe from the 
 big gun of the few that be mount on Porquerolles . on the Giens 
 side of the pass he know for certain there be not even a popgun mount 
 anywhere . his long familiarity with that part of the coast have imbue 
 he with the belief that he know the habit of its population 
 thoroughly . the gleam of light in their house go out very early and 
 Captain Vincent feel convinced that they be all in their bed , 
 include the gunner of the battery who belong to the local 
 militia . their interest in the movement of H.M. 's twenty - two gun sloop 
  Amelia a have grow stale by custom . she never interfere with their 
 private affair , and allow the small coasting craft to go to and fro 
 unmoleste . they would have wonder if she have be more than two day 
 away . Captain Vincent use to say grimly that the Hyres roadstead have 
 become like a second home to he . 
 
 for an hour or so Captain Vincent muse a bit on his real home , on 
 matter of service and other unrelated thing , then get into motion 
 in a very wide - awake manner , he superintend himself the dispatch of 
 that boat the existence of which have be acutely surmise by Lieutenant 
 Ral and be a matter of no doubt whatever to old Peyrol . as to her 
 mission , it have nothing to do with catch fish for the captain 's 
 breakfast . it be the captain 's own gig , a very fast - pull boat . she 
 be already alongside with her crew in she when the officer , who be 
 go in charge , be beckon to by the captain . he have a cutlass at his 
 side and a brace of pistol in his belt , and there be a businesslike 
 air about he that show he have be on such service before . 
 
 " this calm will last a good many hour , " say the captain . " in this 
 tideless sea you be certain to find the ship very much where she be 
 now , but close inshore . the attraction of the land - you know . " 
 
 " yes , sir . the land do attract . " 
 
 " yes . well , she may be allow to put her side against any of these 
 rock . there would be no more danger than alongside a quay with a sea 
 like this . just look at the water in the pass , Mr. Bolt . like the floor 
 of a ballroom . pull close along shore when you return . I will expect you 
 back at dawn . " 
 
 Captain Vincent pause suddenly . a doubt cross his mind as to the 
 wisdom of this nocturnal expedition . the hammer - head of the peninsula 
 with its sea - face invisible from both side of the coast be an ideal 
 spot for a secret landing . its lonely character appeal to his 
 imagination , which in the first instance have be stimulate by a chance 
 remark of Mr. Bolt himself . 
 
 the fact be that the week before , when the Amelia be cruise off 
 the peninsula , Bolt , look at the coast , mention that he know that 
 part of it well ; he have actually be ashore there a good many year 
 ago , while serve with Lord Howe 's fleet . he describe the nature of 
 the path , the aspect of a little village on the reverse slope , and have 
 much to say about a certain farmhouse where he have be more than once , 
 and have even stay for twenty - four hour at a time on more than one 
 occasion . 
 
 this have arouse Captain Vincent 's curiosity . he send for Bolt and have a 
 long conversation with he . he listen with great interest to Bolt 's 
 story - how one day a man be see from the deck of the ship in which 
 Bolt be serve then , wave a white sheet or table - cloth amongst the 
 rock at the water 's edge . it might have be a trap ; but , as the man 
 seem alone and the shore be within range of the ship 's gun , a boat 
 be send to take he off . 
 
 " and that , sir , " Bolt pursue impressively , " be , I verily believe , 
 the very first communication that Lord Howe have from the royalist in 
 Toulon . " afterwards Bolt describe to Captain Vincent the meeting of 
 the Toulon royalist with the officer of the fleet . from the back of 
 the farm he , Bolt himself , have often watch for hour the entrance of 
 the Toulon harbour on the lookout for the boat bring over the 
 royalist emissary . then he would make an agree signal to the advanced 
 squadron and some english officer would land on their side and meet the 
 Frenchmen at the farmhouse . it be as simple as that . the people of the 
 farmhouse , husband and wife , be well - to - do , good class altogether , and 
 staunch royalist . he have get to know they well . 
 
 Captain Vincent wonder whether the same people be still live 
 there . Bolt could see no reason why they should not   be . it be not   more 
 than ten year ago , and they be by no mean an old couple . as far as 
 he could make out , the farm be their own property . he , Bolt , know only 
 very few french word at that time . it be much later , after he have be 
 make a prisoner and keep inland in France till the Peace of Amiens , that 
 he have pick up a smattering of the lingo . his captivity have do away 
 with his feeble chance of promotion , he could not help remark . Bolt 
 be a master 's mate still . 
 
 Captain Vincent , in common with a good many officer of all rank in 
 Lord Nelson 's fleet , have his misgiving about the system of distant 
 blockade from which the Admiral apparently would not depart . yet one 
 could not blame Lord Nelson . everybody in the fleet understand that what 
 be in his mind be the destruction of the enemy ; and if the enemy be 
 closely blockade he would never come out to be destroy . on the other 
 hand it be clear that as thing be conduct the French have too many 
 chance leave they to slip out unobserved and vanish from all human 
 knowledge for month . those possibility be a constant worry to 
 Captain Vincent , who have throw himself with the ardour of passion into 
 the special duty with which he be entrust . oh , for a pair of eye 
 fasten night and day on the entrance of the harbour of Toulon ! oh , for 
 the power to look at the very state of french ship and into the very 
 secret of french mind ! 
 
 but he say nothing of this to Bolt . he only observe that the character 
 of the french Government be change and that the mind of the royalist 
 people in the farmhouse might have change too , since they have get back 
 the exercise of their religion . Bolt 's answer be that he have have a lot 
 to do with royalist , in his time , on board Lord Howe 's fleet , both 
 before and after Toulon be evacuate . all sort , man and woman , barber 
 and nobleman , sailor and tradesman ; almost every kind of royalist one 
 could think of ; and his opinion be that a royalist never change . as to 
 the place itself , he only wish the captain have see it . it be the 
 sort of spot that nothing could change . he make bold to say that it 
 would be just the same a hundred year hence . 
 
 the earnestness of his officer cause Captain Vincent to look hard at 
 he . he be a man of about his own age , but while Vincent be a 
 comparatively young captain , Bolt be an old master 's mate . each 
 understand the other perfectly . Captain Vincent fidget for a while and 
 then observe abstractedly that he be not a man to put a noose round a 
 dog 's neck , let alone a good seaman 's . 
 
 this cryptic pronouncement cause no wonder to appear in Bolt 's 
 attentive gaze . he only become a little thoughtful before he say in the 
 same abstract tone that an officer in uniform be not likely to be 
 hang for a spy . the service be risky , of course . it be necessary , 
 for its success , that , assume the same people be there , it should be 
 undertake by a man well know to the inhabitant . then he add that he 
 be certain of be recognize . and while he enlarge on the extremely 
 good term he have be on with the owner of the farm , especially the 
 farmer 's wife , a comely motherly woman , who have be very kind to he , 
 and have all her wit about she , Captain Vincent , look at the master 's 
 mate 's bushy whisker , think that these in themselves be enough to 
 insure recognition . this impression be so strong that he ask 
 point - blank : " you have not   alter the growth of the hair on your face , 
 Mr. Bolt , since then ? " 
 
 there be just a touch of indignation in Bolt 's negative reply ; for he 
 be proud of his whisker . he declare he be ready to take the most 
 desperate chance for the service of his king and his country . 
 
 Captain Vincent add : " for the sake of Lord Nelson , too . " one 
 understand well what his Lordship wish to bring about by that blockade 
 at sixty league off . he be talk to a sailor , and there be no need 
 to say any more . do Bolt think that he could persuade those people to 
 conceal he in their house on that lonely shore end of the peninsula for 
 some considerable time ? Bolt think it be the easy thing in the 
 world . he would simply go up there and renew the old acquaintance , but 
 he do not mean to do that in a reckless manner . it would have to be 
 do at night , when of course there would be no one about . he would land 
 just where he use to before , wrap up in a Mediterranean sailor 's 
 cloak - he have one of his own - over his uniform , and simply go 
 straight to the door , at which he would knock . ten to one the farmer 
 himself would come down to open it . he know enough French by now , he 
 hop , to persuade those people to conceal he in some room have a 
 view in the right direction ; and there he would stick day after day on 
 the watch , take a little exercise in the middle of the night , ready to 
 live on mere bread and water if necessary , so as not to arouse suspicion 
 amongst the farmhand . and who know if , with the farmer 's help , he 
 could not get some news of what be go on actually within the port . 
 then from time to time he could go down in the dead of night , signal to 
 the ship and make his report . Bolt express the hope that the Amelia 
 would remain as much as possible in sight of the coast . it would cheer 
 he up to see she about . Captain Vincent naturally assent . he point 
 out to Bolt , however , that his post would become most important exactly 
 when the ship have be chase away or drive by the weather off her 
 station , as could very easily happen . - " you would be then the eye of 
 Lord Nelson 's fleet , Mr. Bolt - think of that . the actual eye of Lord 
 Nelson 's fleet ! " 
 
 after dispatch his officer , Captain Vincent spend the night on deck . 
 the break of day come at last , much pale than the moonlight which it 
 replace . and still no boat . and again Captain Vincent ask himself if 
 he have not act indiscreetly . impenetrable , and look as fresh as if 
 he have just come up on deck , he argue the point with himself till the 
 rise sun clear the ridge on Porquerolles Island flash its level 
 ray upon his ship with her dew - darken sail and dripping rigging . he 
 rouse himself then to tell his first lieutenant to get the boat out to 
 tow the ship away from the shore . the report of the gun he order to be 
 fire express simply his irritation . the Amelia , point towards 
 the middle of the Passe , be move at a snail 's pace behind her string 
 of boat . Minutes pass . and then suddenly Captain Vincent perceive 
 his boat pull back in shore accord to order . when nearly abreast 
 of the ship , she dart away , make for her side . Mr. Bolt clamber on 
 board , alone , order the gig to go ahead and help with the towing . 
 Captain Vincent , stand apart on the quarter - deck , receive he with a 
 grimly questioning look . 
 
 Mr. Bolt 's first word be to the effect that he believe the 
 confound spot to be bewitch . then he glance at the group of 
 officer on the other side of the quarter - deck . Captain Vincent lead the 
 way to his cabin . there he turn and look at his officer , who , with 
 an air of distraction , mumble : " there be night - walker there . " 
 
 " come , Bolt , what the devil have you see ? do you get near the house 
 at all ? " 
 
 " I get within twenty yard of the door , sir , " say Bolt . and 
 encourage by the captain 's much less ferocious - " well ? " begin his 
 tale . he do not pull up to the path which he know , but to a little bit 
 of beach on which he tell his man to haul up the boat and wait for he . 
 the beach be conceal by a thick growth of bush on the landward side 
 and by some rock from the sea . then he go to what he call the 
 ravine , still avoid the path , so that as a matter of fact he make his 
 way up on his hand and knee mostly , very carefully and slowly amongst 
 the loose stone , till by hold on to a bush he bring his eye on a 
 level with the piece of flat ground in front of the farmhouse . 
 
 the familiar aspect of the building , totally unchanged from the time 
 when he have play his part in what appear as a most successful 
 operation at the beginning of the war , inspire Bolt with great 
 confidence in the success of his present enterprise , vague as it be , 
 but the great charm of which lay , no doubt , in mental association with 
 his young year . nothing seem easy than to stride across the forty 
 yard of open ground and rouse the farmer whom he remember so well , 
 the well - to - do man , a grave sagacious royalist in his humble way ; 
 certainly , in Bolt 's view , no traitor to his country , and preserve so 
 well his dignity in ambiguous circumstance . to Bolt 's simple vision 
 neither that , man nor his wife could have change . 
 
 in this view of Arlette 's parent Bolt be influence by the 
 consciousness of there have be no change in himself . he be the same 
 Jack Bolt , and everything around he be the same as if he have leave the 
 spot only yesterday . already he see himself in the kitchen which he know 
 so well , seat by the light of a single candle before a glass of wine 
 and talk his good French to that worthy farmer of sound principle . 
 the whole thing be as well as do . he imagine himself a secret inmate 
 of that building , closely confine indeed , but sustain by the possible 
 great result of his watchfulness , in many way more comfortable than on 
 board the Amelia and with the glorious consciousness that he be , in 
 Captain Vincent 's phrase , the actual physical eye of the fleet . 
 
 he do not , of course , talk of his private feeling to Captain Vincent . 
 all those thought and emotion be compress in the space of not much 
 more than a minute or two while , hold on with one hand to his bush 
 and have get a good foothold for one of his foot , he indulge in that 
 pleasant anticipatory sense of success . in the old day the farmer 's 
 wife use to be a light sleeper . the farmhand who , he remember , live 
 in the village or be distribute in stable and outhouse , do not 
 give he any concern . he would not   need to knock heavily . he picture to 
 himself the farmer 's wife sit up in bed , listening , then rouse her 
 husband , who , as likely as not , would take the gun stand against the 
 dresser downstairs and come to the door . 
 
 and then everything would be all right . . . . but perhaps . . . yes ! it 
 be just as likely the farmer would simply open the window and hold a 
 parley . that really be most likely . naturally . in his place Bolt feel 
 he would do that very thing . yes , that be what a man in a lonely house , 
 in the middle of the night , would do most naturally . and he imagine 
 himself whisper mysteriously his answer up the wall to the obvious 
 question - Ami - Bolt - Ouvrez - moi - vive le roi - or thing of that 
 sort . and in sequence to those vivid image it occur to Bolt that the 
 good thing he could do would be to throw small stone against the window 
 shutter , the sort of sound most likely to rouse a light sleeper . he 
 be not   quite sure which window on the floor above the ground floor be 
 that of those people 's bedroom , but there be anyhow only three of 
 they . in a moment he would have spring up from his foothold on to the 
 level if , raise his eye for another look at the front of the house , 
 he have not perceive that one of the window be already open . how he 
 could have fail to notice that before he could not   explain . 
 
 he confess to Captain Vincent in the course of his narrative that 
 " this open window , sir , check I dead . in fact , sir , it shake my 
 confidence , for you know , sir , that no native of these part would dream 
 of sleep with his window open . it strike I that there be something 
 wrong there ; and I remain where I be . " 
 
 that fascination of repose , of secretive friendliness , which house 
 present at night , be go . by the power of an open window , a black 
 square in the moon - light wall , the farmhouse take on the aspect of a 
 man - trap . Bolt assure Captain Vincent that the window would not have 
 stop he ; he would have go on all the same , though with an 
 uncertain mind . but while he be think it out , there glide without a 
 sound before his irresolute eye from somewhere a white vision - a 
 woman . he could see her black hair flow down her back . a woman whom 
 anybody would have be excuse for take for a ghost . " I will not   say 
 that she freeze my blood , sir , but she make I cold all over for a 
 moment . lot of people have see ghost , at least they say so , and I 
 have an open mind about that . she be a weird thing to look at in the 
 moonlight . she do not act like a sleep - walker either . if she have not 
 come out of a grave , then she have jump out of bed . but when she steal 
 back and hide herself round the corner of the house I know she be not a 
 ghost . she could not have see I . there she stand in the black shadow 
 watch for something - or wait for somebody , " add Bolt in a grim 
 tone . " she look crazy , " he concede charitably . 
 
 one thing be clear to he : there have be change in that farmhouse 
 since his time . Bolt resent they , as if that time have be only last 
 week . the woman conceal round the corner remain in his full view , 
 watchful , as if only wait for he to show himself in the open , to run 
 off screech and rouse all the countryside . Bolt come quickly to the 
 conclusion that he must withdraw from the slope . on lower himself 
 from his first position he have the misfortune to dislodge a stone . this 
 circumstance precipitate his retreat . in a very few minute he find 
 himself by the shore . he pause to listen . above he , up the ravine and 
 all round amongst the rock , everything be perfectly still . he walk 
 along in the direction of his boat . there be nothing for it but to get 
 away quietly and perhaps . . . 
 
 " yes , Mr. Bolt , I fear we shall have to give up our plan , " interrupt 
 Captain Vincent at that point . Bolt 's assent come reluctantly , and then 
 he brace himself to confess that this be not the bad . before the 
 astonished face of Captain Vincent he hasten to blurt it out . he be 
 very sorry , he could in no way account for it , but - he have lose a man . 
 
 Captain Vincent seem unable to believe his ear . " what do you say ? 
 lose a man out of my boat 's crew ! " he be profoundly shocked . Bolt be 
 correspondingly distressed . he narrate that , shortly after he have leave 
 they , the seaman have hear , or imagine they have hear , some faint and 
 peculiar noise somewhere within the cove . the coxswain send one of the 
 man , the old of the boat 's crew , along the shore to ascertain whether 
 their boat haul on the beach could be see from the other side of the 
 cove . the man - it be symon - depart crawl on his hand and knee 
 to make the circuit and , well - he have not return . this be really 
 the reason why the boat be so late in get back to the ship . of 
 course Bolt do not like to give up the man . it be inconceivable that 
 symon should have desert . he have leave his cutlass behind and be 
 completely unarmed , but have he be suddenly pounce upon he surely 
 would have be able to let out a yell that could have be hear all 
 over the cove . but till daybreak a profound stillness , in which it 
 seem a whisper could have be hear for mile , have reign over the 
 coast . it be as if Symons have be spirit away by some supernatural 
 mean , without a scuffle , without a cry . for it be inconceivable that 
 he should have venture inland and get capture there . it be equally 
 inconceivable that there should have be on that particular night man 
 ready to pounce upon symon and knock he on the head so neatly as not 
 to let he give a groan even . 
 
 Captain Vincent say : " all this be very fantastical , Mr. Bolt , " and 
 compress his lip firmly for a moment before he continue : " but not 
 much more than your woman . I suppose you do see something real . . . . " 
 
 " I tell you , sir , she stand there in full moonlight for ten minute 
 within a stone 's throw of I , " protest Bolt with a sort of 
 desperation . " she seem to have jump out of bed only to look at the 
 house . if she have a petticoat over her night - shift , that be all . her 
 back be to I . when she move away I could not make out her face 
 properly . then she go to stand in the shadow of the house . " 
 
 " on the watch , " suggest Captain Vincent . 
 
 " look like it , sir , " confess Bolt . 
 
 " so there must have be somebody about , " conclude Captain Vincent 
 with assurance . 
 
 Bolt murmur a reluctant , " must have be . " he have expect to get 
 into enormous trouble over this affair and be much relieve by the 
 captain 's quiet attitude . " I hope , sir , you approve of my conduct in 
 not attempt to look for symon at once ? " 
 
 " yes . you act prudently by not advance inland , " say the captain . 
 
 " I be afraid of spoil our chance to carry out your plan , sir , by 
 disclose our presence on shore . and that could not have be avoid . 
 moreover , we be only five in all and not properly armed . " 
 
 " the plan have go down before your night - walker , Mr. Bolt , " Captain 
 Vincent declare dryly . " but we must try to find out what have become of 
 our man if it can be do without risk too much . " 
 
 " by land a large party this very next night we could surround the 
 house , " Bolt suggest . " if we find friend there , well and good . if 
 enemy , then we could carry off some of they on board for exchange 
 perhaps . I be almost sorry I do not go back and kidnap that 
 wench - whoever she be , " he add recklessly . " ah ! if it have only 
 be a man ! " 
 
 " no doubt there be a man not very far off , " say Captain Vincent 
 equably . " that will do , Mr. Bolt . you have well go and get some rest 
 now . " 
 
 Bolt be glad to obey , for he be tired and hungry after his dismal 
 failure . what vex he most be its absurdity . Captain Vincent , though 
 he too have pass a sleepless night , feel too restless to remain below . 
 he follow his officer on deck . 
 
 
 by that time the Amelia have be tow half a mile or so away from 
 Cape Esterel . this change have bring she nearer to the two watcher on 
 the hillside , who would have be plainly visible to the people on her 
 deck , but for the head of the pine which conceal their movement . 
 Lieutenant Ral , bestride the rugged trunk as high as he could get , have 
 the whole of the english ship 's deck open to the range of his 
 pocket - glass which he use between the branch . he say to Peyrol suddenly : 
 
 " her captain have just come on deck . " 
 
 Peyrol , sit at the foot of the tree , make no answer for a long 
 while . a warm drowsiness lie over the land and seem to press down his 
 eyelid . but inwardly the old rover be intensely awake . under the mask 
 of his immobility , with half - shut eye and idly clasp hand , he hear 
 the lieutenant , perch up there near the head of the tree , mutter 
 count something : " one , two , three , " and then a loud " Parbleu ! " 
 after which the lieutenant in his trunk - bestride attitude begin to 
 jerk himself backwards . Peyrol get up out of his way , but could not 
 restrain himself from ask : " what be the matter now ? " 
 
 " I will tell you what be the matter , " say the other excitedly . as soon 
 as he get his footing he walk up to old Peyrol and when quite close to 
 he fold his arm across his chest . 
 
 " the first thing I do be to count the boat in the water . there be 
 not a single one leave on board . and now I just count they again and 
 find one more there . that ship have a boat out last night . how I miss 
 see she pull out from under the land I do not   know . I be watch the 
 deck , I suppose , and she seem to have go straight up to the 
 tow - rope . but I be right . that Englishman have a boat out . " 
 
 he seize Peyrol by both shoulder suddenly . " I believe you know it all 
 the time . you know it , I tell you . " Peyrol , shake violently by the 
 shoulder , raise his eye to look at the angry face within a few inch 
 of his own . in his worn gaze there be no fear or shame , but a troubled 
 perplexity and obvious concern . he remain passive , merely 
 remonstrate softly : 
 
 " Doucement . doucement . " 
 
 the lieutenant suddenly desist with a final jerk which fail to 
 stagger old Peyrol , who , directly he have be release , assume an 
 explanatory tone . 
 
 " for the ground be slippery here . if I have lose my footing I would not 
 have be able to prevent myself from grab at you , and we would have 
 go down that cliff together ; which would have tell those englishman 
 more than twenty boat could have find out in as many night . " 
 
 secretly Lieutenant Ral be daunt by Peyrol 's mildness . it could not 
 be shake . even physically he have an impression of the utter futility of 
 his effort , as though he have try to shake a rock . he throw himself on 
 the ground carelessly say : 
 
 " as for instance ? " 
 
 Peyrol lower himself with a deliberation appropriate to his grey 
 hair . " you do not   suppose that out of a hundred and twenty or so pair 
 of eye on board that ship there would not   be a dozen at least scan 
 the shore . two man fall down a cliff would have be a startling 
 sight . the English would have be interested enough to send a boat 
 ashore to go through our pocket , and whether dead or only half dead we 
 would not   have be in a state to prevent they . it would not   matter so 
 much as to I , and I do not   know what paper you may have in your 
 pocket , but there be your shoulder - strap , your uniform coat . " 
 
 " I carry no paper in my pocket , and . . . " a sudden thought seem to 
 strike the lieutenant , a thought so intense and far - fetched as to give 
 his mental effort a momentary aspect of vacancy . he shake it off and 
 go on in a change tone : " the shoulder - strap would not have be 
 much of a revelation by themselves . " 
 
 " no . not much . but enough to let her captain know that he have be 
 watch . for what else could the dead body of a naval officer with a 
 spyglass in his pocket mean ? hundred of eye may glance carelessly at 
 that ship every day from all part of the coast , though I fancy those 
 landsman hardly take the trouble to look at she now . but that be a very 
 different thing from be keep under observation . however I do not  
 suppose all this matter much . " 
 
 the lieutenant be recover from the spell of that sudden thought . 
 " paper in my pocket , " he mutter to himself . " that would be a 
 perfect way . " his part lip come together in a slightly sarcastic 
 smile with which he meet Peyrol 's puzzle , sidelong glance provoke by 
 the inexplicable character of these word . 
 
 " I bet , " say the lieutenant , " that ever since I come here first you 
 have be more or less worry your old head about my motif and 
 intention . " 
 
 Peyrol say simply : " you come here on service at first and afterwards 
 you come again because even in the Toulon fleet an officer may get a few 
 day ' leave . as to your intention , I will not   say anything about they . 
 especially as regard myself . about ten minute ago anybody look on 
 would have think they be not friendly to I . " 
 
 the lieutenant sit up suddenly . by that time the english sloop , get 
 away from under the land , have become visible even from the spot on which 
 they sit . 
 
 " look ! " exclaim Ral . " she seem to be forge ahead in this calm . " 
 
 Peyrol , startle , raise his eye and see the Amelia clear of the edge 
 of the cliff and head across the Passe . all her boat be already 
 alongside , and yet , as a minute or two of steady gazing be enough to 
 convince Peyrol , she be not stationary . 
 
 " she move ! there be no deny that . she move . watch the white speck 
 of that house on Porquerolles . there ! the end of her jib - boom touch it 
 now . in a moment her head sail will mask it to we . " 
 
 " I would never have believe it , " mutter the lieutenant , after a 
 pause of intent gazing . " and look , Peyrol , look , there be not a wrinkle 
 on the water . " 
 
 Peyrol , who have be shade his eye from the sun , let his hand fall . 
 " yes , " he say , ' she would answer to a child 's breath quick than a 
 feather , and the English very soon find it out when they get she . she 
 be catch in Genoa only a few month after I come home and get my 
 mooring here . " 
 
 " I do not   know , " murmur the young man . 
 
 " aha , lieutenant , " say Peyrol , press his finger to his breast , 
 " it hurt here , do not   it ? there be nobody but good frenchman here . do 
 you think it be a pleasure to I to watch that flag out there at her 
 peak ? look , you can see the whole of she now . look at her ensign hang 
 down as if there be not a breath of wind under the heaven . . . . " he 
 stamp his foot suddenly . " and yet she move ! those in Toulon that may 
 be think of catch her dead or alive would have to think hard and 
 make long plan and get good man to carry they out . " 
 
 " there be some talk of it at the Toulon Admiralty , " say Ral . 
 
 the rover shake his head . " they need not have send you on the duty , " 
 he say . " I have be watch she now for a month , she and the man who 
 have get she now . I know all his trick and all his habit and all his 
 dodge by this time . the man be a seaman , that must be say for he , but 
 I can tell beforehand what he will do in any give case . " 
 
 Lieutenant Ral lie down on his back again , his clasped hand under his 
 head . he think that this old man be not boast . he know a lot about 
 the english ship , and if an attempt to capture she be to be make , his 
 idea would be worth have . nevertheless , in his relation with old 
 Peyrol Lieutenant Ral suffer from contradictory feeling . Ral be the 
 son of a ci - devant couple - small provincial gentry - who have both lose 
 their head on the scaffold , within the same week . as to their boy , he 
 be apprentice by order of the Delegate of the Revolutionary Committee 
 of his town to a poor but pure - minded joiner , who could not provide he 
 with shoe to run his errand in , but treat this aristocrat not 
 unkindly . nevertheless , at the end of the year the orphan run away and 
 volunteer as a boy on board one of the ship of the Republic about to 
 sail on a distant expedition . at sea he find another standard of 
 value . in the course of some eight year , suppress his faculty of 
 love and hatred , he arrive at the rank of an officer by sheer merit , 
 and have accustom himself to look at man sceptically , without much 
 scorn or much respect . his principle be purely professional and he 
 have never form a friendship in his life - more unfortunate in that 
 respect than old Peyrol , who at least have know the bond of the lawless 
 Brotherhood of the Coast . he be , of course , very self - contain . 
 Peyrol , whom he have find unexpectedly settle on the peninsula , be the 
 first human be to break through that school reserve which the 
 precariousness of all thing have force on the orphan of the Revolution . 
 Peyrol 's striking personality have arouse Ral 's interest , a mistrustful 
 liking mix with some contempt of a purely doctrinaire kind . it be 
 clear that the fellow have be next thing to a pirate at one time or 
 another - a sort of past which could not commend itself to a naval officer . 
 
 still , Peyrol have break through : and , presently , the peculiarity of 
 all those people at the farm , each individual one of they , have enter 
 through the breach . 
 
 Lieutenant Ral , on his back , close his eye to the glare of the sky , 
 meditate on old Peyrol , while Peyrol himself , with his white head bare 
 in the sunshine , seem to be sit by the side of a corpse . what in 
 that man impress Lieutenant Ral be the faculty of shrewd insight . the 
 fact of Ral 's connection with the farmhouse on the peninsula be much 
 as Peyrol have state . first on specific duty about establish a signal 
 station , then , when that project have be give up , voluntary visit . 
 not belong to any ship of the fleet but do shore duty at the 
 Arsenal , Lieutenant Ral have spend several period of short leave at the 
 farm , where indeed nobody could tell whether he have come on duty or on 
 leave . he personally could not - or perhaps would not - tell even to 
 himself why it be that he come there . he have be grow sick of his 
 work . he have no place in the world to go to , and no one either . be it 
 Peyrol he be come to see ? a mute , strangely suspicious , defiant 
 understanding have establish itself imperceptibly between he and that 
 lawless old man who might have be suspect to have come there only to 
 die , if the whole robust personality of Peyrol with its quiet vitality 
 have not be antagonistic to the notion of death . that rover behave as 
 though he have all the time in the world at his command . 
 
 Peyrol speak suddenly , with his eye fix in front of he as if he be 
 address the Island of Porquerolles , eight mile away . 
 
 " yes - I know all her move , though I must say that this trick of 
 dodge close to our peninsula be something new . " 
 
 " H'm ! fish for the captain 's breakfast , " mumble Ral without open 
 his eye . " where be she now ? " 
 
 " in the middle of the Passe , busy hoisting in her boat . and still 
 move ! that ship will keep her way as long as the flame of a candle on 
 her deck will not stand upright . " 
 
 " that ship be a marvel . " 
 
 " she have be build by french shipwright , " say old Peyrol bitterly . 
 
 this be the last sound for a long time . then the lieutenant say in an 
 indifferent tone : " you be very positive about that . how do you know ? " 
 
 " I have be look at she for a month , whatever name she might have 
 have or whatever name the English call she by now . do you ever see such 
 a bow on an English - build ship ? " 
 
 the lieutenant remain silent , as though he have lose all interest and 
 there have be no such thing as an english man - of - war within a mile . but 
 all the time he be think hard . he have be tell confidentially of a 
 certain piece of service to be perform on instruction receive from 
 Paris . not an operation of war , but service of the great importance . 
 the risk of it be not so much deadly as particularly odious . a brave 
 man might well have shrink from it ; and there be risk   not death   from 
 which a resolute man might shrink without shame . 
 
 " have you ever taste of prison , Peyrol ? " he ask suddenly , in an 
 affectedly sleepy voice . 
 
 it rouse Peyrol nearly into a shout . " Heavens ! no ! prison ! what do you 
 mean by prison ? . . . I have be a captive to savage , " he add , 
 calm down , " but that be a very old story . I be young and foolish 
 then . later , when a grown man , I be a slave to the famous Ali - Kassim . I 
 spend a fortnight with chain on my leg and arm in the yard of a mud 
 fort on the shore of the Persian Gulf . there be nearly a score of we 
 brother of the Coast in the same predicament in consequence of a 
 shipwreck . " 
 
 " yes . . . . the lieutenant be very languid indeed . . . . and I daresay 
 you all take service with that bloodthirsty old pirate . " 
 
 " there be not a single one of his thousand of blackamoor that could 
 lay a gun properly . but Ali - Kassim make war like a prince . we sail , a 
 regular fleet , across the gulf , take a town on the coast of Arabia 
 somewhere , and loot it . then I and the other manage to get hold of 
 an armed dhow , and we fight our way right through the blackamoor ' 
 fleet . several of we die of thirst later . all the same , it be a great 
 affair . but do not   you talk to I of prison . a proper man if give a 
 chance to fight can always get himself kill . you understand I ? " 
 
 " yes , I understand you , " drawl the lieutenant . " I think I know you 
 pretty well . I suppose an english prison . . . " 
 
 " that be a horrible subject of conversation , " interrupt Peyrol in a 
 loud , emotional tone . " naturally , any death be well than a prison . 
 any death ! what be it you have in your mind , lieutenant ? " 
 
 " oh , it be not   that I want you to die , " drawl Ral in an uninterested 
 manner . 
 
 Peyrol , his entwined finger clasp his leg , gaze fixedly at the 
 English sloop float idly in the Passe while he give up all his mind 
 to the consideration of these word that have float out , idly too , into 
 the peace and silence of the morning . then he ask in a low tone : 
 
 " do you want to frighten I ? " 
 
 the lieutenant laugh harshly . neither by word , gesture nor glance do 
 Peyrol acknowledge the enigmatic and unpleasant sound . but when it 
 cease the silence grow so oppressive between the two man that they get 
 up by a common impulse . the lieutenant spring to his foot lightly . the 
 uprising of Peyrol take more time and have more dignity . they stand side 
 by side unable to detach their longing eye from the enemy ship below 
 their foot . 
 
 " I wonder why he put himself into this curious position , " say the 
 officer . 
 
 " I wonder , " growl Peyrol curtly . " if there have be only a couple 
 of eighteen - pounder place on the rocky ledge to the left of we , we 
 could have unrig she in about ten minute . " 
 
 " good old gunner , " comment Ral ironically . " and what afterwards ? 
 swim off , you and I , with our cutlass in our tooth and take she by 
 boarding , what ? " 
 
 this sally provoke in Peyrol an austere smile . " no ! no ! " he protest 
 soberly . " but why not let Toulon know ? bring out a frigate or two and 
 catch he alive . many a time have I plan his capture just to ease my 
 heart . often I have star at night out of my window upstairs across the 
 bay to where I know he be lie at anchor , and think of a little 
 surprise I could arrange for he if I be not only old Peyrol , the 
 gunner . " 
 
 " yes . and keep out of the way at that , with a bad note against his 
 name in the book of the Admiralty in Toulon . " 
 
 " you can not   say I have try to hide myself from you who be a naval 
 officer , " strike in Peyrol quickly . " I fear no man . I do not run . I 
 simply go away from Toulon . nobody have give I an order to stay 
 there . and you can not   say I run very far either . " 
 
 " that be the clever move of all . you know what you be do . " 
 
 " here you go again , hint at something crook like that fellow with 
 big epaulette at the Port Office that seem to be long to put I 
 under arrest just because I bring a prize from the Indian Ocean , eight 
 thousand mile , dodge clear of every Englishmen that come in my way , 
 which be more perhaps than he could have do . I have my gunner 's 
 warrant sign by Citizen Renaud , a chef d'escadre . it be not   give I 
 for twirl my thumb or hide in the cable tier when the enemy be 
 about . there be on board our ship some patriot that be not   above 
 do that sort of thing , I can tell you . but republic or no republic , 
 that kind be not   likely to get a gunner 's warrant . " 
 
 " that be all right , " say Ral , with his eye fix on the english ship , 
 the head of which be swing to the northward now . . . . " look , she 
 seem to have lose her way at last , " he remark parenthetically to 
 Peyrol , who also glance that way and nod . . . . " that be all right . 
 but it be on record that you manage in a very short time to get very 
 thick with a lot of patriot ashore . section leader . terrorist . . . . " 
 
 " why , yes . I want to hear what they have to say . they talk like a 
 drunken crew of scallywag that have steal a ship . but at any rate it 
 be not   such as they that have sell the Port to the English . they be a 
 lot of bloodthirsty landlubber . I do get out of town as soon as I 
 could . I remember I be bear around here . I know no other bit of 
 France , and I do not   care to go any far . nobody come to look for I . " 
 
 " no , not here . I suppose they think it be too near . they do look 
 for you , a little , but they give it up . perhaps if they have persevere 
 and make an admiral of you we would not have be beat at Aboukir . " 
 
 at the mention of that name Peyrol shake his fist at the serene 
 Mediterranean sky . " and yet we be no bad man than the English , " he 
 cry , " and there be no such ship as our in the world . you see , 
 lieutenant , the republican god of these talker would never give we 
 seaman a chance of fair play . " 
 
 the lieutenant look round in surprise . " what do you know about a 
 republican god ? " he ask . " what on earth do you mean ? " 
 
 " I have hear of and see more god than you could ever dream of in a 
 long night 's sleep , in every corner of the earth , in the very heart of 
 forest , which be an inconceivable thing . figure , stone , stick . there 
 must be something in the idea . . . . and what I mean , " he continue in 
 a resentful tone , " be that their republican god , which be neither stick 
 nor stone , but seem to be some kind of lubber , have never give we 
 seaman a chief like that one the soldier have get ashore . " 
 
 Lieutenant Ral look at Peyrol with unsmile attention , then remark 
 quietly , " well , the god of the aristocrat be come back again and it 
 look as if he be bring an emperor along with he . you have   hear 
 something of that , you people in the farmhouse ? have not   you ? " 
 
 " no , " say Peyrol . " I have hear no talk of an emperor . but what do 
 it matter ? under one name or another a chief can be no more than a 
 chief , and that general whom they have be call consul be a good 
 chief - nobody can deny that . " 
 
 after say those word in a dogmatic tone , Peyrol look up at the sun 
 and suggest that it be time to go down to the farmhouse " pour manger 
 la soupe . " with a suddenly gloomy face Ral move off , follow by 
 Peyrol . at the first turn of the path they get the view of the 
 Escampobar building with the pigeon still walk on the ridge of the 
 roof , of the sunny orchard and yard without a live soul in they . 
 Peyrol remark that everybody no doubt be in the kitchen wait for 
 his and the lieutenant 's return . he himself be properly hungry . " and 
 you , lieutenant ? " 
 
 the lieutenant be not hungry . hear this declaration make in a 
 peevish tone , Peyrol give a sagacious movement of his head behind the 
 lieutenant be back . well , whatever happen , a man have to eat . he , 
 Peyrol , know what it be to be altogether without food ; but even 
 half - ration be a poor show , very poor show for anybody who have to work 
 or to fight . for himself he could not   imagine any conjuncture that would 
 prevent he have a meal as long as there be something to eat within 
 reach . 
 
 his unwonted garrulity provoke no response , but Peyrol continue to 
 talk in that strain as though his thought be concentrate on food , 
 while his eye rove here and there and his ear be open for the 
 slight sound . when they arrive in front of the house Peyrol stop 
 to glance anxiously down the path to the coast , let the lieutenant 
 enter the caf . the Mediterranean , in that part which could be see from 
 the door of the caf , be as empty of all sail as a yet undiscovered sea . 
 the dull tinkle of a crack bell on the neck of some wandering cow be 
 the only sound that reach he , accentuate the Sunday peace of the 
 farm . two goat be lie down on the western slope of the hill . it all 
 have a very reassuring effect and the anxious expression on Peyrol 's face 
 be pass away when suddenly one of the goat leap to its foot . the 
 rover give a start and become rigid in a pose of tense apprehension . a 
 man who be in such a frame of mind that a leaping goat make he start 
 can not be happy . however , the other goat remain lie down . there be 
 really no reason for alarm , and Peyrol , compose his feature as near 
 as possible to their usual placid expression , follow the lieutenant 
 into the house . 
 
 
 a single cover have be lay at the end of a long table in the salle 
 for the lieutenant , he have his meal there while the other sit down to 
 theirs in the kitchen , the usual strangely assorted company serve by 
 the anxious and silent Catherine . Peyrol , thoughtful and hungry , face 
 Citizen Scevola in his work clothe and very much withdraw within 
 himself . Scevola 's aspect be more feverish than usual , with the red 
 patch on his cheekbone very mark above the thick beard . from time 
 to time the mistress of the farm would get up from her place by the side 
 of old Peyrol and go out into the salle to attend to the lieutenant . the 
 other three people seem unconscious of her absence . towards the end 
 of the meal Peyrol lean back in his wooden chair and let his gaze rest 
 on the ex - terrorist who have not finish yet , and be still busy over 
 his plate with the air of a man who have do a long morning 's work . the 
 door lead from the kitchen to the salle stand wide open , but no sound 
 of voice ever come from there . 
 
 till lately Peyrol have not concern himself very much with the mental 
 state of the people with whom he live . now , however , he wonder to 
 himself what could be the thought of the ex - terrorist patriot , that 
 sanguinary and extremely poor creature occupy the position of master 
 of the Escampobar Farm . but when Citizen Scevola raise his head at last 
 to take a long drink of wine there be nothing new on that face which in 
 its high colour resemble so much a paint mask . their eye meet . 
 
 " Sacrebleu ! " exclaim Peyrol at last . " if you never say anything to 
 anybody like this you will forget how to speak at last . " 
 
 the patriot smile from the depth of his beard , a smile which Peyrol 
 for some reason , mere prejudice perhaps , always think resemble the 
 defensive grin of some small wild animal afraid of be cornered . 
 
 " what be there to talk about ? " he retort . " you live with we ; you 
 have not   budge from here ; I suppose you have count the bunch of 
 grape in the enclosure and the fig on the fig - tree on the west wall 
 many time over . . . . " he pause to lend an ear to the dead silence in 
 the salle , and then say with a slight rise of tone , " you and I know 
 everything that be go on here . " 
 
 Peyrol wrinkle the corner of his eye in a keen , search glance . 
 Catherine clear the table bear herself as if she have be completely 
 deaf . her face , of a walnut colour , with sunken cheek and lip , might 
 have be a carving in the marvellous immobility of its fine wrinkle . 
 her carriage be upright and her hand swift in their movement . Peyrol 
 say : " we do not   want to talk about the farm . have not   you hear any news 
 lately ? " 
 
 the patriot shake his head violently . of public news he have a horror . 
 everything be lose . the country be rule by perjurer and renegade . 
 all the patriotic virtue be dead . he strike the table with his fist 
 and then remain listen as though the blow could have rouse an echo 
 in the silent house . not the faint sound come from anywhere . Citizen 
 Scevola sigh . it seem to he that he be the only patriot left , and 
 even in his retirement his life be not safe . 
 
 " I know , " say Peyrol . " I see the whole affair out of the window . you 
 can run like a hare , citizen . " 
 
 " be I to allow myself to be sacrifice by those superstitious 
 brute ? " argue Citizen Scevola in a high - pitch voice and with 
 genuine indignation which Peyrol watch coldly . he could hardly catch 
 the mutter of " perhaps it would have be just as well if I have let 
 those reactionary dog kill I that time . " 
 
 the old woman wash up at the sink glance uneasily towards the door 
 of the salle . 
 
 " no ! " shout the lonely sans - culotte . " it be not   possible ! there must 
 be plenty of patriot leave in France . the sacred fire be not burn out 
 yet . " 
 
 for a short time he present the appearance of a man who be sit 
 with ash on his head and desolation in his heart . his almond - shape 
 eye look dull , extinguish . but after a moment he give a sidelong 
 look at Peyrol as if to watch the effect and begin declaim in a low 
 voice and apparently as if rehearse a speech to himself : " no , it 
 be not   possible . some day tyranny will stumble and then it will be time 
 to pull it down again . we will come out in our thousand and - a ira ! " 
 
 those word , and even the passionate energy of the tone , leave Peyrol 
 unmove . with his head sustain by his thick brown hand he be think 
 of something else so obviously as to depress again the feebly struggle 
 spirit of terrorism in the lonely breast of Citizen Scevola . the glow of 
 reflect sunlight in the kitchen become darken by the body of the 
 fisherman of the lagoon , mumble a shy greeting to the company from the 
 frame of the doorway . without alter his position Peyrol turn his 
 eye on he curiously . Catherine , wipe her hand on her apron , 
 remark : " you come late for your dinner , Michel . " he step in then , 
 take from the old woman 's hand an earthenware pot and a large hunk of 
 bread and carry they out at once into the yard . Peyrol and the 
 sans - culotte get up from the table . the latter , after hesitate like 
 somebody who have lose his way , go brusquely into the passage , while 
 Peyrol , avoid Catherine 's anxious stare , make for the back - yard . 
 through the open door of the salle he obtain a glimpse of Arlette 
 sit upright with her hand in her lap gaze at somebody he could 
 not see , but who could be no other than Lieutenant Ral . 
 
 in the blaze and heat of the yard the chicken , break up into small 
 group , be have their siesta in patch of shade . but Peyrol care 
 nothing for the sun . Michel , who be eat his dinner under the pent 
 roof of the cart shed , put the earthenware pot down on the ground and 
 join his master at the well encircled by a low wall of stone and 
 top by an arch of wrought iron on which a wild fig - tree have twin a 
 slender offshoot . after his dog 's death the fisherman have abandon the 
 salt lagoon , leave his rotting punt expose on the dismal shore and 
 his miserable net shut up in the dark hut . he do not care for another 
 dog , and besides , who be there to give he a dog ? he be the last of 
 man . somebody must be last . there be no place for he in the life of 
 the village . so one fine morning he have walk up to the farm in order 
 to see Peyrol . more correctly , perhaps , to let himself be see by 
 Peyrol . that be exactly Michel 's only hope . he sit down on a stone 
 outside the gate with a small bundle , consist mainly of an old 
 blanket , and a crooked stick lie on the ground near he , and look 
 the most lonely , mild and harmless creature on this earth . Peyrol have 
 listen gravely to his confused tale of the dog 's death . he , 
 personally , would not have make a friend of a dog like Michel 's dog , but 
 he understand perfectly the sudden break up of the establishment on 
 the shore of the lagoon . so when Michel have conclude with the word , 
 " I think I would come up here , " Peyrol , without wait for a plain 
 request , have say : " Trs bien . you will be my crew , " and have point 
 down the path lead to the seashore . and as Michel , pick up his 
 bundle and stick , start off , wait for no further direction , he have 
 shout after he : " you will find a loaf of bread and a bottle of wine 
 in a locker aft , to break your fast on . " 
 
 these have be the only formality of Michel 's engagement to serve as 
 " crew " on board Peyrol 's boat . the rover indeed have try without loss 
 of time to carry out his purpose of get something of his own that 
 would float . it be not so easy to find anything worthy . the miserable 
 population of Madrague , a tiny fishing hamlet face towards Toulon , have 
 nothing to sell . moreover , Peyrol look with contempt on all their 
 possession . he would have as soon buy a catamaran of three log of 
 wood tie together with rattan as one of their boat ; but lonely and 
 prominent on the beach , lie on her side in weather - beat melancholy , 
 there be a two - masted tartane with her sun - whitened cordage hang in 
 festoon and her dry mast show long crack . no man be ever see 
 doze under the shade of her hull on which the Mediterranean gull make 
 themselves very much at home . she look a wreck throw high up on the 
 land by a disdainful sea . Peyrol , have survey she from a distance , 
 see that the rudder still hang in its place . he run his eye along her 
 body and say to himself that a craft with such line would sail well . 
 she be much big than anything he have think of , but in her size , 
 too , there be a fascination . it seem to bring all the shore of the 
 Mediterranean within his reach , Baleares and Corsica , Barbary and Spain . 
 Peyrol have sail over hundred of league of ocean in craft that be 
 no big . at his back in silent wonder a knot of fisherman 's wife , 
 bareheaded and lean , with a swarm of ragged child cling to their 
 skirt , watch the first stranger they have see for year . 
 
 Peyrol borrow a short ladder in the hamlet   he know well than to 
 trust his weight to any of the rope hang over the side   and carry 
 it down to the beach follow at a respectful distance by the star 
 woman and child : a phenomenon and a wonder to the native , as it have 
 happen to he before on more than one island in distant sea . he 
 clamber on board the neglect tartane and stand on the deck 
 forepart , the centre of all eye . a gull fly away with an angry scream . 
 the bottom of the open hold contain nothing but a little sand , a few 
 broken piece of wood , a rusty hook , and some few stalk of straw which 
 the wind must have carry for mile before they find their rest in 
 there . the deck after - part have a small skylight and a companion , and 
 Peyrol 's eye rest fascinated on an enormous padlock which secure its 
 slide door . it be as if there have be secret or treasure inside 
  - and yet most probably it be empty . Peyrol turn his head away and 
 with the whole strength of his lung shout in the direction of the 
 fisherman 's wife who have be join by two very old man and a 
 hunchbacke cripple swing between two crutch : 
 
 " be there anybody look after this tartane , a caretaker ? " 
 
 at first the only answer be a movement of recoil . only the hunchback 
 hold his ground and shout back in an unexpectedly strong voice : 
 
 " you be the first man that have be on board she for year . " 
 
 the wife of the fisherman admire his boldness , for Peyrol indeed 
 appear to they a very formidable being . 
 
 " I might have guess that , " think Peyrol . " she be in a dreadful 
 mess . " the disturbed gull have bring some friend as indignant as 
 itself and they circle at different level utter wild cry over 
 Peyrol 's head . he shout again : 
 
 " who do she belong to ? " 
 
 the be on crutch lift a finger towards the circle bird and 
 answer in a deep tone : 
 
 " they be the only one I know . " then , as Peyrol gaze down at he 
 over the side , he go on : " this craft use to belong to Escampobar . 
 you know Escampobar ? it be a house in the hollow between the hill there . " 
 
 " yes , I know Escampobar , " yell Peyrol , turn away and lean 
 against the mast in a pose which he do not change for a long time . his 
 immobility tired out the crowd . they move slowly in a body towards 
 their hovel , the hunchback bring up the rear with long swing 
 between his crutch , and Peyrol remain alone with the angry gull . he 
 linger on board the tragic craft which have take Arlette 's parent to 
 their death in the vengeful massacre of Toulon and have bring the 
 youthful Arlette and Citizen Scevola back to Escampobar where old 
 Catherine , leave alone at that time , have wait for day for somebody 's 
 return . day of anguish and prayer , while she listen to the booming of 
 gun about Toulon and with an almost great but different terror to the 
 dead silence which ensue . 
 
 Peyrol , enjoy the sensation of some sort of craft under his foot , 
 indulge in no image of horror connect with that desolate tartane . it 
 be late in the evening before he return to the farm , so that he have 
 to have his supper alone . the woman have retire , only the sans - culotte , 
 smoke a short pipe out of door , have follow he into the kitchen and 
 ask where he have be and whether he have lose his way . this question 
 give Peyrol an opening . he have be to Madrague and have see a very fine 
 tartane lying perish on the beach . 
 
 " they tell I down there that she belong to you , citoyen . " 
 
 at this the terrorist only blink . 
 
 " what be the matter ? be not   she the craft you come here in ? will not   you 
 sell she to I ? " Peyrol wait a little . " what objection can you have ? " 
 
 it appear that the patriot have no positive objection . he mumble 
 something about the tartane be very dirty . this cause Peyrol to look 
 at he with intense astonishment . 
 
 " I be ready to take she off your hand as she stand . " 
 
 " I will be frank with you , citoyen . you see , when she lie at the quay 
 in Toulon a lot of fugitive traitor , man and woman , and child too , 
 swarm on board of she , and cut the rope with a view of escaping , but 
 the avenger be not far behind and make short work of they . when we 
 discover she behind the Arsenal , I and another man , we have to throw a 
 lot of body overboard , out of the hold and the cabin . you will find 
 her very dirty all over . we have no time to clear up . " Peyrol feel 
 inclined to laugh . he have see deck swim in blood and have himself 
 help to throw dead body overboard after a fight ; but he eye the 
 citizen with an unfriendly eye . he think to himself : " he have a hand 
 in that massacre , no doubt , " but he make no audible remark . he only 
 think of the enormous padlock securing that empty charnel house at 
 the stern . the terrorist insist . " we really have not a moment to clean 
 she up . the circumstance be such that it be necessary for I to get 
 away quickly lest some of the false patriot should do I some 
 carmagnole or other . there have be bitter quarrelling in my section . I 
 be not alone in get away , you know . " 
 
 Peyrol wave his arm to cut short the explanation . but before he and the 
 terrorist have part for the night Peyrol could regard himself as the 
 owner of the tragic tartane . 
 
 next day he return to the hamlet and take up his quarter there for a 
 time . the awe he have inspire wear off , though no one care to come very 
 near the tartane . Peyrol do not want any help . he wrench off the 
 enormous padlock himself with a bar of iron and let the light of day 
 into the little cabin which do indeed bear the trace 's of the massacre 
 in the stain of blood on its woodwork , but contain nothing else 
 except a wisp of long hair and a woman 's earring , a cheap thing which 
 Peyrol pick up and look at for a long time . the association of such 
 find be not foreign to his past . he could without very strong emotion 
 figure to himself the little place choke with corps . he sit down and 
 look about at the stain and splash which have be untouched by 
 sunlight for year . the cheap little earring lie before he on the 
 rough - hewn table between the locker , and he shake his head at it 
 weightily . he , at any rate , have never be a butcher . 
 
 Peyrol unassisted do all the cleaning . then he turn con amore to the 
 fitting out of the tartane . the habit of activity still clung to he . 
 he welcome something to do ; this congenial task have all the air of 
 preparation for a voyage , which be a pleasing dream , and it bring 
 every evening the satisfaction of something achieve to that illusory 
 end . he rove new gear , scrap the mast himself , do all the sweeping , 
 scrub and paint single - handed , work steadily and hopefully as 
 though he have be prepare his escape from a desert island ; and 
 directly he have clean and renovate the dark little hole of a cabin he 
 take to sleep on board . once only he go up on a visit to the farm 
 for a couple of day , as if to give himself a holiday . he pass they 
 mostly in observe Arlette . she be perhaps the first problematic human 
 be he have ever be in contact with . Peyrol have no contempt for 
 woman . he have see they love , suffer , endure , riot , and even fight for 
 their own hand , very much like man . generally with man and woman you have 
 to be on your guard , but in some way woman be more to be trust . as 
 a matter of fact , his country - woman be to he less known than any 
 other kind . from his experience of many different race , however , he have 
 a vague idea that woman be very much alike everywhere . this one be a 
 lovable creature . she produce on he the effect of a child , arouse a 
 kind of intimate emotion which he have not know before to exist by 
 itself in a man . he be startle by its detached character . " be it that 
 I be get old ? " he ask himself suddenly one evening , as he sit on 
 the bench against the wall look straight before he , after she have 
 cross his line of sight . 
 
 he feel himself an object of observation to Catherine , whom he use to 
 detect peep at he round corner or through half - open door . on his 
 part he would stare at her openly - aware of the impression he produce 
 on she : mingle curiosity and awe . he have the idea she do not 
 disapprove of his presence at the farm , where , it be plain to he , she 
 have a far from easy life . this have no relation to the fact that she do 
 all the household work . she be a woman of about his own age , straight 
 as a dart but with a wrinkle face . one evening as they be sit 
 alone in the kitchen Peyrol say to she : " you must have be a handsome 
 girl in your day , Catherine . it be strange you never get marry . " 
 
 she turn to he under the high mantel of the fireplace and seem 
 strike all of a heap , unbelieving , amazed , so that Peyrol be quite 
 provoke . " what be the matter ? if the old moke in the yard have speak 
 you could not look more surprised . you can not   deny that you be a 
 handsome girl . " 
 
 she recover from her scare to say : " I be bear here , grow up here , 
 and early in my life I make up my mind to die here . " 
 
 " a strange notion , " say Peyrol , " for a young girl to take into her 
 head . " 
 
 " it be not a thing to talk about , " say the old woman , stoop to get 
 a pot out of the warm ash . " I do not think , then , " she go on , 
 with she back to Peyrol , " that I would live long . when I be eighteen I 
 fall in love with a priest . " 
 
 " ah , bah ! " exclaim Peyrol under his breath . 
 
 " that be the time when I pray for death , " she pursue in a quiet 
 voice . " I spend night on my knee upstairs in that room where you 
 sleep now . I shun everybody . People begin to say I be crazy . we have 
 always be hat by the rabble about here . they have poisonous tongue . 
 I get the nickname of ` la fiance du prtre . " yes , I be handsome , but who 
 would have look at I if I have want to be look at ? my only luck 
 be to have a fine man for a brother . he understand . no word pass his 
 lip , but sometimes when we be alone and not even his wife be by , he 
 would lay his hand on my shoulder gently . from that time to this I have 
 not be to church and I never will go . but I have no quarrel with God 
 now . " 
 
 there be no sign of watchfulness and care in her bearing now . she 
 stand straight as an arrow before Peyrol and look at he with a 
 confident air . the rover be not yet ready to speak . he only nod 
 twice and Catherine turn away to put the pot to cool in the sink . 
 " yes , I wish to die . but I do not , and now I have get something to 
 do , " she say , sit down near the fireplace and take her chin in 
 her hand . " and I daresay you know what that be , " she add . 
 
 Peyrol get up deliberately . 
 
 " well ! bonsoir , " he say . " I be off to Madrague . I want to begin work 
 again on the tartane at daylight . " 
 
 " do not   talk to I about the tartane , she take my brother away for ever . 
 I stand on the shore watch her sail grow small and small . 
 then I come up alone to this farmhouse . " 
 
 move calmly her fade lip which no lover or child have ever kiss , 
 old Catherine tell Peyrol of the day and night of wait , with the 
 distant growl of the big gun in her ear . she use to sit outside on 
 the bench long for news , watch the flicker in the sky and 
 listen to heavy burst of gunfire come over the water . then come a 
 night as if the world be come to an end . all the sky be light up , 
 the earth shake to its foundation , and she feel the house rock , so that 
 jump up from the bench she scream with fear . that night she never 
 go to bed . next morning she see the sea cover with sail , while a 
 black and yellow cloud of smoke hang over Toulon . a man come up from 
 Madrague tell she that he believe that the whole town have be blow 
 up . she give he a bottle of wine and he help she to feed the stock 
 that evening . before go home he express the opinion that there 
 could not be a soul leave alive in Toulon , because the few that survive 
 would have go away in the english ship . nearly a week later she be 
 doze by the fire when voice outside wake she up , and she behold 
 stand in the middle of the salle , pale like a corpse out of a grave , 
 with a blood - soak blanket over her shoulder and a red cap on her 
 head , a ghastly look young girl in whom she suddenly recognize her 
 niece . she scream in her terror : " Franois , Franois ! " this be her 
 brother 's name , and she think he be outside . her scream scar the 
 girl , who run out of the door . all be still outside . once more she 
 scream " Franois ! " and , totter as far as the door , she see her 
 niece cling to a strange man in a red cap and with a sabre by his 
 side who yell excitedly : " you will not   see Franois again . Vive la 
 Rpublique ! " 
 
 " I recognize the son Bron , " go on Catherine . " I know his parent . 
 when the trouble begin he leave his home to follow the Revolution . I 
 walk straight up to he and take the girl away from his side . she 
 do not   want much coax . the child always love I , " she continue , 
 get up from the stool and move a little close to Peyrol . " she 
 remember her Aunt Catherine . I tear the horrid blanket off her 
 shoulder . her hair be clot with blood and her clothe all stain 
 with it . I take she upstairs . she be as helpless as a little child . I 
 undress she and examine she all over . she have no hurt anywhere . I be 
 sure of that - but of what more could I be sure ? I could not   make sense 
 of the thing she babble at I . her very voice distract I . she fall 
 asleep directly I have put she into my bed , and I stand there look 
 down at she , nearly go out of my mind with the thought of what that 
 child may have be drag through . when I go downstairs I find that 
 good - for - nothing inside the house . he be rant up and down the salle , 
 vapouring and boasting till I think all this must be an awful dream . 
 my head be in a whirl . he lay claim to she , and God know what . I 
 seem to understand thing that make my hair stir on my head . I stand 
 there clasp my hand with all the strength I have , for fear I should 
 go out of my sens . " 
 
 " he frighten you , " say Peyrol , look at she steadily . Catherine 
 move a step near to he . 
 
 " what ? the son Bron , frighten I ! he be the butt of all the girl , 
 moon about amongst the people outside the church on feast day in the 
 time of the king . all the countryside know about he . no . what I say to 
 myself be that I must not   let he kill I . there upstairs be the child 
 I have just get away from he , and there be I , all alone with that man 
 with the sabre and unable to get hold of a kitchen knife even . " 
 
 " and so he remain , " say Peyrol . 
 
 " what would you have have I to do ? " ask Catherine steadily . " he have 
 bring the child back out of those shamble . it be a long time before 
 I get an idea of what have happen . I do not   know everything even yet and 
 I suppose I will never know . in a very few day my mind be more at case 
 about Arlette , but it be a long time before she would speak and then it 
 be never anything to the purpose . and what could I have do 
 single - handed ? there be nobody I would condescend to call to my help . 
 we of the Escampobar have never be in favour with the peasant here , " 
 she say , proudly . " and this be all I can tell you . " 
 
 her voice falter , she sit down on the stool again and take her chin in 
 the palm of her hand . as Peyrol leave the house to go to the hamlet he 
 see Arlette and the patron come round the corner of the yard wall 
 walk side by side but as if unconscious of each other . 
 
 that night he sleep on board the renovate tartane and the rise sun 
 find he at work about the hull . by that time he have cease to be the 
 object of awed contemplation to the inhabitant of the hamlet who still , 
 however , keep up a mistrustful attitude . his only intermediary for 
 communicating with they be the miserable cripple . he be Peyrol 's only 
 company , in fact , during his period of work on the tartane . he have more 
 activity , audacity , and intelligence , it seem to Peyrol , than all the 
 rest of the inhabitant put together . early in the morning he could be 
 see make his way on his crutch with a pendulum motion towards the 
 hull on which Peyrol would have be already an hour or so at work . 
 Peyrol then would throw he over a sound rope 's end and the cripple , 
 lean his crutch against the side of the tartane , would pull his 
 wretched little carcass , all wither below the waist , up the rope , hand 
 over hand , with extreme ease . there , sit on the small foredeck , with 
 his back against the mast and his thin , twisted leg fold in front of 
 he , he would keep Peyrol company , talk to he along the whole length 
 of the tartane in a strained voice and share his midday meal , as of 
 right , since it be he generally who bring the provision sling round 
 his neck in a quaint flat basket . thus be the hour of labour 
 shorten for Peyrol by shrewd remark and bit of local gossip . how the 
 cripple get hold of it it be difficult to imagine , and the rover have 
 not enough knowledge of european superstition to suspect he of fly 
 through the night on a broomstick like a sort of male witch - for there 
 be a manliness in that twisted scrap of humanity which strike Peyrol 
 from the first . his very voice be manly and the character of his gossip 
 be not feminine . he do indeed mention to Peyrol that people use to 
 take he about the neighbourhood in cart for the purpose of play a 
 fiddle at wedding and other festive occasion ; but this seem hardly 
 adequate , and even he himself confess that there be not much of that 
 sort of thing go on during the Revolution when people do not   like to 
 attract attention and everything be do in a hole - and - corner manner . 
 there be no priest to officiate at wedding , and if there be no 
 ceremony how could there be rejoicing ? of course child be bear 
 as before , but there be no christening - and people get to look funny 
 somehow or other . their countenance get change somehow ; the very boy 
 and girl seem to have something on their mind . 
 
 Peyrol , busy about one thing and another , listen without appear to 
 pay much attention to the story of the Revolution , as if to the tale of 
 an intelligent islander on the other side of the world talk of bloody 
 rite and amazing hope of some religion unknown to the rest of mankind . 
 but there be something bite in the speech of that cripple which 
 confuse his thought a little . Sarcasm be a mystery which he could not 
 understand . on one occasion he remark to his friend the cripple as 
 they sit together on the foredeck munch the bread and fig of their 
 midday meal : 
 
 " there must have be something in it . but it do not   seem to have do 
 much for you people here . " 
 
 " to be sure , " retort the scrap of man vivaciously , " it have not  
 straighten my back or give I a pair of leg like your . " 
 
 Peyrol , whose trouser be roll up above the knee because he have be 
 wash the hold , look at his calf complacently . " you could hardly 
 have expect that , " he remark with simplicity . 
 
 " ah , but you do not   know what people with properly make body expect 
 or pretend to , " say the cripple . " everything be go to be 
 change . everybody be go to tie up his dog with a string of sausage 
 for the sake of principle . " his long face which , in repose , have an 
 expression of suffer peculiar to cripple , be light up by an 
 enormous grin . " they must feel jolly well sell by this time , " he 
 add . " and of course that vex they , but I be not vex . I be never 
 vex with my father and mother . while the poor thing be alive I 
 never go hungry - not very hungry . they could not   have be very proud 
 of I . " he pause and seem to contemplate himself mentally . " I do not  
 know what I would have do in their place . something very different . 
 but then , do not   you see , I know what it mean to be like I be . of course 
 they could not   know , and I do not   suppose the poor people have very much 
 sense . a priest from Almanarre - Almanarre be a sort of village up there 
 where there be a church . . . . " 
 
 Peyrol interrupt he by remark that he know all about Almanarre . 
 this , on his part , be a simple delusion because in reality he know much 
 less of Almanarre than of Zanzibar or any pirate village from there up 
 to Cape Guardafui . and the cripple contemplate he with his brown eye 
 which have an upward cast naturally . 
 
 " you know . . . ! for I , " he go on , in a tone of quiet decision , 
 " you be a man fall from the sky . well , a priest from Almanarre come 
 to bury they . a fine man with a stern face . the fine man I have see 
 from that time till you drop on we here . there be a story of a girl 
 have fall in love with he some year before . I be old enough then 
 to have hear something of it , but that be neither here nor there . 
 moreover , many people would not   believe the tale . " 
 
 Peyrol , without look at the cripple , try to imagine what sort of 
 child he might have be - what sort of youth ? the rover have see 
 staggering deformity , dreadful mutilation which be the cruel work 
 of man ; but it be amongst people with dusky skin . and that make a 
 great difference . but what he have hear and see since he have come back 
 to his native land , the tale , the fact , and also the face , reach 
 his sensibility with a particular force , because of that feeling that 
 come to he so suddenly after a whole lifetime spend amongst Indians , 
 malagashe , Arabs , blackamoor of all sort , that he belong there , to 
 this land , and have escape all those thing by a mere hair 's breadth . 
 his companion complete his significant silence , which seem to have 
 be occupy with thought very much like his own , by say : 
 
 " all this be in the king 's time . they do not   cut off his head till 
 several year afterwards . it do not   make my life any easy for I , but 
 since those Republicans have depose God and fling he out of all the 
 church I have forgive he all my trouble . " 
 
 " speak like a man , " say Peyrol . only the misshapen character of the 
 cripple 's back prevent Peyrol from give he a hearty slap . he get up 
 to begin his afternoon 's work . it be a bit of inside painting and from 
 the foredeck the cripple watch he at it with dreamy eye and 
 something ironic on his lip . 
 
 it be not till the sun have travel over Cape Cici , which could be 
 see across the water like dark mist in the glare , that he open his 
 lip to ask : " and what do you propose to do with this tartane , citoyen ? " 
 
 Peyrol answer simply that the tartane be fit to go anywhere now , the 
 very moment she take the water . 
 
 " you could go as far as Genoa and Naples and even far , " suggest 
 the cripple . 
 
 " much far , " say Peyrol . 
 
 " and you have be fit she out like this for a voyage ? " 
 
 " certainly , " say Peyrol , use his brush steadily . 
 
 " somehow I fancy it will not be a long one . " 
 
 Peyrol never check the to - and - fro movement of his brush , but it be 
 with an effort . the fact be that he have discover in himself a 
 distinct reluctance to go away from the Escampobar Farm . his desire to 
 have something of his own that could float be no long associate with 
 any desire to wander . the cripple be right . the voyage of the renovated 
 tartane would not take she very far . what be surprising be the fellow 
 be so very positive about it . he seem able to read people 's thought . 
 
 the dragging of the renovate tartane into the water be a great affair . 
 everybody in the hamlet , include the woman , do a full day 's work and 
 there be never so much coin pass from hand to hand in the hamlet in 
 all the day of its obscure history . swing between his crutch on a 
 low sand - ridge the cripple survey the whole of the beach . it be he 
 that have persuade the villager to lend a hand and have arrange the 
 term for their assistance . it be he also who through a very 
 miserable - look pedlar   the only one who frequent the peninsula   have 
 get in touch with some rich person in Frjus who have change for Peyrol 
 a few of his gold piece for current money . he have expedite the course 
 of the most exciting and interesting experience of his life , and now 
 plant on the sand on his two stick in the manner of a beacon he 
 watch the last operation . the rover , as if about to launch himself 
 upon a track of a thousand mile , walk up to shake hand with he and 
 look once more at the soft eye and the ironic smile . 
 
 " there be no deny it - you be a man . " 
 
 " do not   talk like this to I , citoyen , " say the cripple in a trembling 
 voice . till then , suspend between his two stick and with his 
 shoulder as high as his ear , he have not look towards the approach 
 Peyrol . " this be too much of a compliment ! " 
 
 " I tell you , " insist the rover roughly , and as if the insignificance 
 of mortal envelope have present itself to he for the first time at 
 the end of his rove life , " I tell you that there be that in you which 
 would make a chum one would like to have alongside one in a tight place . " 
 
 as he go away from the cripple towards the tartane , while the whole 
 population of the hamlet dispose around she wait for his word , some 
 on land and some waist - deep in the water hold rope in their hand , 
 Peyrol have a slight shudder at the thought : " suppose I have be bear 
 like that . " ever since he have put his foot on his native land such 
 thought have haunt he . they would have be impossible anywhere else . 
 he could not have be like any blackamoor , good , bad , or indifferent , 
 hale or crippled , king or slave ; but here , on this Southern shore that 
 have call to he irresistibly as he have approach the Straits of 
 Gibraltar on what he have feel to be his last voyage , any woman , lean and 
 old enough , might have be his mother ; he might have be any Frenchman 
 of they all , even one of those he pity , even one of those he despise . 
 he feel the grip of his origin from the crown of his head to the sol 
 of his foot while he clamber on board the tartane as if for a long and 
 distant voyage . as a matter of fact he know very well that with a bit of 
 luck it would be over in about an hour . when the tartane take the water 
 the feeling of be afloat pluck at his very heart . some Madrague 
 fisherman have be persuade by the cripple to help old Peyrol to sail 
 the tartane round to the cove below the Escampobar Farm . a glorious sun 
 shine upon that short passage and the cove itself be full of sparkle 
 light when they arrive . the few Escampobar goat wander on the 
 hillside pretend to feed where no grass be visible to the naked eye 
 never even raise their head . a gentle breeze drive the tartane , as 
 fresh as paint could make she , opposite a narrow crack in the cliff 
 which give admittance to a tiny basin , no big than a village pond , 
 conceal at the foot of the southern hill . it be there that old 
 Peyrol , aid by the Madrague man , who have their boat with they , tow 
 his ship , the first really that he ever own . 
 
 once in , the tartane nearly fill the little basin , and the fisherman , 
 get into their boat , row away for home . Peyrol , by spend the 
 afternoon in drag rope ashore and fasten they to various 
 boulder and dwarf tree , moor she to his complete satisfaction . she 
 be as safe from the tempest there as a house ashore . 
 
 after he have make everything fast on board and have furl the sail 
 neatly , a matter of some time for one man , Peyrol contemplate his 
 arrangement which savour of rest much more than of wander , and 
 find they good . though he never mean to abandon his room at the 
 farmhouse he feel that his true home be in the tartane , and he rejoice 
 at the idea that it be conceal from all eye except perhaps the eye 
 of the goat when their arduous feeding take they on the southern slope . 
 he linger on board , he even throw open the slide door of the little 
 cabin , which now smell of fresh paint , not of stale blood . before he 
 start for the farm the sun have travel far beyond Spain and all the 
 sky to the west be yellow , while on the side of Italy it present a 
 sombre canopy pierce here and there with the light of star . Catherine 
 put a plate on the table , but nobody ask he any question . 
 
 he spend a lot of his time on board , go down early , come up at 
 midday " pour manger la soupe , " and sleep on board almost every 
 night . he do not like to leave the tartane alone for so many hour . 
 often , have climb a little way up to the house , he would turn round 
 for a last look at she in the gathering dusk , and actually would go back 
 again . after Michel have be enlist for a crew and have take his abode 
 on board for good , Peyrol find it a much easy matter to spend his 
 night in the lantern - like room at the top of the farmhouse . 
 
 often wake up at night he would get up to look at the starry sky out 
 of all his three window in succession , and think : " now there be 
 nothing in the world to prevent I get out to sea in less than an 
 hour . " as a matter of fact it be possible for two man to manage the 
 tartane . thus Peyrol 's thought be comfortingly true in every way , for 
 he love to feel himself free , and Michel of the lagoon , after the death 
 of his depressed dog , have no tie on earth . it be a fine thought which 
 somehow make it quite easy for Peyrol to go back to his four - poster and 
 resume his slumber . 
 
 
 perch sideways on the circular wall border the well , in the full 
 blaze of the midday sun , the rover of the distant sea and the fisherman 
 of the lagoon , share between they a most surprising secret , have the 
 air of two man confer in the dark . the first word that Peyrol say 
 be , " well ? " 
 
 " all quiet , " say the other . 
 
 " have you fasten the cabin door properly ? " 
 
 " you know what the fastening be like . " 
 
 Peyrol could not deny that . it be a sufficient answer . it shift the 
 responsibility on to his shoulder and all his life he have be 
 accustom to trust to the work of his own hand , in peace and in war . 
 yet he look doubtfully at Michel before he remark : 
 
 " yes , but I know the man too . " 
 
 there could be no great contrast than those two face : Peyrol 's clean , 
 like a carving of stone , and only very little soften by time , and that 
 of the owner of the late dog , hirsute , with many silver thread , with 
 something elusive in the feature and the vagueness of expression of a 
 baby in arm . " yes , I know the man , " repeat Peyrol . Michel 's mouth 
 fall open at this , a small oval set a little crookedly in the innocent face . 
 
 " he will never wake , " he suggest timidly . 
 
 the possession of a common and momentous secret draw man together , 
 Peyrol condescend to explain . 
 
 " you do not   know the thickness of his skull . I do . " 
 
 he speak as though he have make it himself . Michel , who in the face of 
 that positive statement have forget to shut his mouth , have nothing to say . 
 
 " he breathe all right ? " ask Peyrol . 
 
 " yes . after I get out and lock the door I listen for a bit and I 
 think I hear he snore . " 
 
 Peyrol look interested and also slightly anxious . 
 
 " I have to come up and show myself this morning as if nothing have 
 happen , " he say . " the officer have be here for two day and he 
 might have take it into his head to go down to the tartane . I have be 
 on the stretch all the morning . a goat jump up be enough to give I 
 a turn . fancy he run up here with his broken head all bandage up , 
 with you after he . " 
 
 this seem to be too much for Michel . he say almost indignantly : 
 
 " the man 's half kill . " 
 
 " it take a lot to even half kill a Brother of the Coast . there be man 
 and man . you , for instance , " Peyrol continue placidly , " you would 
 have be altogether kill if it have be your head that get in the 
 way . and there be animal , beast twice your size , regular monster , 
 that may be kill with nothing more than just a tap on the nose . that be 
 well know . I be really afraid he would overcome you in some way or 
 other . . . . " 
 
 " come , matre ! one be not   a little child , " protest Michel against this 
 accumulation of improbability . he do it , however , only in a whisper 
 and with childlike shyness . Peyrol fold his arm on his breast : 
 
 " go , finish your soup , " he command in a low voice , " and then go 
 down to the tartane . you lock the cabin door properly , you say ? " 
 
 " yes , I have , " protest Michel , stagger by this display of anxiety . 
 " he could soon burst the deck above his head , as you know . " 
 
 " all the same , take a small spar and shore up that door against the 
 heel of the mast . and then watch outside . do not   you go in to he on any 
 account . stay on deck and keep a lookout for I . there be a tangle here 
 that will not   be easily clear and I must be very careful . I will try to 
 slip away and get down as soon as I get rid of that officer . " 
 
 the conference in the sunshine be end , Peyrol walk leisurely out 
 of the yard gate , and protrude his head beyond the corner of the 
 house , see Lieutenant Ral sit on the bench . this he have expect to 
 see . but he have not expect to see he there alone . it be just like 
 this : wherever Arlette happen to be , there be worry 
 possibility . but she might have be help her aunt in the kitchen 
 with her sleeve roll up on such white arm as Peyrol have never see 
 on any woman before . the way she have take to dress her hair in a 
 plait with a broad black velvet ribbon and an arlesian cap be very 
 become . she be wear now her mother 's clothe of which there be 
 chestful , alter for she of course . the late mistress of the 
 Escampobar Farm have be an Arlesienne . well - to - do , too . yes , even for 
 woman 's clothe the Escampobar native could do without intercourse with 
 the outer world . it be quite time that this confound lieutenant go 
 back to Toulon . this be the third day . his short leave must be up . 
 Peyrol 's attitude towards naval officer have be always guard and 
 suspicious . his relation with they have be very mixed . they have be 
 his enemy and his superior . he have be chase by they . he have be 
 trust by they . the Revolution have make a clean cut across the 
 consistency of his wild life - brother of the Coast and gunner in the 
 national navy - and yet he be always the same man . it be like that , 
 too , with they . officer of the king , officer of the Republic , it be 
 only change the skin . all alike look askance at a free rover . even 
 this one could not forget his epaulette when talk to he . scorn and 
 mistrust of epaulette be root deeply in old Peyrol . yet he do not 
 absolutely hate Lieutenant Ral . only the fellow be come to the farm be 
 generally a curse and his presence at that particular moment a 
 confound nuisance and to a certain extent even a danger . " I have no 
 mind to be haul to Toulon by the scruff of my neck , " Peyrol say to 
 himself . there be no trust those epaulette - wearer . any one of they 
 be capable of jump on his good friend on account of some 
 officer - like notion or other . 
 
 Peyrol , step round the corner , sit down by the side of Lieutenant 
 Ral with the feeling somehow of come to grip with a slippery 
 customer . the lieutenant , as he sit there , unaware of Peyrol 's survey of 
 his person , give no notion of slipperiness . on the contrary , he look 
 rather immovably establish . very much at home . too much at home . even 
 after Peyrol sit down by his side he continue to look immovable - or at 
 least difficult to get rid of . in the still noonday heat the faint 
 shrilling of cicada be the only sound of life hear for quite a long 
 time . delicate , evanescent , cheerful , careless sort of life , yet not 
 without passion . a sudden gloom seem to be cast over the joy of the 
 cicada by the lieutenant 's voice though the word be the most 
 perfunctory possible . 
 
 " Tiens ! vous voil . " 
 
 in the stress of the situation Peyrol at once ask himself : " now why 
 do he say that ? where do he expect I to be ? " the lieutenant need 
 not have speak at all . he have know he now for about two year off and 
 on , and it have happen many time that they have sit side by side on 
 that bench in a sort of " at arm 's length " equality without exchange 
 a single word . and why could he not have keep quiet now ? that naval 
 officer never speak without an object , but what could one make of word 
 like that ? Peyrol achieve an insincere yawn and suggest mildly : 
 
 " a bit of siesta would not   be amiss . what do you think , lieutenant ? " 
 
 and to himself he think : " no fear , he will not   go to his room . " he 
 would stay there and thereby keep he , Peyrol , from go down to the 
 cove . he turn his eye on that naval officer , and if extreme and 
 concentrated desire and mere force of will could have have any effect 
 Lieutenant Ral would certainly have be remove suddenly from that 
 bench . but he do not   move . and Peyrol be astonish to see that man 
 smile , but what astonish he still more be to hear he say : 
 
 " the trouble be that you have never be frank with I , Peyrol . " 
 
 " Frank with you , " repeat the rover . " you want I to be frank with 
 you ? well , I have wish you to the devil many time . " 
 
 " that be well , " say Lieutenant Ral . " but why ? I never try to do 
 you any harm . " 
 
 " I harm , " cry Peyrol , " to I ? " but he falter in his indignation 
 as if frighten at it and end in a very quiet tone : " you have be 
 nose in a lot of dirty paper to find something against a man who be 
 not do you any harm and be a seaman before you be bear . " 
 
 " quite a mistake . there be no nosing amongst paper . I come on they 
 quite by accident . I will not   deny I be intrigu find a man of your sort 
 live in this place . but do not   be uneasy . nobody would trouble his head 
 about you . it be a long time since you have be forget . have no fear . " 
 
 " you ! you talk to I of fear . . . ? no , " cry the rover , " it be 
 enough to turn a fellow into a san - culotte if it be not   for the sight 
 of that speciman sneak around here . " 
 
 the lieutenant turn his head sharply , and for a moment the naval 
 officer and the free sea - rover look at each other gloomily . when 
 Peyrol speak again he have change his mood . 
 
 " why should I fear anybody ? I owe nothing to anybody . I have give they 
 up the prize ship in order and everything else , except my luck ; and for 
 that I account to nobody , " he add darkly . 
 
 " I do not   know what you be drive at , " the lieutenant say after a 
 moment of thought . " all I know be that you seem to have give up your 
 share of the prize money . there be no record of you ever claim it . " 
 
 Peyrol do not like the sarcastic tone . " you have a nasty tongue , " he 
 say , " with your damned trick of talk as if you be make of 
 different clay . " 
 
 " no offence , "   say the lieutenant , grave but a little puzzle . 
 " nobody will drag out that against you . it have be pay year ago to 
 the Invalides   fund . all this be bury and forget . " 
 
 Peyrol be grumble and swear to himself with such concentration 
 that the lieutenant stop and wait till he have finish . 
 
 " and there be no record of desertion or anything like that , " he 
 continue then . " you stand there as disparu . I believe that after 
 search for you a little they come to the conclusion that you have come 
 by your death somehow or other . " 
 
 " do they ? well , perhaps old Peyrol be dead . at any rate he have bury 
 himself here . " the rover suffer from great instability of feeling 
 for he pass in a flash from melancholy into fierceness . " and he be 
 quiet enough till you come sniff around this hole . More than once in 
 my life I have occasion to wonder how soon the jackal would have a 
 chance to dig up my carcass ; but to have a naval officer come scratch 
 round here be the last thing . . . . " again a change come over he . 
 " what can you want here ? " he whisper , suddenly depressed . 
 
 the lieutenant fall into the humour of that discourse . " I do not   want to 
 disturb the dead , " he say , turn full to the rover who after his 
 last word have fix his eye on the ground . " I want to talk to the 
 gunner Peyrol . " 
 
 Peyrol , without raise his eye from the ground , growl : " he be not  
 here . he be disparu . go and look at the paper again . vanish . nobody 
 here . " 
 
 " that , " say Lieutenant Ral , in a conversational tone , " that be a 
 lie . he be talk to I this morning on the hillside as we be 
 look at the english ship . he know all about she . he tell I he spend 
 night make plan for her capture . he seem to be a fellow with his 
 heart in the right place . Un homme de cur . you know he . " 
 
 Peyrol raise his big head slowly and look at the lieutenant . 
 
 " Humph , " he grunt . a heavy , non - committal grunt . his old heart be 
 stir , but the tangle be such that he have to be on his guard with any 
 man who wear epaulette . his profile preserve the immobility of a head 
 strike on a medal while he listen to the lieutenant assure he that 
 this time he have come to Escampobar on purpose to speak with the gunner 
 Peyrol . that he have not do so before be because it be a very 
 confidential matter . at this point the lieutenant stop and Peyrol 
 make no sign . inwardly he be ask himself what the lieutenant be 
 drive at . but the lieutenant seem to have shift his ground . his 
 tone , too , be slightly different . more practical . 
 
 " you say you have make a study of that english ship 's movement . well , 
 for instance , suppose a breeze spring up , as it very likely will 
 towards the evening , could you tell I where she will be to - night ? I 
 mean , what her captain be likely to do . " 
 
 " no , I could not , " say Peyrol . 
 
 " but you say you have be observe he minutely for week . there 
 be not   so many alternative , and take the weather and everything into 
 consideration , you can judge almost with certainty . " 
 
 " no , " say Peyrol again . " it so happen that I can not . " 
 
 " can not   you ? then you be bad than any of the old admiral that you 
 think so little of . why can not   you ? " 
 
 " I will tell you why , " say Peyrol after a pause and with a face more 
 like a carving than ever . " it be because the fellow have never come so 
 far this way before . therefore I do not   know what he have get in his mind , 
 and in consequence I can not   guess what he will do next . I may be able to 
 tell you some other day but not to - day . next time when you come . . . to 
 see the old gunner . " 
 
 " no , it must be this time . " 
 
 " do vou mean you be go to stay here tonight ? " 
 
 " do you think I be here on leave ? I tell you I be on service . do not  
 you believe I ? " 
 
 Peyrol let out a heavy sigh . " yes , I believe you . and so they be 
 think of catch her alive . and you be send on service . well , that 
 do not   make it any easy for I to see you here . " 
 
 " you be a strange man , Peyrol , " say the lieutenant . " I believe you 
 wish I dead . " 
 
 " no . only out of this . but you be right , Peyrol be no friend either to 
 your face or to your voice . they have do harm enough already . " 
 
 they have never attain to such intimate term before . there be no need 
 for they to look at each other . the lieutenant think : " ah ! he can not  
 keep his jealousy in . " there be no scorn or malice in that thought . it 
 be much more like despair . he say mildly : 
 
 " you snarl like an old dog , Peyrol . " 
 
 " I have feel sometimes as if I could fly at your throat , " say Peyrol 
 in a sort of calm whisper . " and it amuse you the more . " 
 
 " amuse I ? do I look light - hearted ? " 
 
 again Peyrol turn his head slowly for a long , steady stare . and again 
 the naval officer and the rover gaze at each other with a searching and 
 sombre frankness . this new - bear intimacy could go no far . 
 
 " listen to I , Peyrol . . . . " 
 
 " no , " say the other . " if you want to talk , talk to the gunner . " 
 
 though he seem to have adopt the notion of a double personality the 
 rover do not seem to be much easy in one character than in the other . 
 furrow of perplexity appear on his brow , and as the lieutenant do 
 not speak at once Peyrol the gunner ask impatiently : 
 
 " so they be think of catch her alive ? " it do not please he to 
 hear the lieutenant say that it be not exactly this that the chief in 
 Toulon have in their mind . Peyrol at once express the opinion that of 
 all the naval chief that ever be , Citizen Renaud be the only one 
 that be worth anything . Lieutenant Ral , disregard the challenging 
 tone , keep to the point . 
 
 " what they want to know be whether that English corvette interfere 
 much with the coast traffic . " 
 
 " no , she do not , " say Peyrol : ' she leave poor people alone , 
 unless , I suppose , some craft act suspiciously . I have see she give 
 chase to one or two . but even those she do not detain . Michel - you 
 know Michel - have hear from the mainland people that she have capture 
 several at various time . of course , strictly speak , nobody be safe . " 
 
 " well , no . I wonder now what that Englishman would call ` act 
 suspiciously . " " 
 
 " ah , now you be ask something . do not   you know what an Englishman 
 be ? one day easy and casual , next day ready to pounce on you like a 
 tiger . hard in the morning , careless in the afternoon , and only reliable 
 in a fight , whether with or against you , but for the rest perfectly 
 fantastic . you might think a little touch in the head , and there again 
 it would not do to trust to that notion either . " 
 
 the lieutenant lend an attentive ear , Peyrol smooth his brow and 
 discourse with gusto of Englishmen as if they have be a strange , very 
 little - know tribe . " in a manner of speak , " he conclude , " the 
 old bird of they all can be catch with chaff , but not every day . " 
 he shake his head , smile to himself faintly as if remember a quaint 
 passage or two . 
 
 " you do not   get all that knowledge of the English while you be a 
 gunner , " observe the lieutenant dryly . 
 
 " there you go again , " say Peyrol . " and what be that to you where I 
 learn it all ? suppose I learn it all from a man who be dead now . put 
 it down to that . " 
 
 " I see . it amount to this , that one can not   get at the back of their 
 mind very easily . " 
 
 " no , " say Peyrol , then add grumpily , " and some frenchman be not 
 much well . I wish I could get at the back of your mind . " 
 
 " you would find a service matter there , gunner , that be what you would 
 find there , and a matter that seem nothing much at first sight , but 
 when you look into it , be about as difficult to manage properly as 
 anything you ever undertake in your life . it puzzle all the big - wig . 
 it must have , since I be call in . of course I work on shore at the 
 Admiralty and I be in the way . they show I the order from Paris and 
 I could see at once the difficulty of it . I point it out and I be 
 tell . . . " 
 
 " to come here , " strike in Peyrol . 
 
 " no . to make arrangement to carry it out . " 
 
 " and you begin by come here . you be always come here . " 
 
 " I begin by look for a man , " say the naval officer with emphasis . 
 
 Peyrol look at he searchingly . " do you mean to say that in the whole 
 fleet you could not   have find a man ? " 
 
 " I never attempt to look for one there . my chief agree with I that 
 it be not   a service for navy man . " 
 
 " well , it must be something nasty for a naval man to admit that much . 
 what be the order ? I do not   suppose you come over here without be 
 ready to show it to I . " 
 
 the lieutenant plunge his hand into the inside pocket of his naval 
 jacket and then bring it out empty . 
 
 " Understand , Peyrol , " he say earnestly , " this be not a service of 
 fight . good man be plentiful for that . the object be to play the 
 enemy a trick . " 
 
 " trick ? " say Peyrol in a judicial tone , " that be all right . I have 
 see in the Indian Seas Monsieur Surcouf play trick on the English . . 
 . see they with my own eye , deception , disguise , and such - like . . . 
 . that be quite sound in war . " 
 
 " certainly . the order for this one come from the First Consul himself , 
 for it be no small matter . it be to deceive the English Admiral . " 
 
 " what - that Nelson ? ah ! but he be a cunning one . " 
 
 after express that opinion the old rover pull out a red bandana 
 handkerchief and after rub his face with it repeat his opinion 
 deliberately : " Celui - l est un malin . " 
 
 this time the lieutenant really bring out a paper from his pocket and 
 say , " I have copy the order for you to see , " hand it to the 
 rover , who take it from he with a doubtful air . 
 
 Lieutenant Ral watch old Peyrol handle it at arm 's length , then with 
 his arm bent try to adjust the distance to his eyesight , and wonder 
 whether he have copy it in a hand big enough to be read easily by the 
 gunner Peyrol . the order run like this : " you will make up a packet of 
 dispatch and pretend private letter as if from officer , contain 
 a clear statement besides hint calculate to convince the enemy that 
 the destination of the fleet now fit in Toulon be for Egypt and 
 generally for the East . that packet you will send by sea in some small 
 craft to Naples , take care that the vessel shall fall into the enemy 's 
 hand . " the Prfet Maritime have call Ral , have show he the paragraph 
 of the letter from Paris , have turn the page over and lay his finger 
 on the signature , " Bonaparte . " then after give he a meaning glance , 
 the admiral lock up the paper in a drawer and put the key in his 
 pocket . Lieutenant Ral have write the passage down from memory directly 
 the notion of consult Peyrol have occur to he . 
 
 the rover , screw his eye and purse his lip , have come to the end 
 of it . the lieutenant extend his hand negligently and take the paper 
 away : " well , what do you think ? " he ask . " you understand that there 
 can be no question of any ship of war be sacrifice to that dodge . 
 what do you think of it ? " 
 
 " Easier say than do , " opine Peyrol curtly . 
 
 " that be what I tell my admiral . " 
 
 " be he a lubber , so that you have to explain it to he ? " 
 
 " no , gunner , he be not . he listen to I , nod his head . " 
 
 " and what do he say when you finish ? " 
 
 " he say : ` Parfaitement . have you get any idea about it ? " and I 
 say - listen to I , gunner - I say : ` Oui , Amiral , I think I have   get a 
 man , " and the admiral interrupt I at once : ` all right , you do not   want 
 to talk to I about he . I put you in charge of that affair and give you 
 a week to arrange it . when it be do report to I . meantime you may just 
 as well take this packet . " they be already prepare , Peyrol , all those 
 fake letter and dispatch . I carry it out of the admiral 's room , a 
 parcel do up in sail - cloth , properly cord and seal . I have have it 
 in my possession for three day . it be upstairs in my valise . " 
 
 " that do not   advance you very much , " growl old Peyrol . 
 
 " no , " admit the lieutenant . " I can also dispose of a few thousand 
 franc . " 
 
 " franc , " repeat Peyrol . " well , you have well get back to Toulon 
 and try to bribe some man to put his head into the jaw of the English 
 lion . " 
 
 Ral reflect , then say slowly , " I would not   tell any man that . of 
 course a service of danger , that would be understand . " 
 
 " it would be . and if you could get a fellow with some sense in his 
 caboche , he would naturally try to slip past the english fleet and maybe 
 do it , too . and then where be your trick ? " 
 
 " we could give he a course to steer . " 
 
 " yes . and it may happen that your course would just take he clear of 
 all Nelson 's fleet , for you never can tell what the English be do . 
 they might be water in Sardinia . " 
 
 " some cruiser be sure to be out and pick he up . " 
 
 " maybe . but that be not do the job , that be take a chance . do you 
 think you be talk to a toothless baby - or what ? " 
 
 " no , my gunner . it will take a strong man 's tooth to undo that knot . " 
 a moment of silence follow . then Peyrol assume a dogmatic tone . 
 
 " I will tell you what it be , lieutenant . this seem to I just the sort 
 of order that a landlubber would give to good seaman . you dare not   deny 
 that . " 
 
 " I do not   deny it , " the lieutenant admit . " and look at the whole 
 difficulty . for suppose even that the tartane blunder right into the 
 English fleet , as if it have be indeed arrange , they would just look 
 into her hold or perhaps poke their nose here and there but it would 
 never occur to they to search for dispatch , would it ? our man , of 
 course , would have they well hide , would not   he ? he be not to know . and 
 if he be ass enough to leave they lie about the deck the English 
 would at once smell a rat there . but what I think he would do would be 
 to throw the dispatch overboard . " 
 
 " yes - unless he be tell the nature of the job , " say Peyrol . 
 
 " evidently . but where be the bribe big enough to induce a man to taste 
 of the english pontoon ? " 
 
 " the man will take the bribe all right and then will do his good not to 
 be catch ; and if he can not   avoid that , he will take jolly good care that 
 the English should find nothing on board his tartane . oh no , lieutenant , 
 any damn scallywag that own a tartane will take a couple of thousand 
 franc from your hand as tame as can be ; but as to deceive the English 
 Admiral , it be the very devil of an affair . do not   you think of all that 
 before you speak to the big epaulette that give you the job ? " 
 
 " I do see it , and I put it all before he , " the lieutenant say , 
 lower his voice still more , for their conversation have be carry 
 on in undertone though the house behind they be silent and solitude 
 reign round the approach of Escampobar Farm . it be the hour of 
 siesta - for those that could sleep . the lieutenant , edge close 
 towards the old man , almost breathe the word in his ear . 
 
 " what I want be to hear you say all those thing . do you understand 
 now what I mean this morning on the lookout ? do not   you remember what I 
 say ? " 
 
 Peyrol , gaze into space , speak in a level murmur . 
 
 " I remember a naval officer try to shake old Peyrol off his foot and 
 not manage to do it . I may be disparu but I be too solid yet for any 
 blancbec that lose his temper , devil only know why . and it be a good 
 thing that you do not   manage it , else I would have take you down with 
 I , and we would have make our last somersault together for the 
 amusement of an english ship 's company . a pretty end that ! " 
 
 " do not   you remember I say , when you mention that the English 
 would have send a boat to go through our pocket , that this would have 
 be the perfect way ? " in his stony immobility with the other man 
 lean towards his car , Peyrol seem a mere insensible receptacle for 
 whisper , and the lieutenant go on forcibly : " well , it be in 
 allusion to this affair , for , look here , gunner , what could be more 
 convincing , if they have find the packet of dispatch on I ! what would 
 have be their surprise , their wonder ! not the slight doubt could 
 enter their head . could it , gunner ? of course it could not . I can 
 imagine the captain of that corvette crowd sail on she to get this 
 packet into the Admiral 's hand . the secret of the Toulon fleet 's 
 destination find on the body of a dead officer . would not   they have 
 exult at their enormous piece of luck ! but they would not   have call 
 it accidental . oh , no ! they would have call it providential . I know 
 the English a little too . they like to have God on their side - the 
 only ally they never need pay a subsidy to . come , gunner , would it not 
 have be a perfect way ? " 
 
 Lieutenant Ral throw himself back and Peyrol , still like a carven image 
 of grim dreaminess , growl softly : 
 
 " time yet . the english ship be still in the Passe . " he wait a little 
 in his uncanny living - statue manner before he add viciously : " you 
 do not   seem in a hurry to go and take that leap . " 
 
 " upon my word , I be almost sick enough of life to do it , " the 
 lieutenant say in a conversational tone . 
 
 " well , do not   forget to run upstairs and take that packet with you 
 before you go , " say Peyrol as before . " but do not   wait for I ; I be 
 not sick of life . I be disparu , and that be good enough . there be no need 
 for I to die . " 
 
 and at last he move in his seat , swing his head from side to side as if 
 to make sure that his neck have not be turn to stone , emit a short 
 laugh , and grumble : " Disparu ! Hein ! well , I be damned ! " as if the 
 word " vanish " have be a gross insult to enter against a man 's name 
 in a register . it seem to rankle , as Lieutenant Ral observe with some 
 surprise ; or else it be something inarticulate that rankle , 
 manifest itself in that funny way . the lieutenant , too , have a moment 
 of anger which flame and go out at once in the deadly cold 
 philosophic reflection : " we be victim of the destiny which have 
 bring we together . " then again his resentment flame . why should he 
 have stumble against that girl or that woman , he do not   know how he 
 must think of she , and suffer so horribly for it ? he who have endeavour 
 almost from a boy to destroy all the soft feeling within himself . his 
 change mood of distaste , of wonder at himself and at the unexpected 
 turn of life , wear the aspect of profound abstraction from which he be 
 recall by an outburst of Peyrol 's , not loud but fierce enough . 
 
 " no , " cry Peyrol , " I be too old to break my bone for the sake of a 
 lubberly soldier in Paris who fancy he have invent something clever . " 
 
 " I do not   ask you to , " the lieutenant say , with extreme severity , in 
 what Peyrol would call an epaulette wearer 's voice . " you old 
 sea - bandit . and it would not   be for the sake of a soldier anyhow . you and 
 I be Frenchmen after all . " 
 
 " you have discover that , have you ? " 
 
 " yes , " say Ral . " this morning , listen to your talk on the 
 hillside with that english corvette within one might say a stone 's throw . " 
 
 " yes , " groan Peyrol . " a French - build ship ! " he strike his breast a 
 resound blow . " it hurt one there to see she . it seem to I I 
 could jump down on her deck single - handed . " 
 
 " yes , there you and I understand each other , " say the lieutenant . 
 " but look here , this affair be a much big thing than get back a 
 capture corvette . in reality it be much more than merely play a 
 trick on an admiral . it be a part of a deep plan , Peyrol ! it be another 
 stroke to help we on the way towards a great victory at sea . " 
 
 " Us ! " say Peyrol . " I be a sea - bandit and you be a sea - officer . what 
 do you mean by we ? " 
 
 " I mean all frenchman , " say the lieutenant . " or , let we say simply 
 France , which you too have serve . " 
 
 Peyrol , whose stone - effigy bearing have become humanize almost against 
 his will , give an appreciative nod , and say : " you have   get something in 
 your mind . now what be it ? if you will trust a sea - bandit . " 
 
 " no , I will trust a gunner of the Republic . it occur to I that for 
 this great affair we could make use of this corvette that you have be 
 observe so long . for to count on the capture of any old tartane by the 
 fleet in a way that would not arouse suspicion be no use . " 
 
 " a lubberly notion , " assent Peyrol , with more heartiness than he have 
 ever display towards Lieutenant Ral . 
 
 " yes , but there be that corvette . could not   something be arrange to make 
 they swallow the whole thing , somehow , some way ? you laugh . . . why ? " 
 
 " I laugh because it would be a great joke , " say Peyrol , whose 
 hilarity be very short - lived . " that fellow on board , he think himself 
 very clever . I never set my eye on he , but I use to feel that I know 
 he as if he be my own brother ; but now . . . " 
 
 he stop short . Lieutenant Ral , after observe the sudden change on 
 his countenance , say in an impressive manner : 
 
 " I think you have just have an idea . " 
 
 " not the slight , " say Peyrol , turn suddenly into stone as if by 
 enchantment . the lieutenant do not feel discouraged and he be not 
 surprised to hear the effigy of Peyrol pronounce : " all the same one 
 could see . " then very abruptly : " you mean to stay here to - night ? " 
 
 " yes . I will only go down to Madrague and leave word with the sailing 
 barge which be to come to - day from Toulon to go back without I . " 
 
 " no , lieutenant . you must return to Toulon to - day . when you get there 
 you must turn out some of those damn quill - driver at the Port Office 
 if it be midnight and have paper make out for a tartane - oh , any 
 name you like . some sort of paper . and then you must come back as soon 
 as you can . why not go down to Madrague now and see whether the barge 
 be not   already there ? if she be , then by start at once you may get 
 back here some time about midnight . " 
 
 he get up impetuously and the lieutenant stand up too . Hesitation be 
 imprint on his whole attitude . Peyrol 's aspect be not animate , but 
 his roman face with its severe aspect give he a great air of authority . 
 
 " will not   you tell I something more ? " ask the lieutenant . 
 
 " no , " say the rover . " not till we meet again . if you return during 
 the night do not   you try to get into the house . wait outside . do not   rouse 
 anybody . I will be about , and if there be anything to say I will say it 
 to you then . what be you look about you for ? you do not   want to go up 
 for your valise . your pistol up in your room too ? what do you want with 
 pistol , only to go to Toulon and back with a naval boat 's crew ? " he 
 actually lay his hand on the lieutenant 's shoulder and impel he 
 gently towards the track lead to Madrague . Ral turn his head at the 
 touch and their eye meet with the strained closeness of a wrestler 's 
 hug . it be the lieutenant who give way before the unflinchingly direct 
 stare of the old Brother of the Coast . he give way under the cover of a 
 sarcastic smile and a very airy , " I see you want I out of the way for 
 some reason or other , " which produce not the slight effect upon 
 Peyrol , who stand with his arm pointing towards Madrague . when the 
 lieutenant turn his back on he Peyrol 's point arm fall down by his 
 side ; but he watch the lieutenant out of sight before he turn too 
 and move in a contrary direction . 
 
 
 on lose sight of the perplexed lieutenant , Peyrol discover that his 
 own mind be a perfect blank . he start to get down to his tartane 
 after one side - long look at the face of the house which contain quite 
 a different problem . let that wait . his head feel strangely empty , he 
 feel the press necessity of furnish it with some thought without 
 loss of time . he scramble down steep place , catch at bush , step 
 from stone to stone , with the assurance of long practice , with 
 mechanical precision and without for a moment relax his effort to 
 capture some definite scheme which he could put into his head . to his 
 right the cove lie full of pale light , while the rest of the 
 Mediterranean extend beyond it in a dark , unruffled blue . Peyrol be 
 make for the little basin where his tartane have be hide for year , 
 like a jewel in a casket mean only for the secret rejoicing of his eye , 
 of no more practical use than a miser 's hoard - and as precious ! come 
 upon a hollow in the ground where grow a few bush and even a few 
 blade of grass , Peyrol sit down to rest . in that position his visible 
 world be limit to a stony slope , a few boulder , the bush against 
 which he lean and the vista of a piece of empty sea - horizon . he 
 perceive that he detest that lieutenant much more when he do not   see 
 he . there be something in the fellow . well , at any rate he have get rid 
 of he for say eight or ten hour . an uneasiness come over the old 
 rover , a sense of the endangered stability of thing , which be anything 
 but welcome . he wonder at it , and the thought " I be grow old , " 
 intrude on he again . and yet he be aware of his sturdy body . he could 
 still creep stealthily like an Indian and with his trusty cudgel knock a 
 man over with a certain aim at the back of his head , and with force 
 enough to fell he like a bullock . he have do that thing no far 
 back than two o'clock the night before , not twelve hour ago , as easy as 
 easy and without an undue sense of exertion . this fact cheer he up . 
 but still he could not find an idea for his head . not what one could 
 call a real idea . it would not   come . it be no use sit there . 
 
 he get up and after a few stride come to a stony ridge from which he 
 could see the two white blunt masthead of his tartane . her hull be 
 hide from he by the formation of the shore , in which the most 
 prominent feature be a big flat piece of rock . that be the spot on 
 which not twelve hour before Peyrol , unable to rest in his bed and 
 come to seek sleep in his tartane , have see by moonlight a man 
 stand above his vessel and look down at she , a characteristic 
 fork black shape that certainly have no business to be there . Peyrol , 
 by a sudden and logical deduction , have say to himself . " land from an 
 English boat . " why , how , wherefore , he do not stay to consider . he 
 act at once like a man accustom for many year to meet emergency 
 of the most unexpected kind . the dark figure , lose in a sort of 
 attentive amazement , hear nothing , suspect nothing . the impact of the 
 thick end of the cudgel come down on its head like a thunderbolt from 
 the blue . the side of the little basin echo the crash . but he could 
 not have hear it . the force of the blow fling the senseless body over 
 the edge of the flat rock and down headlong into the open hold of the 
 tartane , which receive it with the sound of a muffled drum . Peyrol 
 could not have do the job well at the age of twenty . no . not so 
 well . there be swiftness , mature judgment - and the sound of the 
 muffle drum be follow by a perfect silence , without a sigh , without 
 a moan . Peyrol run round a little promontory to where the shore shelve 
 down to the level of the tartane rail and get on board . and still the 
 silence remain perfect in the cold moonlight and amongst the deep 
 shadow of the rock . it remain perfect because Michel , who always 
 sleep under the half - deck forward , be waken by the thump which have 
 make the whole tartane tremble , have lose the power of speech . with his 
 head just protrude from under the half - deck , arrest on all four and 
 shiver violently like a dog that have be wash with hot water , he 
 be keep from advance far by his terror of this bewitched corpse 
 that have come on board fly through the air . he would not have touch 
 it for anything . 
 
 the " you there , Michel , " pronounce in an undertone , act like a 
 moral tonic . this then be not the doing of the evil one ; it be no 
 sorcery ! and even if it have be , now that Peyrol be there , Michel have 
 lose all fear . he venture not a single question while he help Peyrol 
 to turn over the limp body . its face be cover with blood from the cut 
 on the forehead which it have get by strike the sharp edge of the 
 keelson . what account for the head not be completely smash and 
 for no limb be break be the fact that on its way through the air 
 the victim of undue curiosity have come in contact with and have snap 
 like a carrot one of the foremast shroud . raise his eve casually 
 Peyrol notice the broken rope , and at once put his hand on the man 's 
 breast . 
 
 " his heart beat yet , " he murmur . " go and light the cabin lamp , 
 Michel . " 
 
 " you go to take that thing into the cabin ? " 
 
 " yes , " say Peyrol . " the cabin be use to that kind of thing , " and 
 suddenly he feel very bitter . " it have be a death - trap for well 
 people than this fellow , whoever he be . " 
 
 while Michel be away execute that order Peyrol 's eye roam all over 
 the shore of the basin , for he could not divest himself of the idea 
 that there must be more englishman dodge about . that one of the 
 corvette 's boat be still in the cove he have not the slight doubt . 
 as to the motive of she come , it be incomprehensible . only that 
 senseless form lie at his foot could perhaps have tell he : but Peyrol 
 have little hope that it would ever speak again . if his friend start 
 to look for their shipmate there be just a bare chance that they would 
 not discover the existence of the basin . Peyrol stoop and feel the 
 body all over . he find no weapon of any kind on it . there be only a 
 common clasp - knife on a lanyard round its neck . 
 
 that soul of obedience , Michel , return from aft , be direct to 
 throw a couple of bucketful of salt water upon the bloody head with its 
 face upturned to the moon . the lowering of the body down into the cabin 
 be a matter of some little difficulty . it be heavy . they lay it full 
 length on a locker and after Michel with a strange tidiness have arrange 
 its arm along its side it look incredibly rigid . the dripping head 
 with soaked hair be like the head of a drowned man with a gap pink 
 gash on the forehead . 
 
 " go on deck to keep a lookout , " say Peyrol . " we may have to fight 
 yet before the night 's out . " 
 
 after Michel leave he Peyrol begin by fling off his jacket and , 
 without a pause , drag his shirt off over his head . it be a very 
 fine shirt . the Brothers of the Coast in their hour of ease be by no 
 mean a ragged crowd , and Peyrol the gunner have preserve a taste for 
 fine linen . he tear the shirt into long strip , sit down on the locker 
 and take the wet head on his knee . he bandage it with some skill , 
 work as calmly as though he have be practise on a dummy . then the 
 experience Peyrol seek the lifeless hand and feel the pulse . the 
 spirit have not flee yet . the rover , strip to the waist , his powerful 
 arm fold on the grizzle pelt of his bare breast , sit gaze down at 
 the inert face in his lap with the eye close peacefully under the 
 white band cover the forehead . he contemplate the heavy jaw combine 
 oddly with a certain roundness of cheek , the noticeably broad nose with 
 a sharp tip and a faint dent across the bridge , either natural or the 
 result of some old injury . a face of brown clay , roughly model , with 
 a lot of black eyelash stick on the closed lid and look 
 artificially youthful on that physiognomy forty year old or more . and 
 Peyrol think of his youth . not his own youth ; that he be never 
 anxious to recapture . it be of that man 's youth that he think , of how 
 that face have look twenty year ago . suddenly he shift his position , 
 and put his lip to the ear of that inanimate head , yell with all 
 the force of his lung : 
 
 " Hullo ! Hullo ! wake up , shipmate ! " 
 
 it seem enough to wake up the dead . a faint " Voil ! Voil ! " be the 
 answer from a distance , and presently Michel put his head into the cabin 
 with an anxious grin and a gleam in the round eye . 
 
 " you call , matre ? " 
 
 " yes , " say Peyrol . " come along and help I to shift he . " 
 
 " Overboard ? " murmur Michel readily . 
 
 " no , " say Peyrol , " into that bunk . steady ! do not   bang his head , " he 
 cry with unexpected tenderness . " throw a blanket over he . stay in 
 the cabin and keep his bandage wet with salt water . I do not   think 
 anybody will trouble you to - night . I be go to the house . " 
 
 " the day be not very far off , " remark Michel . 
 
 this be one reason the more why Peyrol be in a hurry to get back to 
 the house and steal up to his room unseen . he draw on his jacket over 
 his bare skin , pick up his cudgel , recommend Michel not to let that 
 strange bird get out of the cabin on any account . as Michel be 
 convince that the man would never walk again in his life , he receive 
 those instruction without particular emotion . 
 
 the dawn have break some time before Peyrol , on his way up to 
 Escampobar , happen to look round and have the luck to actually see with 
 his own eye the english man - of - war 's boat pull out of the cove . this 
 confirm his surmise but do not enlighten he a bit as to the cause . 
 puzzle and uneasy , he approach the house through the farmyard - 
 Catherine , always the first up , stand at the open kitchen door . she 
 move aside and would have let he pass without remark , if Peyrol 
 himself have not ask in a whisper : " anything new ? " she answer he 
 in the same tone : " she have take to roam at night . " Peyrol steal 
 silently up to his bedroom , from which he descend an hour later as 
 though he have spend all the night in his bed up there . 
 
 it be this nocturnal adventure which have affect the character of 
 Peyrol 's forenoon talk with the lieutenant . what with one thing and 
 another he find it very try . now that he have get rid of Ral for 
 several hour , the rover have to turn his attention to that other invader 
 of the strained , questionable , and ominous in its origin , peace of the 
 Escampobar Farm . as he sit on the flat rock with his eye fix idly on 
 the few drop of blood betray his last night 's work to the high 
 heaven , and try to get hold of something definite that he could think 
 about , Peyrol become aware of a faint thunder noise . faint as it be 
 it fill the whole basin . he soon guess its nature , and his face lose 
 its perplexity . he pick up his cudgel , get on his foot briskly , 
 mutter to himself . " he be anything but dead , " and hurry on board 
 the tartane . 
 
 on the after - deck Michel be keep a lookout . he have carry out the 
 order he have receive by the well . besides be secure by the very 
 obvious padlock , the cabin door be shore up by a spar which make it 
 stand as firm as a rock . the thunder noise seem to issue from its 
 immovable substance magically . it cease for a moment , and a sort of 
 distracted continuous growling could be hear . then the thundering begin 
 again . Michel report : " this be the third time he start this game . " 
 
 " not much strength in this , " remark Peyrol gravely . 
 
 " that he can do it at all be a miracle , " say Michel , show a 
 certain excitement . " he stand on the ladder and beat the door with 
 his fist . he be get well . he begin about half an hour after I get 
 back on board . he drum for a bit and then fall off the ladder . I 
 hear he . I have my ear against the scuttle . he lie there and talk to 
 himself for a long time . then he go at it again . " Peyrol approach 
 the scuttle while Michel add his opinion : " he will go on like that 
 for ever . you can not   stop he . " 
 
 " easy there , " say Peyrol in a deep authoritative voice . " time you 
 finish that noise . " 
 
 these word bring instantly a death - like silence . Michel cease to 
 grin . he wonder at the power of these few word of a foreign language . 
 
 Peyrol himself smile faintly . it be age since he have utter a 
 sentence of English . he wait complacently until Michel have unbarred 
 and unlock the door of the cabin . after it be throw open he boom 
 out a warning : " stand clear ! " and , turn about , go down with great 
 deliberation , order Michel to go forward and keep a lookout . 
 
 down there the man with the bandaged head be hang on to the table 
 and swear feebly without intermission . Peyrol , after listen for a 
 time with an air of interested recognition as one would to a tune hear 
 many year ago , stop it by a deep - voice : 
 
 " that will do . " after a short silence he add : " you look bien 
 malade , hein ? what you call sick , " in a tone which if not tender be 
 certainly not hostile . " we will remedy that . " 
 
 " who be you ? " ask the prisoner , look frightened and throw his 
 arm up quickly to guard his head against the come blow . but Peyrol 's 
 uplifted hand fall only on his shoulder in a hearty slap which make he 
 sit down suddenly on a locker in a partly collapse attitude and unable 
 to speak . but though very much daze he be able to watch Peyrol open a 
 cupboard and produce from there a small demijohn and two tin cup . he 
 take heart to say plaintively : " my throat 's like tinder , " and then 
 suspiciously : " be it you who break my head ? " 
 
 " it be I , " admit Peyrol , sit down on the opposite side of the 
 table and lean back to look at his prisoner comfortably . 
 
 " what the devil do you do that for ? " inquire the other with a sort 
 of faint fierceness which leave Peyrol unmove . 
 
 " because you put your nose where you no business . understand ? I see you 
 there under the moon , pench , eat my tartane with your eye . you never 
 hear I , hein ? " 
 
 " I believe you walk on air . do you mean to kill I ? " 
 
 " yes , in preference to let you go and make a story of it on board 
 your cursed corvette . " 
 
 " well then , now be your chance to finish I . I be as weak as a kitten . " 
 
 " how do you say that ? Kitten ? ha , ha , ha ! " laugh Peyrol . " you make 
 a nice petit chat . " he seize the demijohn by the neck and fill the 
 mug . " there , " he go on , push one towards the prisoner - " it be 
 good drink - that . " 
 
 symon ' state be as though the blow have rob he of all power of 
 resistance , of all faculty of surprise and generally of all the mean by 
 which a man may assert himself except bitter resentment . his head be 
 ache , it seem to he enormous , too heavy for his neck and as if full 
 of hot smoke . he take a drink under Peyrol 's fix gaze and with 
 uncertain movement put down the mug . he look drowsy for a moment . 
 presently a little colour deepen his bronze ; he hitch himself up on 
 the locker and say in a strong voice : 
 
 " you play a damned dirty trick on I . call yourself a man , walk on 
 air behind a fellow 's back and fell he like a bullock ? " 
 
 Peyrol nod calmly and sip from his mug . 
 
 " if I have meet you anywhere else but look at my tartane I would have 
 do nothing to you . I would have permit you to go back to your boat . 
 where be your damned boat ? " 
 
 " how can I tell you ? I can not   tell where I be . I have   never be here 
 before . how long have I be here ? " 
 
 " oh , about fourteen hour , " say Peyrol . 
 
 " my head feel as if it would fall off if I move , " grumble the 
 other . . . . " you be a damned bungler , that be what you be . " 
 
 " what for - bungler ? " 
 
 " for not finish I off at once . " 
 
 he seize the mug and empty it down his throat . Peyrol drink too , 
 observe he all the time . he put the mug down with extreme gentleness 
 and say slowly : 
 
 " how could I know it be you ? I hit hard enough to crack the skull of 
 any other man . " 
 
 " what do you mean ? what do you know about my skull ? what be you 
 drive at ? I do not   know you , you white - head villain , go about at 
 night knock people on the head from behind . do you do for our 
 officer , too ? " 
 
 " oh yes ! your officer . what be he up to ? what trouble do you people 
 come to make here , anyhow ? " 
 
 " do you think they tell a boat 's crew ? go and ask our officer . he go 
 up the gully and our coxswain get the jump . he say to I : ` you be 
 light - footed , Sam ,   say he ; ` you just creep round the head of the cove 
 and see if our boat can be see across from the other side .   well , I 
 could not   see anything . that be all right . but I think 1 would climb a 
 little high amongst the rock . . . . " 
 
 he pause drowsily . 
 
 " that be a silly thing to do , " remark Peyrol in an encouraging voice . 
 
 " I would 've   soon expect to see an elephant inland than a craft 
 lie in a pool that seem no big than my hand . could not understand 
 how she get there . could not   help go down to find out - and the next 
 thing I know 1 be lie on my back with my head tie up , in a bunk in 
 this kennel of a cabin here . why could not   you have give I a hail and 
 engage I properly , yardarm to yardarm ? you would have get I all the 
 same , because all I have in the way of weapon be the clasp - knife which 
 you have loot off I . " 
 
 " up on the shelf there , " say Peyrol , look round . " no , my friend , 
 I be not   go to take the risk of see you spread your wing and fly . " 
 
 " you need not have be afraid for your tartane . our boat be after no 
 tartane . we would not   have take your tartane for a gift . why , we see 
 they by dozen every day - those tartane . " 
 
 Peyrol fill the two mug again . " ah , " he say , " I daresay you see 
 many tartane , but this one be not like the other . you a sailor - and 
 you could not   see that she be something extraordinary . " 
 
 " hellfire and gunpowder ! " cry the other . " how can you expect I to 
 have see anything ? I just notice that her sail be bent before your 
 club hit I on the head . " he raise his hand to his head and groan . 
 " oh lord , I feel as though I have be drunk for a month . " 
 
 Peyrol 's prisoner do look somewhat as though he have get his head break 
 in a drunken brawl . but to Peyrol his appearance be not repulsive . the 
 rover preserve a tender memory of his freebooter 's life with its 
 lawless spirit and its spacious scene of action , before the change in 
 the state of affair in the Indian Ocean , the astounding rumour from 
 the outer world , make he reflect on its precarious character . it be 
 true that he have desert the french flag when quite a youngster ; but at 
 that time that flag be white ; and now it be a flag of three colour . 
 he have know the practice of liberty , equality and fraternity as 
 understand in the haunt open or secret of the Brotherhood of the Coast . 
 so the change , if one could believe what people talk about , could not 
 be very great . the rover have also his own positive notion as to what 
 these three word be worth . liberty - to hold your own in the world if 
 you could . equality - yes ! but no body of man ever accomplish anything 
 without a chief . all this be worth what it be worth . he regard 
 fraternity somewhat differently . of course brother would quarrel 
 amongst themselves ; it be during a fierce quarrel that flame up 
 suddenly in a company of Brothers that he have receive the most 
 dangerous wound of his life . but for that Peyrol nurse no grudge 
 against anybody . in his view the claim of the Brotherhood be a claim 
 for help against the outside world . and here he be sit opposite a 
 Brother whose head he have break on sufficient ground . there he be 
 across the table look dishevel and daze , uncomprehending and 
 aggrieve , and that head of his prove as hard as age ago when the 
 nickname of Testa Dura have be give to he by a Brother of italian 
 origin on some occasion or other , some butting match no doubt ; just as 
 he , Peyrol himself , be know for a time on both side of the Mozambique 
 Channel as Poigne - de - Fer , after an incident when in the presence of the 
 Brothers he play at arm 's length with the windpipe of an obstreperous 
 negro sorcerer with an enormous girth of chest . the villager bring 
 out food with alacrity , and the sorcerer be never the same man again . 
 it have be a great display . 
 
 yes , no doubt it be Testa Dura ; the young neophyte of the order   where 
 and how pick up Peyrol never hear , strange to the camp , simpleminde 
 and much impressed by the swagger cosmopolitan company in which he 
 find himself . he have attach himself to Peyrol in preference to some 
 of his own countryman of whom there be several in that band , and use 
 to run after he like a little dog and certainly have act a good 
 shipmate 's part on the occasion of that wound which have neither kill 
 nor cow Peyrol but merely have give he an opportunity to reflect at 
 leisure on the conduct of his own life . 
 
 the first suspicion of that amazing fact have intrude on Peyrol while he 
 be bandage that head by the light of the smoky lamp . since the fellow 
 still live , it be not in Peyrol to finish he off or let he lie 
 unattended like a dog . and then this be a sailor . his be English be 
 no obstacle to the development of Peyrol 's mixed feeling in which 
 hatred certainly have no place . amongst the member of the Brotherhood it 
 be the Englishmen whom he prefer . he have also find amongst they 
 that particular and loyal appreciation , which a Frenchman of character 
 and ability will receive from Englishmen soon than from any other 
 nation . Peyrol have at time be a leader , without ever try for it 
 very much , for he be not ambitious . the lead use to fall to he mostly 
 at a time of crisis of some sort ; and when he have get the lead it be on 
 the Englishmen that he use to depend most . 
 
 and so that youngster have turn into this english man - of - war 's man ! in 
 the fact itself there be nothing impossible . you find Brothers of the 
 Coast in all sort of ship and in all sort of place . Peyrol have find 
 one once in a very ancient and hopeless cripple practise the 
 profession of a beggar on the step of Manila cathedral ; and have leave 
 he the rich by two broad gold piece to add to his secret hoard . 
 there be a tale of a Brother of the Coast have become a mandarin in 
 China , and Peyrol believe it . one never know where and in what position 
 one would find a Brother of the Coast . the wonderful thing be that this 
 one should have come to seek he out , to put himself in the way of his 
 cudgel . Peyrol 's great concern have be all through that Sunday 
 morning to conceal the whole adventure from Lieutenant Ral . as against a 
 wearer of epaulette , mutual protection be the first duty between 
 brother of the Coast . the unexpectedness of that claim come to he 
 after twenty year invest it with an extraordinary strength . what he 
 would do with the fellow he do not   know . but since that morning the 
 situation have change . Peyrol have receive the lieutenant 's confidence 
 and have get on term with he in a special way . he fall into profound 
 thought . 
 
 " Sacre tte dure , " he mutter without rouse himself . Peyrol be 
 annoy a little at not have be recognize . he could not conceive 
 how difficult it would have be for symon to identify this portly 
 deliberate person with a white head of hair as the object of his 
 youthful admiration , the black - ringlete French Brother in the prime of 
 life of whom everybody think so much . Peyrol be rouse by hear the 
 other declare suddenly : 
 
 " I be an Englishman , I be . I be not go to knuckle under to anybody . 
 what be you go to do with I ? " 
 
 " I will do what I please , " say Peyrol , who have be ask himself 
 exactly the same question . 
 
 " well , then , be quick about it , whatever it be . I do not   care a damn 
 what you do , but - be - quick - about it . " 
 
 he try to be emphatic ; but as a matter of fact the last word come out 
 in a falter tone . and old Peyrol be touch . he think that if he 
 be to let he drink the mugful standing there , it would make he dead 
 drunk . but he take the risk . so he say only : 
 
 " Allons . drink . " the other do not wait for a second invitation but 
 could not control very well the movement of his arm extend towards 
 the mug . Peyrol raise his on high . 
 
 " trinquon , eh ? " he propose . but in his precarious condition the 
 Englishman remain unforgiving . 
 
 " I be damned if I do , " he say indignantly , but so low that Peyrol have 
 to turn his ear to catch the word . " you will have to explain to I 
 first what you mean by knock I on the head . " 
 
 he drank , star all the time at Peyrol in a manner which be mean to 
 give offence but which strike Peyrol as so childlike that he burst into 
 a laugh . 
 
 " sacr imbcile , va ! do I not tell you it be because of the tartane ? if 
 it have not   be for the tartane I would have hide from you . I would 
 have crouch behind a bush like a - what do you call they ? - livre . " 
 
 the other , who be feel the effect of the d star with frank 
 incredulity . 
 
 " you be of no account , " continue Peyrol . " ah ! if you have be an 
 officer I would have go for you anywhere . do you say your officer 
 go up the gully ? " 
 
 symon sigh deeply and easily . " that be the way he go . we have hear 
 on board of a house thereabout . " 
 
 " oh , he go to the house ! " say Peyrol . " well , if he do get there 
 he must be very sorry for himself . there be half a company of infantry 
 billet in the farm . " 
 
 this inspire fib go down easily with the English sailor . soldier 
 be station in many part of the coast as any seaman of the 
 blockading fleet know very well . to the many expression which have 
 pass over the face of that man recover from a long period of 
 unconsciousness , there be add the shade of dismay . 
 
 " what the devil have they stick soldier on this piece of rock for ? " 
 he ask . 
 
 " oh , signal post and thing like that . I be not likely to tell you 
 everything . why ! you might escape . " 
 
 that phrase reach the sober spot in the whole of symon ' 
 individuality . thing be happen , then . Mr. Bolt be a prisoner . but 
 the main idea evoke in his confused mind be that he would be give up 
 to those soldier before very long . the prospect of captivity make his 
 heart sink and he resolve to give as much trouble as he could . 
 
 " you will have to get some of these soldier to carry I up . I will not  
 walk . I will not . not after have have my brain nearly knock out from 
 behind . I tell you straight ! I will not   walk . not a step . they will have to 
 carry I ashore . " 
 
 Peyrol only shake his head deprecatingly . 
 
 " now you go and get a corporal with a file of man , " insist Symons 
 obstinately . " I want to be make a proper prisoner of . who the devil be 
 you ? you have no right to interfere . I believe you be a civilian . a 
 common marinero , whatever you may call yourself . you look to I a pretty 
 fishy marinero at that . where do you learn English ? in prison - eh ? you 
 be not   go to keep I in this damned dog - hole , on board your rubbishy 
 tartane . go and get that corporal , I tell you . " 
 
 he look suddenly very tired and only murmur : " I be an Englishman , I 
 be . " 
 
 Peyrol 's patience be positively angelic . 
 
 " do not   you talk about the tartane , " he say impressively , make his 
 word as distinct as possible . " I tell you she be not like the other 
 tartane . that be because she be a courier boat . every time she go to 
 sea she make a pie - de - nez , what you call thumb to the nose , to all 
 your english cruiser . I do not mind tell you because you be my 
 prisoner . you will soon learn French now . " 
 
 " who be you ? the caretaker of this thing or what ? " ask the 
 undaunted symon . but Peyrol 's mysterious silence seem to intimidate 
 he at last . he become deject and begin to curse in a languid tone all 
 boat expedition , the coxswain of the gig and his own infernal luck . 
 
 Peyrol sit alert and attentive like a man interested in an experiment , 
 while after a moment symon ' face begin to look as if he have be hit 
 with a club again , but not as hard as before . a film come over his round 
 eye and the word " fishy mariner " make their way out of his lip in 
 a sort of death - bed voice . yet such be the hardness of his head that he 
 actually rally enough to address Peyrol in an ingratiate tone . 
 
 " come , grandfather ! " he try to push the mug across the table and 
 upset it . " come ! let we finish what be in that tiny bottle of your . " 
 
 " no , " say Peyrol , draw the demijohn to his side of the table and 
 put the cork in . 
 
 " no ? " repeat Symons in an unbelieve voice and look at the 
 demijohn fixedly . . . " you must be a tinker " . . . he try to say 
 something more under Peyrol 's watchful eye , fail once or twice , and 
 suddenly pronounce the word " cochon " so correctly as to make old 
 Peyrol start . after that it be no use look at he any more . Peyrol 
 busy himself in lock up the demijohn and the mug . when he turn 
 round most of his prisoner 's body be extend over the table and no 
 sound come from it , not even a snore . 
 
 when Peyrol get outside , pull to the door of the cuddy behind he , 
 Michel hasten from forward to receive the master 's order . but Peyrol 
 stand so long on the after - deck meditate profoundly with his hand over 
 his mouth that Michel become fidgety and venture a cheerful : " it look 
 as if he be not go to die . " 
 
 " he be dead , " say Peyrol with grim jocularity . " dead drunk . and you 
 very likely will not see I till to - morrow sometime . " 
 
 " but what be I to do ? " ask Michel timidly . 
 
 " nothing , " say Peyrol . " of course you must not let he set fire to 
 the tartane . " 
 
 " but suppose , " insist Michel , " he should give sign of escape . " 
 
 " if you see he try to escape , " say Peyrol with mock solemnity , 
 " then , Michel , it will be a sign for you to get out of his way as 
 quickly as you can . a man who would try to escape with a head like this 
 on he would just swallow you at one mouthful . " 
 
 he pick up his cudgel and , step ashore , go off without as much 
 as a look at his faithful henchman . Michel listen to he scramble 
 amongst the stone , and his habitual amiably vacant face acquire a sort 
 of dignity from the utter and absolute blankness that come over it . 
 
 
 it be only after reach the level ground in front of the farmhouse 
 that Peyrol take time to pause and resume his contact with the exterior 
 world . 
 
 while he have be closet with his prisoner the sky have get cover 
 with a thin layer of cloud , in one of those swift change of weather 
 that be not unusual in the Mediterranean . this grey vapour , drift 
 high up , close against the disc of the sun , seem to enlarge the space 
 behind its veil , add to the vastness of a shadowless world no long 
 hard and brilliant but all soften in the contours of its mass and in 
 the faint line of the horizon , as if ready to dissolve in the immensity 
 of the Infinite . 
 
 familiar and indifferent to his eye , material and shadowy , the extent 
 of the changeable sea have go pale under the pale sun in a mysterious 
 and emotional response . mysterious too be the great oval patch of dark 
 water to the west ; and also a broad blue lane trace on the dull silver 
 of the water in a parabolic curve describe magistrally by an invisible 
 finger for a symbol of endless wandering . the face of the farmhouse 
 might have be the face of a house from which all the inhabitant have 
 flee suddenly . in the high part of the building the window of the 
 lieutenant 's room remain open , both glass and shutter . by the door of 
 the salle the stable fork lean against the wall seem to have be 
 forget by the sans - culotte . this aspect of abandonment strike Peyrol 
 with more force than usual . he have be think so hard of all these 
 people , that to find no one about seem unnatural and even depressing . 
 he have see many abandon place in his life , grass hut , mud fort , 
 king ' palace - temple from which every white - rob soul have flee . 
 temple , however , never look quite empty . the god clung to their own . 
 Peyrol 's eye rest on the bench against the wall of the salle . in the 
 usual course of thing it should have be occupy by the lieutenant 
 who have the habit of sit there with hardly a movement , for hour , 
 like a spider watch for the coming of a fly . this paralyze 
 comparison hold Peyrol motionless with a twisted mouth and a frown on 
 his brow , before the evoked vision , coloured and precise , of the man 
 more troubling than the reality have ever be . 
 
 he come to himself with a start . what sort of occupation be this , " cr 
 nom de nom , star at a silly bench with no one on it ? be he go 
 wrong in his head ? or be it that he be get really old ? he have 
 notice old man lose themselves like that . but he have something to do . 
 first of all he have to go and see what the english sloop in the Passe 
 be do . 
 
 while he be make his way towards the lookout on the hill where the 
 incline pine hung peer over the cliff as if an insatiable curiosity 
 be hold it in that precarious position , Peyrol have another view 
 from above of the farmyard and of the building and be again affect 
 by their deserted appearance . not a soul , not even an animal seem to 
 have be leave ; only on the roof the pigeon walk with smart 
 elegance . Peyrol hurry on and presently see the english ship well over 
 on the Porquerolles side with her yard braced tip and her head to the 
 southward . there be a little wind in the Passe , while the dull silver 
 of the open have a darkling rim of ripple water far away to the cast in 
 that quarter where , far or near , but mostly out of sight , the British 
 Fleet keep its endless watch . not a shadow of a spar or gleam of sail on 
 the horizon betray its presence ; but Peyrol would not have be 
 surprised to see a crowd of ship surge up , people the horizon with 
 hostile life , come in run , and dot the sea with their order group 
 all about Cape Cici , parade their damned impudence . then indeed that 
 corvette , the big factor of everyday life on that stretch of coast , 
 would become very small potato indeed ; and the man in command of her 
  he have be Peyrol 's personal adversary in many imaginary encounter 
 fight to a finish in the room upstairs   then indeed that Englishman 
 would have to mind his step . he would be order to come within hail of 
 the Admiral , be send here and there , make to run like a little dog and 
 as likely as not get call on board the flagship and get a dressing 
 down for something or other . 
 
 Peyrol think for a moment that the impudence of this Englishman be 
 go to take the form of run along the peninsula and look into 
 the very cove ; for the corvette 's head be fall off slowly . a fear 
 for his tartane clutched Peyrol 's heart till he remember that the 
 Englishman do not know of her existence . of course not . his cudgel have 
 be absolutely effective in stop that bit of information . the only 
 Englishman who know of the existence of the tartane be that fellow with 
 the broken head . Peyrol actually laugh at his momentary scare . 
 moreover , it be evident that the Englishman do not mean to parade in 
 front of the peninsula . he do not mean to be impudent . the sloop 's 
 yard be swing right round and she come again to the wind but now 
 head to the northward back from where she come . Peyrol see at once 
 that the Englishman mean to pass to windward of Cape Esterel , probably 
 with the intention of anchor for the night off the long white beach 
 which in a regular curve close the roadstead of Hyres on that side . 
 
 Peyrol picture she to himself , on the clouded night , not so very dark 
 since the fall moon be but a day old , lie at anchor within hail of 
 the low shore , with her sail furl and look profoundly asleep , but 
 with the watch on deck lie by the gun . he gnash his tooth . it have 
 come to this at last , that the captain of the Amelia could do nothing 
 with his ship without put Peyrol into a rage . oh , for forty 
 brother , or sixty , pick one , he think , to teach the fellow what it 
 might cost he take liberty along the french coast ! ship have be 
 carry by surprise before , on night when there be just light enough 
 to see the white of each other 's eye in a close tussle . and what would 
 be the crew of that Englishman ? something between ninety and a hundred 
 altogether , boy and landsman include . ... Peyrol shake his fist for a 
 good - bye , just when Cape Esterel shut off the English sloop from his 
 sight . but in his heart of heart that seaman of cosmopolitan 
 association know very well that no forty or sixty , not any give 
 hundred brother of the Coast would have be enough to capture that 
 corvette make herself at home within ten mile of where he have first 
 open his eye to the world . 
 
 he shake his head dismally at the lean pine , his only companion . the 
 disinherit soul of that rover range for so many year a lawless 
 ocean with the coast of two continent for a raid ground , have come 
 back to its crag , circle like a sea - bird in the dusk and longing for a 
 great sea victory for its people : that inland multitude of which Peyrol 
 know nothing except the few individual on that peninsula cut off from 
 the rest of the land by the dead water of a salt lagoon ; and where only 
 a strain of manliness in a miserable cripple and an unaccountable charm 
 of a half - craze woman have find response in his heart . 
 
 this scheme of false dispatch be but a detail in a plan for a great , 
 a destructive victory . just a detail , but not a trifle all the same . 
 nothing connect with the deception of an admiral could be call 
 trifling . and such an admiral too . it be , Peyrol feel vaguely , a scheme 
 that only a confounded landsman would invent . it behove the sailor , 
 however , to make a workable thing of it . it would have to be work 
 through that corvette . 
 
 and here Peyrol be bring up by the question that all his life have not 
 be able to settle for he - and that be whether the English be 
 really very stupid or very acute . that difficulty have present itself 
 with every fresh case . the old rover have enough genius in he to have 
 arrive at a general conclusion that if they be to be deceive at all 
 it could not be do very well by word but rather by deed ; not by mere 
 wriggling , but by deep craft conceal under some sort of 
 straightforward action . that conviction , however , do not take he 
 forward in this case , which be one in which much thinking would be 
 necessary . 
 
 the Amelia have disappear behind Cape Esterel , and Peyrol wonder 
 with a certain anxiety whether this mean that the Englishman have give 
 up his man for good . " if he have , " say Peyrol to himself , " I be bind 
 to see he pass out again from beyond Cape Esterel before it get 
 dark . " if , however , he do not see the ship again within the next hour 
 or two , then she would be anchor off the beach , to wait for the night 
 before make some attempt to discover what have become of her man . this 
 could be do only by send out one or two boat to explore the coast , 
 and no doubt to enter the cove - perhaps even to land a small search party . 
 
 after come to this conclusion Peyrol begin deliberately to charge his 
 pipe . have he spar a moment for a glance inland he might have catch a 
 whisk of a black skirt , the gleam of a white fichu - Arlette run 
 down the faint track lead from Escampobar to the village in the 
 hollow ; the same track in fact up which Citizen Scevola , while indulge 
 in the strange freak to visit the church , have be chase by the 
 incense faithful . but Peyrol , while charge and light his pipe , have 
 keep his eye fasten on Cape Esterel . then , throw his arm 
 affectionately over the trunk of the pine , he have settle himself to 
 watch . far below he the roadstead , with its play of grey and bright 
 gleam , look like a plaque of mother - of - pearl in a frame of yellow 
 rock and dark green ravine set off inland by the mass of the hill 
 display the tint of the fine purple ; while above his head the sun , 
 behind a cloud - veil , hang like a silver disc . 
 
 that afternoon , after wait in vain for Lieutenant Ral to appear 
 outside in the usual way , Arlette , the mistress of Escampobar , have go 
 unwillingly into the kitchen where Catherine sit upright in a heavy 
 capacious wooden armchair , the back of which rise above the top of her 
 white muslin cap . even in her old age , even in her hour of ease , 
 Catherine preserve the upright carriage of the family that have hold 
 Escampobar for so many generation . it would have be easy to believe 
 that , like some character famous in the world , Catherine would have 
 wish to die stand up and with unbowed shoulder . 
 
 with her sense of hearing undecaye she detect the light footstep in 
 the salle long before Arlette enter the kitchen . that woman , who have 
 face alone and unaide   except for her brother 's comprehending silence  
 the anguish of passion in a forbidden love , and of terror comparable to 
 those of the judgment Day , neither turn her face , quiet without 
 serenity , nor her eye , fearless but without fire , in the direction of 
 her niece . 
 
 Arlette glance on all side , even at the wall , even at the mound of 
 ash under the big overmantel , nursing in its heart a spark of fire , 
 before she sit down and lean her elbow on the table . 
 
 " you wander about like a soul in pain , " say her aunt , sit by the 
 hearth like an old queen on her throne . 
 
 " and you sit here eat your heart out . " 
 
 " formerly , " remark Catherine , " old woman like I could always go 
 over their prayer , but now . . . " 
 
 " I believe you have not be to church for year . I remember Scevola 
 tell I that a long time ago . be it because you do not   like people 's 
 eye ? I have fancy sometimes that most people in the world must have 
 be massacre long ago . " 
 
 Catherine turn her face away . Arlette rest her head on her 
 half - close hand , and her eye , lose their steadiness , begin to 
 tremble amongst cruel vision . she get up suddenly and caress the 
 thin , half - avert , wither cheek with the tip of her finger , and in 
 a low voice , with that marvellous cadence that pluck at one 's 
 heart - string , she say coaxingly : 
 
 " those be dream , be not   they ? " 
 
 in her immobilitv the old woman call with all the might of she will 
 for the presence of Peyrol . she have never be able to shake off a 
 superstitious fear of that niece restore to she from the terror of a 
 Judgment Day in which the world have be give over to the devil . she 
 be always afraid that this girl , wander about with restless eye and 
 a dim smile on her silent lip , would suddenly say something atrocious , 
 unfit to be hear , call for vengeance from heaven , unless Peyrol be 
 by . that stranger come from " par dela les mer " be out of it 
 altogether , care probably for no one in the world but have strike her 
 imagination by his massive aspect , his deliberation suggest a mighty 
 force like the reposeful attitude of a lion . Arlette desist from 
 caress the irresponsive cheek , exclaim petulantly : " I be awake 
 now ! " and go out of the kitchen without have ask she aunt the 
 question she have mean to ask , which be whether she know what have 
 become of the lieutenant . 
 
 her heart have fail she . she let herself drop on the bench outside the 
 door of the salle . " what be the matter with they all ? " she think . 
 " I can not   make they out . what wonder be it that I have not be able to 
 sleep ? " even Peyrol , so different from all mankind , who from the first 
 moment when he stand before she have the power to soothe her aimless 
 unrest , even Peyrol would now sit for hour with the lieutenant on the 
 bench , gaze into the air and keep he in talk about thing without 
 sense , as if on purpose to prevent he from think of she . well , he 
 could not do that . but the enormous change imply in the fact that 
 every day have a to - morrow now , and that all the people around she have 
 cease to be mere phantom for her wandering glance to glide over 
 without concern , make she feel the need of support from somebody , from 
 somewhere . she could have cry aloud for it . 
 
 she spring up and walk along the whole front of the farm building . at 
 the end of the wall enclose the orchard she call out in a modulate 
 undertone : " Eugne , " not because she hop that the lieutenant be 
 anywhere within earshot , but for the pleasure of hear the sound of 
 the name utter for once above a whisper . she turn about and at the 
 end of the wall on the yard side she repeat her call , drink in the 
 sound that come from her lip , " Eugne , Eugne , " with a sort of 
 half - exult despair . it be in such dizzy moment that she want a 
 steady support . but all be still . she hear no friendly murmur , not 
 even a sigh . above her head under the thin grey sky a big mulberry tree 
 stir no leaf . step by step , as if unconsciously , she begin to move 
 down the track . at the end of fifty yard she open the inland view , 
 the roof of the village between the green top of the platane 
 overshadow the fountain , and just beyond the flat blue - grey level of 
 the salt lagoon , smooth and dull like a slab of lead . but what draw she 
 on be the church - tower , where , in a round arch , she could see the black 
 speck of the bell which escape the requisition of the republican 
 war , and dwell mute above the lock - up empty church , have only 
 lately recover its voice . she run on , but when she have come near 
 enough to make out the figure move about the village fountain , she 
 check herself , hesitate a moment and then take the footpath lead 
 to the presbytery . 
 
 she push open the little gate with the broken latch . the humble 
 building of rough stone , from between which much mortar have crumble 
 out , look as though it have be sink slowly into the ground . the 
 bed of the plot in front be choke with weed , because the abb have no 
 taste for gardening . when the heiress of Escampobar open the door , he 
 be walk up and down the large room which be his bedroom and 
 sitting room and where he also take his meal . he be a gaunt man with a 
 long , as if convulse , face . in his young day he have be tutor to the 
 son of a great noble , but he do not emigrate with his employer . 
 neither do he submit to the Republic . he have live in his native land 
 like a hunt wild beast , and there have be many tale of his 
 activity , warlike and other . when the hierarchy be re - establish he 
 find no favour in the eye of his superior . he have remain too much 
 of a Royalist . he have accept , without a word , the charge of this 
 miserable parish , where he have acquire influence quickly enough . his 
 sacerdotalism lie in he like a cold passion . though accessible enough , 
 he never walk abroad without his breviary , acknowledge the solemnly 
 bared head by a curt nod . he be not exactly fear , but some of the 
 old inhabitant who remember the previous incumbent , an old man who 
 die in the garden after have be drag out of bed by some patriot 
 anxious to take he to prison in Hyres , jerk their head sideways in a 
 knowing manner when their cur be mention . 
 
 on see this apparition in an arlesian cap and silk skirt , a white 
 fichu , and otherwise as completely different as any princess could be 
 from the rustic with whom he be in daily contact , his face express 
 the blankest astonishment . then - for he know enough of the gossip of 
 his community - his straight , thick eyebrow come together inimically . 
 this be no doubt the woman of whom he have hear his parishioner talk 
 with bated breath as have give herself and her property up to a 
 Jacobin , a Toulon san - culotte who have either deliver her parent to 
 execution or have murder they himself during the first three day of 
 massacre . no one be very sure which it be , but the rest be current 
 knowledge . the abb , though persuade that any amount of moral turpitude 
 be possible in a godless country , have not accept all that tale 
 literally . no doubt those people be republican and impious , and the 
 state of affair up there be scandalous and horrible . he struggle with 
 his feeling of repulsion and manage to smooth his brow and wait . he 
 could not imagine what that woman with mature form and a youthful face 
 could want at the presbytery . suddenly it occur to he that perhaps 
 she want to thank he - it be a very old occurrence - for interpose 
 between the fury of the villager and that man . he could not   call he , 
 even in his thought , her husband , for apart from all other 
 circumstance , that connection could not imply any kind of marriage to a 
 priest , even have there be legal form observe . his visitor be 
 apparently disconcert by the expression of his face , the austere 
 aloofness of his attitude , and only a low murmur escape her lip . he 
 bent his head and be not very certain what he have hear . 
 
 " you come to seek my aid ? " he ask in a doubt tone . 
 
 she nod slightly , and the abb go to the door she have leave half open 
 and look out . there be not a soul in sight between the presbytery and 
 the village , or between the presbytery and the church . he go back to 
 face she , say : 
 
 " we be as alone as we can well be . the old woman in the kitchen be as 
 deaf as a post . " 
 
 now that he have be look at Arlette close the abb feel a sort of 
 dread . the carmine of those lip , the pellucid , unstaine , unfathomable 
 blackness of those eye , the pallor of her cheek , suggest to he 
 something provokingly pagan , something distastefully different from the 
 common sinner of this earth . and now she be ready to speak . he 
 arrest she with a raise hand . 
 
 " wait , " he say . " I have never see you before . I do not   even know 
 properly who you be . none of you belong to my flock - for you be from 
 Escampobar . be you not ? " Sombre under their bony arch , his eye 
 fasten on her face , notice the delicacy of feature , the naive 
 pertinacity of her stare . she say : 
 
 " I be the daughter . " 
 
 " the daughter ! . . . oh ! I see . . . much evil be speak of you . " 
 
 she say a little impatiently : " by that rabble ? " and the priest 
 remain mute for a moment . " what do they say ? in my father 's time they 
 would not   have dare to say anything . the only thing I see of they for 
 year and year be when they be yelp like cur on the heel of 
 Scevola . " 
 
 the absence of scorn in her tone be perfectly annihilate . gentle 
 sound flow from her lip and a disturbing charm from her strange 
 equanimity . the abb frown heavily at these fascination , which seem 
 to have in they something diabolic . 
 
 " they be simple soul , neglect , fall back into darkness . it be not  
 their fault . they have natural feeling of humanity which be outraged . 
 I save he from their indignation . there be thing that must be leave 
 to divine justice . " 
 
 he be exasperate by the unconsciousness of that fair face . 
 
 " that man whose name you have just pronounce and which I have hear 
 couple with the epithet of ` blood - drinker ' be regard as the master of 
 Escampobar Farm . he have be live there for year . how be that ? " 
 
 " yes , it be a long time ago since he bring I back to the house . 
 year ago . Catherine let he stay . " 
 
 " who be Catherine ? " the abb ask harshly . 
 
 " she be my father 's sister who be leave at home to wait . she have give 
 up all hope of see any of we again , when one morning Scevola come 
 with I to the door . then she let he stay . he be a poor creature . what 
 else could Catherine have do ? and what be it to we up there how the 
 people in the village regard he ? " she drop her eye and seem to 
 fall into deep thought , then add , " it be only later that I 
 discover that he be a poor creature , even quite lately . they call he 
  blood - drinker ,   do they ? what of that ? all the time he be afraid of 
 his own shadow . " 
 
 she cease but do not raise her eye . 
 
 " you be no long a child , " begin the abb in a severe voice , frown 
 at her downcast eye , and he hear a murmur : " not very long . " he 
 disregard it and continue : " I ask you , be this all that you have to 
 tell I about that man ? I hope that at least you be no hypocrite . " 
 
 " Monsieur l'abb , " she say , raise her eye fearlessly , " what more 
 be I to tell you about he ? I can tell you thing that will make your 
 hair stand on end , but it would not   be about he . " 
 
 for all answer the abb make a weary gesture and turn away to walk up 
 and down the room . his face express neither curiosity nor pity , but a 
 sort of repugnance which he make an effort to overcome . he drop into 
 a deep and shabby old armchair , the only object of luxury in the room , 
 and point to a wooden straight - back stool . Arlette sit down on it 
 and begin to speak . the abb listen , but look far away ; his big bony 
 hand rest on the arm of the chair . after the first word he 
 interrupt she : " this be your own story you be tell I . " 
 
 " yes , " say Arlette . 
 
 " be it necessary that I should know ? " 
 
 " yes , Monsieur l'abb . " 
 
 " but why ? " 
 
 he bend his head a little , without , however , cease to look far away . 
 her voice now be very low . suddenly the abb throw himself back . 
 
 " you want to tell I your story because you have fall in love with a 
 man ? " 
 
 " no , because that have bring I back to myself . nothing else could 
 have do it . " 
 
 he turn his head to look at she grimly , but he say nothing and look 
 away again . he listen . at the beginning he mutter once or twice , 
 " yes , I have hear that , " and then keep silent , not look at she at 
 all . once he interrupt she by a question : " you be confirm before 
 the convent be forcibly enter and the nun disperse ? " 
 
 " yes , " she say , " a year before that or more . " 
 
 " and then two of those lady take you with they towards Toulon . " 
 
 " yes , the other girl have their relation near by . they take I with 
 they think to communicate with my parent , but it be difficult . then 
 the English come and my parent sail over to try and get some news of 
 I . it be safe for my father to be in Toulon then . perhaps you think 
 that he be a traitor to his country ? " she ask , and wait with 
 part lip . with an impassible face the abb murmur : " he be a good 
 Royalist , " in a tone of bitter fatalism , which seem to absolve that 
 man and all the other man of whose action and error he have ever hear . 
 
 for a long time , Arlette continue , her father could not discover the 
 house where the nun have take refuge . he only obtain some information 
 on the very day before the English evacuate Toulon . late in the day he 
 appear before she and take she away . the town be full of retreat 
 foreign troop . her father leave she with her mother and go out again 
 to make preparation for sail home that very night ; but the tartane 
 be no long in the place where he have leave her lying . the two Madrague 
 man that he have for a crew have disappear also . thus the family be 
 trap in that town full of tumult and confusion . ship and house be 
 burst into flame . appalling explosion of gunpowder shake the earth . 
 she spend that night on her knee with her face hide in her mother 's 
 lap , while her father keep watch by the barricaded door with a pistol in 
 each hand . 
 
 in the morning the house be fill with savage yell . People be hear 
 rush up the stair , and the door be burst in . she jump up at the 
 crash and fling herself down on her knee in a corner with her face to 
 the wall . there be a murderous uproar , she hear two shot fire , then 
 somebody seize she by the arm and pull she up to her foot . it be 
 Scevola . he drag she to the door . the body of her father and mother 
 be lie across the doorway . the room be full of gunpowder smoke . she 
 want to fle herself on the body and cle to they , but Scevola 
 take she under the arm and lift she over they . he seize her hand and 
 make she run with he , or rather drag her downstair . outside on the 
 pavement some dreadful man and many fierce woman with knife join 
 they . they run along the street brandish pike and sabre , pursue 
 other group of unarmed people , who flee round corner with loud shriek . 
 
 " I run in the midst of they , Monsieur l'abb , " Arlette go on in a 
 breathless murmur . " whenever I see any water I want to throw myself 
 into it , but I be surround on all side , I be jostle and push and 
 most of the time Scevola hold my hand very tight . when they stop at a 
 wine shop , they would offer I some wine . my tongue stick to the roof of 
 my mouth and I drank . the wine , the pavement , the arm and face , 
 everything be red . I have red splash all over I . I have to run with 
 they all day , and all the time I feel as if I be fall down , and 
 down , and down . the house be nod at I . the sun would go out at 
 time . and suddenly I hear myself yell exactly like the other . do 
 you understand , Monsieur i'abb ? the very same word ! " 
 
 the eye of the priest in their deep orbit glide towards she and then 
 resume their far - away fixity . between his fatalism and his faith he be 
 not very far from the belief of Satan take possession of rebellious 
 mankind , expose the nakedness of heart like flint and of the 
 homicidal soul of the Revolution . 
 
 " I have hear something of that , " he whisper stealthily . 
 
 she affirm with quiet earnestness : " yet at that time I resist with 
 all my might . " 
 
 that night Scevola put she under the care of a woman call Perose . she 
 be young and pretty and be a native of Arles , her mother 's country . 
 she keep an inn . that woman lock she up in her own room , which be 
 next to the room where the patriot keep on shout , sing and make 
 speech far into the night . several time the woman would look in for a 
 moment , make a hopeless gesture at she with both arm , and vanish again . 
 later , on many other night when all the band lie asleep on bench and 
 on the floor , Perose would steal into the room , fall on her knee by the 
 bed on which Arlette sit upright , open - eye , and rave silently to 
 herself , embrace her foot and cry herself to sleep . but in the morning 
 she would jump up briskly and say : " come . the great affair be to keep 
 our life in our body . come along to help in the work of justice " ; and 
 they would join the band that be make ready for another day of 
 traitor hunting . but after a time the victim , of which the street be 
 full at first , have to be seek for in back - yard , ferret out of their 
 hiding - place , drag up out of the cellar , or down from the garret 
 of the house , which would be enter by the band with howl of death 
 and vengeance . 
 
 " then , Monsieur l'abb , "   say Arlette , " I let myself go at last . I 
 could resist no long . I say to myself . ` if it be so then it must be 
 right .   but most of the time I be like a person half asleep and 
 dream thing that it be impossible to believe . about that time , I 
 do not   know why , the woman Perose hint to I that Scevola be a poor 
 creature . next night while all the band lie fast asleep in the big room 
 Perose and Scevola help I out of the window into the street and lead 
 I to the quay behind the arsenal . Scevola have find our tartane lie 
 at the pontoon and one of the Madrague man with she . the other have 
 disappear . Perose fall on my neck and cry a little . she give I a 
 kiss and say : " my time will come soon . you , Scevola , do not   you show 
 yourself in Toulon , because nobody believe in you any more . Adieu , 
 Arlette . Vive la Nation ! " and she vanish in the night . I wait on 
 the pontoon shiver in my torn clothe , listen to Scevola and the 
 man throw dead body overboard out of the tartane . Splash , splash , 
 splash . and suddenly I feel I must run away , but they be after I in a 
 moment , drag I back and throw I down into that cabin which smell of 
 blood . but when I get back to the farm all feeling have leave I . I do 
 not feel myself exist . I see thing round I here and there , but I 
 could not   look at anything for long . something be go out of I . 1 know 
 now that it be not my heart , but then I do not   mind what it be . I feel 
 light and empty , and a little cold all the time , but I could smile at 
 people . nothing could matter . nothing could mean anything . I care for 
 no one . I want nothing . I be not   alive at all , Monsieur l'abb . People 
 seem to see I and would talk to I , and it seem funny - till one 
 day I feel my heart beat . " 
 
 " why precisely do you come to I with this tale ? " ask the abb in a 
 low voice . 
 
 " because you be a priest . have you forget that I have be bring 
 up in a convent ? I have not forget how to pray . but I be afraid of 
 the world now . what must I do ? " 
 
 " Repent ! " thunder the abb , get up . he see her candid gaze 
 uplifted and lower his voice forcibly . " you must look with fearless 
 sincerity into the darkness of your soul . remember whence the only true 
 help can come . those whom God have visit by a trial such as yours can 
 not be hold guiltless of their enormity . withdraw from the world . 
 descend within yourself and abandon the vain thought of what people 
 call happiness . be an example to yourself of the sinfulness of our 
 nature and of the weakness of our humanity . you may have be possess . 
 what do I know ? perhaps it be permit in order to lead your soul to 
 saintliness through a life of seclusion and prayer . to that it would be 
 my duty to help you . meantime you must pray to be give strength for a 
 complete renunciation . " 
 
 Arlette , lower her eye slowly , appeal to the abb as a symbolic 
 figure of spiritual mystery . " what can be God 's design on this 
 creature ? " he ask himself . 
 
 " Monsieur le Cur , " she say quietly , " I feel the need to pray to - day 
 for the first time in many year . when I leave home it be only to go to 
 your church . " 
 
 " the church stand open to the bad of sinner , " say the abb . 
 
 " I know . but I would have have to pass before all those villager : and 
 you , abb , know well what they be capable of . " 
 
 " perhaps , " murmur the abb , " it would be well not to put their 
 charity to the test . " 
 
 " I must pray before I go back again . I think you would let I come in 
 through the sacristy . " 
 
 " it would be inhuman to refuse your request , " he say , rouse himself 
 and take down a key that hang on the wall . he put on his broad - brim 
 hat and without a word lead the way through the wicket gate and along the 
 path which he always use himself and which be out of sight of the 
 village fountain . after they have enter the damp and dilapidated 
 sacristy he lock the door behind they and only then open another , a 
 small one , lead into the church . when he stand aside , Arlette 
 become aware of the chilly odour as of freshly turn - up earth mingle 
 with a faint scent of incense . in the deep dusk of the nave a single 
 little flame glimmer before an image of the virgin . the abb whisper 
 as she pass on : 
 
 " there before the great altar abase yourself and pray for grace and 
 strength and mercy in this world full of crime against God and man . " 
 
 she do not look at he . through the thin sol of her shoe she could 
 feel the chill of the flagstone . the abb leave the door ajar , sit down 
 on a rush - bottom chair , the only one in the sacristy , fold his arm 
 and let his chin fall on his breast . he seem to be sleep 
 profoundly , but at the end of half an hour he get up and , go to the 
 doorway , stand look at the kneeling figure sink low on the altar 
 step . Arlette 's face be bury in her hand in a passion of piety and 
 prayer . the abb wait patiently for a good many minute more , before he 
 raise his voice in a grave murmur which fill the whole dark place . 
 
 " it be time for you to leave . I be go to ring for vesper . " 
 
 the view of her complete absorption before the most High have touch 
 he . he step back into the sacristy and after a time hear the 
 faintest possible swish of the black silk skirt of the Escampobar 
 daughter in her arlesian costume . she enter the sacristy lightly with 
 shin eye , and the abb look at she with some emotion . 
 
 " you have pray well , my daughter , " he say . " no forgiveness will be 
 refuse to you , for you have suffer much . put your trust in the grace 
 of God . " 
 
 she raise her head and stay her footstep for a moment . in the dark 
 little place he could see the gleam of her eye swim in tear . 
 
 " yes , Monsieur l'abb , " she say in her clear seductive voice . " I have 
 pray and I feel answered . I entreat the merciful God to keep the 
 heart of the man I love always true to I or else to let I die before I 
 set my eye on he again . " 
 
 the abb pal under his tan of a village priest and lean his shoulder 
 against the wall without a word . 
 
 
 after leave the church by the sacristy door Arlette never look back . 
 the abb see she flit past the presbytery , and the building hide she from 
 his sight . he do not accuse she of duplicity . he have deceive himself . 
 a heathen . white as her skin be , the blackness of her hair and of her 
 eye , the dusky red of her lip , suggest a strain of saracen blood . he 
 give she up without a sigh . 
 
 Arlette walk rapidly towards Escampobar as if she could not get there 
 soon enough ; but as she near the first enclose field her step become 
 slow and after hesitate awhile she sit down between two olive tree , 
 near a wall border by a growth of thin grass at the foot . " and if I 
 have be possess , " she argue to herself , " as the abb say , what be 
 it to I as I be now ? that evil spirit cast my true self out of my body 
 and then cast away the body too . for year I have be live empty . 
 there have be no meaning in anything . " 
 
 but now her true self have return mature in its mysterious exile , 
 hopeful and eager for love . she be certain that it have never be far 
 away from that outcast body which Catherine have tell she lately be fit 
 for no man 's arm . that be all that old woman know about it , think 
 Arlette , not in scorn but rather in pity . she know well , she have go 
 to heaven for truth in that long prostration with its ardent prayer and 
 its moment of ecstasy before an unlighted altar . 
 
 she know its meaning well , and also the meaning of another - of a 
 terrestrial revelation which have come to she that day at noon while she 
 wait on the lieutenant . everybody else be in the kitchen ; she and Ral 
 be as much alone together as have ever happen to they in their life . 
 that day she could not deny herself the delight to be near he , to watch 
 he covertly , to hear he perhaps utter a few word , to experience that 
 strange satisfying consciousness of her own existence which nothing but 
 Ral 's presence could give she ; a sort of unimpassioned but all - absorb 
 bliss , warmth , courage , confidence ! . . . she back away from Ral 's 
 table , seat herself face he and cast down her eye . there be a 
 great stillness in the salle except for the murmur of the voice in the 
 kitchen . she have at first steal a glance or two and then peep again 
 through her eyelash , as it be , she see his eye rest on she with a 
 peculiar meaning . this have never happen before . she jump up , 
 think that he want something , and while she stand in front of he 
 with her hand rest on the table he stoop suddenly , press it to 
 the table with his lip and begin kiss it passionately without a 
 sound , endlessly . . . . more startled than surprised at first , then 
 infinitely happy , she be begin to breathe quickly , when he leave off 
 and throw himself back in the chair . she walk away from the table and 
 sit down again to gaze at he openly , steadily , without a smile . but he 
 be not look at she . his passionate lip be set hard now and his 
 face have an expression of stern despair . no word pass between they . 
 brusquely he get up with avert eye and go outside , leave the food 
 before he unfinishe . 
 
 in the usual course of thing , on any other day , she would have get up 
 and follow he , for she have always yield to the fascination that have 
 first rouse her faculty . she would have go out just to pass in 
 front of he once or twice . but this time she have not obey what be 
 strong than fascination , something within herself which at the same 
 time prompt and restrain she . she only raise her arm and look at 
 her hand . it be true . it have happen . he have kiss it . formerly she 
 care not how gloomy he be as long as he remain somewhere where she 
 could look at he - which she would do at every opportunity with an open 
 and unbridled innocence . but now she know well than to do that . she 
 have get up , have pass through the kitchen , meet without 
 embarrassment Catherine 's inquisitive glance , and have go upstairs . 
 when she come down after a time , he be nowhere to be see , and 
 everybody else too seem to have go into hiding ; Michel , Peyrol , 
 Scevola . . . but if she have meet Scevola she would not have speak to 
 he . it be now a very long time since she have volunteer a 
 conversation with Scevola . she guess , however , that Scevola have simply 
 go to lie down in his lair , a narrow shabby room light by one glaze 
 little window high up in the end wall . Catherine have put he in there on 
 the very day he have bring her niece home and he have retain it for 
 his own ever since . she could even picture he to herself in there 
 stretch on his pallet . she be capable of that now . formerly , for 
 year after her return , people that be out of her sight be out of 
 her mind also . have they run away and leave she she would not have think 
 of they at all . she would have wander in and out of the empty house 
 and round the empty field without give anybody a thought . Peyrol be 
 the first human being she have notice for year . Peyrol , since he have 
 come , have always exist for she . and as a matter of fact the rover be 
 generally very much in evidence about the farm . that afternoon , however , 
 even Peyrol be not to be see . her uneasiness begin to grow , but she 
 feel a strange reluctance to go into the kitchen where she know her aunt 
 would be sit in the armchair like a preside genius of the house 
 take its rest , and unreadable in her immobility . and yet she feel she 
 must talk about Ral to somebody . this be how the idea of go down to 
 the church have come to she . she would talk of he to the priest and to 
 God . the force of old association assert itself . she have be teach 
 to believe that one could tell everything to a priest , and that the 
 omnipotent God who know everything could be pray to , ask for grace , 
 for strength , for mercy , for protection , for pity . she have do it and 
 feel she have be hear . 
 
 her heart have quieten down while she rest under the wall . pull 
 out a long stalk of grass she twin it round her finger absently . the 
 veil of cloud have thicken over her head , early dusk have descend upon 
 the earth , and she have not find out what have become of Ral . she jump 
 to her foot wildly . but directly she have do that she feel the need of 
 self - control . it be with her usual light step that she approach the 
 front of the house and for the first time in her life perceive how 
 barren and sombre it look when Ral be not about . she slip in 
 quietly through the door of the main building and run upstairs . it be 
 dark on the landing . she pass by the door lead into the room 
 occupy by her aunt and herself . it have be her father and mother 's 
 bedroom . the other big room be the lieutenant 's during his visit to 
 Escampobar . without even a rustle of her dress , like a shadow , she 
 glide along the passage , turn the handle without noise and go in . 
 after shut the door behind she she listen . there be no sound in 
 the house . Scevola be either already down in the yard or still lie 
 open - eyed on his tumbled pallet in rag sulk about something . she have 
 once accidentally catch , he at it , down on his face , one eye and cheek 
 of which be bury in the pillow , the other eye glare savagely , and 
 have be scar away by a thick mutter : " keep off . do not   approach I . " 
 and all this have mean nothing to she then . 
 
 have ascertain that the inside of the house be as still as the 
 grave , Arlette walk across to the window , which when the lieutenant 
 be occupy the room stand always open and with the shutter push 
 right back against the wall . it be of course uncurtaine , and as she 
 come near to it Arlette catch sight of Peyrol come down the hill on 
 his return from the lookout . his white head gleam like silver against 
 the slope of the ground and by and by pass out of her sight , while she 
 ear catch the sound of his footstep below the window . they pass into 
 the house , but she do not hear he come upstairs . he have go into the 
 kitchen . to Catherine . they would talk about she and Eugne . but what 
 would they say ? she be so new to life that everything appear 
 dangerous : talk , attitude , glance . she feel frightened at the mere 
 idea of silence between those two . it be possible . suppose they do not  
 say anything to each other . that would be awful . 
 
 yet she remain calm like a sensible person , who know that rush 
 about in excitement be not the way to meet unknown danger . she sweep 
 her eye over the room and see the lieutenant 's valise in a corner . that 
 be really what she have want to see . he be not   go then . but it 
 do not   tell she , though she open it , what have become of he . as to his 
 return , she have no doubt whatever about that . he have always return . 
 she notice particularly a large packet sew up in sail - cloth and with 
 three large red seal on the seam . it do not , however , arrest her 
 thought . those be still hover about Catherine and Peyrol 
 downstair . how changed they be . have they ever think that she be 
 mad ? she become indignant . " how could I have prevent that ? " she 
 ask herself with despair . she sit down on the edge of the bed in her 
 usual attitude , her foot cross , her hand lie in her lap . she feel 
 on one of they the impress off Ral 's lip , soothe , reassure like 
 every certitude , but she be aware of a still remain confusion in her 
 mind , an indefinite weariness like the strain of an imperfect vision 
 try to discern shifting outline , float shape , incomprehensible 
 sign . she could not resist the temptation of rest her tired body , 
 just for a little while . 
 
 she lie down on the very edge of the bed , the kissed hand tuck under 
 her cheek . the faculty of thinking abandon she altogether , but she 
 remain open - eye , wide awake . in that position , without hear the 
 slight sound , she see the door handle move down as far as it would 
 go , perfectly noiseless , as though the lock have be oil not long 
 before . her impulse be to leap right out into the middle of the room , 
 but she restrain herself and only swing herself into a sit 
 posture . the bed have not creak . she lower her foot gently to the 
 ground , and by the time when hold her breath she put her ear against 
 the door , the handle have come back into position . she have detect no 
 sound outside . not the faint . nothing . it never occur to she to 
 doubt her own eye , but the whole thing have be so noiseless that it 
 could not have disturb the light sleeper . she be sure that have she 
 be lie on her other side , that be with she back to the door , she 
 would have know nothing . it be some time before she walk away from 
 the door and sit on a chair which stand near a heavy and much - carve 
 table , an heirloom more appropriate to a chteau than to a farmhouse . the 
 dust of many month cover its smooth oval surface of dark , finely 
 grain wood . 
 
 " it must have be Scevola , " think Arlette . it could have be no 
 one else . what could he have want ? she give herself up to thought , but 
 really she do not care . the absent Ral occupy all her mind . with an 
 unconscious slowness her finger trace in the dust on the table the 
 initial e A and achieve a circle round they . then she jump up , 
 unlock the door and go downstairs . in the kitchen , as she fully 
 expect , she find Scevola with the other . directly she appear he 
 get up and run upstairs , but return almost immediately look as if 
 he have see a ghost , and when Peyrol ask he some insignificant 
 question his lip and even his chin tremble before he could command his 
 voice . he avoid look anybody in the face . the other too seem shy 
 of meet each other 's eye , and the evening meal of the Escampobar 
 seem haunted by the absent lieutenant . Peyrol , besides , have his 
 prisoner to think of . his existence present a most interesting 
 problem , and the proceeding of the english ship be another , closely 
 connect with it and full of dangerous possibility . Catherine 's black 
 and ungleame eye seem to have sink deeply in their socket , but her 
 face wear its habitual severe aloofness of expression . suddenly Scevola 
 speak as if in answer to some thought of his own . 
 
 " what have lose we be moderation . " 
 
 Peyrol swallow the piece of bread and butter which he have be 
 masticate slowly , and ask : 
 
 " what be you allude to , citoyen ? " 
 
 " I be allude to the republic , " answer Scevola , in a more assured 
 tone than usual . " moderation I say . we patriot hold our hand too soon . 
 all the child of the ci - devant and all the child of traitor 
 should have be kill together with their father and mother . 
 Contempt for civic virtue and love of tyranny be inborn in they all . 
 they grow up and trample on all the sacred principle . . . . the work of 
 the Terror be undo ! " 
 
 " what do you propose to do about it ? " growl Peyrol . " no use 
 declaim here or anywhere for that matter . you would not   find anybody 
 to listen to you - you cannibal , " he add in a good - humour tone . 
 Arlette , lean her head on her left hand , be trace with the 
 forefinger of her right invisible initial on the table - cloth . 
 Catherine , stoop to light a four - beak oil lamp mount on a brass 
 pedestal , turn she finely carve face over her shoulder . the 
 sans - culotte jump up , fling his arm about . his hair be tousle 
 from his sleepless tumbling on his pallet . the unbuttoned sleeve of his 
 shirt flap against his thin hairy forearm . he no long look as 
 though he have see a ghost . he open a wide black mouth , but Peyrol 
 raise his finger at he calmly . 
 
 " no , no . the time when your own people up La Boyre way - do not   they 
 live up there ? - tremble at the idea of you come to visit they with a 
 lot of patriot scallywag at your back be past . you have nobody at your 
 back ; and if you start spout like this at large , people would rise 
 up and hunt you down like a mad dog . " 
 
 Scevola , who have shut his mouth , glance over his shoulder , and as if 
 impressed by his unsupported state go out of the kitchen , reeling , 
 like a man who have be drink . he have drink nothing but water . Peyrol 
 look thoughtfully at the door which the indignant san - culotte have 
 slam after he . during the colloquy between the two man , Arlette have 
 disappear into the salle . Catherine , straighten she long back , put 
 the oil lamp with its four smoky flame on the table . it light she 
 face from below . Peyrol move it slightly aside before he speak . 
 
 " it be lucky for you , " he say , gaze upwards , " that Scevola have not  
 even one other like himself when he come here . " 
 
 " yes , "   she admit . " I have to face he alone from first to last . but 
 can you see I between he and Arlette ? in those day he rave terribly , 
 but he be daze and tired out . afterwards I recover myself and I 
 could argue with he firmly . I use to say to he , ` look , she be so 
 young and she have no knowledge of herself .   why , for month the only 
 thing she would say that one could understand be ` look how it spurt , 
 look how it splash ! " he talk to I of his republican virtue . he be 
 not a profligate . he could wait . she be , he say , sacred to he , and 
 thing like that . he would walk up and down for hour talk of she and 
 I would sit there listen to he with the key of the room the child 
 be lock in , in my pocket . I temporize , and , as you say yourself , it 
 be perhaps because he have no one at his back that he do not try to 
 kill I , which he might have do any day . I temporize . and after all , 
 why should he want to kill I ? he tell I more than once he be sure to 
 have Arlette for his own . many a time he make I shiver explain why 
 it must be so . she owe her life to he . oh ! that dreadful crazy life . 
 you know he be one of those man that can be patient as far as woman be 
 concerned . " 
 
 Peyrol nod understandingly . " yes , some be like that . that kind be 
 more impatient sometimes to spill blood . still I think that your life 
 be one long narrow escape , at least till I turn up here . " 
 
 " thing have settle down , somehow , " murmur Catherine . " but all the 
 same I be glad when you appear here , a grey - head man , serious . " 
 
 " Grey hair will come to any sort of man , " observe Peyrol acidly , 
 " and you do not know I . you do not   know anything of I even now . " 
 
 " there have be peyrol live less than half a day 's journey from 
 here , " observe Catherine in a reminiscent tone . 
 
 " that be all right , " say the rover in such a peculiar tone that she 
 ask he sharply : " what be the matter ? be not   you one of they ? be not  
 peyrol your name ? " 
 
 " I have have many name and this be one of they . so this name and my 
 grey hair please you , Catherine ? they give you confidence in I , hein ? " 
 
 " I be not   sorry to see you come . Scevola too , I believe . he hear that 
 patriot be be hunt down , here and there , and he be grow 
 quieter every day . you rouse the child wonderfully . " 
 
 " and do that please Scevola too ? " 
 
 " before you come she never speak to anybody unless first speak to . she 
 do not   seem to care where she be . at the same time , " add Catherine 
 after a pause , ' she do not   care what happen to she either . oh , I have 
 have some heavy hour think it all over , in the daytime do my work , 
 and at night while I lay awake , listen to her breathing . and I 
 grow old all the time , and , who know , with my last hour ready to 
 strike . I often think that when I feel it come I would speak to you 
 as I be speak to you now . " 
 
 " oh , you do think , " say Peyrol in an undertone . " because of my grey 
 hair , I suppose . " 
 
 " yes . and because you come from beyond the sea , " Catherine say with 
 unbend mien and in an unflinche voice . " do not   you know that the 
 first time Arlette see you she speak to you and that it be the first 
 time I hear she speak of her own accord since she have be bring back 
 by that man , and I have to wash she from head to foot before I put she 
 into her mother 's bed . " 
 
 " the first time , " repeat Peyrol . 
 
 " it be like a miracle happen , " say Catherine , " and it be you 
 that have do it . " 
 
 " then it must be that some indian witch have give I the power , " 
 mutter Peyrol , so low that Catherine could not hear the word . but she 
 do not seem to care , and presently go on again : 
 
 " and the child take to you wonderfully . some sentiment be arouse in 
 she at last . " 
 
 " yes , " assent Peyrol grimly . " she do take to I . she learn to 
 talk to - the old man . " 
 
 " it be something in you that seem to have open her mind and unloose 
 her tongue , " say Catherine , speak with a sort of regal composure 
 down at Peyrol , like a chieftainess of a tribe . " I often use to look 
 from afar at you two talk and wonder what she . . . " 
 
 " she talk like a child , " strike in Peyrol abruptly . " and so you 
 be go to speak to I before your last hour come . why , you be not 
 make ready to die yet ? " 
 
 " listen , Peyrol . if anybody 's last hour be near it be not   mine . you just 
 look about you a little . it be time I speak to you . " 
 
 " why , I be not go to kill anybody , " mutter Peyrol . " you be 
 get strange idea into your head . " 
 
 " it be as I say , " insist Catherine without animation . " death seem 
 to cling to her skirt . she have be run with it madly . let we keep 
 her foot out of more human blood . " 
 
 Peyrol , who have let his head fall on his breast , jerk it up suddenly . 
 " what on earth be you talk about ? " he cry angrily . " I do not  
 understand you at all . " 
 
 " you have not see the state she be in when I get she back into my 
 hand , " remark Catherine . . . . " I suppose you know where the 
 lieutenant be . what make he go off like that ? where do he go to ? " 
 
 " I know , " say Peyrol . " and he may be back to - night . " 
 
 " you know where he be ! and of course you know why he have go away and 
 why he be come back , " pronounce Catherine in an ominous voice . 
 " well , you have well tell he that unless he have a pair of eye at the 
 back of his head he have well not return here - not return at all ; for 
 if he do , nothing can save he from a treacherous blow . " 
 
 " no man be ever safe from treachery , " opine Peyrol after a moment 's 
 silence . " I will not   pretend not to understand what you mean . " 
 
 " you hear as well as I what Scevola say just before he go out . the 
 lieutenant be the child of some ci - devant and Arlette of a man they 
 call a traitor to his country . you can see yourself what be in his 
 mind . " 
 
 " he be a chicken - hearted spouter , " say Peyrol contemptuously , but it 
 do not affect Catherine 's attitude of an old sibyl rise from the 
 tripod to prophesy calmly atrocious disaster . " it be all his 
 republicanism , " comment Peyrol with increase scorn . " he have get a 
 fit of it on . " 
 
 " no , that be jealousy , " say Catherine . " maybe he have cease to care 
 for she in all these year . it be a long time since he have leave off 
 worry I . with a creature like that I think that if I let he be 
 master here . . . but no ! I know that after the lieutenant start 
 come here his awful fancy have come back . he be not sleep at 
 night . his republicanism be always there . but do not   you know , Peyrol , 
 that there may be jealousy without love ? " 
 
 " you think so , " say the rover profoundly . he ponder full of his own 
 experience . " and he have taste blood too , " he mutter after a pause . 
 " you may be right . " 
 
 " I may be right , " repeat Catherine in a slightly indignant tone . 
 " every time I see Arlette near he I tremble lest it should come to 
 word and to a bad blow . and when they be both out of my sight it be 
 still bad . at this moment I be wonder where they be . they may be 
 together and I dare not   raise my voice to call she away for fear of 
 rouse his fury . " 
 
 " but it be the lieutenant he be after , " observe Peyrol in a lowered 
 voice . " well , I can not   stop the lieutenant come back . " 
 
 " where be she ? where be he ? " whisper Catherine in a tone betray 
 her secret anguish . 
 
 Peyrol rise quietly and go into the salle , leave the door open . 
 Catherine hear the latch of the outer door be lift cautiously . in 
 a few moment Peyrol return as quietly as he have go out . 
 
 " I step out to look at the weather . the moon be about to rise and 
 the cloud have thin down . one can see a star here and there . " he 
 lower his voice considerably . " Arlette be sit on the bench 
 hum a little song to herself . I really wonder whether she know I be 
 stand within a few foot of she . " 
 
 " she do not   want to hear or see anybody except one man , " affirm 
 Catherine , now in complete control of her voice . " and she be hum a 
 song , do you say ? she who would sit for hour without make a sound . 
 and God know what song it could have be ! " 
 
 " yes , there be a great change in she , " admit Peyrol with a heavy 
 sigh . " this lieutenant , " he continue after a pause , " have always 
 behave coldly to she . I notice he many time turn his face away when 
 he see she come towards we . you know what these epaulette - wearer be , 
 Catherine . and then this one have some worm of his own that be gnaw at 
 he . I doubt whether he have ever forget that he be a ci - devant boy . 
 yet I do believe that she do not want to see and hear anybody but he . 
 be it because she have be derange in her head for so long ? " 
 
 " no , Peyrol , " say the old woman . " it be not   that . you want to know 
 how I can tell ? for year nothing could make she either laugh or cry . 
 you know that yourself . you have see she every day . would you believe 
 that within the last month she have be both cry and laugh on my 
 breast without know why ? " 
 
 " this I do not   understand , " say Peyrol . 
 
 " but I do . that lieutenant have get only to whistle to make she run 
 after he . yes , Peyrol . that be so . she have no fear , no shame , no pride . 
 I myself have be nearly like that . " her fine brown face seem to 
 grow more impassive before she go on much low and as if argue with 
 herself : " only I at least be never blood - mad . I be fit for any man 's 
 arm . . . . but then that man be not a priest . " 
 
 the last word make Peyrol start . he have almost forget that story . he 
 say to himself : " she know , she have have the experience . " 
 
 " look here , Catherine , " he say decisively , " the lieutenant be come 
 back . he will be here probably about midnight . but one thing I can tell 
 you : he be not come back to whistle she away . oh , no ! it be not for 
 her sake that he will come back . " 
 
 " well , if it be not   for she that he be come back then it must be 
 because death have beckon to he , " she announce in a tone of solemn 
 unemotional conviction . " a man who have receive a sign from death 
  - nothing can stop he ! " 
 
 Peyrol , who have see death face to face many time , look at 
 Catherine 's fine brown profile curiously . 
 
 " it be a fact , " he murmur , " that man who rush out to seek death do 
 not often find it . so one must have a sign ? what sort of sign would it be ? " 
 
 " how be anybody to know ? " ask Catherine , star across the kitchen 
 at the wall . " even those to whom it be make do not recognize it for 
 what it be . but they obey all the same . I tell you , Peyrol , nothing can 
 stop they . it may be a glance , or a smile , or a shadow on the water , or 
 a thought that pass through the head . for my poor brother and 
 sister - in - law it be the face of their child . " 
 
 Peyrol fold his arm on his breast and drop his head . melancholy 
 be a sentiment to which he be a stranger ; for what have melancholy to 
 do with the life of a sea - rover , a Brother of the Coast , a simple , 
 venturesome , precarious life , full of risk and leave no time for 
 introspection or for that momentary self - forgetfulness which be call 
 gaiety . sombre fury , fierce merriment , he have know in pass gust , 
 come from outside ; but never this intimate inward sense of the vanity 
 of all thing , that doubt of the power within himself . 
 
 " I wonder what the sign for I will be , " he think ; and conclude 
 with self - contempt that for he there would be no sign , that he would 
 have to die in his bed like an old yard dog in his kennel . have 
 reach that depth of despondency , there be nothing more before he but 
 a black gulf into which his consciousness sink like a stone . 
 
 the silence which have last perhaps a minute after Catherine have 
 finish speak be traverse suddenly by a clear high voice say : 
 
 " what be you two plot here ? " 
 
 Arlette stand in the doorway of the salle . the gleam of light in the 
 white of her eye set off her black and penetrate glance . the 
 surprise be complete . the profile of Catherine , who be stand by the 
 table , become if possible hard ; a sharp carving of an old prophetess 
 of some desert tribe . Arlette make three step forward . in Peyrol even 
 extreme astonishment be deliberate . he have be famous for never 
 look as though he have be catch unprepared . Age have accentuate 
 that trait of a bear leader . he only slip off the edge of the table 
 and say in his deep voice : 
 
 " why , patronne ! we have not   say a word to each other for ever so long . " 
 
 Arlette move near still . " I know , " she cry . " it be horrible . I 
 have be watch you two . Scevola come and dump himself on the bench 
 close to I . he begin to talk to I , and so I go away . that man bore 
 I . and here I find you people say nothing . it be insupportable . what 
 have come to you both ? say , you , Papa Peyrol - do not   you like I any 
 more ? " her voice fill the kitchen . Peyrol go to the salle door and 
 shut it . while come back he be stagger by the brilliance of life 
 within she that seem to pale the flame of the lamp . he say half in jest : 
 
 " I do not   know whether I do not   like you well when you be quieter . " 
 
 " and you would like good to see I still quieter in my grave . " 
 
 she dazzle he . Vitality stream out of her eye , her lip , her whole 
 person , envelop she like a halo and . . . yes , truly , the faint 
 possible flush have appear on her cheek , play on they faintly rosy 
 like the light of a distant flame on the snow . she raise her arm up in 
 the air and let her hand fall from on high on Peyrol 's shoulder , 
 capture his desperately dodge eye with her black and compelling 
 glance , put out all her instinctive seduction - while he feel a grow 
 fierceness in the grip of her finger . 
 
 " no ! I can not   hold it in ! Monsieur Peyrol , Papa Peyrol , old gunner , you 
 horrid sea - wolf , be an angel and tell I where he be . " 
 
 the rover , whom only that morning the powerful grasp of Lieutenant Ral 
 find as unshakable as a rock , feel all his strength vanish under the 
 hand of that woman . he say thickly : 
 
 " he have go to Toulon . he have to go . " 
 
 " what for ? speak the truth to I ! " 
 
 " truth be not for everybody to know , " mumble Peyrol , with a sink 
 sensation as though the very ground be go soft under his foot . " on 
 service , " he add in a growl . 
 
 her hand slip suddenly from his big shoulder . " on service ? " she 
 repeat . " what service ? " her voice sink and the word " oh , yes ! his 
 service " be hardly hear by Peyrol , who as soon as her hand have leave 
 his shoulder feel his strength return to he and the yield earth 
 grow firm again under his foot . right in front of he Arlette , silent , 
 with her arm hang down before she with entwined finger , seem 
 stun because Lieutenant Ral be not free from all earthly 
 connection , like a visit angel from heaven depend only on God to 
 whom she have pray . she have to share he with some service that could 
 order he about . she feel in herself a strength , a power , great than 
 any service . 
 
 " Peyrol , " she cry low , " do not   break my heart , my new heart , that 
 have just begin to beat . feel how it beat . who could bear it ? " she 
 seize the rover 's thick hairy paw and press it hard against her 
 breast . " tell I when he will be back . " 
 
 " listen , patronne , you have well go upstairs , " begin Peyrol with a 
 great effort and snatch his capture hand away . he stagger 
 backwards a little while Arlette shout at he : 
 
 " you can not   order I about as you use to do . " in all the change from 
 entreaty to anger she never strike a false note , so that her emotional 
 outburst have the heart - move power of inspire art . she turn round 
 with a tempestuous swish to Catherine who have neither stir nor 
 emit a sound : " nothing you two can do will make any difference 
 now . " the next moment she be face Peyrol again . " you frighten I 
 with your white hair . come ! . . . be I to go on my knee to you ? . . . 
 there ! " 
 
 the rover catch she under the elbow , swing she up clear of the ground , 
 and set she down on her foot as if she have be a child . directly he have 
 let she go , she stamp her foot at he . 
 
 " be you stupid ? " she cry . " do not   you understand that something have 
 happen to - day ? " 
 
 through all this scene Peyrol have keep his head as creditably as could 
 have be expect , in the manner of a seaman catch by a white squall 
 in the tropic . but at those word a dozen thought try to rush 
 together through his mind , in chase of that startling declaration . 
 something have happen ! where ? how ? whom to ? what thing ? it could not   be 
 anything between she and the lieutenant . he have , it seem to he , never 
 lose sight of the lieutenant from the first hour when they meet in the 
 morning till he have send he off to Toulon by an actual push on the 
 shoulder ; except while he be have his dinner in the next room with 
 the door open , and for the few minute spend in talk with Michel in 
 the yard . but that be only a very few minute , and directly afterwards 
 the first sight of the lieutenant sit gloomily on the bench like a 
 lonely crow do not suggest either elation or excitement or any emotion 
 connect with a woman . in the face of these difficulty Peyrol 's mind 
 become suddenly a blank . " voyon , patronne , " he begin , unable to think 
 of anything else to say . " what be all this fuss about ? I expect he to 
 be back here about midnight . " 
 
 he be extremely relieved to notice that she believe he . it be the 
 truth . for indeed he do not know what he could have invent on the 
 spur of the moment that would get she out of the way and induce she to 
 go to bed . she treat he to a sinister frown and a terribly menacing , 
 " if you have lie . . . oh ! " 
 
 he produce an indulgent smile . " compose yourself . he will be here soon 
 after midnight . you may go to sleep with an easy mind . " 
 
 she turn she back on he contemptuously , and say curtly , " come 
 along , aunt , " and go to the door lead to the passage . there she 
 turn for a moment with her hand on the door handle . 
 
 " you be change . I can not   trust either of you . you be not the same 
 people . " 
 
 she go out . only then do Catherine detach her gaze from the wall to 
 meet Peyrol 's eye . " do you hear what she say ? we ! change ! it be she 
 herself . . . " 
 
 Peyrol nod twice and there be a long pause , during which even the 
 flame of the lamp do not stir . 
 
 " go after she , Mademoiselle Catherine , " he say at last with a shade 
 of sympathy in his tone . she do not move . " allon - du courage , " he 
 urge she deferentially as it be . " try to put she to sleep . " 
 
 
 Upright and deliberate , Catherine leave the kitchen , and in the passage 
 outside find Arlette wait for she with a light candle in her hand . 
 her heart be fill with sudden desolation by the beauty of that young 
 face enhaloe in the patch of light , with the profound darkness as of a 
 dungeon for a background . at once her niece lead the way upstairs 
 mutter savagely through her pretty tooth : " he think I could go to 
 sleep . old imbecile ! " 
 
 Peyrol do not take his eye off Catherine 's straight back till the door 
 have close after she . only then he relieve himself by let the air 
 escape through his pursed lip and roll his eye freely about . he 
 pick up the lamp by the ring on the top of the central rod and go 
 into the salle , close behind he the door of the dark kitchen . he 
 stand the lamp on the very table on which Lieutenant Ral have have his 
 midday meal . a small white cloth be still spread on it and there be 
 his chair askew as he have push it back when he get up . another of the 
 many chair in the salle be turn round conspicuously to face the 
 table . these thing make Peyrol remark to himself bitterly : " she sit 
 and star at he as if he have be gild all over , with three head and 
 seven arm on his body " - a comparison reminiscent of certain idol he 
 have see in an indian temple . though not an iconoclast , Peyrol feel 
 positively sick at the recollection , and hasten to step outside . the 
 great cloud have break up and the mighty fragment be move to the 
 westward in stately flight before the rise moon . Scevola , who have be 
 lie extend full length on the bench , swing himself up suddenly , very 
 upright . 
 
 " have a little nap in the open ? " ask Peyrol , let his eye roam 
 through the luminous space under the depart rearguard of the cloud 
 jostle each other up there . 
 
 " I do not sleep , " say the sans - culotte . " I have not   close my 
 eye - not for one moment . " 
 
 " that must be because you be not   sleepy , " suggest the deliberate 
 Peyrol , whose thought be far away with the english ship . his mental 
 eye contemplate her black image against the white beach of the salin 
 describe a sparkling curve under the moon , and meantime he go on 
 slowly : " for it could not have be noise that keep you awake . " on the 
 level of Escampobar the shadow lie long on the ground while the side of 
 the lookout hill remain yet black but edge with an increase 
 brightness . and the amenity of the stillness be such that if soften 
 for a moment Peyrol 's hard inward attitude towards all mankind , 
 include even the captain of the english ship . the old rover savour a 
 moment of serenity in the midst of his care . 
 
 " this be an accursed spot , " declare Scevola suddenly . 
 
 Peyrol , without turn his head , look at he sideways . though he have 
 spring up from his reclining posture smartly enough , the citizen have 
 go slack all over and be sit all in a heap . his shoulder be 
 hunch up , his hand repose on his knee . with his star eye he 
 resemble a sick child in the moonlight . 
 
 " it be the very spot for hatch treachery . one feel steep in they 
 up to the neck . " 
 
 he shudder and yawn a long irresistible nervous yawn with the gleam 
 of unexpected long canine in a retract , gap mouth give away the 
 restless panther lurking in the man . 
 
 " oh , yes , there be treachery about right enough . you could not   conceive 
 that , citoyen ? " 
 
 " of course I could not , " assent Peyrol with serene contempt . " what 
 be this treachery that you be concoct ? " he add carelessly , in a 
 social way , while enjoy the charm of a moonlit evening . Scevola , who 
 do not expect that turn , manage , however , to produce a rattle sort 
 of laugh almost at once . 
 
 " that be a good one . ha ! ha ! ha ! . . . I ! . . . concoct ! . . . why I ? " 
 
 " well , " say Peyrol carelessly , " there be not many of we to carry 
 out treachery about here . the woman be go upstairs ; Michel be down 
 at the tartane . there be I , and you would not dare suspect I of 
 treachery . well , there remain only you . " 
 
 Scevola rouse himself . " this be not much of a jest , " he say . " I 
 have be a treason - hunter . I . . . " 
 
 he check that strain . he be full of purely emotional suspicion . 
 Peyrol be talk like this only to annoy he and to get he out of the 
 way ; but in the particular state of his feeling Scevola be acutely 
 aware of every syllable of these offensive remark . " aha , " he think 
 to himself , " he do not   mention the lieutenant . " this omission seem 
 to the patriot of immense importance . if Peyrol have not mention the 
 lieutenant it be because those two have be plot some treachery 
 together , all the afternoon on board that tartane . that be why nothing 
 have be see of they for the good part of the day . as a matter of fact , 
 Scevola too have observe Peyrol return to the farm in the evening , 
 only he have observe he from another window than Arlette . this be a 
 few minute before his attempt to open the lieutenant 's door , in order 
 to find out whether Ral be in his room . he have tiptoe away , uncertain , 
 and go into the kitchen have find only Catherine and Peyrol there . 
 directly Arlette join they a sudden inspiration make he run upstairs 
 and try the door again . it be open now ! a clear proof that it be 
 Arlette who have be lock up in there . the discovery that she make 
 herself at home like this in the lieutenant 's room give Scevola such a 
 sicken shock that he think he would die of it . it be beyond doubt 
 now that the lieutenant have be conspire with Peyrol down on board 
 that tartane ; for what else could they have be do there ? " but why 
 have not Ral come up in the evening with Peyrol ? " Scevola ask himself , 
 sit on the bench with his hand clasp between his knee . . . . 
 it be their cunning , " he conclude suddenly . " conspirator always avoid 
 be see together . ha ! " 
 
 it be as if somebody have let off a lot of firework in his brain . he 
 be illuminate , dazzle , confused , with a hiss in his car and 
 shower of spark before alone . Peyrol have vanish . Scevola seem to 
 remember that he have hear somebody pronounce the word " good - night " 
 and the door of the salle slam . and sure enough the door of the salle 
 be shut now . a dim light shine in the window that be next to it . 
 Peyrol have extinguish three of the lamp flame and be now recline 
 on one of the long table with that faculty of accommodate himself to 
 a plank an old sea - dog never lose . he have decide to remain below 
 simply to be handy , and he do not   lie down on one of the bench along 
 the wall because they be too narrow . he leave one wick burning , so that 
 the lieutenant should know where to look for he , and he be tired 
 enough to think that he would snatch a couple of hour ' sleep before Ral 
 could return from Toulon . he settle himself with one arm under his head 
 as if he be on the deck of a privateer , and it never occur to he 
 that Scevola be look through the pane ; but they be so small and 
 dusty that the patriot could see nothing . his movement have be purely 
 instinctive . he be not   even aware that he have look in . he go away 
 from there , walk to the end of the building , spin round and walk 
 back again to the other end ; and it be as if he have be afraid of 
 go beyond the wall against which he reel sometimes . " conspiracy , 
 conspiracy , " he think . he be now absolutely certain that the 
 lieutenant be still hide in that tartane , and be only wait till 
 all be quiet to sneak back to his room in which Scevola have proof 
 positive that Arlette be in the habit of make herself at home . to rob 
 he of his right to Arlette be part of the conspiracy no doubt . 
 
 " have I be a slave to those two woman , have I wait all those year , 
 only to see that corrupt creature go off infamously with a ci - devant , 
 with a conspire aristocrat ? " 
 
 he become giddy with virtuous fury . there be enough evidence there for 
 any revolutionary tribunal to cut all their head off . Tribunal ! there 
 be no tribunal ! no revolutionary justice ! no patriot ! he hit his 
 shoulder against the wall in his distress with such force that he 
 rebound . this world be no place for patriot . 
 
 " if I have betray myself in the kitchen they would have murder I in 
 there . " 
 
 as it be he think that he have say too much . too much . " Prudence ! 
 caution ! " he repeat to himself , gesticulate with both arm . 
 suddenly he stumble and there be an amazing metallic clatter make by 
 something that fall at his foot . 
 
 " they be try to kill I now , " he think , shake with fright . he 
 give himself up for dead . profound silence reign all round . nothing 
 more happen . he stoop fearfully to look and recognize his own 
 stable fork lie on the ground . he remember he have leave it at noon 
 lean against the wall . his own foot have make it fall . he throw 
 himself upon it greedily . " here be what I need , " he mutter 
 feverishly . " I suppose that by now the lieutenant would think I be go 
 to bed . " 
 
 he flatten himself upright against the wall with the fork hold along 
 his body like a ground musket . the moon clear the hill - top flood 
 suddenly the front of the house with its cold light , but he do not   know 
 it ; he imagine himself still to be ambush in the shadow and remain 
 motionless , glare at the path lead towards the cove . his tooth 
 chatter with savage impatience . 
 
 he be so plainly visible in his death - like rigidity that Michel , come 
 up out of the ravine , stop dead short , believe he an apparition 
 not belong to this earth . Scevola , on his side , notice the moving 
 shadow cast by a man - that man ! - and charge forward without 
 reflection , the prong of the fork lower like a bayonet . he do not  
 shout . he come straight on , growl like a dog , and lunge headlong 
 with his weapon . 
 
 Michel , a primitive , untroubled by anything so uncertain as 
 intelligence , execute an instantaneous sideways leap with the precision 
 of a wild animal ; but he be enough of a man to become afterwards 
 paralyze with astonishment . the impetus of the rush carry Scevola 
 several yard down the hill , before he could turn round and assume an 
 offensive attitude . then the two adversary recognize each other . the 
 terrorist exclaim : " Michel ? " and Michel hasten to pick up a large 
 stone from the ground . 
 
 " hey , you , Scevola , " he cry , not very loud but very threatening . 
 " what be these trick ? . . . keep away , or I will heave that piece of 
 rock at your head , and I be good at that . " 
 
 Scevola ground the fork with a thud . " I do not   recognize you , " he say . 
 
 " that be a story . who do you think I be ? not the other ! I have not   get 
 a bandaged head , have I ? " 
 
 Scevola begin to scramble up . " what be this ? " he ask . " what head , 
 do you say ? " 
 
 " I say that if you come near I will knock you over with that stone , " 
 answer Michel . " you be not   to be trust when the moon be full . not 
 recognize ! there be a silly excuse for fly at people like this . you 
 have not   get anything against I , have you ? " 
 
 " no , " say the ex - terrorist in a dubious tone and keep a watchful 
 eye on Michel , who be still hold the stone in his hand . 
 
 " People have be say for year that you be a kind of lunatic , " 
 Michel criticize fearlessly , because the other 's discomfiture be 
 evident enough to put heart into the timid hare . " if a fellow can not 
 come up now to get a snooze in the shed without be run at with a 
 fork , well . . . " 
 
 " I be only go to put this fork away , " Scevola burst out volubly . 
 " I have leave it lean against the wall , and as I. be pass along I 
 suddenly see it , so I think I would put it in the stable before I go 
 to bed . that be all . " 
 
 Michel 's mouth fall open a bit . 
 
 " now what do you think I would want with a stable fork at this time of 
 night , if it be not   to put it away ? " argue Scevola . 
 
 " what indeed ! " mumble Michel , who begin to doubt the evidence of his 
 sens . 
 
 " you go about moon like a fool and imagine a lot of silly thing , 
 you great , stupid imbecile . all I want to do be to ask whether 
 everything be all right down there , and you , idiot , bind to one side 
 like a goat and pick up a stone . the moon have affect your head , not 
 mine . now drop it . " 
 
 Michel , accustom to do what he be tell , open his finger slowly , 
 not quite convinced but think there might be something in it . 
 Scevola , perceive his advantage , scold on : 
 
 " you be dangerous . you ought to have your foot and hand tie every 
 full moon . what do you say about a head just now ? what head ? " 
 
 " I say that I do not   have a broken head . " 
 
 " be that all ? " say Scevola . he be ask himself what on earth 
 could have happen down there during the afternoon to cause a broken 
 head . clearly , it must have be either a fight or an accident , but in 
 any case he consider that it be for he a favourable circumstance , 
 for obviously a man with a bandaged head be at a disadvantage . he be 
 inclined to think it must have be some silly accident , and he 
 regret profoundly that the lieutenant have not kill himself 
 outright . he turn sourly to Michel . 
 
 " now you may go into the shed . and do not   try any of your trick with I 
 any more , because next time you pick up a stone I will shoot you like a 
 dog . " 
 
 he begin to move towards the yard gate which stand always open , throw 
 over his shoulder an order to Michel : " go into the salle . somebody have 
 leave a light in there . they all seem to have go crazy to - day . take the 
 lamp into the kitchen and put it out and see that the door into the yard 
 be shut . I be go to bed . " he pass through the gateway , but he do 
 not penetrate into the yard very far . he stop to watch Michel obey 
 the order . Scevola , advance his head cautiously beyond the pillar of 
 the gate , wait till he have see Michel open the door of the salle and 
 then bound out again across the level space and down the ravine path . 
 it be a matter of less than a minute . his fork be still on his 
 shoulder . his only desire be not to be interfere with , and for the 
 rest he do not care what they all do , what they would think and how 
 they would behave . the fixed idea have take complete possession of he . 
 he have no plan , but he have a principle on which to act ; and that be to 
 get at the lieutenant unawares , and if the fellow die without know 
 what hand have strike he , so much the well . Scevola be go to act 
 in the cause of virtue and justice . it be not to be a matter of 
 personal contest at all . meantime , Michel , have go into the salle , 
 have discover Peyrol fast asleep on a table . though his reverence for 
 Peyrol be unbounded , his simplicity be such that he shake his master 
 by the shoulder as he would have do any common mortal . the rover 
 pass from a state of inertia into a sit posture so quickly that 
 Michel step back a pace and wait to be address . but as Peyrol 
 only star at he , Michel take the initiative in a concise phrase : 
 
 " he be at it ! " 
 
 Peyrol do not seem completely awake : " what be it you mean ? " he ask . 
 
 " he be make motion to escape . " 
 
 Peyrol be wide awake now . he even swing his foot off the table . 
 
 " be he ? have not   you lock the cabin door ? " 
 
 Michel , very frightened , explain that he have never be tell to do that . 
 
 " no ? " remark Peyrol placidly . " I must have forget . " but Michel 
 remain agitated and murmur : " he be escape . " 
 
 " that be all right , " say Peyrol . " what be you fuss about ? how far 
 can he escape , do you think ? " 
 
 a slow grin appear on Michel 's face . " if he try to scramble over 
 the top of the rock , he will get a broken neck in a very short time , " 
 he say . " and he certainly will not   get very far , that be a fact . " 
 
 " well - you see , " say Peyrol . 
 
 " and he do not   seem strong either . he crawl out of the cabin door 
 and get as far as the little water cask and he dip and dip into 
 it . it must be half empty by now . after that he get on to his leg . I 
 clear out ashore directly I hear he move , " he go on in a tone of 
 intense self - approval . " I hide myself behind a rock and watch he . ; ; 
 
 " quite right , " observe Peyrol . after that word of commendation , 
 Michel 's face wear a constant grin . 
 
 " he sit on the after - deck , " he go on as if relate an immense joke , 
 " with his foot dangle down the hold , and may the devil take I if I 
 do not   think he have a nap with his back against the cask . he be nod 
 and catch himself up , with that big white head of his . well , I get 
 tired of watch that , and as you tell I to keep out of his way , I 
 think I would come up here and sleep in the shed . that be right , 
 be not   it ? " 
 
 " quite right , " repeat Peyrol . " well , you go now into the shed . and 
 so you leave he sit on the after - deck ? " 
 
 " yes , " say Michel . " but he be rouse himself . I have not   get away 
 more than ten yard when I hear an awful thump on board . I think he 
 try to get up and fall down the hold . " 
 
 " fall down the hold ? " repeat Peyrol sharply . 
 
 " yes , notre matre . I think at first I would go back and see , but you 
 have warn I against he , have not   you ? and I really think that nothing 
 can kill he . " 
 
 Peyrol get down from the table with an air of concern which would have 
 astonish Michel , if he have not be utterly incapable of observe thing . 
 
 " this must be see to , " murmur the rover , button the waistband of 
 his trouser . " my cudgel there , in the corner . now you go to the shed . 
 what the devil be you do at the door ? do not   you know the way to the 
 shed ? " this last observation be cause by Michel remain in the 
 doorway of the salle with his head out and look to right and leave 
 along the front of the house . " what be come to you ? you do not   suppose he 
 have be able to follow you so quick as this up here ? " 
 
 " oh no , notre matre , quite impossible . I see that sacr Scevola 
 promenade up and down here . I do not   want to meet he again . " 
 
 " be he promenade outside ? " ask Peyrol , with annoyance . " well , 
 what do you think he can do to you ? what notion have you get in your 
 silly head ? you be get bad and bad . out you go . " 
 
 Peyrol extinguish the lamp and , go out , close the door without the 
 slight noise . the intelligence about Scevola be on the move do 
 not please he very much , but he reflect that probably the 
 sans - culotte have fall asleep again and after wake up be on his way 
 to bed when Michel catch sight of he . he have his own view of the 
 patriot 's psychology and do not think the woman be in any danger . 
 nevertheless he go to the shed and hear the rustling of straw as 
 Michel settle himself for the night . 
 
 " debout , " he cry low . " sh , do not   make any noise . I want you to go 
 into the house and sleep at the bottom of the stair . if you hear 
 voice , go up , and if you see Scevola about , knock he down . you be not  
 afraid of he , be you ? " 
 
 " no , if you tell I not to be , " say Michel , who , pick up his 
 shoe , a present from Peyrol , walk barefoot towards the house . the 
 rover watch he slip noiselessly through the salle door . have 
 thus , so to speak , guard his base , Peyrol proceed down the ravine 
 with a very deliberate caution . when he get as far as the little hollow 
 in the ground from which the masthead of the tartane could be see , he 
 squat and wait . he do not   know what his prisoner have do or be 
 do and he do not want to blunder into the way of his escape . the 
 day - old moon be high enough to have shorten the shadow almost to 
 nothing and all the rock be inundate by a yellow sheen , while the 
 bush by contrast look very black . Peyrol reflect that he be not 
 very well conceal . the continued silence impress he in the end . 
 " he have get away , " he think . yet he be not sure . nobody could be 
 sure . he reckon it be about an hour since Michel have leave the 
 tartane ; time enough for a man , even on all four , to crawl down to the 
 shore of the cove . Peyrol wish he have not hit so hard . his object 
 could have be attain with half the force . on the other hand all the 
 proceeding of his prisoner , as report by Michel , seem quite 
 rational . naturally the fellow be badly shake . Peyrol feel as though 
 he want to go on board and give he some encouragement , and even 
 active assistance . 
 
 the report of a gun from seaward cut his breath short as he lie there 
 meditating . within a minute there be a second report , send another 
 wave of deep sound among the crag and hill of the peninsula . the 
 ensue silence be so profound that it seem to extend to the very 
 inside of Peyrol 's head , and lull all his thought for a moment . but he 
 have understand . he say to himself that after this his prisoner , if he 
 have life enough leave in he to stir a limb , would rather die than not 
 try to make his way to the seashore . the ship be call to her man . 
 
 in fact those two gun have proceed from the Amelia . after pass 
 beyond Cape Esterel , Captain Vincent drop an anchor under foot off 
 the beach just as Peyrol have surmise he would do . from about six 
 o'clock till nine the Amelia lie there with her unfurled sail hang 
 in the gear . just before the moon rise the captain come up on deck and 
 after a short conference with his first lieutenant , direct the master 
 to get the ship under way and put her head again for the Petite Passe . 
 then he go below , and presently word be pass on deck that the 
 captain want Mr. Bolt . when the master 's mate appear in his cabin , 
 Captain Vincent motion he to a chair . 
 
 " I do not   think I ought to have listen to you , " he say . " still , the 
 idea be fascinating , but how it would strike other people it be hard to 
 say . the losing of our man be the bad feature . I have an idea that we 
 might recover he . he may have be capture by the peasant or have meet 
 with an accident . it be unbearable to think of he lie at the foot of 
 some rock with a broken leg . I have order the first and second cutter 
 to be man , and I propose that you should take command of they , enter 
 the cove and , if necessary , advance a little inland to investigate . as 
 far as we know there have never be any troop on that peninsula . the 
 first thing you will do be to examine the coast . " 
 
 he talk for some time , give more minute instruction , and then go 
 on deck . the Amelia , with the two cutter tow alongside , reach 
 about half - way down the Passe and then the boat be order to 
 proceed . just before they shove off , two gun be fire in quick 
 succession . 
 
 " like this , Bolt , " explain Captain Vincent , " symon will guess that 
 we be look for he ; and if he be hide anywhere near the shore he 
 will be sure to come down where he can be see by you . " 
 
 
 the motive force of a fix idea be very great . in the case of Scevola 
 it be great enough to launch he down the slope and to rob he for the 
 moment of all caution . he bound amongst the boulder , use the handle 
 of the stable fork for a staff . he pay no regard to the nature of the 
 ground , till he get a fall and find himself sprawl on his face , 
 while the stable fork go clatter down until it be stop by a 
 bush . it be this circumstance which save Peyrol 's prisoner from be 
 catch unawares . since he have get out of the little cabin , simply 
 because after come to himself he have perceive it be open , Symons have 
 be greatly refresh by long drink of cold water and by his little 
 nap in the fresh air . every moment he be feel in well command of 
 his limb . as to the command of his thought , that be come to he too 
 rather quickly . the advantage of have a very thick skull become 
 evident in the fact that as soon as he have drag himself out of that 
 cabin he know where he be . the next thing he do be to look at the 
 moon , to judge of the passage of time . then he give way to an immense 
 surprise at the fact of be alone aboard the tartane . as he sit with 
 his leg dangle into the open hold he try to guess how it come about 
 that the cabin have be leave unlocked and unguarded . 
 
 he go on think about this unexpected situation . what could have 
 become of that white - head villain ? be he dodge about somewhere 
 watch for a chance to give he another tap on the head ? symon feel 
 suddenly very unsafe sit there on the after - deck in the full light 
 of the moon . Instinct rather than reason suggest to he that he ought 
 to get down into the dark hold . it seem a great undertaking at first , 
 but once he start he accomplish it with the great ease , though he 
 could not avoid knock down a small spar which be lean up against 
 the deck . it precede he into the hold with a loud crash which give 
 poor symon an attack of palpitation of the heart . he sit on the keelson 
 of the tartane and gasp , but after a while reflect that all this do 
 not matter . his head feel very big , his neck be very painful and one 
 shoulder be certainly very stiff . he could never stand up against that 
 old ruffian . but what have become of he ? why ! he have go to fetch the 
 soldier ! after that conclusion symon become more composed . he begin to 
 try to remember thing . when he have last see that old fellow it be 
 daylight , and now - symon look up at the moon again - it must be near 
 six bell in the first watch . no doubt the old scoundrel be sit in 
 a wine shop drink with the soldier . they would be here soon enough ! 
 the idea of be a prisoner of war make his heart sink a little . his 
 ship appear to he invest with an extraordinary number of lovable 
 feature which include Captain Vincent and the first lieutenant . he 
 would have be glad to shake hand even with the corporal , a surly and 
 malicious marine act as master - at - arm of the ship . " I wonder where 
 she be now , " he think dismally , feel his distaste for captivity 
 grow with the increase of his strength . 
 
 it be at this moment that he hear the noise of Scevola 's fall . it be 
 pretty close ; but afterwards he hear no voice and footstep herald 
 the approach of a body of man . if this be the old ruffian come back , 
 then he be come back alone . at once symon start on all four for 
 the fore - end of the tartane . he have an idea that ensconce under the 
 fore - deck he would be in a well position to parley with the enemy and 
 that perhaps he could find there a handspike or some piece of iron to 
 defend himself with . just as he have settle himself in his hiding - place 
 Scevola step from the shore on to the after - deck . 
 
 at the very first glance Symons perceive that this one be very unlike 
 the man he expect to see . he feel rather disappointed . as Scevola 
 stand still in full moonlight symon congratulate himself on have 
 take up a position under the fore - deck . that fellow , who have a beard , 
 be like a sparrow in body compare with the other ; but he be armed 
 dangerously with something that look to symon like either a trident 
 or fishgrain on a staff . " a devil of a weapon that , " he think , 
 appal . and what on earth do that beggar want on board ? what could he 
 be after ? 
 
 the new - comer act strangely at first . he stand stock - still , crane 
 his neck here and there , peer along the whole length of the tartane , 
 then cross the deck he repeat all those performance on the other 
 side . " he have notice that the cabin door be open . he be try to see 
 where I have   get to . he will be come forward to look for I , " say 
 symon to himself . " if he corner I here with that beastly pronged 
 affair I be do for . " for a moment he debate within himself whether 
 it would not   be well to make a dash for it and scramble ashore ; but in 
 the end he mistrust his strength . " he would run I down for sure , " 
 he conclude . " and he mean no good , that be certain . no man would go 
 about at night with a confound thing like that if he do not   mean to do 
 for somebody . " 
 
 Scevola , after keep perfectly still , strain his ear for any sound 
 from below where he suppose Lieutenant Ral to be , stoop down to the 
 cabin scuttle and call in a low voice : " be you there , lieutenant ? " 
 symon see these motion and could not imagine their purport . that 
 excellent able seaman of prove courage in many cutting - out expedition 
 break into a slight perspiration . in the light of the moon the prong of 
 the fork polish by much use shone like silver , and the whole aspect of 
 the stranger be weird and dangerous in the extreme . whom could that man 
 be after but he , himself ? 
 
 Scevola , receive no answer , remain in a stoop position . he could 
 not detect the slight sound of breathe down there . he remain in 
 this position so long that symon become quite interested . " he must 
 think I be still down there , "   he whisper to himself . the next 
 proceeding be quite astonishing . the man , take up a position on one 
 side of the cuddy scuttle and hold his horrid weapon as one would a 
 boarding pike , utter a terrific whoop and go on yell in French 
 with such volubility that he quite frighten symon . suddenly he leave 
 off , move away from the scuttle and look at a loss what to do next . 
 anybody who could have see then symon   protrude head with his face 
 turn aft would have see on it an expression of horror , " the cunning 
 beast , " he think . " if I have be down there , with the row he make I 
 would have surely rush on deck and then he would have have I . " symon 
 experience the feeling of a very narrow escape ; yet it bring not much 
 relief . it be simply a matter of time . the fellow 's homicidal purpose 
 be evident . he be bind before long to come forward . symon see he 
 move , and think , " now he be come , " and prepare himself for a dash . 
 " if I can dodge past those blame prong I might be able to take he by 
 the throat , " he reflect , without , however , feel much confidence in 
 himself . 
 
 but to his great relief Scevola 's purpose be simply to conceal the fork 
 in the hold in such a manner that the handle of it just reach the edge 
 of the after - deck . in that position it be of course invisible to 
 anybody come from the shore . Scevola have make up his mind that the 
 lieutenant be out of the tartane . he have wander away along the shore 
 and would probably be back in a moment . meantime it have occur to he 
 to see if he could discover anything compromise in the cabin . he do 
 not take the fork down with he because in that confine space it would 
 have be useless and rather a source of embarrassment than otherwise , 
 should the return lieutenant find he there . he cast a circular 
 glance around the basin and then prepare to go down . 
 
 every movement of his be watch by symon . he guess Scevola 's 
 purpose by his movement and say to himself : " here be my only chance , 
 and not a second to be lose either . " Directly Scevola turn his back 
 on the forepart of the tartane in order to go down the little cabin 
 ladder , symon crawl out from his concealment . he run along the hold 
 on all four for fear the other should turn his head round before 
 disappear below , but directly he judge that the man have touch 
 bottom , he stand on his foot and catch hold of the main rigging swung 
 himself on the after - deck and , as it be in the same movement , fling 
 himself on the door of the cabin which come together with a crash . how 
 he could secure they he have not think , but as a matter of fact he see 
 the padlock hang on a staple on one side ; the key be in it , and it 
 be a matter of a fraction of a second to secure the door effectually . 
 
 almost simultaneously with the crash of the cabin door there be a 
 shrill exclamation of surprise down there , and just as Symons have turn 
 the key the man he have trap make an effort to break out . that , 
 however , do not disturb symon . he know the strength of that door . his 
 first action be to get possession of the stable fork . at once he feel 
 himself a match for any single man or even two man unless they have 
 fire - arm . he have no hope , however , of be able to resist the soldier 
 and really have no intention of do so . he expect to see they appear 
 at any moment lead by that confound marinero . as to what the farmer man 
 have come for on board the tartane he have not the slight doubt about 
 it . not be trouble by too much imagination , it seem to he obvious 
 that it be to kill an Englishman and for nothing else . " well , I be 
 jiggere , " he exclaim mentally . " the damned savage ! I have not   do 
 anything to he . they must be a murderous lot hereabouts . " he look 
 anxiously up the slope . he would have welcome the arrival of soldier . 
 he want more than ever to be make a proper prisoner , but a profound 
 stillness reign on the shore and a most absolute silence down below in 
 the cabin . absolute . no word , no movement . the silence of the grave . 
 " he be scared to death , " think symon , hit in his simplicity on 
 the exact truth . " it would serve he jolly well right if I go down 
 there and run he through with that thing . I would do it for a shilling , 
 too . " he be get angry . it occur to he also that there be some 
 wine down there too . he discover he be very thirsty and he feel 
 rather faint . he sit down on the little skylight to think the matter 
 over while await the soldier . he even give a friendly thought to 
 peyrol himself . he be quite aware that he could have go ashore and 
 hide himself for a time , but that mean in the end be hunt among 
 the rock and , certainly , capture ; with the additional risk of get 
 a musket ball through his body . 
 
 the first gun of the Amelia lift he to his foot as though he have 
 be snatch up by the hair of his head . he intend to give a 
 resounding cheer , but produce only a feeble gurgle in his throat . his 
 ship be talk to he . they have not   give he up . at the second report 
 he scramble ashore with the agility of a cat - in fact , with so much 
 agility that he have a fit of giddiness . after it pass off he return 
 deliberately to the tartane to get hold of the stable fork . then 
 tremble with emotion , he stagger off quietly and resolutely with the 
 only purpose of get down to the seashore . he know that as long as he 
 keep downhill he would be all right . the ground in this part be a 
 smooth rocky surface and symon be barefoote , he pass at no great 
 distance from Peyrol without be hear . when he get on rough ground he 
 use the stable fork for a staff . slowly as he move he be not really 
 strong enough to be sure - footed . ten minute later or so Peyrol , lie 
 ensconce behind a bush , beard the noise of a roll stone far away in 
 the direction of the cove . instantly the patient Peyrol get on his foot 
 and start towards the cove himself . perhaps he would have smile if 
 the importance and gravity of the affair in which he be engage have not 
 give all his thought a serious cast . pursue a high path than the 
 one follow by symon , he have presently the satisfaction of see the 
 fugitive , make very noticeable by the white bandage about his head , 
 engage in the last part of the steep descent . no nurse could have 
 watch with more anxiety the adventure of a little boy than Peyrol the 
 progress of his former prisoner . he be very glad to perceive that he 
 have have the sense to take what look like the tartane 's boathook to 
 help himself with . as symon ' figure sink lower and low in his descent 
 Peyrol move on , step by step , till at last he see he from above 
 sit down on the seashore , look very forlorn and lonely , with his 
 bandaged head between his hand . instantly Peyrol sit down too , 
 protect by a project rock . and it be safe to say that with that 
 there come a complete cessation of all sound and movement on the lonely 
 head of the peninsula for a full half hour . 
 
 Peyrol be not in doubt as to what be go to happen . he be as 
 certain that the corvette 's boat or boat be now on the way to the 
 cove as though he have see they leave the side of the Amelia . but he 
 begin to get a little impatient . he want to see the end of this 
 episode . Most of the time he be watch symon . " Sacre tte dure , " he 
 think . " he have go to sleep . "   indeed symon   immobility be so 
 complete that he might have be dead from his exertion : only Peyrol 
 have a conviction that his once youthful chum be not the sort of person 
 that die easily . the part of the cove he have reach be all right for 
 Peyrol 's purpose . but it would have be quite easy for a boat or boat 
 to fail to notice symon , and the consequence of that would be that the 
 English would probably land in several party for a search , discover 
 the tartane . Peyrol shudder . 
 
 suddenly he make out a boat just clear of the eastern point of the cove . 
 Mr. Bolt have be hug the coast and progress very slowly , 
 accord to his instruction , till he have reach the edge of the 
 point 's shadow where it lie ragged and black on the moonlit water . 
 Peyrol could see the oar rise and fall . then another boat glide into 
 view . Peyrol 's alarm for his tartane grow intolerable . " wake up , 
 animal , wake up , " he mumble through his tooth . slowly they glide on , 
 and the first cutter be on the point of pass by the man on the shore 
 when Peyrol be relieve by the hail of " boat ahoy " reach he 
 faintly where he kneel lean forward , an absorbed spectator . 
 
 he see the boat head for symon , who be stand up now and make 
 desperate sign with both arm . then he see he drag in over the 
 bow , the boat back out , and then both of they toss oar and floated 
 side by side on the sparkle water of the cove . 
 
 Peyrol get up from his knee . they have their man now . but perhaps they 
 would persist in landing since there must have be some other purpose 
 at first in the mind of the captain of the English corvette . this 
 suspense do not last long . Peyrol see the oar fall in the water , and 
 in a very few minute the boat , pull round , disappear one after 
 another behind the eastern point of the cove . 
 
 " that be do , " mutter Peyrol to himself . " I will never see the 
 silly hard - head again . " he have a strange notion that those English 
 boat have carry off something belong to he , not a man but a part 
 of his own life , the sensation of a regained touch with the far - off day 
 in the Indian Ocean . he walk down quickly as if to examine the spot 
 from which Testa Dura have leave the soil of France . he be in a hurry now 
 to get back to the farmhouse and meet Lieutenant Ral , who would be due 
 back from Toulon . the way by the cove be as short as any other . when he 
 get down he survey the empty shore and wonder at a feeling of 
 emptiness within himself . while walk up towards the foot of the 
 ravine he see an object lie on the ground . it be a stable fork . he 
 stand over it ask himself , " how on earth do this thing come here ? " 
 as though he have be too surprised to pick it up . even after he have 
 do so he remain motionless , meditate on it . he connect it with 
 some activity of Scevola , since he be the man to whom it belong , but 
 that be no sort of explanation of its presence on that spot , unless . . . 
 
 " could he have drown himself ? " think Peyrol , look at the smooth 
 and luminous water of the cove . it could give he no answer . then at 
 arm 's length he contemplate his find . at last he shake his head , 
 shoulder the fork , and with slow step continue on his way . 
 
 
 the midnight meeting of Lieutenant Ral and Peyrol be perfectly silent . 
 Peyrol , sit on the bench outside the salle , have hear the footstep 
 come up the Madrague track long before the lieutenant become visible . 
 but he do not move . he do not even look at he . the lieutenant , 
 unbuckle his sword - belt , sit down without utter a word . the moon , 
 the only witness of the meeting , seem to shine on two friend so 
 identical in thought and feel that they could commune with each other 
 without word . it be Peyrol who speak first . 
 
 " you be up to time . " 
 
 " I have the deuce of a job to hunt up the people and get the certificate 
 stamp . everything be shut up . the Port - Admiral be give a 
 dinner - party , but he come out to speak to I when I send in my name . and 
 all the time , do you know , gunner , I be wonder whether I would ever 
 see you again in my life . even after I have the certificate , such as it 
 be , in my pocket , I wonder whether I would . " 
 
 " what the devil do you think be go to happen to I ? " growl 
 Peyrol perfunctorily . he have throw the incomprehensible stable fork 
 under the narrow bench , and with his foot draw in he could feel it 
 there , lie against the wall . 
 
 " no , the question with I be whether I would ever come here again . " 
 
 Ral draw a fold paper from his pocket and drop it on the bench . 
 Peyrol pick it up carelessly . that thing be mean only to throw dust 
 into Englishmen 's eye . the lieutenant , after a moment 's silence , go 
 on with the sincerity of a man who suffer too much to keep his trouble 
 to himself . 
 
 " I have a hard struggle . " 
 
 " that be too late , " say Peyrol , very positively . " you have to come 
 back here for very shame ; and now you have come , you do not   look very 
 happy . " 
 
 " never mind my look , gunner . I have make up my mind . " 
 
 a ferocious , not unpleasing thought flash through Peyrol 's mind . it 
 be that this intruder on the Escampobar sinister solitude in which he , 
 Peyrol , keep order be under a delusion . mind ! pah ! his mind have nothing 
 to do with his return . he have return because in Catherine 's word , 
 " death have make a sign to he . " meantime , Lieutenant Ral raise his 
 hat to wipe his moist brow . 
 
 " I make up my mind to play the part of dispatch - bearer . as you have 
 say yourself , Peyrol , one could not bribe a man - I mean an honest 
 man - so you will have to find the vessel and leave the rest to I . in 
 two or three day . . . you be under a moral obligation to let I have 
 your tartane . " 
 
 Peyrol do not answer . he be think that Ral have get his sign , but 
 whether it mean death from starvation or disease on board an English 
 prison hulk , or in some other way , it be impossible to say . this naval 
 officer be not a man he could trust ; to whom he could , for instance , 
 tell the story of his prisoner and what he have do with he . indeed , 
 the story be altogether incredible . the Englishman command that 
 corvette have no visible , conceivable or probable reason for send a 
 boat ashore to the cove of all place in the world . peyrol himself could 
 hardly believe that it have happen . and he think : " if I be to tell 
 that lieutenant he would only think that I be an old scoundrel who have 
 be in treasonable communication with the English for God know how 
 long . no word of mine could persuade he that this be as unforeseen to 
 I as the moon fall from the sky . " 
 
 " I wonder , " he burst out , but not very loud , " what make you keep on 
 come back here time after time ! " Ral lean his back against the wall 
 and fold his arm in the familiar attitude of their leisurely talk . 
 
 " Ennui , Peyrol , " he say in a far - away tone . " confound boredom . " 
 
 Peyrol also , as if unable to resist the force of example , assume the 
 same attitude , and say : 
 
 " you seem to be a man that make no friend . " 
 
 " true , Peyrol . I think I be that sort of man . " 
 
 " what , no friend at all ? not even a little friend of any sort ? " 
 
 Lieutenant Ral lean the back of his head against the wall and make no 
 answer . Peyrol get on his leg . 
 
 " oh , then , it would not   matter to anybody if you be to disappear for 
 year in an english hulk . and so if I be to give you my tartane you 
 would go ? " 
 
 " yes , I would go this moment . " 
 
 Peyrol laugh quite loud , tilt his head back . all at once the laugh 
 stop short and the lieutenant be amazed to see he reel as though he 
 have be hit in the chest . while give way to his bitter mirth , the 
 rover have catch sight of Arlette 's face at the , open window of the 
 lieutenant 's room . he sit heavily on the bench and be unable to make a 
 sound . the lieutenant be startle enough to detach the back of his head 
 from the wall to look at he . Peyrol stoop low suddenly , and begin to 
 drag the stable fork from its concealment . then he get on his foot and 
 stand lean on it , glare down at Ral , who gaze upwards with languid 
 surprise . Peyrol be ask himself , " shall I pick he up on that pair 
 of prong , carry he down and fle he in the sea ? " he feel suddenly 
 overcome by a heaviness of arm and a heaviness of heart that make all 
 movement impossible . his stiffened and powerless limb refuse all 
 service . . . . let Catherine look after her niece . he be sure that the 
 old woman be not very far away . the lieutenant see he absorb in 
 examine the point of the prong carefully . there be something queer 
 about all this . 
 
 " Hallo , Peyrol ! what be the matter ? " he could not   help ask . 
 
 " I be just look , " say Peyrol . " one prong be chip a little . I 
 find this thing in a most unlikely place . " 
 
 the lieutenant still gaze at he curiously . 
 
 " I know ! it be under the bench . " 
 
 " H'm , " say Peyrol , who have recover some self - control . " it belong 
 to Scevola . " 
 
 " do it ? " say the lieutenant , fall back again . 
 
 his interest seem exhausted , but Peyrol do not   move . 
 
 " you go about with a face fit for a funeral , " he remark suddenly in 
 a deep voice . " hang it all , lieutenant , I have hear you laugh once or 
 twice , but the devil take I if I ever see you smile . it be as if you 
 have be bewitch in your cradle . " 
 
 Lieutenant Ral get up as if move by a spring . " bewitch , " he 
 repeat , stand very stiff : " in my cradle , eh ? . . . no , I do not  
 think it be so early as that . " 
 
 he walk forward with a tense still face straight at Peyrol as though 
 he have be blind . startle , the rover step out of the way and , 
 turn on his heel , follow he with his eye . the lieutenant pace 
 on , as if draw by a magnet , in the direction of the door of the house . 
 Peyrol , his eye fasten on Ral 's back , let he nearly reach it before 
 he call out tentatively : " I say , lieutenant ! " to his extreme 
 surprise , Ral swing round as if to a touch . 
 
 " oh , yes , " he answer , also in an undertone . " we will have to 
 discuss that matter to - morrow . " 
 
 Peyrol , who have approach he close , say in a whisper which sound 
 quite fierce : " Discuss ? no ! we will have to carry it out to - morrow . I 
 have be wait half the night just to tell you that . " 
 
 Lieutenant Ral nod . the expression on his face be so stony that 
 Peyrol doubt whether he have understand . he add : 
 
 " it be not   go to be child 's play . " the lieutenant be about to open 
 the door when Peyrol say : " a moment , " and again the lieutenant turn 
 about silently . 
 
 " Michel be sleep somewhere on the stair . will you just stir he up 
 and tell he I be wait outside ? we two will have to finish our night 
 on board the tartane , and start work at break of day to get her ready 
 for sea . yes , lieutenant , by noon . in twelve hour ' time you will be 
 say good - bye to la belle France . " 
 
 Lieutenant Ral 's eye star over his shoulder , seem glaze and 
 motionless in the moonlight like the eye of a dead man . but he go in . 
 Peyrol hear presently sound within of somebody staggering in the 
 passage and Michel project himself outside headlong , but after a 
 stumble or two pull up , scratch his head and look on every side 
 in the moonlight without perceive Peyrol , who be regard he from a 
 distance of five foot . at last Peyrol say : 
 
 " come , wake up ! Michel ! Michel ! " 
 
 " Voil , notre matre . " 
 
 " look at what I have pick up , " say Peyrol . " take it and put it away . " 
 
 Michel do not   offer to touch the stable fork extend to he by Peyrol . 
 
 " what be the matter with you ? " ask Peyrol . 
 
 " nothing , nothing ! only last time I see it , it be on Scevola 's 
 shoulder . " he glance up at the sky . 
 
 " a little well than an hour ago . " 
 
 " what be he do ? " 
 
 " go into the yard to put it away . " 
 
 " well , now you go into the yard to put it away , " say Peyrol , " and 
 do not   be long about it . " he wait with his hand over his chin till his 
 henchman reappear before he . but Michel have not get over his surprise . 
 
 " he be go to bed , you know , " he say . 
 
 " eh , what ? he be go . . . . he have not   go to sleep in the stable , 
 perchance ? he do sometimes , you know . " 
 
 " I know . I look . he be not   there , " say Michel , very awake and 
 round - eye . 
 
 Peyrol start towards the cove . after three or four step he turn 
 round and find Michel motionless where he have leave he . 
 
 " come on , " he cry , " we will have to fit the tartane for sea 
 directly the day break . " 
 
 stand in the lieutenant 's room just clear of the open window , Arlette 
 listen to their voice and to the sound of their footstep diminish 
 down the slope . before they have quite die out she become aware of a 
 light tread approach the door of the room . 
 
 Lieutenant Ral have speak the truth . while in Toulon he have more than 
 once say to himself that he could never go back to that fatal 
 farmhouse . his mental state be quite pitiable . honour , decency , every 
 principle forbid he to trifle with the feeling of a poor creature 
 with her mind darken by a very terrifying , atrocious and , as it be , 
 guilty experience . and suddenly he have give way to a base impulse and 
 have betray himself by kiss her hand ! he recognize with despair 
 that this be no trifling , but that the impulse have come from the very 
 depth of his being . it be an awful discovery for a man who on emerge 
 from boyhood have lay for himself a rigidly straight line of conduct 
 amongst the unbridled passion and the clamouring falsehood of 
 revolution which seem to have destroy in he all capacity for the 
 soft emotion . taciturn and guard , he have form no intimacy . 
 relation he have none . he have keep clear of social connection . it be 
 in his character . at first he visit Escampobar because when he take 
 his leave he have no place in the world to go to , and a few day there 
 be a complete change from the odious town . he enjoy the sense of 
 remoteness from ordinary mankind . he have develop a liking for old 
 Peyrol , the only man who have nothing to do with the revolution - who have 
 not even see it at work . the sincere lawlessness of the ex - brother of 
 the Coast be refresh . that one be neither a hypocrite nor a fool . 
 when he rob or kill it be not in the name of the sacred 
 revolutionary principle or for the love of humanity . 
 
 of course Ral have remark at once Arlette 's black , profound and unquiet 
 eye and the persistent dim smile on her lip , her mysterious silence 
 and the rare sound of her voice which make a caress of every word . he 
 hear something of her story from the reluctant Peyrol who do not care 
 to talk about it . it awaken in Ral more bitter indignation than pity . 
 but it stimulate his imagination , confirm he in that scorn and angry 
 loathing for the revolution he have feel as a boy and have nurse secretly 
 ever since . she attract he by her unapproachable aspect . later he 
 try not to notice that , in common parlance , she be inclined to hang 
 about he . he use to catch her gaze at he stealthily . but he be 
 free from masculine vanity . it be one day in Toulon that it suddenly 
 dawn on he what her mute interest in his person might mean . he be 
 then sit outside a caf sip some drink or other with three or 
 four officer , and not listen to their uninteresting conversation . he 
 marvel that this sort of illumination should come to he like this , 
 under these circumstance ; that he should have think of she while 
 seat in the street with these man round he , in the midst of more or 
 less professional talk ! and then it suddenly dawn on he that he have 
 be think of nothing but that woman for day . 
 
 he get up brusquely , fling the money for his drink on the table , and 
 without a word leave his companion . but he have the reputation of an 
 eccentric man and they do not even comment on his abrupt departure . it 
 be a clear evening . he walk straight out of town , and that night 
 wander beyond the fortification , not notice the direction he take . 
 all the countryside be asleep . there be not a human being stir , 
 and his progress in that desolate part of the country between the fort 
 could have be trace only by the barking of dog in the rare hamlet 
 and scattered habitation . 
 
 " what have become of my rectitude , of my self - respect , of the firmness 
 of my mind ? " he ask himself pedantically . " I have let myself be 
 master by an unworthy passion for a mere mortal envelope , stain with 
 crime and without a mind . " 
 
 his despair at this awful discovery be so profound that if he have not 
 be in uniform he would have try to commit suicide with the small 
 pistol he have in his pocket . he shrink from the act , and the thought of 
 the sensation it would produce , from the gossip and comment it would 
 raise , the dishonour suspicion it would provoke . " no , " he say to 
 himself , " what I will have to do be to unmark my linen , put on civilian 
 old clothe and walk out much far away , mile beyond the fort , hide 
 myself in some wood or in an overgrown hollow and put an end to my life 
 there . the gendarme or a garde - champtre discover my body after a few 
 day , a complete stranger without mark of identity , and be unable to 
 find out anything about I , will give I an obscure burial in some 
 village churchyard . " 
 
 on that resolution he turn back abruptly and at daybreak find himself 
 outside the gate of the town . he have to wait till it be open , and 
 then the morning be so far advanced that he have to go straight to work 
 at his office at the Toulon Admiralty . nobody notice anything peculiar 
 about he that day . he go through his routine task with outward 
 composure , but all the same he never cease argue with himself . by the 
 time he return to his quarter he have come to the conclusion that as 
 an officer in war - time he have no right to take his own life . his 
 principle would not permit he to do that . in this reasoning he be 
 perfectly sincere . during a deadly struggle against an irreconcilable 
 enemy his life belong to his country . but there be moment when his 
 loneliness , haunt by the forbidden vision of Escampobar with the 
 figure of that distract girl , mysterious , awful , pale , irresistible in 
 her strangeness , pass along the wall , appear on the hill - path , 
 look out of the window , become unbearable . he spend hour of solitary 
 anguish shut up in his quarter , and the opinion amongst his comrade 
 be that Ral 's misanthropy be get beyond all bound . 
 
 one day it dawn upon he clearly that he could not stand this . it 
 affect his power of thinking . " I shall begin to talk nonsense to 
 people , " he say to himself . " have not   there be once a poor devil who 
 fall in love with a picture or a statue ? he use to go and contemplate 
 it . his misfortune can not be compare with mine ! well , I will go to look 
 at she as at a picture too ; a picture as untouchable as if it have be 
 under glass . " and he go on a visit to Escampobar at the very first 
 opportunity . he make up for himself a repellent face , he cling to Peyrol 
 for society , out there on the bench , both with their arm fold and 
 gaze into space . but whenever Arlette cross his line of sight it be 
 as if something have move in his breast . yet these visit make life just 
 bearable ; they enable he to attend to his work without begin to 
 talk nonsense to people . he say to himself that he be strong enough to 
 rise above temptation , that he would never overstep the line ; but it have 
 happen to he upstairs in his room at the farm , to weep tear of sheer 
 tenderness while think of his fate . these tear would put out for a 
 while the gnawing fire of his passion . he assume austerity like an 
 armour and in his prudence he , as a matter of fact , look very seldom 
 at Arlette for fear of be catch in the act . 
 
 the discovery that she have take to wandering at night have upset he all 
 the same , because that sort of thing be unaccountable . it give he a 
 shock which unsettle , not his resolution , but his fortitude . that 
 morning he have allow himself , while she be wait on he , to be 
 catch look at she and then , lose his self - control , have give she 
 that kiss on the hand . directly he have do it he be appal . he have 
 overstep the line . under the circumstance this be an absolute moral 
 disaster . the full consciousness of it come to he slowly . in fact this 
 moment of fatal weakness be one of the reason why he have let himself 
 be send off so unceremoniously by Peyrol to Toulon . even while cross 
 over he think the only thing be not to come back any more . yet while 
 battle with himself he go on with the execution of the plan . a 
 bitter irony preside over his dual state . before leave the Admiral 
 who have receive he in full uniform in a room light by a single 
 candle , he be suddenly move to say : " I suppose if there be no other 
 way I be authorize to go myself , " and the Admiral have answer : " I 
 do not   contemplate that , but if you be willing I do not   see any 
 objection . I would only advise you to go in uniform in the character of 
 an officer entrust with dispatch . no doubt in time the Government 
 would arrange for your exchange . but bear in mind that it would be a 
 long captivity , and you must understand it might affect your promotion . " 
 
 at the foot of the grand staircase in the lighted hall of the official 
 build Ral suddenly think : " and now I must go back to Escampobar . " 
 indeed he have to go to Escampobar because the false dispatch be 
 there in the valise he have leave behind . he could not   go back to the 
 Admiral and explain that he have lose they . they would look on he as an 
 unutterable idiot or a man go mad . while walk to the quay where the 
 naval boat be wait for he he say to himself . " this , in truth , be 
 my last visit for year - perhaps for life . " 
 
 go back in the boat , notwithstanding that the breeze be very light , 
 he would not let the man take to the oar . he do not   want to return 
 before the woman have go to bed . he say to himself that the proper and 
 honest thing to do be not to see Arlette again . he even manage to 
 persuade himself that his uncontrolled impulse have have no meaning for 
 that witless and unhappy creature . she have neither start nor 
 exclaim ; she have make no sign . she have remain passive and then she 
 have back away and sit down quietly . he could not even remember that 
 she have colour at all . as to himself , he have enough self - control to 
 rise from the table and go out without look at she again . neither do 
 she make a sign . what could startle that body without mind ? she have make 
 nothing of it , he think with self - contempt . " body without mind ! body 
 without mind ! " he repeat with angry derision direct at himself . and 
 all at once he think : " no . it be not   that . all in she be mystery , 
 seduction , enchantment . and then - what do I care for her mind ! " 
 
 this thought wring from he a faint groan so that the coxswain ask 
 respectfully : " be you in pain , lieutenant ? " " it be nothing , " he 
 mutter and set his tooth with the desperation of a man under torture . 
 
 while talk with Peyrol outside the house , the word " I will not   see she 
 again , " and " body without mind " ring through his head . by the time he 
 have leave Peyrol and walk up the stair his endurance be absolutely at 
 an end . all he want be to be alone . go along the dark , passage he 
 notice that the door of Catherine 's room be stand ajar . but that 
 do not arrest his attention . he be approach a state of 
 insensibility . as he put his hand on the door handle of his room he say 
 to himself . " it will soon be over ! " 
 
 he be so tired out that he be almost unable to hold up his head , and 
 on go in he do not   see Arlette , who stand against the wall on one 
 side of the window , out of the moonlight and in the dark corner of 
 the room . he only become aware of somebody 's presence in the room as she 
 flit past he with the faint possible rustle , when he stagger 
 back two pace and hear behind he the key being turn in the lock . if 
 the whole house have fall into ruin , bring he to the ground , lie 
 could not have be more overwhelmed and , in a manner , more utterly 
 bereft of all his sens . the first that come back to he be the sense 
 of touch when Arlette seize his hand . he regain his hearing next . she 
 be whisper to he : " at last . at last ! but you be careless . if it 
 have be Scevola instead of I in this room you would have be dead 
 now . I have see he at work . " he feel a significant pressure on his 
 hand , but he could not   see she properly yet , though he be aware of her 
 nearness with every fibre of his body . " it be not   yesterday though , " 
 she add in a low tone . then suddenly : " come to the window so that I 
 may look at you . " 
 
 a great square of moonlight lie on the floor . he obey the tug like a 
 little child . she catch hold of his other hand as it hang by his side . 
 he be rigid all over , without joint , and it do not seem to he that 
 he be breathe . with her face a little below his she star at he 
 closely , whisper gently : " Eugne , Eugne , " and suddenly the livid 
 immobility of his face frighten she . " you say nothing . you look ill . 
 what be the matter ? be you hurt ? " she let go his insensitive hand and 
 begin to feel he all over for evidence of some injury . she even 
 snatch off his hat and fling it away in her haste to discover that his 
 head be unharmed ; but find no sign of bodily damage , she calm down 
 like a sensible , practical person . with her hand clasp round his neck 
 she hang back a little . her little even tooth gleam , her black eye , 
 immensely profound , look into his , not with a transport of passion or 
 fear but with a sort of reposeful satisfaction , with a searching and 
 appropriating expression . he come back to life with a low and reckless 
 exclamation , feel horribly insecure at once as if he be stand on a 
 lofty pinnacle above a noise as of break wave in his car , in fear 
 lest her finger should part and she would fall off and be lose to he 
 for ever . he fling his arm round her waist and hug she close to his 
 breast . in the great silence , in the bright moonlight fall through 
 the window , they stand like that for a long , long time . he look at her 
 head rest on his shoulder . her eye be close and the expression of 
 her unsmile face be that of a delightful dream , something infinitely 
 ethereal , peaceful and , as it be , eternal . its appeal pierce his 
 heart with a pointed sweetness . " she be exquisite . it be a miracle , " he 
 think with a snort of terror . " it be impossible . " 
 
 she make a movement to disengage herself , and instinctively he resist , 
 press she close to his breast . she yield for a moment and then 
 try again . he let she go . she stand at arm 's length , her hand on his 
 shoulder , and her charm strike he suddenly as funny in the seriousness 
 of expression as of a very capable , practical woman . 
 
 " all this be very well , " she say in a businesslike undertone . " we 
 will have to think how to get away from here . I do not   mean now , this 
 moment , " she add , feel his slight start . " Scevola be thirst 
 for your blood . " she detach one hand to point a finger at the inner 
 wall of the room , and lower her voice . " he be there , you know . do not  
 trust Peyrol either . I be look at you two out there . he have change . 
 I can trust he no long . " her murmur vibrate . " he and Catherine 
 behave strangely . I do not   know what come to they . he do not   talk to I . 
 when I sit down near he he turn his shoulder to I . . . . " 
 
 she feel Ral sway under her hand , pause in concern and say : " you be 
 tired . " but as he do not   move , she actually lead he to a chair , push 
 he into it , and sit on the floor at his foot . she rest her head 
 against his knee and keep possession of one of his hand . a sigh 
 escape she . " I know this be go to be , " she say very low . " but I 
 be take by surprise . " 
 
 " oh , you know it be go to be , " he repeat faintly . 
 
 " yes ! I have pray for it . have you ever be pray for , Eugne ? " she 
 ask , linger on his name . 
 
 " not since I be a child , " answer Ral in a sombre tone . 
 
 " oh yes ! you have be pray for to - day . I go down to the church . . 
 . . " Ral could hardly believe his ear . . . . the abb let I in by the 
 sacristy door . he tell I to renounce the world . I be ready to renounce 
 anything for you . " Ral , turn his face to the dark part of the 
 room , seem to see the spectre of fatality await its time to move 
 forward and crush that calm , confident joy . he shake off the dreadful 
 illusion , raise her hand to his lip for a linger kiss , and then ask : 
 
 " so you know that it be go to be ? everything ? yes ! and of I , what 
 do you think ? " 
 
 she press strongly the hand to which she have be cling all the 
 time . " I think this . " 
 
 " but what do you think of my conduct at time ? you see , I do not know 
 what be go to be . I . . . I be afraid , " he add under his breath . 
 
 " Conduct ? what conduct ? you come , you go . when you be not here I 
 think of you , and when you be here I could look my fill at you . I 
 tell you I know how it be go to be . I be not afraid then . " 
 
 " you go about with a little smile , " he whisper , as one would 
 mention an inconceivable marvel . 
 
 " I be warm and quiet , " murmur Arlette , as if on the border of 
 dreamland . tender murmur flow from her lip describe a state of 
 blissful tranquillity in phrase that sound like the veri nonsense , 
 incredible , convincing and soothing to Ral 's conscience . 
 
 " you be perfect , " it go on . " whenever you come near I everything 
 seem different . " 
 
 " what do you mean ? how different ? " 
 
 " altogether . the light , the very stone of the house , the hill , the 
 little flower amongst the rock ! even Nanette be different . " 
 
 Nanette be a white Angora with long silken hair , a pet that live 
 mostly in the yard . 
 
 " oh , Nanette be different too , " say Ral , whom delight in the 
 modulation of that voice have cut off from all reality , and even from a 
 consciousness of himself , while he sit stoop over that head rest 
 against his knee , the soft grip of her hand be his only contact with 
 the world . 
 
 " yes . Prettier . it be only the people . . . . she cease on an uncertain 
 note . the crested wave of enchantment seem to have pass over his 
 head ebb out fast than the sea , leave the dreary expanse of the 
 sand . he feel a chill at the root of his hair . 
 
 " what people ? " he ask . 
 
 " they be so change . listen , to - night while you be away - why do 
 you go away ? - I catch those two in the kitchen , say nothing to each 
 other . that Peyrol - he be terrible . " 
 
 he be strike by the tone of awe , by its profound conviction . he could 
 not know that Peyrol , unforeseen , unexpected , inexplicable , have give by 
 his mere appearance at Escampobar a moral and even a physical jolt to 
 all her be , that he be to she an immense figure , like a messenger 
 from the unknown enter the solitude of Escampobar ; something 
 immensely strong , with inexhaustible power , unaffected by familiarity 
 and remain invincible . 
 
 " he will say nothing , he will listen to nothing . he can do what he like . " 
 
 " can he ? " mutter Ral . 
 
 she sit up on the floor , move her head up and down several time as if 
 to say that there could be no doubt about that . 
 
 " be he , too , thirst for my blood ? " ask Ral bitterly . 
 
 " no , no . it be not   that . you could defend yourself . I could watch over 
 you . I have be watch over you . only two night ago I think I 
 hear noise outside and I go downstairs , fear for you ; your window 
 be open but I could see nobody , and yet I feel . . . . no , it be not  
 that ! it be bad . I do not   know what he want to do . I can not   help be 
 fond of he , but I begin to fear he now . when he first come here and I 
 see he he be just the same - only his hair be not so white - big , 
 quiet . it seem to I that something move in my head . he be gentle , 
 you know . I have to smile at he . it be as if I have recognize he . I 
 say to myself . ` that be he , the man himself . " " 
 
 " and when I come ? " ask Ral with a feeling of dismay . 
 
 " you ! you be expect , " she say in a low tone with a slight tinge 
 of surprise at the question , but still evidently think of the Peyrol 
 mystery . " yes , I catch they at it last evening , he and Catherine in 
 the kitchen , look at each other and as quiet as mouse . I tell he he 
 could not   order I about . oh , mon chri , mon chri , do not   you listen to 
 Peyrol - do not   let he . . . " 
 
 with only a slight touch on his knee she spring to her foot . Ral stand 
 up too . 
 
 " he can do nothing to I , " he mumble . 
 
 ` do not   tell he anything . nobody can guess what he think , and now even 
 I can not tell what he mean when he speak . it be as if he know a 
 secret . " she put an accent into those word which make Ral feel move 
 almost to tear . he repeat that Peyrol could have no influence over 
 he , and he feel that he be speak the truth . he be in the power of 
 his own word . ever since he have leave the Admiral in a gold - embroider 
 uniform , impatient to return to his guest , he be on a service for 
 which he have volunteer . for a moment he have the sensation of an iron 
 hoop very tight round his chest . she peer at his face closely , and it 
 be more than he could bear . 
 
 " all right . I will be careful , " he say . " and Catherine , be she also 
 dangerous ? " 
 
 in the sheen of the moonlight Arlette , her neck and head above the 
 gleam of the fichu , visible and elusive , smile at he and move a step 
 close . 
 
 " Poor Aunt Catherine , " she say . . . . " put your arm round I , Eugne . 
 . . . she can do nothing . she use to follow I with her eye always . 
 she think I do not   notice , but I do . and now she seem unable to look 
 I in the face . peyrol too , for that matter . he use to follow I with 
 his eye . often I wonder what make they look at I like that . can you 
 tell , Eugne ? but it be all change now . " 
 
 " yes , it be all change , " say Ral in a tone which he try to make as 
 light as possible . " do Catherine know you be here ? " 
 
 " when we go upstairs this evening I lie down all dress on my bed 
 and she sit on her . the candle be out , but in the moonlight I could 
 see she quite plainly with her hand on her lap . when I could lie still 
 no long I simply get up and go out of the room . she be still 
 sit at the foot of her bed . all I do be to put my finger on my 
 lip and then she drop her head . I do not   think I quite close the 
 door . . . . hold I tight , Eugne , I be tired . . . . strange , you know ! 
 formerly , a long time ago , before I ever see you , I never rest and 
 never feel tired . " she stop she murmur suddenly and lift a finger 
 recommend silence . she listen and Ral listen too , he do not know 
 for what ; and in this sudden concentration on a point , all that have 
 happen since he have enter the room seem to he a dream in its 
 improbability and in the more than life - like force dream have in their 
 inconsequence . even the woman let herself go on his arm seem to 
 have no weight as it might have happen in a dream . 
 
 " she be there , " breathe Arlette suddenly , rise on tiptoe to reach 
 up to his ear . " she must have hear you go past . " 
 
 " where be she ? " ask Ral with the same intense secrecy . 
 
 " outside the door . she must have be listen to the murmur of our 
 voice . . . . " Arlette breathe into his ear as if relate an 
 enormity . " she tell I one day that I be one of those who be fit for 
 no man 's arm . " 
 
 at this he fling his other arm round she and look into her enlarge as 
 if frightened eye , while she clasp he with all her strength and they 
 stand like that a long time , lip press on lip without a kiss , and 
 breathless in the closeness of their contact . to he the stillness 
 seem to extend to the limit of the universe . the thought " be I go 
 to die ? " flash through that stillness and lose itself in it like a 
 spark fly in an everlasting night . the only result of it be the 
 tightening of his hold on Arlette . 
 
 an aged and uncertain voice be hear utter the word " Arlette . " 
 Catherine , who have be listen to their murmur , could not bear the 
 long silence . they hear her tremble tone as distinctly as though she 
 have be in the room . Ral feel as if it have save his life . they 
 separate silently . 
 
 " go away , " call out Arlette . 
 
 " Arl - - . . . " 
 
 " be quiet , " she cry louder . " you can do nothing . " 
 
 " Arlette , " come through the door , tremulous and commanding . 
 
 " she will wake up Scevola , " remark Arlette to Ral in a 
 conversational tone . and they both wait for sound that do not come . 
 Arlette point her finger at the wall . " he be there , you know . " 
 
 " he be asleep , " mutter Ral . but the thought " I be lose " which he 
 formulate in his mind have no reference to Scevola . 
 
 " he be afraid , " say Arlette contemptuously in an undertone . " but 
 that mean little . he would quake with fright one moment and rush out to 
 do murder the next . " 
 
 slowly , as if draw by the irresistible authority of the old woman , they 
 have be move towards the door . Ral think with the sudden 
 enlightenment of passion : " if she do not go now I will not   have the 
 strength to part from she in the morning . " he have no image of death 
 before his eye but of a long and intolerable separation . a sigh verging 
 upon a moan reach they from the other side of the door and make the 
 air around they heavy with sorrow against which lock and key will not 
 avail . 
 
 " you have well go to she , " he whisper in a penetrate tone . 
 
 " of course I will , " say Arlette with some feeling . " poor old thing . 
 she and I have only each other in the world , but I be the daughter here , 
 she must do what I tell she . " with one of her hand on Ral 's shoulder 
 she put her mouth close to the door and say distinctly : 
 
 " I be come directly . go back to your room and wait for I , " as if 
 she have no doubt of be obey . 
 
 a profound silence ensue . perhaps Catherine have go already . Ral and 
 Arlette stand still for a whole minute as if both have be change into 
 stone . 
 
 " go now , " say Ral in a hoarse , hardly audible voice . 
 
 she give he a quick kiss on the lip and again they stand like a pair 
 of enchant lover bewitch into immobility . 
 
 " if she stay on , " think Ral , " I shall never have the courage to 
 tear myself away , and then I shall have to blow my brain out . " but 
 when at last she move he seize she again and hold she as if she have 
 be his very life . when he let she go he be appal by hear a very 
 faint laugh of her secret joy . 
 
 " why do you laugh ? " he ask in a scared tone . 
 
 she stop to answer he over her shoulder . 
 
 " I laugh because I think of all the day to come . day and day and 
 day . have you think of they ? " 
 
 " yes , " Ral falter , like a man stab to the heart , hold the door 
 half open . and he be glad to have something to hold on to . 
 
 she slip out with a soft rustle of her silk skirt , but before he have 
 time to close the door behind she she put back her arm for an instant . 
 he have just time to press the palm of her hand to his lip . it be cool . 
 she snatch it away and he have the strength of mind to shut the door 
 after she . he feel like a man chain to the wall and dying of thirst , 
 from whom a cold drink be snatch away . the room become dark suddenly . 
 he think , " a cloud over the moon , a cloud over the moon , an enormous 
 cloud , " while he walk rigidly to the window , insecure and sway as 
 if on a tight rope . after a moment he perceive the moon in a sky on 
 which there be no sign of the small cloud anywhere . he say to 
 himself , " I suppose I nearly die just now . but no , " he go on 
 think with deliberate cruelty , " oh , no , I shall not die . I shall 
 only suffer , suffer , suffer . . . . " 
 
 " suffer , suffer . " only by stumble against the side of the bed do he 
 discover that he have go away from the window . at once he fling himself 
 violently on the bed with his face bury in the pillow , which he bite to 
 restrain the cry of distress about to burst through his lip . nature 
 school into insensibility when once overcome by a master passion 
 be like vanquished giant ready for despair . he , a man on service , feel 
 himself shrink from death and that doubt contain in itself all 
 possible doubt of his own fortitude . the only thing he know be that he 
 would be go to - morrow morning . he shudder along his whole extended 
 length , then lie still grip a handful of bedclothe in each hand to 
 prevent himself from leap up in panicky restlessness . he be say 
 to himself pedantically , " I must lie down and rest , I must rest to have 
 strength for to - morrow , I must rest , " while the tremendous struggle to 
 keep still break out in wave of perspiration on his forehead . at last 
 sudden oblivion must have descend on he because he turn over and 
 sit up suddenly with the sound of the word " Ecoutez " in his ear . 
 
 a strange , dim , cold light fill the room ; a light he do not recognize 
 for anything he have know before , and at the foot of his bed stand a 
 figure in dark garment with a dark shawl over its head , with a 
 fleshless predatory face and dark hollow for its eye , silent , 
 expectant , implacable . . . . be this death ? " he ask himself , star 
 at it terrify . it resemble Catherine . it say again : " Ecoutez . " he 
 take away his eye from it and glance down notice that his clothe 
 be tear open on his chest . he would not look up at that thing , 
 whatever it be , spectre or old woman , and say : 
 
 " yes , I hear you . " 
 
 " you be an honest man . " it be Catherine 's unemotional voice . " the 
 day have break . you will go away . " 
 
 " yes , " he say without raise his head . 
 
 " she be asleep , " go on Catherine or whoever it be , " exhaust , and 
 you would have to shake she hard before she would wake . you will go . you 
 know , " the voice continue inflexibly , ' she be my niece , and you know 
 that there be death in the fold of her skirt and blood about her foot . 
 she be for no man . " 
 
 Ral feel all the anguish of an unearthly experience . this thing that 
 look like Catherine and speak like a cruel fate have to be face . he 
 raise his head in this light that seem to he appalling and not of 
 this world . 
 
 " listen well to I , you too , " he say . " if she have all the madness of 
 the world and the sin of all the murder of the Revolution on her 
 shoulder , I would still hug she to my breast . do you understand ? " 
 
 the apparition which resemble Catherine lower and raise its hooded 
 head slowly . " there be a time when I could have hug l'enfer mme to 
 my breast . he go away . he have his vow . you have only your honesty . you 
 will go . " 
 
 " I have my duty , " say Lieutenant Ral in measured tone , as if calm 
 by the excess of horror that old woman inspire he with . 
 
 " go without disturb she , without look at she . " 
 
 " I will carry my shoe in my hand , " he say . he sigh deeply and feel 
 as if sleepy . " it be very early , " he mutter . 
 
 " Peyrol be already down at the well , " announce Catherine . " what can 
 he be do there all this time ? " she add in a troubled voice . Ral , 
 with his foot now on the ground , give she a side glance ; but she be 
 already glide away , and when he look again she have vanish from the 
 room and the door be shut . 
 
 
 Catherine , go downstairs , find Peyrol still at the well . he seem 
 to be look into it with extreme interest . 
 
 " your coffee be ready , Peyrol , " she shout to he from the doorway . 
 
 he turn very sharply like a man surprise and come along smile . 
 
 " that be pleasant news , Mademoiselle Catherine , " he say . " you be 
 down early . " 
 
 " yes , " she admit , " but you too , Peyrol . be Michel about ? let he 
 come and have some coffee too . " 
 
 " Michel 's at the tartane . perhaps you do not   know that she be go to 
 make a little voyage . " he drink a mouthful of coffee and take a bite 
 out of a slice of bread . he be hungry . he have be up all night and have 
 even have a conversation with Citizen Scevola . he have also do some work 
 with Michel after daylight ; however , there have not be much to do 
 because the tartane be always keep ready for sea . then after have 
 again lock up Citizen Scevola , who be extremely concerned as to what 
 be go to happen to he but be leave in a state of uncertainty , he 
 have come up to the farm , have go upstairs where he be busy with 
 various thing for a time , and then have steal down very cautiously to 
 the well , where Catherine , whom he have not expect downstair so early , 
 have see he before she go into Lieutenant Ral 's room . while he 
 enjoy his coffee he listen without any sign of surprise to 
 Catherine 's comment upon the disappearance of Scevola . she have look 
 into his den . he have not sleep on his pallet last night , of that she be 
 certain , and he be nowhere to be see , not even in the most distant 
 field , from the point of vantage around the farm . it be inconceivable 
 that he should have slip away to Madrague , where he dislike to go , 
 or to the village , where he be afraid to go . Peyrol remark that 
 whatever happen to he he be no great loss , but Catherine be not to 
 be soothe . 
 
 " it frighten a body , " she say . " he may be hide somewhere to jump 
 on one treacherously . you know what I mean , Peyrol . " 
 
 " well , the lieutenant will have nothing to fear , as he be go away . as 
 to myself , Scevola and I be good friend . I have a long talk with he 
 quite recently . you two woman can manage he perfectly ; and then , who 
 know , perhaps he have go away for good . " 
 
 Catherine star at he , if such a word as stare can be apply to a 
 profound contemplative gaze . " the lieutenant have nothing to fear from 
 he , " she repeat cautiously . 
 
 " no , he be go away . do not   you know it ? " the old woman continue to 
 look at he profoundly . " yes , he be on service . " 
 
 for another minute or so Catherine continue silent in her contemplative 
 attitude . then her hesitation come to an end . she could not resist the 
 desire to inform Peyrol of the event of the night . as she go on 
 Peyrol forget the half - full bowl of coffee and his half - eat piece of 
 bread . Catherine 's voice flow with austerity . she stand there , 
 impose and solemn like a peasant - priestess . the relation of what have 
 be to she a soul - shake experience do not take much time , and she 
 finish with the word , " the lieutenant be an honest man . " and after 
 a pause she insist far : " there be no deny it . he have act 
 like an honest man . " 
 
 for a moment long Peyrol continue to look at the coffee in the bowl , 
 then without warning get up with such violence that the chair behind he 
 be throw back upon the flagstone . 
 
 " where be he , that honest man ? " he shout suddenly in stentorian 
 tone which not only cause Catherine to raise her hand , but frighten 
 himself , and he drop at once to a mere forcible utterance . " where be 
 that man ? let I see he . " 
 
 even Catherine 's hieratic composure be disturb . " why , " she say , 
 look really disconcert , " he will be down here directly . this bowl 
 of coffee be for he . " 
 
 Peyrol make as if to leave the kitchen , but Catherine stop he . " for 
 God 's sake , Monsieur Peyrol , " she say , half in entreaty and half in 
 command , " do not   wake up the child . let her sleep . oh , let her sleep ! 
 do not   wake she up . God only know how long it be since she have sleep 
 properly . I could not tell you . I dare not   think of it . " she be shock 
 by hear Peyrol declare : " all this be confound nonsense . " but he 
 sit down again , seem to catch sight of the coffee bowl and empty 
 what be leave in it down his throat . 
 
 " I do not   want she on my hand more crazy than she have be before , " 
 say Catherine , in a sort of exasperation but in a very low tone . this 
 phrase in its selfish form express a real and profound compassion for 
 her niece . she dread the moment when that fatal Arlette would wake up 
 and the dreadful complication of life which her slumber have suspend 
 would have to be pick up again . Peyrol fidget on his seat . 
 
 " and so he tell you he be go ? he actually do tell you that ? " he 
 ask . 
 
 " he promise to go before the child wake up . . . . at once . " 
 
 " but , sacr nom d'un chien , there be never any wind before eleven 
 o'clock , " Peyrol exclaim in a tone of profound annoyance , yet try 
 to moderate his voice , while Catherine , indulgent to his change mood , 
 only compress her lip and nod at he soothingly . " it be 
 impossible to work with people like that , " he mumble . 
 
 " do you know , Monsieur Peyrol , that she have be to see the priest ? " 
 Catherine be hear suddenly , tower above her end of the table . the 
 two woman have have a talk before Arlette have be induce by her aunt to 
 lie down . Peyrol give a start . 
 
 " what ? Priest ? . . . now look here , Catherine , " he go on with 
 repressed ferocity , " do you imagine that all this interest I in the 
 least ? " 
 
 " I can think of nothing but that niece of mine . we two have nobody but 
 each other in the world , " she go on , reproduce the very phrase 
 Arlette have use to Ral . she seem to be think aloud , but notice 
 that Peyrol be listen with attention . " he want to shut she up 
 from everybody , " and the old woman clasp her meagre hand with a 
 sudden gesture . " I suppose there be still some convent about the world . " 
 
 " you and the patronne be mad together , " declare Peyrol . " all this 
 only show what an ass the cur be . I do not   know much about these thing , 
 though I have see some nun in my time , and some very queer one too , 
 but it seem to I that they do not   take crazy people into convent . 
 do not   you be afraid . I tell you that . " he stop because the inner 
 door of the kitchen come open and Lieutenant Ral step in . his sword 
 hang on his forearm by the belt , his hat be on his head . he drop his 
 little valise on the floor and sit down in the near chair to put on 
 his shoe which he have bring down in his other hand . then he come up 
 to the table . Peyrol , who have keep his eye on he , think : " here be 
 one who look like a moth scorch in the fire . " Ral 's eye be sink , 
 his cheek seem hollowed and the whole face have an arid and dry aspect . 
 
 " well , you be in a fine state for the work of deceive the enemy , " 
 Peyrol observe . " why , to look at you , nobody would believe a word you 
 say . you be not go to be ill , I hope . you be on service . you 
 have not   get the right to be ill . I say , Mademoiselle Catherine , produce 
 the bottle - you know , my private bottle . . . . " he snatch it from 
 Catherine 's hand , pour some brandy into the lieutenant 's coffee , 
 push the bowl towards he and wait . " Nom de nom ! " he say 
 forcibly , " do not   you know what this be for ? it be for you to drink . " 
 Ral obey with a strange , automatic docility . " and now , " say Peyrol , 
 get up , " I will go to my room and shave . this be a great day - the 
 day we be go to see the lieutenant off . " 
 
 till then Ral have not utter a word , but directly the door close 
 behind Peyrol he raise his head . 
 
 " Catherine ! " his voice be like a rustle in his throat . she be 
 look at he steadily and he continue : " listen , when she find I be 
 go you tell she I will return soon . to - morrow . always to - morrow . " 
 
 " yes , my good Monsieur , " say Catherine in an unmoved voice but 
 clasp her hand convulsively . " there be nothing else I would dare 
 tell she ! " 
 
 " she will believe you , " whisper Ral wildly . 
 
 " yes ! she will believe I , " repeat Catherine in a mournful tone . 
 
 Ral get up , put the sword - belt over his head , pick up the valise . 
 there be a little flush on his cheek . 
 
 " Adieu , " he say to the silent old woman . she make no answer , but as 
 he turn away she raise her hand a little , hesitate , and let it fall 
 again . it seem to she that the woman of Escampobar have be single 
 out for divine wrath . her niece appear to she like the scapegoat 
 charge with all the murder and blasphemy of the Revolution . she 
 herself too have be cast out from the grace of God . but that have be a 
 long time ago . she have make her peace with Heaven since . again she 
 raise her hand and , this time , make in the air the sign of the cross at 
 the back of Lieutenant Ral . 
 
 meanwhile upstairs Peyrol , scrap his big flat cheek with an english 
 razor - blade at the window , see Lieutenant Ral on the path to the shore ; 
 and high above there , command a vast view of sea and land , he 
 shrug his shoulder impatiently with no visible provocation . one 
 could not trust those epaulette - wearer . they would cram a fellow 's head 
 with notion either for their own sake or for the sake of the service . 
 still , he be too old a bird to be catch with chaff ; and besides , that 
 long - legged stiff beggar go down the path with all his officer air , 
 be honest enough . at any rate he know a seaman when he see one , though 
 he be as cold - blooded as a fish . Peyrol have a smile which be a little 
 awry . 
 
 clean the razor - blade   one of a set of twelve in a case   he have a 
 vision of a brilliantly hazy ocean and an English Indiaman with her 
 yard brace all way , her canvas blow loose above her bloodstained 
 deck overrun by a lot of privateersman and with the island of Ceylon 
 swell like a thin blue cloud on the far horizon . he have always wish 
 to own a set of english blade and there he have get it , fall over it as 
 it be , lie on the floor of a cabin which have be already ransack . 
 " for good steel - it be good steel , " he think look at the blade 
 fixedly . and there it be , nearly wear out . the other too . that steel ! 
 and here he be hold the case in his hand as though he have just 
 pick it up from the floor . same case . same man . and the steel wear out . 
 
 he shut the case brusquely , fling it into his sea - chest which be 
 stand open , and slam the lid down . the feeling which be in his 
 breast and have be know to more articulate man than himself , be that 
 life be a dream less substantial than the vision of Ceylon lie like a 
 cloud on the sea . Dream leave astern . Dream straight ahead . this 
 disenchanted philosophy take the shape of fierce swearing . " sacr nom de 
 nom de nom . . . . Tonnerre de bon Dieu ! " 
 
 while tie his neckcloth he handle it with fury as though he mean to 
 strangle himself with it . he ram a soft cap on to his venerable lock 
 recklessly , seize his cudgel - but before leave the room walk up to 
 the window giving on the east . he could not see the Petite Passe on 
 account of the lookout hill , but to the leave a great portion of the 
 Hyres roadstead lie spread out before he , pale grey in the morning 
 light , with the land about Cape Blanc swell in the distance with all 
 its detail blur as yet and only one conspicuous object present to 
 his sight something that might have be a lighthouse by its shape , but 
 which Peyrol know very well be the english corvette already under way 
 and with all her canvas set . 
 
 this sight please Peyrol mainly because he have expect it . the 
 Englishman be do exactly what he have expect he would do , and 
 Peyrol look towards the english cruiser with a smile of malicious 
 triumph as if he be confront her captain . for some reason or other 
 he imagine Captain Vincent as long - face , with yellow tooth and a wig , 
 whereas that officer wear his own hair and have a set of tooth which 
 would have do honour to a London belle and be really the hidden cause 
 of Captain Vincent appear so often wreathe in smile . 
 
 that ship at this great distance and steering in his direction hold 
 Peyrol at the window long enough for the increase light of the morning 
 to burst into sunshine , colour and fill - in the flat outline of the 
 land with tint of wood and rock and field , with clear dot of building 
 enliven the view . the sun throw a sort of halo around the ship . 
 recollect himself , Peyrol leave the room and shut the door quietly . 
 quietly too he descend the stair from his garret . on the landing he 
 undergo a short inward struggle , at the end of which he approach the 
 door of Catherine 's room and open it a little , put his head in . 
 across the whole width of it he see Arlette fast asleep . her aunt have 
 throw a light coverlet over she . her low shoe stand at the foot of the 
 bed . her black hair lie loose on the pillow ; and Peyrol 's gaze become 
 arrest by the long eyelash on her pale cheek . suddenly he fancy 
 she move , and he withdraw his head sharply , pull the door to . he 
 listen for a moment as if tempt to open it again , but judge it too 
 risky , continue on his way downstairs . at his reappearance in the 
 kitchen Catherine turn sharply . she be dress for the day , with a 
 big white cap on her head , a black bodice and a brown skirt with ample 
 fold . she have a pair of varnish sabot on her foot over her shoe . 
 
 " no sign of Scevola , " she say , advance towards Peyrol . " and 
 Michel too have not be here yet . " 
 
 Peyrol think that if she have be only short , what with her black 
 eye and slightly curved nose she would have look like a witch . but 
 witch can read people 's thought , and he look openly at Catherine 
 with the pleasant conviction that she could not read his thought . he say : 
 
 " I take good care not to make any noise upstairs , Mademoiselle 
 Catherine . when I be go the house will be empty and quiet enough . " 
 
 she have a curious expression . she strike Peyrol suddenly as if she be 
 lose in that kitchen in which a she have reign for many year . he 
 continue : 
 
 " you will be alone all the morning . " 
 
 she seem to be listen to some distant sound , and after Peyrol have 
 add , " everything be all right now , " she nod and after a moment 
 say in a manner that for she be unexpectedly impulsive : 
 
 " Monsieur Peyrol , I be tired of life . " 
 
 he shrug his shoulder and with somewhat sinister jocosity remark : 
 
 " I will tell you what it be ; you ought to have be marry . " 
 
 she turn she back on he abruptly . 
 
 " no offence , " Peyrol excuse himself in a tone of gloom rather than of 
 apology . " it be no use to attach any importance to thing . what be this 
 life ? Phew ! nobody can remember one - tenth of it . here I be ; and , you 
 know , I would bet that if one of my old - time chum come along and see I 
 like this , here with you - I mean one of those chum that stand up for a 
 fellow in a scrimmage and look after he should he be hurt - well , I 
 bet , " he repeat , " he would not   know I . he would say to himself 
 perhaps , ` Hullo ! here be a comfortable married couple . " " 
 
 he pause . Catherine , with she back to he and call he , not 
 " Monsieur , " but " Peyrol , " tout court , remark , not exactly with 
 displeasure , but rather with an ominous accent that this be no time for 
 idle talk . Peyrol , however , continue , though his tone be very far from 
 be that of idle talk : 
 
 " but you see , Mademoiselle Catherine , you be not like the other . you 
 allow yourself to be strike all of a heap , and at the same time you 
 be too hard on yourself . " 
 
 her long thin frame , bent low to work the bellow under the enormous 
 overmantel , she assent : " perhaps ! we Escampobar woman be always 
 hard on ourselves . " 
 
 " that be what I say . if you have have thing happen to you which happen 
 to I . . . . " 
 
 " but you man , you be different . lt do not   matter what you do . you 
 have get your own strength . you need not be hard on yourself . you go 
 from one thing to another thoughtlessly . " 
 
 he remain look at she searchingly with something like a hint of a 
 smile on his shaven lip , but she turn away to the sink where one of 
 the woman work about the farm have deposit a great pile of 
 vegetable . she start on they with a break - bladed knife , preserve 
 her sibylline air even in that homely occupation . 
 
 " it will be a good soup , I see , at noon to - day , " say the rover 
 suddenly . he turn on his heel and go out through the salle . the 
 whole world lie open to he , or at any rate the whole of the 
 Mediterranean , view down the ravine between the two hill . the bell of 
 the farm 's milch - cow , which have a talent for keep herself invisible , 
 reach he from the right , but he could not see as much as the tip of 
 her horn , though he look for they . he step out sturdily . he have 
 not go twenty yard down the ravine when another sound make he stand 
 still as if change into stone . it be a faint noise resemble very 
 much the hollow rumble an empty farm - cart would make on a stony road , 
 but Peyrol look up at the sky , and though it be perfectly clear , he 
 do not seem pleased with its aspect . he have a hill on each side of he 
 and the placid cove below his foot . he mutter " H'm ! thunder at 
 sunrise . it must be in the west . it only want that ! " he fear it 
 would first kill the little breeze there be and then knock the weather 
 up altogether . for a moment all his faculty seem paralyze by that 
 faint sound . on that sea rule by the god of Olympus he might have be 
 a pagan mariner subject to Jupiter 's caprice ; but like a defiant pagan 
 he shake his fist vaguely at space which answer he by a short and 
 threaten mutter . then he swing on his way till he catch sight of the 
 two masthead of the tartane , when he stop to listen . no sound of any 
 sort reach he from there , and he go on his way thinking , " go from 
 one thing to another thoughtlessly ! indeed ! . . . that be all old 
 Catherine know about it . " he have so many thing to think of that he 
 do not know which to lay hold of first . he just let they lie jumble up 
 in his head . his feeling too be in a state of confusion , and vaguely 
 he feel that his conduct be at the mercy of an internal conflict . the 
 consciousness of that fact account perhaps for his sardonic attitude 
 towards himself and outwardly towards those whom he perceive on board 
 the tartane ; and especially towards the lieutenant whom he see sit 
 on the deck lean against the head of the rudder , characteristically 
 aloof from the two other person on board . Michel , also 
 characteristically , be stand on the top of the little cabin scuttle , 
 obviously look out for his " matre . " Citizen Scevola , sit on 
 deck , seem at first sight to be at liberty , but as a matter of fact he 
 be not . he be loosely tie up to a stanchion by three turn of the 
 mainsheet with the knot in such a position that he could not get at it 
 without attract attention ; and that situation seem also somewhat 
 characteristic of Citizen Scevola with its air of half liberty , half 
 suspicion and , as it be , contemptuous restraint . the san - culotte , 
 whose late experience have nearly unsettle his reason , first by their 
 utter incomprehensibility and afterwards by the enigmatical attitude of 
 Peyrol , have drop his head and fold his arm on his breast . and that 
 attitude be dubious too . it might have be resignation or it might 
 have be profound sleep . the rover address himself first to the 
 lieutenant . 
 
 " Le moment approche , " say Peyrol with a queer twitch at a corner of 
 his lip , while under his soft woollen cap his venerable lock stir in 
 the breath of a suddenly warm air . " the great moment - eh ? " 
 
 he lean over the big tiller , and seem to be hover above the 
 lieutenant 's shoulder . 
 
 " what be this infernal company ? " murmur the latter without even 
 look at Peyrol . 
 
 " all old friend - quoi ? " say Peyrol in a homely tone . " we will keep 
 that little affair amongst ourselves . the few the man the great the 
 glory . Catherine be get the vegetable ready for the noonday soup 
 and the Englishman be come down towards the Passe where he will arrive 
 about noon too , ready to have his eye put out . you know , lieutenant , 
 that will be your job . you may depend on I for send you off when the 
 moment come . for what be it to you ? you have no friend , you have not 
 even a petite amie . as to expect an old rover like I - oh no , 
 lieutenant ! of course liberty be sweet , but what do you know of it , you 
 epaulette - wearer ? moreover , I be no good for quarter - deck talk and all 
 that politeness . " 
 
 " I wish , Peyrol , you would not talk so much , " say Lieutenant Ral , 
 turn his head slightly . he be strike by the strange expression on 
 the old rover 's face . " and I do not   see what the actual moment matter . 
 I be go to look for the fleet . all you have to do be to hoist the 
 sail for I and then scramble ashore . " 
 
 " very simple , " observe Peyrol through his tooth , and then begin to sing : 
 
 " quoique leur chapeaux sont bien laid God - dam ! Moi , j'aime les 
 Anglais Ils ont un si bon caractre ! " 
 
 
 " H ! Citoyen ! " and then remark confidentially to Ral : " he be not  
 asleep , you know , but he be not   like the English , he have a sacr mauvais 
 caractre . he get into his head , " continue Peyrol , in a loud and 
 innocent tone , " that you lock he up in this cabin last night . do 
 you notice the venomous glance he give you just now ? " 
 
 both Lieutenant Ral and the innocent Michel appear surprised at his 
 boisterousness ; but all the time Peyrol be think : " I wish to 
 goodness I know how that thunderstorm be get on and what course it 
 be shape . I can not   find that out unless I go up to the farm and get a 
 view to the westward . it may be as far as the Rhne Valley ; no doubt it 
 be and it will come out of it too , curse on it . one will not   be able to 
 reckon on half an hour of steady wind from any quarter . " he direct a 
 look of ironic gaiety at all the face in turn . Michel meet it with a 
 faithful - dog gaze and innocently open mouth . Scevola keep his chin 
 bury on his chest . Lieutenant Ral be insensible to outward 
 impression and his absent stare make nothing of Peyrol . the rover 
 himself presently fall into thought . the last stir of air die out in 
 the little basin , and the sun clearing Porquerolles inundate it with a 
 sudden light in which Michel blink like an owl . 
 
 " it be hot early , " he announce aloud but only because he have form 
 the habit of talk to himself . he would not have presume to offer an 
 opinion unless ask by Peyrol . 
 
 his voice have recall Peyrol to himself , he propose to masthead the 
 yard and even ask Lieutenant Ral to help in that operation which be 
 accomplish in silence except for the faint squeaking of the block . 
 the sail , however , be keep haul up in the gear . 
 
 " like this , " say Peyrol , " you have only to let go the rope and you 
 will be under canvas at once . " 
 
 without answer Ral return to his position by the rudder - head . he 
 be say to himself - " I be sneak off . no , there be honour , duty . 
 and of course I will return . but when ? they will forget all about I and 
 I shall never be exchange . this war may last for year , - " and 
 illogically he wish he could have have a God to whom he could pray for 
 relief in his anguish . " she will be in despair , " he think , writhe 
 inwardly at the mental picture of a distracted Arlette . life , however , 
 have embitter his spirit early , and he say to himself : " but in a 
 month 's time will she even give I a thought ? " instantly he feel 
 remorseful with a remorse strong enough to lift he to his foot as if he 
 be morally oblige to go up again and confess to Arlette this 
 sacrilegious cynicism of thought . " I be mad , " he mutter , perch 
 himself on the low rail . his lapse from faith plunge he into such a 
 depth of unhappiness that he feel all his strength of will go out of 
 he . he sit there apathetic and suffering . he meditate dully : " young 
 man have be know to die suddenly ; why should not I ? I be , as a matter 
 of fact , at the end of my endurance . I be half dead already . yes ! but 
 what be leave of that life do not belong to I now . " 
 
 " Peyrol , " he say in such a pierce tone that even Scevola jerk his 
 head up ; but he make an effort to reduce his shrillness and go on 
 speak very carefully : " I have leave a letter for the Secretary 
 General at the Majorit to pay twenty - five hundred franc to Jean - you 
 be Jean , be you not ? - Peyrol , price of the tartane in which I sail . 
 be that right ? " 
 
 " what do you do that for ? " ask Peyrol with an extremely stony face . 
 " to get I into trouble ? " 
 
 " do not   be a fool , gunner , nobody remember your , name . it be bury 
 under a stack of blacken paper . I must ask you to go there and tell 
 they that you have see with your own eye Lieutenant Ral sail away on 
 his mission . " 
 
 the stoniness of Peyrol persist but his eye be full of fury . " oh , 
 yes , I see myself go there . twenty - five hundred franc ! twenty - five 
 hundred fiddlestick . " his tone change suddenly . " I hear some one 
 say that you be an honest man , and I suppose this be a proof of it . 
 well , to the devil with your honesty . " he glare at the lieutenant and 
 then think : " he do not   even pretend to listen to what I say " - and 
 another sort of anger , partly contemptuous and with something of dim 
 sympathy in it , replace his downright fury . " Pah ! " he say , spat over 
 the side , and walk up to Ral with great deliberation , slap he on 
 the shoulder . the only effect of this proceeding be to make Ral look up 
 at he without any expression whatever . 
 
 Peyrol then pick up the lieutenant 's valise and carry it down into 
 the cuddy . as he pass by , Citizen Scevola utter the word " Citoyen " 
 but it be only when he come back again that Peyrol condescend to say , 
 " well ? " 
 
 " what be you go to do with I ? " ask Scevola . 
 
 " you would not give I an account of how you come on board this 
 tartane , " say Peyrol in a tone that sound almost friendly , 
 " therefore I need not tell you what I will do with you . " 
 
 a low muttering of thunder follow so close upon his word that it 
 might have come out of Peyrol 's own lip . the rover gaze uneasily at 
 the sky . it be still clear overhead , and at the bottom of that little 
 basin surround by rock there be no view in any other direction ; but 
 even as he gaze there be a sort of flicker in the sunshine succeed 
 by a mighty but distant clap of thunder . for the next half hour Peyrol 
 and Michel be busy ashore take a long line from the tartane to the 
 entrance of the little basin where they fasten the end of it to a 
 bush . this be for the purpose of haul the tartane out into the cove . 
 then they come aboard again . the bit of sky above their head be still 
 clear , but while walk with the haul line near the cove Peyrol have 
 get a glimpse of the edge of the cloud . the sun grow scorch all of a 
 sudden , and in the stagnate air a mysterious change seem to come 
 over the quality and the colour of the light . Peyrol fling his cap on 
 the deck , bar his head to the subtle menace of the breathless 
 stillness of the air . 
 
 " Phew ! a chauffe , " he mutter , roll up the sleeve of his jacket . 
 he wipe his forehead with his mighty forearm upon which a mermaid with 
 an immensely long fishtail be tattoo . perceive the lieutenant 's 
 belt sword lie on the deck , he pick it up and without any ceremony 
 throw it down the cabin stair . as he be pass again near Scevola , 
 the sans - culotte raise his voice . 
 
 " I believe you be one of those wretch corrupt by English gold , " 
 he cry like one inspire . his shin eye , his red cheek , testify 
 to the fire of patriotism burn in his breast , and he use that 
 conventional phrase of revolutionary time , a time when , intoxicate with 
 oratory , he use to run about deal death to traitor of both sex 
 and all age . but his denunciation be receive in such profound silence 
 that his own belief in it waver . his word have sink into an abysmal 
 stillness and the next sound be Peyrol speak to Ral . 
 
 " I be afraid you will get very wet , lieutenant , before long , " and 
 then , look at Ral , he think with great conviction : " wet ! he 
 would not   mind get drown . " stand stock - still he fret and 
 fume inwardly , wonder where precisely the english ship be by this 
 time and where the devil that thunderstorm have get to : for the sky have 
 become as mute as the oppress earth . Ral ask : 
 
 " be it not time to haul out , gunner ? " and Peyrol say : 
 
 " there be not a breath of wind anywhere for mile . " he be gratify 
 by the fairly loud mutter roll apparently along the inland hill . 
 over the pool a little ragged cloud tear from the purple robe of the 
 storm float , arrest and thin like a bit of dark gauze . 
 
 above at the farm Catherine have hear too the ominous mutter and come to 
 the door of the salle . from there she could see the purple cloud itself , 
 convoluted and solid , and its sinister shadow lie over the hill . the 
 oncoming of the storm add to her sense of uneasiness at find 
 herself all alone in the house . Michel have not come up . she would have 
 welcome Michel , to whom she hardly ever speak , simply as a person 
 belong to the usual order of thing . she be not talkative , but 
 somehow she would have like somebody to speak to just for a moment . 
 this cessation of all sound , voice or footstep , around the building 
 be not welcome ; but look at the cloud , she think that there would 
 be noise enough presently . however , step back into the kitchen , she 
 be meet by a sound that make her regret the oppressive silence , by its 
 pierce and terrifying character ; it be a shriek in the upper part of 
 the house where , as far as she know , there be only Arlette asleep . in 
 her attempt to cross the kitchen to the foot of the stair the weight of 
 her accumulate year fall upon the old woman . she feel suddenly very 
 feeble and hardly able to breathe . and all at once the thought , 
 " Scevola ! be he murder she up there ? " paralyze the last remnant 
 of her physical power . what else could it be ? she fall , as if shoot , 
 into a chair under the first shock and find herself unable to move . 
 only her brain remain active , and she raise her hand to her eye as 
 if to shut out the image of the horror upstairs . she hear nothing more 
 from above . Arlette be dead . she think that now it be her turn . 
 while her body quail before the brutal violence , her weary spirit 
 long ardently f or the end . let he come ! let all this be over at 
 last , with a blow on the head or a stab in the breast . she have not the 
 courage to uncover her eye . she wait . but after about a minute - it 
 seem to her interminable - she hear rapid footstep overhead . Arlette 
 be run here and there . Catherine uncover her eye and be about 
 to rise when she hear at the top of the stair the name of Peyrol 
 shout with a desperate accent . then , again , after the short of 
 pause , the cry of : " Peyrol , Peyrol ! " and then the sound of foot 
 run downstairs . there be another shriek , " Peyrol ! " just outside 
 the door before it fly open . who be pursue she ? Catherine manage to 
 stand up . steady herself with one hand on the table she present an 
 undaunted front to her niece who run into the kitchen with loose hair 
 fly and the appearance of wild distraction in her eye . 
 
 the staircase door have slam to behind she . nobody be pursue she ; 
 and Catherine , put forth her lean brown arm , arrest Arlette 's 
 flight with such a jerk that the two woman swing against each other . she 
 seize her niece by the shoulder . 
 
 " what be this , in Heaven 's name ? where be you rush to ? " she cry , 
 and the other , as if suddenly exhaust , whisper : 
 
 " I wake up from an awful dream . " 
 
 the kitchen grow dark under the cloud that hang over the house now . 
 there be a feeble flicker of lightning and a faint crash , far away . 
 
 the old woman give her niece a little shake . 
 
 " dream be nothing , " she say . " you be awake now . . . . " and 
 indeed Catherine think that no dream could be so bad as the reality 
 which keep hold of one through the long wake hour . 
 
 " they be kill he , " moan Arlette , begin to tremble and 
 struggle in her aunt 's arm . " I tell you they be kill he . " 
 
 " be quiet . be you dream of Peyrol ? " 
 
 she become still in a moment and then whisper : " no . eugne . " 
 
 she have see Ral set upon by a mob of man and woman , all dripping with 
 blood , in a livid cold light , in front of a stretch of mere shell of 
 house with crack wall and broken window , and go down in the 
 midst of a forest of raise arm brandish sabre , club , knife , 
 axis . there be also a man flourish a red rag on a stick , while 
 another be beat a drum which boom above the sicken sound of 
 break glass fall like rain on the pavement . and away round the 
 corner of an empty street come Peyrol whom she recognize by his white 
 head , walk without haste , swing his cudgel regularly . the terrible 
 thing be that Peyrol look straight at she , not notice anything , 
 compose , without a frown or a smile , unseeing and deaf , while she wave 
 her arm and shriek desperately to he for help . she wake up with the 
 pierce sound of his name in her ear and with the impression of the 
 dream so powerful that even now , look distractedly into her aunt 's 
 face , she could see the bare arm of that murderous crowd raise above 
 Ral 's sink head . yet the name that have spring to her lip on wake 
 be the name of Peyrol . she push her aunt away with such force that 
 the old woman stagger backwards and to save herself have to catch hold 
 of the overmantel above her head . Arlette run to the door of the salle , 
 look in , come back to her aunt and shout : " where be he ? " 
 
 Catherine really do not know which path the lieutenant have take . she 
 understand very well that " he " mean Ral . 
 
 she say : " he go away a long time ago " grasp her niece 's arm and 
 add with an effort to steady her voice : " he be come back , 
 Arlette - for nothing will keep he away from you . " 
 
 Arlette , as if mechanically , be whisper to herself the magic name , 
 " Peyrol , Peyrol ! " then cry : " I want Eugne now . this moment . " 
 
 Catherine 's face wear a look of unflinche patience . " he have depart 
 on service , " she say . her niece look at she with enormous eye , 
 coal - black , profound , and immovable , while in a forcible and distracted 
 tone she say : " you and Peyrol have be plot to rob I of my 
 reason . but I will know how to make that old man give he up . he be 
 mine ! " she spin round wildly like a person look for a way of escape 
 from a deadly peril , and rush out blindly . 
 
 about Escampobar the air be murky but calm , and the silence be so 
 profound that it be possible to hear the first heavy drop of rain 
 strike the ground . in the intimidate shadow of the storm - cloud , 
 Arlette stand irresolute for a moment , but it be to Peyrol , the man of 
 mystery and power , that her thought turn . she be ready to embrace 
 his knee , to entreat and to scold . " Peyrol , Peyrol ! " she cry twice , 
 and lend her ear as if expect an answer . then she shout : " I want 
 he back . " 
 
 Catherine , alone in the kitchen , move with dignity , sit down in the 
 armchair with the tall back , like a senator in his curule chair await 
 the blow of a barbarous fate . 
 
 Arlette fly down the slope . the first sign of she come be a faint 
 thin scream which really the rover alone hear and understand . he 
 press his lip in a particular way , show his appreciation of the 
 come difficulty . the next moment he see , poise on a detached boulder 
 and thinly veil by the first perpendicular shower , Arlette , who , 
 catch sight of the tartane with the man on board of she , let out a 
 prolong shriek of mingled triumph and despair : " Peyrol ! help ! 
 Pey - - rol ! " 
 
 Ral jump to his foot with an extremely scared face , but Peyrol 
 extend an arresting arm . " she be call to I , " he say , gaze at 
 the figure poise on the rock . " well leap ! sacr nom ! . . . well 
 leap ! " and he mutter to himself soberly : " she will break her leg 
 or her neck . " 
 
 " I see you , Peyrol , " scream Arlette , who seem to be fly through 
 the air . " do not   you dare . " 
 
 " yes , here I be , " shout the rover , strike his breast with his fist . 
 
 Lieutenant Ral put both his hand over his face . Michel look on 
 open - mouthed , very much as if watch a performance in a circus ; but 
 Scevola cast his eye down . Arlette come on board with such an impetus 
 that Peyrol have to step forward and save she from a fall which would 
 have stun she . she struggle in his arm with extreme violence . the 
 heiress of Escampobar with her loose black hair seem the incarnation 
 of pale fury . " misrable ! do not   you dare ! " a roll of thunder cover 
 her voice , but when it have pass away she be hear again in suppliant 
 tone . " Peyrol , my friend , my dear old friend . give he back to I , " 
 and all the time her body writhe in the arm of the old seaman . " you 
 use to love I , Peyrol , " she cry without cease to struggle , and 
 suddenly strike the rover twice in the face with her clench fist . 
 Peyrol 's head receive the two blow as if it have be make of marble , 
 but he feel with fear her body become still , grow rigid in his arm . a 
 heavy squall envelop the group of people on board the tartane . Peyrol 
 lay Arlette gently on the deck . her eye be closed , her hand 
 remain clench ; every sign of life have leave her white face . Peyrol 
 stand up and look at the tall rock stream with water . the rain 
 sweep over the tartane with an angry swish roar to which be add 
 the sound of water rush violently down the fold and seam of the 
 precipitous shore vanish gradually from his sight , as if this have 
 be the beginning of a destroying and universal deluge - the end of all 
 thing . 
 
 Lieutenant Ral , kneel on one knee , contemplate the pale face of 
 Arlette . Distinct , yet mingle with the faint growl of distant thunder , 
 Peyrol 's voice be hear say : 
 
 " we can not   put she ashore and leave she lie in the rain . she must be 
 take up to the house . " Arlette 's soak clothe clung to her limb 
 while the lieutenant , his bare head dripping with rain water , look as 
 if he have just save she from drown . Peyrol gaze down inscrutably at 
 the woman stretch on the deck and at the kneeling man . " she have 
 faint from rage at her old Peyrol , " he go on rather dreamily . 
 " strange thing do happen . however , lieutenant , you have well take she 
 under the arm and step ashore first . I will help you . ready ? lift . " 
 
 the movement of the two man have to be careful and their progress be 
 slow on the low , steep part of the slope . after go up more than 
 two - third of the way , they rest their insensible burden on a flat 
 stone . Ral continue to sustain the shoulder but Peyrol lower the 
 foot gently . 
 
 " ha ! " he say . " you will be able to carry she yourself the rest of 
 the way and give she up to old Catherine . get a firm footing and I will 
 lift she and place she in your arm . you can walk the distance quite 
 easily . there . . . . hold she a little high , or her foot will be 
 catch on the stone . " 
 
 Arlette 's hair be hang far below the lieutenant 's arm in an inert 
 and heavy mass . the thunderstorm be pass away , leave a cloudy sky . 
 and Peyrol think with a profound sigh : " I be tired . " 
 
 " she be light , " say Ral . 
 
 " Parbleu , she be light . if she be dead , you would find her heavy 
 enough . allon , lieutenant . no ! I be not come . what be the good ? I will 
 stay down here . I have no mind to listen to Catherine 's scolding . " 
 
 the lieutenant , look absorb into the face rest in the hollow of 
 his arm , never avert his gaze - not even when Peyrol , stoop over 
 Arlette , kiss the white forehead near the root of the hair , black as 
 a raven 's wing . 
 
 " what be I to do ? " mutter Ral . 
 
 " do ? why , give she up to old Catherine . and you may just as well tell 
 she that I will be come along directly . that will cheer she up . I use 
 to count for something in that house . Allez . for our time be very short . " 
 
 with these word he turn away and walk slowly down to the tartane . a 
 breeze have spring up . he feel it on his wet neck and be grateful for 
 the cool touch which recall he to himself , to his old wander self 
 which have know no softness and no hesitation in the face of any risk 
 offer by life . 
 
 as he step on board , the shower pass away . Michel , wet to the skin , 
 be still in the very same attitude gaze up the slope . Citizen Scevola 
 have draw his knee up and be hold his head in his hand ; whether 
 because of rain or cold or for some other reason , his tooth be 
 chatter audibly with a continuous and distressing rattle . Peyrol 
 fling off his jacket , heavy with water , with a strange air as if it be 
 of no more use to his mortal envelope , square his broad shoulder and 
 direct Michel in a deep , quiet voice to let go the line hold the 
 tartane to the shore . the faithful henchman be take aback and require 
 one of Peyrol 's authoritative " Allez " to put he in motion . meantime 
 the rover cast off the tiller line and lay his hand with an air of 
 mastery on the stout piece of wood project horizontally from the 
 rudder - head about the level of his hip . the voice and the movement of 
 his companion cause Citizen Scevola to master the desperate trembling 
 of his jaw . he wriggle a little in his bond and the question that have 
 be on his lip for a good many hour be utter again . 
 
 " what be you go to do with I ? " 
 
 " what do you think of a little promenade at sea ? " Peyrol ask in a 
 tone that be not unkindly . 
 
 Citizen Scevola , who have seem totally and completely cast down and 
 subdue , let out a most unexpected screech . 
 
 " unbind I . put I ashore . " 
 
 Michel , busy forward , be move to smile as though he have possess a 
 cultivate sense of incongruity . Peyrol remain serious . 
 
 " you shall be untie presently , " he assure the blood - drink 
 patriot , who have be for so many year the repute possessor not only 
 of Escampobar , but of the Escampobar heiress that , live on 
 appearance , he have almost come to believe in that ownership himself . no 
 wonder he screech at this rude awakening . Peyrol raise his voice : 
 " Haul on the line , Michel . " 
 
 as , directly the rope have be let go , the tartane have swing clear of 
 the shore , the movement give she by Michel carry she towards the 
 entrance by which the basin communicate with the cove . Peyrol attend 
 to the helm , and in a moment , glide through the narrow gap , the 
 tartane carry her way , shoot out almost into the middle of the cove . 
 
 a little wind could be feel , run light wrinkle over the water , but 
 outside the overshadowed sea be already speckle with white cap . 
 Peyrol help Michel to haul aft the sheet and then go back to the 
 tiller . the pretty spick - and - span craft that have be lie idle for so 
 long begin to glide into the wide world . Michel gaze at the shore as if 
 lose in admiration . Citizen Scevola 's head have fall on his knee while 
 his nerveless hand clasp his leg loosely . he be the very image of 
 dejection . 
 
 " H , Michel ! come here and cast loose the citizen . it be only fair that 
 he should be untie for a little excursion at sea . " 
 
 when his order have be execute , Peyrol address himself to the 
 desolate figure on the deck . 
 
 " like this , should the tartane get capsize in a squall , you will have 
 an equal chance with we to swim for your life . " 
 
 Scevola disdain to answer . he be engage in bite his knee with rage 
 in a stealthy fashion . 
 
 " you come on board for some murderous purpose . who you be after 
 unless it be myself , God only know . I feel quite justified in give 
 you a little outing at sea . I will not   conceal from you , citizen , that it 
 may not be without risk to life or limb . but you have only yourself to 
 thank for be here . " 
 
 as the tartane draw clear of the cove , she feel more the weight of the 
 breeze and dart forward with a lively motion . a vaguely contented 
 smile light up Michel 's hairy countenance . 
 
 " she feel the sea , " say Peyrol , who enjoy the swift movement of 
 his vessel . " this be different from your lagoon , Michel . " 
 
 " to be sure , " say Michel with become gravity . 
 
 " do not   it seem funny to you , as you look back at the shore , to think 
 that you have leave nothing and nobody behind ? " 
 
 Michel assume the aspect of a man confront by an intellectual 
 problem . since he have become Peyrol 's henchman he have lose the habit of 
 think altogether . direction and order be easy thing to 
 apprehend ; but a conversation with he whom he call " notre matre " 
 be a serious matter demand great and concentrated attention . 
 
 " possibly , " he murmur , look strangely self - conscious . 
 
 " well , you be lucky , take my word for it , " say the rover , watch 
 the course of his little vessel along the head of the peninsula . " you 
 have not even a dog to miss you . " 
 
 " I have only you , Matre Peyrol . " 
 
 " that be what I be think , " say Peyrol half to himself , while 
 Michel , who have good sea - leg , keep his balance to the movement of the 
 craft without take his eye from the rover 's face . 
 
 " no , " Peyrol exclaim suddenly , after a moment of meditation , " I 
 could not leave you behind . " he extend his open palm towards Michel . 
 
 " put your hand in there , " he say . 
 
 Michel hesitate for a moment before this extraordinary proposal . at 
 last he do so , and Peyrol , hold the bereaved fisherman 's hand in a 
 powerful grip , say : 
 
 " if I have go away by myself , I would have leave you maroon on this 
 earth like a man throw out to die on a desert island . " some dim 
 perception of the solemnity of the occasion seem to enter Michel 's 
 primitive brain . he connect Peyrol 's word with the sense of his own 
 insignificant position at the tail of all mankind ; and , timidly , he 
 murmur with his clear , innocent glance uncloude , the fundamental 
 axiom of his philosophy : 
 
 " somebody must be last in this world . " 
 
 " well , then , you will have to forgive I all that may happen between 
 this and the hour of sunset . " 
 
 the tartane , obey the helm , fall off before the wind , with her head 
 to the eastward . 
 
 Peyrol murmur : " she have not forget how to walk the sea . " his 
 unsubdued heart , heavy for so many day , have a moment of buoyancy - the 
 illusion of immense freedom . 
 
 at that moment Ral , amazed at find no tartane in the basin , be 
 run madly towards the cove , where he be sure Peyrol must be wait 
 to give she up to he . he run out on to the very rock on which Peyrol 's 
 late prisoner have sit after his escape , too tired to care , yet cheer 
 by the hope of liberty . but Ral be in a bad plight . he could see no 
 shadowy form through the thin veil of rain which pit the sheltered 
 piece of water frame in the rock . the little craft have be spirit 
 away . impossible ! there must be something wrong with his eye ! again the 
 barren hillside echo the name of " Peyrol , " shout with all the 
 force of Ral 's lung . he shout it only once , and about five minute 
 afterwards appear at the kitchen - door , pant , stream with water 
 as if he have fight his way up from the bottom of the sea . in the 
 tall - back armchair Arlette lay , with her limb relax , her head on 
 Catherine 's arm , her face white as death . he see she open her black 
 eye , enormous and as if not of this world ; he see old Catherine turn 
 her head , hear a cry of surprise , and see a sort of struggle begin 
 between the two woman . he scream at they like a madman : " Peyrol have 
 betray I ! " and in an instant , with a bang of the door , he be go . 
 
 the rain have cease . above his head the unbroken mass of cloud move to 
 the eastward , and he move in the same direction as if he too be 
 drive by the wind up the hillside , towards the lookout . when he reach 
 the spot and , gasp , fling one arm round the trunk of the lean 
 tree , the only thing he be aware of during the sombre pause in the 
 unrest of the element be the distract turmoil of his thought . 
 after a moment he perceive through the rain the english ship with her 
 topsail lower on the cap , forge ahead slowly across the northern 
 entrance of the Petite Passe . his distress fasten insanely on the 
 notion of there be a connection between that enemy ship and Peyrol 's 
 inexplicable conduct . that old man have always mean to go himself ! and 
 when a moment after , look to the southward , he make out the shadow of 
 the tartane come round the land in the midst of another squall , he 
 mutter to himself a bitter : " of course ! " she have both her sail set . 
 Peyrol be indeed press she to the utmost in his shameful haste to 
 traffic with the enemy . the truth be that from the position in which 
 Ral first see he , Peyrol could not yet see the english ship , and hold 
 confidently on his course up the middle of the strait . the man - of - war 
 and the little tartane see each other quite unexpectedly at a distance 
 that be very little over a mile . Peyrol 's heart fly into his mouth at 
 find himself so close to the enemy . on board the Amelia at first no 
 notice be take . it be simply a tartane making for shelter on the 
 north side of Porquerolles . but when Peyrol suddenly alter his course , 
 the master of the man - of - war , notice the manuvre , take up the long 
 glass for a look . Captain Vincent be on deck and agree with the 
 master 's remark that " there be a craft act suspiciously . " before 
 the Amelia could come round in the heavy squall , Peyrol be already 
 under the battery of Porquerolles and , so far , safe from capture . 
 Captain Vincent have no mind to bring his ship within reach of the 
 battery and risk damage in his rigging or hull for the sake of a small 
 coaster . however , the tale bring on board by symon of his discovery 
 of a hide craft , of his capture , and his wonderful escape , have make 
 every tartane an object of interest to the whole ship 's company . the 
  Amelia remain hove to in the strait while her officer watch the 
 lateen sail glide to and fro under the protect muzzle of the 
 gun . Captain Vincent himself have be impress by Peyrol 's manuvre . 
 coasting craft as a rule be not afraid of the Amelia . after take a 
 few turn on the quarter - deck he order Symons to be call aft . 
 
 the hero of a unique and mysterious adventure , which have be the only 
 subject of talk on board the corvette for the last twenty - four hour , 
 come along roll , hat in hand , and enjoy a secret sense of his 
 importance . 
 
 " take the glass , " say the captain , " and have a look at that vessel 
 under the land . be she anything like the tartane that you say you have 
 be aboard of ? " 
 
 symon be very positive . " I think I can swear to those paint 
 masthead , your honour . it be the last thing I remember before that 
 murderous ruffian knock I senseless . the moon shine on they . I can 
 make they out now with the glass . " as to the fellow boasting to he 
 that the tartane be a dispatch - boat and have already make some trip , 
 well , symon beg his honour to believe that the beggar be not sober 
 at the time . he do not care what he blurt out . the good proof of his 
 condition be that he go away to fetch the soldier and forget to come 
 back . the murderous old ruffian ! " you see , your honour , "   continue 
 symon , " he think I be not likely to escape after get a blow 
 that would have kill nine out of any ten man . so he go away to boast 
 of what he have do before the people ashore ; because one of his chum , 
 bad than himself , come down think he would kill I with a dam   big 
 manure fork , save your honour 's presence . a regular savage he be . " 
 
 symon pause , star , as if astonish at the marvel of his own tale . 
 the old master , stand at his captain 's elbow , observe in a 
 dispassionate tone that , anyway , that peninsula be not a bad 
 jumping - off place for a craft intend to slip through the blockade . 
 symon , not be dismiss , wait hat in hand while Captain Vincent 
 direct the master to fill on the ship and stand a little near to the 
 battery . it be do , and presently there be a flash of a gun low down 
 on the water 's edge and a shot come skip in the direction of the 
  Amelia . it fall very short , but Captain Vincent judge the ship be 
 close enough and order she to be hove to again . then symon be tell 
 to take a look through the glass once more . after a long interval he 
 lower it and speak impressively to his captain : 
 
 " I can make out three head aboard , your honour , and one be white . I 
 would swear to that white head anywhere . " 
 
 Captain Vincent make no answer . all this seem very odd to he ; but 
 after all it be possible . the craft have certainly act suspiciously . 
 he speak to the first lieutenant in a half - vex tone . 
 
 " he have do a rather smart thing . he will dodge here till dark and 
 then get away . lt be perfectly absurd . I do not   want to send the boat 
 too close to the battery . and if I do he may simply sail away from they 
 and be round the land long before we be ready to give he chase . 
 darkness will be his good friend . however , we will keep a watch on he 
 in case he be tempt to give we the slip late in the afternoon . in that 
 case we will have a good try to catch he . if he have anything aboard I 
 should like to get hold of it . it may be of some importance , after all . " 
 
 on board the tartane Peyrol put his own interpretation on the ship 's 
 movement . his object have be attain . the corvette have mark he for 
 her prey . satisfy as to that , Peyrol watch his opportunity and 
 take advantage of a long squall , with rain thick enough to blur the 
 form of the english ship , he leave the shelter of the battery to lead the 
 Englishman a dance and keep up his character of a man anxious to avoid 
 capture . 
 
 Ral , from his position on the lookout , see in the thinning downpour the 
 pointed lateen sail glide round the north end of Porquerolles and 
 vanish behind the land . some time afterwards the Amelia make sail in a 
 manner that put it beyond doubt that she mean to chase . her lofty 
 canvas be shut off too presently by the land of Porquerolles . when she 
 have disappear Ral turn to Arlette . 
 
 " let we go , " he say . 
 
 Arlette , stimulate by the short glimpse of Ral at the kitchen door , 
 whom she have take for a vision of a lost man call she to follow he 
 to the end of the world , have tear herself out of the old woman 's thin , 
 bony arm which could not cope with the struggle of her body and the 
 fierceness of her spirit . she have run straight to the lookout , though 
 there be nothing to guide she there except a blind impulse to seek Ral 
 wherever he might be . he be not aware of she have find he until she 
 seize hold of his arm with a suddenness , energy and determination of 
 which no one with a clouded mind could have be capable . he feel 
 himself be take possession of in a way that tear all his scruple 
 out of his breast . hold on to the trunk of the tree , he throw his 
 other arm round her waist , and when she confess to he that she do 
 not know why she have run up there , but that if she have not find he she 
 would have throw herself over the cliff , he tighten his clasp with 
 sudden exultation , as though she have be a gift pray for instead of a 
 stumble block for his pedantic conscience . together they walk back . 
 in the fail light the building await they , lifeless , the wall 
 darken by rain and the big slope of the roof glisten and sinister 
 under the fly desolation of the cloud . in the kitchen Catherine 
 hear their mingle footstep , and rigid in the tall armchair await 
 their coming . Arlette throw her arm round the old woman 's neck while 
 Ral stand on one side , look on . thought after thought fly through 
 his mind and vanish in the strong feeling of the irrevocable nature of 
 the event hand he to the woman whom , in the revulsion of his 
 feeling , he be inclined to think more sane than himself Arlette , with 
 one arm over the old woman 's shoulder , kiss the wrinkle forehead 
 under the white band of linen that , on the erect head , have the effect of 
 a rustic diadem . 
 
 " to - morrow you and I will have to walk down to the church . " 
 
 the austere dignity of Catherine 's pose seem to be shake by this 
 proposal to lead before the God , with whom she have make her peace long 
 ago , that unhappy girl choose to share in the guilt of impious and 
 unspeakable horror which have darken her mind . 
 
 Arlette , still stoop over her aunt 's face , extend a hand towards 
 Ral , who , make a step forward , take it silently into his grasp . 
 
 " oh , yes , you will , Aunt , " insist Arlette . " you will have to come 
 with I to pray for Peyrol , whom you and I shall never see any more . " 
 
 Catherine 's head drop , whether in assent or grief ; and Ral feel an 
 unexpected and profound emotion , for he , too , be convince that none of 
 the three person in the farm would ever see Peyrol again . it be as 
 though the rover of the wide sea have leave they to themselves on a 
 sudden impulse of scorn , of magnanimity , of a passion weary of itself . 
 however come by , Ral be ready to clasp for ever to his breast that 
 woman touch by the red hand of the Revolution ; for she , whose little 
 foot have run ankle - deep through the terror of death , have bring to he 
 the sense of triumphant life . 
 
 
 Astern of the tartane , the sun , about to set , kindle a streak of dull 
 crimson glow between the darken sea and the overcast sky . the 
 peninsula of Giens and the island of Hyres form one mass of land 
 detach itself very black against the fiery girdle of the horizon ; but 
 to the north the long stretch of the Alpine coast continue beyond sight 
 its endless sinuosity under the stoop cloud . 
 
 the tartane seem to be rush together with the run of the wave into 
 the arm of the oncoming night . a little more than a mile away on her 
 lee quarter , the Amelia , under all plain sail , press to the end of 
 the chase . it have last now for a good many hour , for Peyrol , when 
 slip away , have manage to get the advantage of the Amelia from the 
 very start . while still within the large sheet of smooth water which be 
 call the Hyres roadstead , the tartane , which be really a craft of 
 extraordinary speed , manage to gain positively on the sloop . 
 afterwards , by suddenly dart down the eastern passage between the two 
 last island of the group , Peyrol actually get out of sight of the 
 chasing ship , be hide by the Ile du Levant for a time . the Amelia 
 have to tack twice in order to follow , lose ground once more . emerge 
 into the open sea , she have to tack again , and then the position become 
 that of a stern chase , which proverbially be know as a long chase . 
 Peyrol 's skilful seamanship have twice extract from Captain Vincent a 
 low murmur accompany by a significant compression of lip . at one time 
 the Amelia have be near enough the tartane to send a shot ahead of 
 she . that one be follow by another which whiz extraordinarily 
 close to the masthead , but then Captain Vincent order the gun to be 
 secure again . he say to his first lieutenant , who , his speaking 
 trumpet in hand , keep at his elbow : " we must not sink that craft on any 
 account . if we could get only an hour 's calm , we would carry she with 
 the boat . " 
 
 the lieutenant remark that there be no hope of a calm for the next 
 twenty - four hour at least . 
 
 " no , " say Captain Vincent , " and in about an hour it will be dark , 
 and then he may very well give we the slip . the coast be not very far 
 off and there be battery on both side of Frjus , under any of which 
 he will be as safe from capture as though he be hove up on the beach . 
 and look , " he exclaim after a moment 's pause , " this be what the 
 fellow mean to do . " 
 
 " yes , sir , " say the lieutenant , keep his eye on the white speck 
 ahead , dance lightly on the short Mediterranean wave , " he be keep 
 off the wind . " 
 
 " we will have he in less than an hour , " say Captain Vincent , and 
 make as if he mean to rub his hand , but suddenly lean his elbow on 
 the rail . " after all , " he go on , " properly speak , it be a race 
 between the Amelia and the night . " 
 
 " and it will be dark early to - day , " say the first lieutenant , 
 swing the speak trumpet by its lanyard . " shall we take the yard 
 off the back - stay , sir ? " 
 
 " no , " say Captain Vincent . " there be a clever seaman aboard that 
 tartane . he be run off now , but at any time he may haul up again . we 
 must not follow he too closely , or we shall lose the advantage which we 
 have now . that man be determine on make his escape . " 
 
 if those word by some miracle could have be carry to the ear of 
 Peyrol , they would have bring to his lip a smile of malicious and 
 triumphant exultation . ever since he have lay his hand on the tiller of 
 the tartane every faculty of his resourcefulness and seamanship have be 
 bent on deceive the english captain , that enemy whom he have never 
 see , the man whose mind he have construct for himself from the 
 evolution of his ship . lean against the heavy tiller he address 
 Michel , break the silence of the strenuous afternoon . 
 
 " this be the moment , " his deep voice utter quietly . " ease off the 
 mainsheet , Michel . a little now , only . " 
 
 when Michel return to the place where he have be sit to windward , 
 the rover notice his eye fix on his face wonderingly . some vague 
 thought have be form themselves slowly , incompletely , in Michel 's 
 brain . Peyrol meet the utter innocence of the unspoken inquiry with a 
 smile that , begin sardonically on his manly and sensitive mouth , 
 end in something resemble tenderness . 
 
 " that be so , camarade , " he say with particular stress and intonation , 
 as if those word contain a full and sufficient answer . Most 
 unexpectedly Michel 's round and generally star eye blink as if 
 dazzle . he too produce from somewhere in the depth of his be a 
 queer , misty smile from which Peyrol avert his gaze . 
 
 " where be the citizen ? " he ask , bear hard against the tiller and 
 star straight ahead . " he be not   go overboard , be he ? I do not   seem 
 to have see he since we round the land near Porquerolles Castle . " 
 
 Michel , after crane his head forward to look over the edge of the 
 deck , announce that Scevola be sit on the keelson . 
 
 " go forward , " say Peyrol , " and ease off the fore - sheet now a little . 
 this tartane have wing , " he add to himself . 
 
 alone on the after - deck Peyrol turn his head to look at the Amelia . 
 that ship , in consequence of hold her wind , be now cross 
 obliquely the wake of the tartane . at the same time she have diminish 
 the distance . nevertheless , Peyrol consider that have he really mean 
 to escape , his chance be as eight to ten - practically an assured 
 success . for a long time he have be contemplate the lofty pyramid of 
 canvas tower against the fading red belt on the sky , when a 
 lamentable groan make he look round . it be Scevola . the citizen have 
 adopt the mode of progression on all four , and while Peyrol look at 
 he he roll to leeward , save himself rather cleverly from go 
 overboard , and hold on desperately to a cleat , shout in a hollow 
 voice , point with the other hand as if he have make a tremendous 
 discovery : " La terre ! La terre ! " 
 
 " certainly , " say Peyrol , steer with extreme nicety . " what of that ? " 
 
 " I do not   want to be drown ! " cry the citizen in his new hollow 
 voice . Peyrol reflect a bit before he speak in a serious tone : 
 
 " if you stay where you be , I assure you that you will . . . " he 
 glance rapidly over his shoulder at the Amelia . . . " not die by 
 drown . " he jerk his head sideways . " I know that man 's mind . " 
 
 " what man ? whose mind ? " yell Scevola with intense eagerness and 
 bewilderment . " we be only three on board . " 
 
 but Peyrol 's mind be contemplate maliciously the figure of a man with 
 long tooth , in a wig and with large buckle to his shoe . such be his 
 ideal conception of what the captain of the Amelia ought to look like . 
 that officer , whose naturally good - humour face wear then a look of 
 severe resolution , have beckon his first lieutenant to his side again . 
 
 " we be gain , " he say quietly . " I intend to close with he to 
 windward . we will not   risk any of his trick . it be very difficult to 
 outmanuvre a Frenchman , as you know . send a few armed marine on the 
 forecastle - head . I be afraid the only way to get hold of this tartane be 
 to disable the man on board of she . I wish to goodness I could think of 
 some other . when we close with she , let the marine fire a well - aim 
 volley . you must get some marine to stand by aft as well . I hope we may 
 shoot away his halliard ; once his sail be down on his deck he be ours 
 for the trouble of put a boat over the side . " 
 
 for more than half an hour Captain Vincent stand silent , elbow on rail , 
 keep his eye on the tartane , while on board the latter Peyrol steer 
 silent and watchful but intensely conscious of the enemy ship hold on 
 in her relentless pursuit . the narrow red band be die out of the sky . 
 the french coast , black against the fade light , merge into the 
 shadow gather in the eastern board . Citizen Scevola , somewhat 
 soothe by the assurance that he would not die by drown , have elect 
 to remain quiet where he have fall , not dare to trust himself to move 
 on the lively deck . Michel , squat to windward , gaze intently at 
 Peyrol in expectation of some order at any minute . but Peyrol utter no 
 word and make no sign . from time to time a burst of foam fly over the 
 tartane , or a splash of water would come aboard with a scurry noise . 
 
 it be not till the corvette have get within a long gunshot from the 
 tartane that Peyrol open his mouth . 
 
 " no ! " he burst out , loud in the wind , as if give vent to long 
 anxious thinking , " no ! I could not have leave you behind with not even a 
 dog for company . Devil take I if I do not   think you would not have 
 thank I for it either . what do you say to that , Michel ? " 
 
 a half - puzzled smile dwelt persistently on the guileless countenance of 
 the ex - fisherman . he state what he have always think in respect of 
 Peyrol 's every remark : " I think you be right , matre . " 
 
 " listen then , Michel . that ship will be alongside of we in less than 
 half an hour . as she come up they will open on we with musketry . " 
 
 " they will open on we . . . " repeat Michel , look quite 
 interested . " but how do you know they will do that , matre ? " 
 
 " because her captain have get to obey what be in my mind , " say Peyrol , 
 in a tone of positive and solemn conviction . " he will do it as sure as 
 if I be at his car tell he what to do . he will do it because he be 
 a first - rate seaman , but I , Michel , I be just a little bit cleverer than 
 he . " he glance over his shoulder at the Amelia rush after the 
 tartane with swell sail , and raise his voice suddenly . " he will do 
 it because no more than half a mile ahead of we be the spot where Peyrol 
 will die ! " 
 
 Michel do not start . he only shut his eye for a time , and the rover 
 continue in a low tone : 
 
 " I may be shoot through the heart at once , " he say : " and in that case 
 you have my permission to let go the halliard if you be alive 
 yourself . but if I live I mean to put the helm down . when I do that you 
 will let go the foresheet to help the tartane to fly into the wind 's 
 eye . this be my last order to you . now go forward and fear nothing . 
 Adieu . " Michel obey without a word . 
 
 half a dozen of the Amelia 's marine stand range on the 
 forecastle - head ready with their musket . Captain Vincent walk into 
 the lee waist to watch his chase . when he think that the jibboom of 
 the Amelia have draw level with the stern of the tartane he wave his 
 hat and the marine discharge their musket . apparently no gear be 
 cut . Captain Vincent observe the white - head man , who be steer , 
 clap his hand to his left side , while he hove the tiller to leeward and 
 bring the tartane sharply into the wind . the marine on the poop fire 
 in their turn , all the report merge into one . voice be hear on 
 the deck cry that they " have hit the white - haired chap . " Captain 
 Vincent shout to the master : 
 
 " get the ship round on the other tack . " 
 
 the elderly seaman who be the master of the Amelia take a critical 
 look before he give the necessary order ; and the Amelia close on her 
 chase with her deck resound to the piping of boatswain 's mate and 
 the hoarse shout : " hand shorten sail . about ship . " 
 
 Peyrol , lie on his back under the swing tiller , hear the call 
 shrill and die away ; he hear the ominous rush of Amelia 's bow 
 wave as the sloop foam within ten yard of the tartane 's stern ; he 
 even see her upper yard come down , and then everything vanish out 
 of the clouded sky . there be nothing in his ear but the sound of the 
 wind , the wash of the wave buffet the little craft leave without 
 guidance , and the continuous thrashing of its foresail the sheet of 
 which Michel have let go accord to order . the tartane begin to roll 
 heavily , but Peyrol 's right arm be sound and he manage to put it round 
 a bollard to prevent himself from be fling about . a feeling of peace 
 sink into he , not unmingled with pride . everything he have plan have 
 come to pass . he have mean to play that man a trick , and now the trick 
 have be play . play by he well than by any other old man on whom 
 age have steal , unnoticed , till the veil of peace be tear down by the 
 touch of a sentiment unexpected like an intruder and cruel like an enemy . 
 
 Peyrol roll his head to the left . all he could see be the leg of 
 Citizen Scevola slide nervelessly to and fro to the rolling of the 
 vessel as if his body have be jam somewhere . dead , or only scar to 
 death ? and Michel ? be he dead or die , that man without friend whom 
 his pity have refuse to leave behind marooned on the earth without even 
 a dog for company ? as to that , Peyrol feel no compunction ; but he 
 think he would have like to see Michel once more . he try to utter 
 his name , but his throat refuse he even a whisper . he feel himself 
 remove far away from that world of human sound , in which Arlette have 
 scream at he : " Peyrol , do not   you dare ! " he would never hear 
 anybody 's voice again ! under that grey sky there be nothing for he but 
 the swish of break sea and the ceaseless furious beating of the 
 tartane 's foresail . his play - thing be knock about terribly under 
 he , with her tiller fly madly to and fro just clear of his head , and 
 solid lump of water come on board over his prostrate body . suddenly , 
 in a desperate lurch which bring the whole Mediterranean with a 
 ferocious snarl level with the slope of the little deck , Peyrol see the 
  Amelia bear right down upon the tartane . the fear , not of death but 
 of failure , grip his slow - down heart . be this blind Englishman 
 go to run he down and sink the dispatch together with the craft ? 
 with a mighty effort of his ebb strength Peyrol sit up and fling his 
 arm round the shroud of the mainmast . 
 
 the Ameleia , whose way have carry she past the tartane for a quarter 
 of a mile , before sail could be shorten and her yard swing on the 
 other tack , be come back to take possession of her chase . in the 
 deepening dusk and amongst the foaming sea it be a matter of 
 difficulty to make out the little craft . at the very moment when the 
 master of the man - of - war , look out anxiously from the 
 forecastle - head , think that she might perhaps have fill and go 
 down , he catch sight of she roll in the trough of the sea , and so 
 close that she seem to be at the end of the Amelia 's jibboom . his 
 heart fly in his mouth . " hard a starboard ! " he yell , his order 
 be pass along the deck . 
 
 Peyrol , sink back on the deck in another heavy lurch of his craft , 
 see for an instant the whole of the English corvette swing up into the 
 cloud as if she mean to fle herself upon his very breast . a blown 
 seatop flicked his face noisily , follow by a smooth interval , a 
 silence of the water . he behold in a flash the day of his manhood , of 
 strength and adventure . suddenly an enormous voice like the roar of an 
 angry sea - lion seem to fill the whole of the empty sky in a mighty and 
 commanding shout : " steady ! " " . . . and with the sound of that familiar 
 english word ring in his ear Peyrol smile to his vision and die . 
 
 the Amelia , strip down to her topsail and hove to , rise and fall 
 easily while on her quarter about a cable 's length away Peyrol 's tartane 
 tumble like a lifeless corpse amongst the sea . Captain Vincent , in his 
 favourite attitude of lean over the rail , keep his eye fasten on 
 his prize . Mr. Bolt , who have be send for , wait patiently till his 
 commander turn round . 
 
 " oh , here you be , Mr. Bolt . I have send for you to go and take 
 possession . you speak French , and there may still be somebody alive in 
 she . if so , of course you will send he on board at once . I be sure 
 there can be nobody unwounde there . it will anyhow be too dark to see 
 much , but just have a good look round and secure everything in the way 
 of paper you can lay your hand on . Haul aft the foresheet and sail she 
 up to receive a tow line . I intend to take she along and ransack she 
 thoroughly in the morning ; tear down the cuddy lining and so on , should 
 you not find at once what I expect . . . . " Captain Vincent , his white 
 tooth gleam in the dusk , give some further order in a low tone , 
 and Mr. Bolt depart in a hurry . half an hour afterwards he be back on 
 board , and the Amelia , with the tartane in tow , make sail to the 
 eastward in search of the blockade fleet . 
 
 Mr. Bolt , introduce into a cabin strongly light by a swing lamp , 
 tender to his captain across the table a sail - cloth package cord and 
 scale , and a piece of paper fold in four , which , he explain , seem 
 to be a certificate of registry , strangely enough mention no name . 
 Captain Vincent seize the grey canvas package eagerly . 
 
 " this look like the very thing , Bolt , " he say , turn it over in 
 his hand . " what else do you find on board ? " 
 
 Bolt say that he have find three dead man , two on the after - deck and 
 one lie at the bottom of the open hold with the bare end of the 
 foresheet in his hand - ' shot down , I suppose , just as he have let it 
 go , " he comment . he describe the appearance of the body and 
 report that he have dispose of they accord to order . in the 
 tartane 's cabin there be half a demijohn of wine and a loaf of bread in 
 a locker ; also , on the floor , a leather valise contain an officer 's 
 uniform coat and a change of clothing . he have light the lamp and see 
 that the linen be mark " E. Ral . " an officer 's sword on a broad 
 shoulder - belt be also lie on the floor . these thing could not have 
 belong to the old chap with the white hair , who be a big man . " look 
 as if somebody have tumble overboard , " comment Bolt . two of the 
 body look nondescript , but there be no doubt about that fine old 
 fellow be a seaman . 
 
 " by Heavens ! " say Captain Vincent , " he be that ! do you know , Bolt , 
 that he nearly manage to escape we ? another twenty minute would have 
 do it . how many wound have he ? " 
 
 " Three I think , sir . I do not look closely , " say Bolt . 
 
 " I hat the necessity of shoot brave man like dog , " say Captain 
 Vincent . " still , it be the only way ; and there may be something 
 here , " he go on , slap the package with his open palm , " that will 
 justify I in my own eye . you may go now . " 
 
 Captain Vincent do not turn in but only lie down fully dressed on the 
 couch till the officer of the watch , appear at the door , tell he 
 that a ship of the fleet be in sight away to windward . Captain Vincent 
 order the private night signal to be make . when he come on deck the 
 tower shadow of a line - of - battle ship that seem to reach to the 
 very cloud be well within hail and a voice bellow from she through a 
 speaking trumpet : 
 
 " what ship be that ? " 
 
 " his Majesty 's sloop Amelia , " hail back Captain Vincent . " what 
 ship be that , pray ? " 
 
 instead of the usual answer there be a short pause and another voice 
 speak boisterously through the trumpet : 
 
 " be that you , Vincent ? do not   you know the Superb when you see she ? " 
 
 " not in the dark , Keats . how be you ? I be in a hurry to speak the 
 Admiral . " 
 
 " the fleet be lie by , " come the voice now with painstaking 
 distinctness across the murmur , whisper and splash of the black lane 
 of water divide the two ship . " the Admiral bear S.S.E. if you 
 stretch on till daylight as you be , you will fetch he on the other 
 tack in time for breakfast on board the victory . be anything up ? " 
 
 at every slight roll the sail of the Amelia , becalm by the bulk of 
 the seventy - four , flap gently against the mast . 
 
 " not much , " hail Captain Vincent . " I make a prize . " 
 
 " have you be in action ? " come the swift inquiry . 
 
 " no , no . piece of luck . " 
 
 " where be your prize ? " roar the speak trumpet with interest . 
 
 " in my desk , " roar Captain Vincent in reply . . . . " Enemy 
 dispatch . . . . I say , Keats , fill on your ship . fill on she , I say , 
 or you will be fall on board of I . " he stamp his foot 
 impatiently . " clap some hand at once on the tow - line and run that 
 tartane close under our stern , " he call to the officer of the watch , 
 " or else the old Superb will walk over she without ever know 
 anything about it . " 
 
 when Captain Vincent present himself on board the victory it be too 
 late for he to be invite to share the Admiral 's breakfast . he be tell 
 that Lord Nelson have not be see on deck yet , that morning ; and 
 presently word come that he wish to see Captain Vincent at once in his 
 cabin . be introduce , the captain of the Amelia , in undress 
 uniform , with a sword by his side and his hat under his arm , be 
 receive kindly , make his bow and with a few word of explanation lay 
 the packet on the big round table at which sit a silent secretary in 
 black clothe , who have be obviously write a letter from his 
 lordship 's dictation . the Admiral have be walk up and down , and 
 after he have greet Captain Vincent he resume his pacing of a nervous 
 man . his empty sleeve have not yet be pin on his breast and swing 
 slightly every time he turn in his walk . his thin lock fall lank 
 against the pale cheek , and the whole face in repose have an expression 
 of suffer with which the fire of his one eye present a startling 
 contrast . he stop short and exclaim while Captain Vincent tower 
 over he in a respectful attitude : 
 
 " a tartane ! capture on board a tartane ! how on earth do you pitch 
 upon that one out of the hundred you must see every month ? " 
 
 " I must confess that I get hold accidentally of some curious 
 information , " say Captain Vincent . " it be all a piece of luck . " 
 
 while the secretary be rip open with a pen - knife the cover of the 
 dispatch Lord Nelson take Captain Vincent out into the stern gallery . 
 the quiet and sunshiny morning have the add charm of a cool , light 
 breeze ; and the victory , under her three topsail and low staysail , 
 be move slowly to the southward in the midst of the scatter fleet 
 carry for the most part the same sail as the Admiral . only far away 
 two or three ship could be see cover with canvas try to close 
 with the flag . Captain Vincent note with satisfaction that the first 
 lieutenant of the Amelia have be oblige to brace by his afteryard 
 in order not to overrun the Admiral 's quarter . 
 
 " why ! " exclaim Lord Nelson suddenly , after look at the sloop for 
 a moment , " you have that tartane in tow ! " 
 
 " I think that your lordship would perhaps like to see a 40 - ton lateen 
 craft which have lead such a chase to , I daresay , the fast sloop in his 
 Majesty 's service . " 
 
 " how do it all begin ? " ask the Admiral , continue to look at the 
  Amelia . 
 
 " as I have already hint to your lordship , certain information come in 
 my way , " begin Captain Vincent , who do not think it necessary to 
 enlarge upon that part of the story . " this tartane , which be not very 
 different to look at from the other tartane along the coast between 
 Cette and Genoa , have start from a cove on the Giens Peninsula . an old 
 man with a white head of hair be entrust with the service and really 
 they could have find nobody well . he come round Cape Esterel 
 intend to pass through the Hyres roadstead . apparently he do not 
 expect to find the Amelia in his way . and it be there that he make 
 his only mistake . if he have keep on his course I would probably have 
 take no more notice of he than of two other craft that be in sight 
 then . but he act suspiciously by haul up for the battery on 
 Porquerolles . this manuvre in connection with the information of which I 
 speak decide I to overhaul he and see what he have on board . " Captain 
 Vincent then relate concisely the episode of the chase . " I assure 
 your lordship that I never give an order with great reluctance than to 
 open musketry fire on that craft ; but the old man have give such proof 
 of his seamanship and determination that there be nothing else for it . 
 why ! at the very moment he have the Amelia alongside of he he still 
 make a most clever attempt to prolong the chase . there be only a few 
 minute of daylight leave , and in the darkness we might very well have 
 lose he . consider that they all could have save their life simply 
 by strike their sail on deck , I can not refuse they my admiration and 
 especially to the white - haired man . " 
 
 the Admiral , who have be all the time look absently at the Amelia 
 keep her station with the tartane in tow , say : 
 
 " you have a very smart little ship , Vincent . very fit for the work I 
 have give you to do . French build , be not   she ? " 
 
 " yes , my lord . they be great shipbuilder . " 
 
 " you do not   seem to hate the French , Vincent , " say the Admiral , 
 smile faintly . 
 
 " not that kind , my lord , " say Captain Vincent with a bow . " I det 
 their political principle and the character of their public man , but 
 your lordship will admit that for courage and determination we could not 
 have find worthy adversary anywhere on this globe . " 
 
 " I never say that they be to be despise , " say Lord Nelson . 
 " Resource , courage , yes . . . . if that Toulon fleet give I the slip , 
 all our squadron from Gibraltar to Brest will be in jeopardy . why do not  
 they come out and be do with it ? do not   I keep far enough out of their 
 way ? " he cry . 
 
 Vincent remark the nervous agitation of the frail figure with a 
 concern augment by a fit of coughing which come on the Admiral . he be 
 quite alarmed by its violence . he watch the Commander - in - chief in the 
 Mediterranean choke and gasp so helplessly that he feel compel 
 to turn his eye away from the painful spectacle ; but he notice also 
 how quickly Lord Nelson recover from the subsequent exhaustion . 
 
 " this be anxious work , Vincent , " he say . " it be kill I . I aspire 
 to repose somewhere in the country , in the midst of field , out of reach 
 of the sea and the Admiralty and dispatch and order , and 
 responsibility too . I have be just finish a letter to tell they at 
 home I have hardly enough breath in my body to carry I on from day to 
 day . . . . but I be like that white - headed man you admire so much , 
 Vincent , " he pursue , with a weary smile , " I will stick to my task 
 till perhaps some shot from the enemy put an end to everything . . . . 
 let we see what there may be in those paper you have bring on board . " 
 
 the secretary in the cabin have arrange they in separate pile . 
 
 " what be it all about ? " ask the Admiral , begin again to pace 
 restlessly up and down the cabin . 
 
 " at the first glance the most important , my lord , be the order for 
 marine authority in Corsica and Naples to make certain disposition in 
 view of an expedition to Egypt . " 
 
 " I always think so , " say the Admiral , his eye gleam at the 
 attentive countenance of Captain Vincent . " this be a smart piece of 
 work on your part , Vincent . I can do no well than send you back to 
 your station . yes . . . Egypt . . . the Easts . . . . everything point 
 that way , " he soliloquize under Vincent 's eye while the secretary , 
 pick up the paper with care , rise quietly and go out to have they 
 translate and to make an abstract for the Admiral . 
 
 " and , yet who know ! " exclaim Lord Nelson , stand still for a 
 moment . " but the blame or the glory must be mine alone . I will seek 
 counsel from no man . " Captain Vincent feel himself forget , 
 invisible , less than a shadow in the presence of a nature capable of 
 such vehement feeling . " how long can he last ? " he ask himself with 
 sincere concern . 
 
 the Admiral , however , soon remember his presence , and at the end of 
 another ten minute Captain Vincent leave the victory , feel , like 
 all officer who approach Lord Nelson , that he have be speak with 
 a personal friend ; and with a renew devotion for the great 
 sea - officer 's soul dwell in the frail body of the Commander - in - chief 
 of his Majesty 's ship in the Mediterranean . while he be be pull 
 back to his ship a general signal go up in the victory for the fleet 
 to form line , as convenient , ahead and astern of the Admiral ; follow 
 by another to the Amelia to part company . Vincent accordingly give his 
 order to make sail , and , direct the master to shape a course for 
 Cape Cici , go down into his cabin . he have be up nearly the whole of 
 the last three night and he want to get a little sleep . his 
 slurnber , however , be short and disturbed . early in the afternoon he 
 find himself broad awake and review in his mind the event of the 
 day before . the order to shoot three brave man in cold blood , terribly 
 distasteful at the time , be lie heavily on he . perhaps he have be 
 impress by Peyrol 's white head , his obstinacy to escape he , the 
 determination show to the very last minute , by something in the whole 
 episode that suggest a more than common devotion to duty and a spirit 
 of dare defiance . with his robust health , simple good nature , and 
 sanguine temperament touch with a little irony , Captain Vincent be a 
 man of generous feeling and of easily move sympathy . 
 
 " yet , " he reflect , " they have be ask for it . there could be 
 only one end to that affair . but the fact remain that they be 
 defenceless and unarmed and particularly harmless - look , and at the 
 same time as brave as any . that old chap now . . . . "   he wonder how 
 much of exact truth there be in symon   tale of adventure . he conclude 
 that the fact must have be true but that symon ' interpretation of 
 they make it extraordinarily difficult to discover what really there be 
 under all that . that craft certainly be fit for blockade run . Lord 
 Nelson have be please . Captain Vincent go on deck with the kindliest 
 feeling towards all man , alive and dead . 
 
 the afternoon have turn out very fine . the British Fleet be just out 
 of sight with the exception of one or two straggler , under a press of 
 canvas . a light breeze in which only the Amelia could travel at five 
 knot , hardly ruffle the profundity of the blue water bask in the 
 warm tenderness of the cloudless sky . to south and west the horizon be 
 empty except for two speck very far apart , of which one shine white 
 like a bit of silver and the other appear black like a drop of ink . 
 Captain Vincent , with his purpose firm in his mind , feel at peace with 
 himself . as he be easily accessible to his officer his first 
 lieutenant venture a question to which Captain Vincent reply : 
 
 " he look very thin and wear out , but I do not   think he be as ill as he 
 think he be . I be sure you all would like to know that his lordship be 
 pleased with our yesterday 's work - those paper be of some importance 
 you know - and generally with the Amelia . it be a queer chase , be not  
 it ? " he go on . " that tartane be clearly and unmistakably run 
 away from we . but she never have a chance against the Amelia . " 
 
 during the latter part of that speech the first lieutenant glance 
 astern as if ask himself how long Captain Vincent propose to drag 
 that tartane behind the Amelia . the two keeper in she wonder also 
 as to when they would be permit to get back on board their ship . 
 symon , who be one of they , declare that he be sick and tired of 
 steer the blame thing . moreover , the company on board make he 
 uncomfortable ; for symon be aware that in pursuance of Captain 
 Vincent 's order , Mr. Bolt have have the three dead frenchman carry into 
 the cuddy which he afterwards secure with an enormous padlock that , 
 apparently , belong to it , and have take the key on board the Amelia . 
 as to one of they , symon ' unforgive verdict be that it would have 
 serve he right to be throw ashore for crow to peck his eye out . and 
 anyhow , he could not understand why he should have be turn into the 
 coxswain of a float hearse , and be damn to it . . . . he grumble 
 interminably . 
 
 just about sunset , which be the time of burial at sea , the Amelia be 
 hove to and , the rope be man , the tartane be bring alongside 
 and her two keeper order on board their ship . Captain Vincent , 
 lean over with his elbow on the rail , seem lose in thought . at 
 last the first lieutenant speak . 
 
 " what be we go to do with that tartane , sir ? our man be on board . " 
 
 " we be go to sink she by gunfire , " declare Captain Vincent 
 suddenly . " his ship make a very good coffin for a seaman , and those 
 man deserve well than to be throw overboard to roll on the wave . let 
 they rest quietly at the bottom of the sea in the craft to which they 
 have stick so well . " 
 
 the lieutenant , make no reply , wait for some more positive order . 
 every eye on the ship be turn on the captain . but Captain Vincent 
 say nothing and seem unable or unwilling to give it yet . he be 
 feel vaguely , that in all his good intention there be something 
 want . 
 
 " ah ! Mr. Bolt , " he say , catch sight of the master' - mate in the 
 waist . " do they have a flag on board that craft ? " 
 
 " I think she have a tiny bit of ensign when the chase begin , sir , but it 
 must have blow away . it be not at the end of her mainyard now . " he 
 look over the side . " the halliard be rove , though , " he add . 
 
 " we must have a french ensign somewhere on board , " say Captain Vincent . 
 
 " certainly , sir , " strike in the master , who be listen . 
 
 " well , Mr. Bolt , " say Captain Vincent , " you have have most to do with 
 all this . take a few man with you , bend the french ensign on the 
 halliard and sway his mainyard to the masthead . " he smile at all the 
 face turn towards he . " after all they never surrender and , by 
 heaven , gentleman , we will let they go down with their colour fly . " 
 
 a profound but not disapprove silence reign over the deck of the 
 ship while Mr. Bolt with three or four hand be busy execute the 
 order . then suddenly above the topgallant rail of the Amelia appear 
 the upper curve of a lateen yard with the tricolour drooping from the 
 point . a subdued murmur from all hand greet this apparition . at the 
 same time Captain Vincent order the line hold the tartane alongside 
 to be cast off and the mainyard of the Amelia to be swing round . the 
 sloop shoot ahead of her prize leave her stationary on the sea , then 
 put the helm up , run back abreast of she on the other side . the port 
 bow - gun be order to fire a round , aim well forward . that shot , 
 however , go just over , take the foremast out of the tartane . the 
 next be more successful , strike the little hull between wind and 
 water , and go out well under water on the other side . a third be 
 fire , as the man say , just for luck , and that too take effect , a 
 splinter hole appear at the bow . after that the gun be secure 
 and the Amelia , with no brace be touch , be bring to her course 
 towards Cape Cici . all hand on board of she with their back to the 
 sunset sky , clear like a pale topaz above the hard blue gem of the sea , 
 watch the tartane give a sudden dip , follow by a slow , unchecked 
 dive . at last the tricolour flag alone remain visible for a tense and 
 interminable moment , pathetic and lonely , in the centre of a brimful 
 horizon . all at once it vanish , like a flame blow upon , bring to 
 the beholder the sense of have be leave face to face with an 
 immense , suddenly create solitude . on the deck of the Amelia a low 
 murmur die out . 
 
             
 
 when Lieutenant Ral sail away with the Toulon fleet on the great 
 strategical cruise which be to end in the battle of Trafalgar , Madame 
 Ral return with her aunt to her hereditary house at Escampobar . she 
 have only spend a few week in town where she be not much see in 
 public . the lieutenant and his wife live in a little house near the 
 western gate , and the lieutenant 's official position , though he be 
 employ on the staff to the last , be not sufficiently prominent to 
 make her absence from official ceremony at all remarkable . but this 
 marriage be an object of mild interest in naval circle . those - mostly 
 man - who have see Madame Ral at home , tell story of her dazzling 
 complexion , of her magnificent black eye , of her personal and 
 attractive strangeness , and of the arlesian costume she insist on 
 wear , even after her marriage to an officer of the navy , be 
 herself spring from farmer stock . it be also say that her father and 
 mother have fall victim in the massacre of Toulon after the 
 evacuation of the town ; but all those story vary in detail and be 
 on the whole very vague . whenever she go abroad Madame Ral be 
 attend by her aunt who arouse almost as much curiosity as herself : a 
 magnificent old woman with upright carriage and an austere , brown , 
 wrinkle face show sign of past beauty . Catherine be also see 
 alone in the street where , as a matter of fact , people turn round to 
 look after the thin and dignified figure , remarkable amongst the 
 passer - by , whom she , herself , do not seem to see . about her escape 
 from the massacre most wonderful tale be tell , and she acquire the 
 reputation of a heroine . Arlette 's aunt be know to frequent the 
 church , which be all open to the faithful now , carry even into 
 the house of God her sibylline aspect of a prophetess and her austere 
 manner . it be not at the service that she be see most . People would 
 see her oftener in an empty nave , stand slim and as straight as an 
 arrow in the shade of a mighty pillar as if make a call on the Creator 
 of all thing with whom she have make her peace generously , and now would 
 petition only for pardon and reconciliation with her niece Arlette . for 
 Catherine for a long time remain uncertain of the future . she do not 
 get rid of her involuntary awe of her niece as a select object of 
 God 's wrath , until towards the end of her life . there be also another 
 soul for which she be concern . the pursuit of the tartane by the 
  Amelia have be observe from various point of the island that close 
 the roadstead of Hyres , and the english ship have be see from the Fort 
 de la Vigie open fire on her chase . the result , though the two 
 vessel soon run out of sight , could not be a matter of doubt . there be 
 also the story tell by a coaster that get into Frjus , of a tartane be 
 fire on by a square - rig man - of - war ; but that apparently be the next 
 day . all these rumour point one way and be the foundation of the 
 report make by Lieutenant Ral to the Toulon Admiralty . that Peyrol go 
 out to sea in his tartane and be never see again , be of course an 
 incontrovertible fact . 
 
 the day before the two woman be to go back to Escampobar , Catherine 
 approach a priest in the church of Ste Marie Majeure , a little 
 unshaven fat man with a watery eye , in order to arrange for some mass 
 to be say for the dead . 
 
 " but for whose soul be we to pray ? " mumble the priest in a wheezy 
 low tone . 
 
 " pray for the soul of Jean , " say Catherine . " yes , Jean . there be no 
 other name . " 
 
 Lieutenant Ral , wound at Trafalgar , but escape capture , retire with 
 the rank of Capitaine de Frgate and vanish from the eye of the naval 
 world in Toulon and indeed from the world altogether . whatever sign 
 bring he back to Escampobar on that momentous night , be not mean to 
 call he to his death but to a quiet and retired life , obscure in a 
 sense but not devoid of dignity . in the course of year he become the 
 Mayor of the Commune in that very same little village which have look 
 on Escampobar as the abode of iniquity , the sojourn of blood - drinker 
 and of wicked woman . 
 
 one of the early excitement break the monotony of the Escampobar 
 life be the discovery at the bottom of the well , one dry year when the 
 water get very low , of some considerable obstruction . after a lot of 
 trouble in get it up , this obstruction turn out to be a garment 
 make of sail - cloth , which have armhole and three horn button in front , 
 and look like a waistcoat ; but it be line , positively quilt , with 
 a surprising quantity of gold piece of various age , coinage and 
 nationality . nobody but Peyrol could have put it there . Catherine be 
 able to give the exact date ; because she remember see he do 
 something at the well on the very morning before he go out to sea with 
 Michel , carry off Scevola . Captain Ral could guess easily the origin 
 of that treasure , and he decide with his wife 's approval to give it up 
 to the Government as the hoard of a man who have die intestate with no 
 discoverable relation , and whose very name have be a matter of 
 uncertainty , even to himself . after that event the uncertain name of 
 Peyrol find itself oftener and oftener on Monsieur and Madame Ral 's 
 lip , on which before it be but seldom hear ; though the recollection 
 of his white - head , quiet , irresistible personality haunt every 
 corner of the Escampobar field . from that time they talk of he 
 openly , as though he have come back to live again amongst they . 
 
 many year afterwards , one fine evening , Monsieur and Madame Ral sit 
 on the bench outside the salle   the house have not be alter at all 
 outside except that it be now keep whitewash , begin to talk of that 
 episode and of the man who , come from the sea , have cross their 
 life to disappear at sea again . 
 
 " how do he get all that lot of gold ? " wonder Madame Ral innocently . 
 " he could not possibly want it ; and , Eugne , why should he have put it 
 down there ? " 
 
 " that , ma chre amie , " say Ral , " be not an easy question to answer . 
 man and woman be not so simple as they seem . even you , fermire   he use 
 to give his wife that name jocularly , sometimes , be not so simple as 
 some people would take you to be . I think that if Peyrol be here he 
 could not perhaps answer your question himself . " 
 
 and they go on , remind each other in short phrase separate by 
 long silence , of his peculiarity of person and behaviour , when above 
 the slope lead down to Madrague , there appear first , the pointed 
 ear , and then the whole body of a very diminutive donkey of a light 
 grey colour with dark point . two piece of wood , strangely shape , 
 project on each side of his body as far as his head , like very long 
 shaft of a cart . but the donkey drag no cart after he . he be 
 carry on his back on a small pack saddle the torso of a man who do 
 not seem to have any leg . the little animal , beautifully groom and 
 with an intelligent and even impudent physiognomy , stop in front of 
 Monsieur and Madame Ral . the man , balance himself cleverly on the pack 
 saddle with his wither leg cross in front of he , slip off , 
 disengage his crutch from each side of the donkey smartly , prop 
 himself on they , and with his open palm give the animal a resounding 
 thwack which send it trot into the yard . the cripple of the Madrague 
 in his quality of Peyrol 's friend   for the rover have often talk of he 
 both to the woman and to Lieutenant Ral with great 
 appreciation - " C'est un homme , a "   have become a member of the 
 Escampobar community . his employment be to run about the country on 
 errand , most unfit , one would think , for a man without leg . but the 
 donkey do all the walking while the cripple supply the sharp wit and 
 an unfailing memory . the poor fellow , snatch off his hat and hold 
 it with one hand alongside his right crutch , approach to render his 
 account of the day in the simple word : " everything have be do as 
 you order , madame " ; then linger , a privileged servant , familiar but 
 respectful , attractive with his soft eye , long face , and his pained smile . 
 
 " we be just talk of Peyrol , " remark Captain Ral . 
 
 " ah , one could talk a long time of he , " say the cripple . " he tell 
 I once that if I have be complete - with leg like everybody else , I 
 suppose he mean - I would have make a good comrade away there in the 
 distant sea . he have a great heart . " 
 
 " yes , " murmur Madame Ral thoughtfully . then turn to her husband , 
 she ask : " what sort of man be he really , Eugne ? " Captain Ral 
 remain silent . " do you ever ask yourself that question ? " she insist . 
 
 " yes , " say Ral . " but the only certain thing we can say of he be 
 that he be not a bad frenchman . " 
 
 " everything be in that , " murmur the cripple , with fervent conviction 
 in the silence that fall upon Ral 's word and Arlette 's faint sigh of 
 memory . 
 
 the blue level of the Mediterranean , the charmer and the deceiver of 
 audacious man , keep the secret of its fascination - hug to its calm 
 breast the victim of all the war , calamity and tempest of its 
 history , under the marvellous purity of the sunset sky . a few rosy 
 cloud float high up over the Esterel range . the breath of the evening 
 breeze come to cool the heated rock of Escampobar ; and the mulberry 
 tree , the only big tree on the head of the peninsula , stand like a 
 sentinel at the gate of the yard , sigh faintly in a shudder of all its 
 leaf , as if regret the Brother of the Coast , the man of dark 
 deed , but of large heart , who often at noonday would lie down to sleep 
 under its shade . 
  
