the sorrows of SATAN 

 or 

 the strange experience of one 
 GEOFFREY TEMPEST , MILLIONAIRE 


 a romance 


 BY MARIE CORELLI 
 I 


 do you know what it be to be poor ? not poor with the arrogant poverty 
 complain of by certain people who have five or six thousand a year to 
 live upon , and who yet swear they can hardly manage to make both end 
 meet , but really poor , - downright , cruelly , hideously poor , with a 
 poverty that be graceless , sordid and miserable ? poverty that compel 
 you to dress in your one suit of clothe till it be wear 
 threadbare , - that deny you clean linen on account of the ruinous 
 charge of washerwoman , - that rob you of your own self - respect , and 
 cause you to slink along the street vaguely abash , instead of 
 walk erect among your fellow - man in independent ease , - this be the 
 sort of poverty I mean . this be the grind curse that keep down noble 
 aspiration under a load of ignoble care ; this be the moral cancer that 
 eat into the heart of an otherwise well - intentione human creature and 
 make he envious and malignant , and incline to the use of dynamite . 
 when he see the fat idle woman of society pass by in her luxurious 
 carriage , loll back lazily , her face mottle with the purple and red 
 sign of superfluous eating , - when he observe the brainless and sensual 
 man of fashion smoking and dawdle away the hour in the Park , as if 
 all the world and its million of honest hard worker be create 
 solely for the casual diversion of the so - call ' upper ' class , - then 
 the good blood in he turn to gall , and his suffer spirit rise in 
 fierce rebellion , cry out - " why in God 's name , should this injustice 
 be ? why should a worthless lounger have his pocket full of gold by mere 
 chance and heritage , while I , toil wearily from morn till midnight , 
 can scarce afford myself a satisfying meal ? " 

 why indeed ! why should the wicked flourish like a green bay - tree ? I have 
 often think about it . now however I believe I could help to solve the 
 problem out of my own personal experience . but ... such an experience ! 
 who will credit it ? who will believe that anything so strange and 
 terrific ever chance to the lot of a mortal man ? no one . yet it be 
 true ; - truer than much so - call truth . moreover I know that many man 
 be live through many such incident as have occur to I , under 
 precisely the same influence , conscious perhaps at time , that they be 
 in the tangle of sin , but too weak of will to break the net in which 
 they have become voluntarily imprison . will they be teach , I wonder , 
 the lesson I have learn ? in the same bitter school , under the same 
 formidable taskmaster ? will they realize as I have be force to 
 do , - aye , to the very fibre of my intellectual perception , - the vast , 
 individual , active mind , which behind all matter , work unceasingly , 
 though silently , a very eternal and positive God ? if so , then dark 
 problem will become clear to they , and what seem injustice in the 
 world will prove pure equity ! but I do not write with any hope of either 
 persuade or enlighten my fellow - man . I know their obstinacy too 
 well ; - I can gauge it by my own . my proud belief in myself be , at one 
 time , not to be outdo by any human unit on the face of the globe . and 
 I be aware that other be in similar case . I merely intend to relate 
 the various incident of my career in due order exactly as they 
 happen , - leave to more confident head the business of propound 
 and answer the riddle of human existence as good they may . 

 during a certain bitter winter , long remember for its arctic severity , 
 when a great wave of intense cold spread freeze influence not alone 
 over the happy isle of Britain , but throughout all Europe , I , Geoffrey 
 Tempest , be alone in London and well - nigh starving . now a starve man 
 seldom get the sympathy he merit , - so few can be persuade to believe 
 in he . worthy folk who have just feed to repletion be the most 
 incredulous , some of they be even move to smile when tell of 
 exist hungry people , much as if these be occasional jest invent 
 for after - dinner amusement . or , with that irritate vagueness of 
 attention which characterize fashionable folk to such an extent that 
 when ask a question they neither wait for the answer nor understand 
 it when give , the well - din group , hear of some one starve to 
 death , will idly murmur ' how dreadful ! ' and at once turn to the 
 discussion of the late ' fad ' for kill time , ere it take to kill 
 they with sheer ennui . the pronounced fact of be hungry sound 
 coarse and common , and be not a topic for polite society , which always 
 eat more than sufficient for its need . at the period I be speak of 
 however , I , who have since be one of the most envy of man , know the 
 cruel meaning of the word hunger , too well , - the gnawing pain , the sick 
 faintness , the deadly stupor , the insatiable animal craving for mere 
 food , all of which sensation be frightful enough to those who be , 
 unhappily , daily inure to they , but which when they afflict one who have 
 be tenderly rear and bring up to consider himself a 
 ' gentleman , ' - God save the mark ! be perhaps still more painful to bear . 
 and I feel that I have not deserve to suffer the wretchedness in which I 
 find myself . I have work hard . from the time my father die , leave 
 I to discover that every penny of the fortune I imagine he possess 
 be due to swarm creditor , and that nothing of all our house and 
 estate be leave to I except a jewel miniature of my mother who have 
 lose her own life in give I birth , - from that time I say , I have put 
 my shoulder to the wheel and toil late and early . I have turn my 
 University education to the only use for which it or I seem 
 fit , - literature . I have seek for employment on almost every journal 
 in London , - refuse by many , take on trial by some , but get steady 
 pay from none . whoever seek to live by brain and pen alone be , at the 
 beginning of such a career , treat as a sort of social pariah . nobody 
 want he , - everybody despise he . his effort be deride , his 
 manuscript be fling back to he unread , and he be less cared for than 
 the condemn murderer in gaol . the murderer be at least feed and 
 clothe , - a worthy clergyman visit he , and his gaoler will 
 occasionally condescend to play card with he . but a man gift with 
 original thought and the power of express they , appear to be 
 regard by everyone in authority as much bad than the bad criminal , 
 and all the ' jack - in - office ' unite to kick he to death if they can . I 
 take both kick and blow in sullen silence and live on , - not for the 
 love of life , but simply because I scorn the cowardice of 
 self - destruction . I be young enough not to part with hope too 
 easily ; - the vague idea I have that my turn would come , - that the 
 ever - circle wheel of Fortune would perchance lift I up some day as it 
 now crush I down , keep I just wearily capable of continue 
 existence , - though it be merely a continuance and no more . for about 
 six month I get some reviewing work on a well - know literary journal . 
 thirty novel a week be send to I to ' criticise , ' - I make a habit of 
 glance hastily at about eight or ten of they , and write one column 
 of rattle abuse concern these thus casually select , - the 
 remainder be never notice at all . I find that this mode of action 
 be consider ' smart , ' and I manage for a time to please my editor who 
 pay I the munificent sum of fifteen shilling for my weekly labour . 
 but on one fatal occasion I happen to change my tactic and warmly 
 praise a work which my own conscience tell I be both original and 
 excellent . the author of it happen to be an old enemy of the 
 proprietor of the journal on which I be employ ; - my eulogistic review 
 of the hat individual , unfortunately for I , appear , with the result 
 that private spite outweigh public justice , and I be immediately 
 dismiss . 

 after this I drag on in a sufficiently miserable way , do ' hack 
 work ' for the daily , and live on promise that never become 
 reality , till , as I have say , in the early January of the bitter 
 winter allude to , I find myself literally penniless and face to face 
 with starvation , owe a month 's rent besides for the poor lodging I 
 occupy in a back street not far from the British Museum . I have be 
 out all day trudge from one newspaper office to another , seek for 
 work and find none . every available post be fill . I have also 
 try , unsuccessfully , to dispose of a manuscript of my own , - a work of 
 fiction which I know have some merit , but which all the ' reader ' in the 
 publishing office appear to find exceptionally worthless . these 
 ' reader ' I learn , be most of they novelist themselves , who read 
 other people 's production in their spare moment and pass judgment on 
 they . I have always fail to see the justice of this arrangement ; to I 
 it seem merely the way to foster mediocrity and suppress originality . 
 common sense point out the fact that the novelist ' reader ' who have a 
 place to maintain for himself in literature would naturally rather 
 encourage work that be likely to prove ephemeral , than that which might 
 possibly take a high footing than his own . be this as it may , and 
 however good or bad the system , it be entirely prejudicial to I and my 
 literary offspring . the last publisher I try be a kindly man who 
 look at my shabby clothe and gaunt face with some commiseration . 

 " I be sorry , " say he , " very sorry , but my reader be quite unanimous . 
 from what I can learn , it seem to I you have be too earnest . and 
 also , rather sarcastic in certain stricture against society . my dear 
 fellow , that will not   do . never blame society , - it buy book ! now if you 
 could write a smart love - story , slightly risqué , - even a little more 
 than risqué for that matter ; that be the sort of thing that suit the 
 present age . " 

 " pardon I , " I interpose somewhat wearily - " but be you sure you judge 
 the public taste correctly ? " 

 he smile a bland smile of indulgent amusement at what he no doubt 
 consider my ignorance in put such a query . 

 " of course I be sure , " - he reply - " it be my business to know the 
 public taste as thoroughly as I know my own pocket . understand I , - I 
 do not   suggest that you should write a book on any positively indecent 
 subject , - that can be safely leave to the ' New ' woman , " - and he 
 laugh , - " but I assure you high - class fiction do not   sell . the critic 
 do not   like it , to begin with . what go down with they and with the 
 public be a bit of sensational realism tell in terse newspaper English . 
 Literary English , - Addisonian English , - be a mistake . " 

 " and I be also a mistake I think , " I say with a forced smile - " at any 
 rate if what you say be true , I must lay down the pen and try another 
 trade . I be old - fashioned enough to consider literature as the high 
 of all profession , and I would rather not join in with those who 
 voluntarily degrade it . " 

 he give I a quick side - glance of mingled incredulity and depreciation . 

 " well , well ! " he finally observe - " you be a little quixotic . that will 
 wear off . will you come on to my club and dine with I ? " 

 I refuse this invitation promptly . I know the man see and recognise my 
 wretched plight , - and pride - false pride if you will - rise up to my 
 rescue . I bid he a hurried good - day , and start back to my lodging , 
 carry my reject manuscript with I . arrive there , my landlady meet 
 I as I be about to ascend the stair , and ask I whether I would 
 ' kindly settle account ' the next day . she speak civilly enough , poor 
 soul , and not without a certain compassionate hesitation in her manner . 
 her evident pity for I gall my spirit as much as the publisher 's 
 offer of a dinner have wound my pride , - and with a perfectly audacious 
 air of certainty I at once promise she the money at the time she 
 herself appoint , though I have not the least idea where or how I should 
 get the require sum . once past she , and shut in my own room , I fling my 
 useless manuscript on the floor and myself into a chair , and - swore . it 
 refresh I to swear , and it seem natural , - for though temporarily 
 weaken by lack of food , I be not yet so weak as to shed tear , - and a 
 fierce formidable oath be to I the same sort of physical relief which 
 I imagine a fit of weeping may be to an excitable woman . just as I could 
 not shed tear , so be I incapable of apostrophize God in my despair . 
 to speak frankly , I do not believe in any God - then . I be to myself 
 an all - sufficing mortal , scorn the time - wear superstition of 
 so - call religion . of course I have be bring up in the christian 
 faith ; but that creed have become bad than useless to I since I have 
 intellectually realize the utter inefficiency of christian minister to 
 deal with difficult life - problem . spiritually I be adrift in 
 chaos , - mentally I be hinder both in thought and achievement , - bodily , 
 I be reduce to want . my case be desperate , - I myself be desperate . 
 it be a moment when if ever good and evil angel play a game of chance 
 for a man 's soul , they be surely throw the dice on the last wager 
 for mine . and yet , with it all , I feel I have do my good . I be drive 
 into a corner by my fellow - man who grudge I space to live in , but I 
 have fight against it . I have work honestly and patiently ; - all to no 
 purpose . I know of rogue who gain plenty of money ; and of knave who 
 be amass large fortune . their prosperity appear to prove that 
 honesty after all be not the good policy . what should I do then ? how 
 should I begin the jesuitical business of commit evil that good , 
 personal good , might come of it ? so I think , dully , if such stray 
 half - stupefy fancy as I be capable of , deserve the name of thought . 

 the night be bitter cold . my hand be numb , and I try to warm 
 they at the oil - lamp my landlady be good enough to still allow I the 
 use of , in spite of delayed cash - payment . as I do so , I notice three 
 letter on the table , - one in a long blue envelope suggestive of either 
 a summon or a return manuscript , - one bear the Melbourne postmark , 
 and the third a thick square missive coronete in red and gold at the 
 back . I turn over all three indifferently , and select the one from 
 Australia , balance it in my hand a moment before open it . I know 
 from whom it come , and idly wonder what news it bring I . some 
 month previously I have write a detailed account of my increase 
 debt and difficulty to an old college chum , who find England too 
 narrow for his ambition have go out to the wide new world on a 
 speculative quest of gold mining . he be get on well , so I 
 understand , and have secure a fairly substantial position ; and I have 
 therefore venture to ask he point - blank for the loan of fifty pound . 
 here , no doubt , be his reply , and I hesitate before break the seal . 

 " of course it will be a refusal , " I say half - aloud , - " however kindly a 
 friend may otherwise be , he soon turn crusty if ask to lend money . he 
 will express many regret , accuse trade and the general bad time and 
 hope I will soon ' tide over . ' I know the sort of thing . well , - after 
 all , why should I expect he to be different to other man ? I have   no claim 
 on he beyond the memory of a few sentimental arm - in - arm day at 
 Oxford . " 

 a sigh escape I in spite of myself , and a mist blur my sight for 
 the moment . again I see the grey tower of peaceful Magdalen , and the 
 fair green tree shade the walk in and around the dear old University 
 town where we , - I and the man whose letter I now hold in my 
 hand , - stroll about together as happy youth , fancy that we be 
 young genius bear to regenerate the world . we be both fond of 
 classic , - we be brimful of Homer and the thought and maxim of all 
 the immortal Greeks and Latins , - and I verily believe , in those 
 imaginative day , we think we have in we such stuff as hero be make 
 of . but our entrance into the social arena soon rob we of our sublime 
 conceit , - we be common work unit , no more , - the grind and prose of 
 daily life put Homer into the background , and we soon discover that 
 society be more interested in the late unsavoury scandal than in the 
 tragedy of Sophocles or the wisdom of Plato . well ! it be no doubt 
 extremely foolish of we to dream that we might help to regenerate a 
 world in which both Plato and Chris appear to have fail , - yet the 
 most harden cynic will scarcely deny that it be pleasant to look back 
 to the day of his youth if he can think that at least then , if only 
 once in his life , he have noble impulse . 

 the lamp burn badly , and I have to re - trim it before I could settle 
 down to read my friend 's letter . next door some - one be play a violin , 
 and play it well . tenderly and yet with a certain amount of brio 
 the note come dance from the bow , and I listen , vaguely pleased . 
 be faint with hunger I be somewhat in a listless state border on 
 stupor , - and the penetrate sweetness of the music appeal to the 
 sensuous and æsthetic part of I , drown for the moment mere animal 
 craving . 

 " there you go ! " I murmur , apostrophize the unseen 
 musician , - " practise away on that friendly fiddle of your , - no doubt 
 for a mere pittance which barely keep you alive . possibly you be some 
 poor wretch in a cheap orchestra , - or you might even be a street - player 
 and be able to live in this neighbourhood of the élite starving , - you 
 can have no hope whatever of be the ' fashion ' and make your bow 
 before Royalty , - or if you have that hope , it be wildly misplaced . play 
 on , my friend , play on ! - the sound you make be very agreeable , and 
 seem to imply that you be happy . I wonder if you be ? - or if , like I , 
 you be go rapidly to the devil ! " 

 the music grow soft and more plaintive , and be now accompany by the 
 rattle of hailstone against the window - pane . a gusty wind whistle 
 under the door and roar down the chimney , - a wind cold as the grasp of 
 death and search as a probe knife . I shiver , - and bend close 
 over the smoky lamp , prepare to read my australian news . as I open 
 the envelope , a bill for fifty pound , payable to I at a well - know 
 London banker 's , fall out upon the table . my heart give a quick bound of 
 mingle relief and gratitude . 

 " why Jack , old fellow , I wrong you ! " I exclaim , - " your heart be in 
 the right place after all . " 

 and profoundly touch by my friend 's ready generosity , I eagerly 
 peruse his letter . it be not very long , and have evidently be write 
 off in haste . 

  Dear Geoff , 

  I be sorry to hear you be down on your luck ; it show what a crop of 
  fool be still flourish in London , when a man of your capability 
  can not gain his proper place in the world of letter , and be 
  fittingly acknowledge . I believe it be all a question of 
  wire - pull , and money be the only thing that will pull the wire . 
  here be the fifty you ask for and welcome , - do not   hurry about pay 
  it back . I be do you a good turn this year by send you a 
  friend , - a real friend , mind you ! - no sham . he bring you a letter 
  of introduction from I , and between ourselves , old man , you can not 
  do well than put yourself and your literary affair entirely in 
  his hand . he know everybody , and be up to all the dodge of 
  editorial management and newspaper clique . he be a great 
  philanthropist besides , - and seem particularly fond of the society 
  of the clergy . rather a queer taste you will say , but his reason for 
  such preference be , as he have explain to I quite frankly , that he 
  be so enormously wealthy that he do not quite know what to do with 
  his money , and the reverend gentleman of the church be generally 
  ready to show he how to spend some of it . he be always glad to know 
  of some quarter where his money and influence   he be very 
  influential   may be useful to other . he have help I out of a very 
  serious hobble , and I owe he a big debt of gratitude . I have   tell he 
  all about you , - what a smart fellow you be , and what a lot dear old 
  Alma Mater think of you , and he have promise to give you a lift 
  up . he can do anything he like ; very naturally , see that the 
  whole world of moral , civilization and the rest be subservient to 
  the power of money , - and his stock of cash appear to be 
  limitless . use he ; he be willing and ready to be use , - and write 
  and let I know how you get on . do not   bother about the fifty till 
  you feel you have tide over the storm . 

  ever yours 
  boffle . 

 I laugh as I read the absurd signature , though my eye be dim with 
 something like tear . ' boffle ' be the nickname give to my friend by 
 several of our college companion , and neither he nor I know how it 
 first arise . but no one except the don ever address he by his proper 
 name , which be John Carrington , - he be simply ' boffle , ' and Boffles 
 he remain even now for all those who have be his intimate . I 
 refolde and put by his letter and the draft for the fifty pound , and 
 with a pass vague wonder as to what manner of man the 
 ' philanthropist ' might be who have more money than he know what to do 
 with , I turn to the consideration of my other two correspondent , 
 relieve to feel that now , whatever happen , I could settle up arrear 
 with my landlady the next day as I have promise . moreover I could order 
 some supper , and have a fire light to cheer my chilly room . before 
 attend to these creature comfort however , I open the long blue 
 envelope that look so like a threat of legal proceeding , and 
 unfold the paper within , star at it amazedly . what be it all 
 about ? the write character dance before my eye , - puzzle and 
 bewilder , I find myself read the thing over and over again without 
 any clear comprehension of it . presently a glimmer of mean flash 
 upon I , startle my sens like an electric shock , ... 
 no - no - ! - impossible ! Fortune never could be so mad as this ! - never so 
 wildly capricious and grotesque of humour ! it be some senseless hoax 
 that be be practise upon I , ... and yet , ... if it be a joke , it 
 be a very elaborate and remarkable one ! weight with the majesty of 
 the law too ! ... upon my word and by all the fantastical freakish 
 destiny that govern human affair , the news seem actually positive 
 and genuine ! 




 II 


 steady my thought with an effort , I read every word of the document 
 over again deliberately , and the stupefaction of my wonder increase . 
 be I go mad , or sicken for a fever ? or could this startling , this 
 stupendous piece of information be really true ? because , - if indeed it 
 be true , ... good heavens ! - I turn giddy to think of it , - and it be 
 only by sheer force of will that I keep myself from swoon with the 
 agitation of such sudden surprise and ecstasy . if it be true - why then 
 the world be mine ! - I be king instead of beggar ; - I be everything I 
 choose to be ! the letter , - the amazing letter , bear the print name of a 
 note firm of London solicitor , and state in measured and precise 
 term that a distant relative of my father 's , of whom I have scarcely 
 hear , except remotely now and then during my boyhood , have die suddenly 
 in South America , leave I his sole heir . 

 " the real and personal estate now amount to something over Five 
 Millions of Pounds Sterling , we should esteem it a favour if you could 
 make it convenient to call upon we any day this week in order that we 
 may go through the necessary formality together . the large bulk of 
 the cash be lodge in the Bank of England , and a considerable amount be 
 place in french government security . we should prefer go into 
 further detail with you personally rather than by letter . trust you 
 will call on we without delay , we be , Sir , yours obediently .... " 

 Five Millions ! I , the starve literary hack , - the friendless , hopeless , 
 almost reckless haunter of low newspaper den , - I , the possessor of 
 " over Five Millions of Pounds Sterling " ! I try to grasp the astounding 
 fact , - for fact it evidently be , - but could not . it seem to I a wild 
 delusion , bear of the dizzy vagueness which lack of food engender in 
 my brain . I star round the room ; - the mean miserable furniture , - the 
 fireless grate , - the dirty lamp , - the low truckle bedstead , - the 
 evidence of penury and want on every side ; - and then , - then the 
 overwhelming contrast between the poverty that environ I and the news 
 I have just receive , strike I as the wild , most ridiculous 
 incongruity I have ever hear of or imagine , - and I give vent to a shout 
 of laughter . 

 " be there ever such a caprice of mad Fortune ! " I cry aloud - " who 
 would have imagine it ! good God ! I ! I , of all man in the world to be 
 suddenly choose out for this luck ! by Heaven ! - if it be all true , I will 
 make society spin round like a top on my hand before I be many month 
 old ! " 

 and I laugh loudly again ; laugh just as I have previously swear , 
 simply by way of relief to my feeling . some one laugh in answer , - a 
 laugh that seem to echo mine . I check myself abruptly , somewhat 
 startle , and listen . rain pour outside , and the wind shriek like 
 a petulant shrew , - the violinist next door be practise a brilliant 
 roulade up and down his instrument , - but there be no other sound than 
 these . yet I could have swear I hear a man 's deep - cheste laughter 
 close behind I where I stand . 

 " it must have be my fancy ; " I murmur , turn the flame of the lamp 
 up higher in order to obtain more light in the room - " I be nervous I 
 suppose , - no wonder ! poor boffle ! - good old chap ! " I continue , 
 remember my friend 's draft for fifty pound , which have seem such a 
 godsend a few minute since - " what a surprise be in store for you ! you 
 shall have your loan back as promptly as you send it , with an extra 
 fifty add by way of interest for your generosity . and as for the new 
 Mæcenas you be send to help I over my difficulty , - well , he may 
 be a very excellent old gentleman , but he will find himself quite out of 
 his element this time . I want neither assistance nor advice nor 
 patronage , - I can buy they all ! Titles , honours , possession , - they be 
 all purchaseable , - love , friendship , position , - they be all for sale in 
 this admirably commercial age and go to the high bidder ! by my 
 soul ! - the wealthy ' philanthropist ' will find it difficult to match I 
 in power ! he will scarcely have more than five million to waste , I 
 warrant ! and now for supper , - I shall have to live on credit till I get 
 some ready cash , - and there be no reason why I should not leave this 
 wretched hole at once , and go to one of the good hotel and swagger it ! " 

 I be about to leave the room on the swift impulse of excitement and 
 joy , when a fresh and violent gust of wind roar down the chimney , 
 bring with it a shower of soot which fall in a black heap on my 
 reject manuscript where it lie forget on the floor , as I have 
 despairingly throw it . I hastily pick it up and shake it free from 
 the noisome dirt , wonder as I do so , what would be its fate 
 now ? - now , when I could afford to publish it myself , and not only 
 publish it but advertise it , and not only advertise it , but ' push ' it , 
 in all the crafty and cautious way know to the inner circle of 
 ' boom ' ! I smile as I think of the vengeance I would take on all 
 those who have scorn and slight I and my labour , - how they should 
 cower before I ! - how they should fawn at my foot like whipt cur , and 
 whine their fulsome adulation ! every stiff and stubborn neck should bend 
 before I ; - this I resolve upon ; for though money do not always 
 conquer everything , it only fail when it be money apart from brain . 
 brain and money together can move the world , - brain can very 
 frequently do this alone without money , of which serious and prove fact 
 those who have no brain should beware ! 

 full of ambitious thought , I now and then catch wild sound from the 
 violin that be be play next door , - note like sob cry of 
 pain , and anon rippling run like a careless woman 's laughter , - and all 
 at once I remember I have not yet open the third letter address to 
 I , - the one coronete in scarlet and gold , which have remain where it 
 be on the table almost unnoticed till now . I take it up and turn it 
 over with an odd sense of reluctance in my finger , which be slow at 
 the work of tear the thick envelope asunder . draw out an equally 
 thick small sheet of notepaper also coronete , I read the follow 
 line write in an admirably legible , small and picturesque hand . 

  Dear Sir . 

  I be the bearer of a letter of introduction to you from your former 
  college companion Mr John Carrington , now of Melbourne , who have be 
  good enough to thus give I the mean of make the acquaintance of 
  one , who , I understand , be more than exceptionally endow with the 
  gift of literary genius . I shall call upon you this evening between 
  eight and nine o'clock , trust to find you at home and disengage . 
  I enclose my card , and present address , and beg to remain , 

  very faithfully your 
  Lucio Rimânez . 

 the card mention drop on the table as I finish read the note . 
 it bear a small , exquisitely engrave coronet and the word 

  PRINCE LUCIO RIMÂNEZ . 

 while , scribble lightly in pencil underneath be the address ' Grand 
 Hotel . ' 

 I read the brief letter through again , - it be simple enough , - express 
 with clearness and civility . there be nothing remarkable about 
 it , - nothing whatever ; yet it seem to I surcharge with meaning . 
 why , I could not imagine . a curious fascination keep my eye fasten on 
 the characteristic bold handwriting , and make I fancy I should like the 
 man who pen it . how the wind roar ! - and how that violin next door 
 wail like the restless spirit of some forget musician in torment ! 
 my brain swam and my heart ache heavily , - the drip drip of the rain 
 outside sound like the stealthy footfall of some secret spy upon my 
 movement . I grow irritable and nervous , - a foreboding of evil somehow 
 darken the bright consciousness of my sudden good fortune . then an 
 impulse of shame possess I , - shame that this foreign prince , if such 
 he be , with limitless wealth at his back , should be come to visit 
 I , - I , now a millionaire , - in my present wretched lodging . already , 
 before I have touch my rich , I be taint by the miserable vulgarity 
 of seek to pretend I have never be really poor , but only embarrassed 
 by a little temporary difficulty ! if I have have a sixpence about I , 
  which I have not   I should have send a telegram to my approach 
 visitor to put he off . 

 " but in any case , " I say aloud , address myself to the empty room and 
 the storm - echo - " I will not meet he to - night . I will go out and leave 
 no message , - and if he come he will think I have not yet have his 
 letter . I can make an appointment to see he when I be well lodge , 
 and dress more in keeping with my present position , - in the meantime , 
 nothing be easy than to keep out of this would - be benefactor 's way . " 

 as I speak , the flickering lamp give a dismal crackle and go out , 
 leave I in pitch darkness . with an exclamation more strong than 
 reverent , I grope about the room for match , or fail they , for my 
 hat and coat , - and I be still engage in a fruitless and annoying 
 search , when I catch a sound of gallop horse ' hoof come to an 
 abrupt stop in the street below . surround by black gloom , I pause and 
 listen . there be a slight commotion in the basement , - I hear my 
 landlady 's accent attuned to nervous civility , mingle with the 
 mellow tone of a deep masculine voice , - then step , firm and even , 
 ascend the stair to my landing . 

 " the devil be in it ! " I mutter vexedly - " just like my wayward 
 luck ! - here come the very man I mean to avoid ! " 




 III 


 the door open , - and from the dense obscurity enshroud I I could 
 just perceive a tall shadowy figure stand on the threshold . I 
 remember well the curious impression the mere outline of this scarcely 
 discern Form make upon I even then , - suggest at the first glance 
 such a stately majesty of height and bear as at once rivet my 
 attention , - so much so indeed that I scarcely hear my landlady 's 
 introductory word " a gentleman to see you sir , " - word that be 
 quickly interrupt by a murmur of dismay at find the room in total 
 darkness . " well to be sure ! the lamp must have go out ! " she 
 exclaim , - then address the personage she have usher thus far , she 
 add - " I be afraid Mr Tempest be not   in after all , sir , though I 
 certainly see he about half - an - hour ago . if you do not   mind wait here 
 a minute I will fetch a light and see if he have leave any message on his 
 table . " 

 she hurry away , and though I know that of course I ought to speak , a 
 singular and quite inexplicable perversity of humour keep I silent and 
 unwilling to declare my presence . meanwhile the tall stranger advance a 
 pace or two , and a rich voice with a ring of ironical amusement in it 
 call I by my name - 

 " Geoffrey Tempest , be you there ? " 

 why could I not answer ? the strange and most unnatural obstinacy 
 stiffen my tongue , - and , conceal in the gloom of my forlorn literary 
 den I still hold my peace . the majestic figure draw nearer , till in 
 height and breadth it seem to suddenly overshadow I ; and once again 
 the voice call - 

 " Geoffrey Tempest , be you there ? " 

 for very shame 's sake I could hold out no long , - and with a determined 
 effort I break the extraordinary dumb spell that have hold I like a 
 coward in silent hiding , and come forward boldly to confront my visitor . 

 " yes I be here , " I say - " and be here I be ashamed to give you such 
 a welcome as this . you be Prince Rimânez of course ; - I have just read 
 your note which prepare I for your visit , but I be hop that my 
 landlady , find the room in darkness , would conclude I be out , and 
 show you downstairs again . you see I be perfectly frank ! " 

 " you be indeed ! " return the stranger , his deep tone still vibrate 
 with the silvery clang of veil satire - " so frank that I can not fail to 
 understand you . briefly , and without courtesy , you resent my visit this 
 evening and wish I have not come ! " 

 this open declaration of my mood sound so brusque that I make haste to 
 deny it , though I know it to be true . truth , even in trifle , always 
 seem unpleasant ! 

 " pray do not think I so churlish , " - I say - " the fact be , I only open 
 your letter a few minute ago , and before I could make any arrangement 
 to receive you , the lamp go out , with the awkward result that I be 
 force to greet you in this unsociable darkness , which be almost too 
 dense to shake hand in . " 

 " shall we try ? " my visitor enquire , with a sudden softening of accent 
 that give his word a singular charm ; " here be my hand , - if yours have 
 any friendly instinct in it the twain will meet , - quite blindly and 
 without guidance ! " 

 I at once extend my hand , and it be instantly clasp in a warm and 
 somewhat masterful manner . at that moment a light flash on the 
 scene , - my landlady enter , bear what she call ' her good lamp ' 
 alit , and set it on the table . I believe she utter some exclamation of 
 surprise at see I , - she may have say anything or nothing , - I do 
 not hear or heed , so entirely be I amazed and fascinate by the 
 appearance of the man whose long slender hand still hold mine . I be 
 myself an average good height , but he be fully half a head tall than 
 I , if not more than that , - and as I look straightly at he , I think 
 I have never see so much beauty and intellectuality combine in the 
 outward personality of any human being . the finely shaped head denote 
 both power and wisdom , and be nobly poise on such shoulder as might 
 have befit a Hercules , - the countenance be a pure oval , and 
 singularly pale , this complexion intensify the almost fiery 
 brilliancy of the full dark eye , which have in they a curious and 
 wonderfully attractive look of mingle mirth and misery . the mouth be 
 perhaps the most telling feature in this remarkable face , - set in the 
 perfect curve of beauty , it be yet firm , determine , and not too small , 
 thus escape effeminacy , - and I note that in repose it express 
 bitterness , disdain and even cruelty . but with the light of a smile upon 
 it , it signify , or seem to signify , something more subtle than any 
 passion to which we can give a name , and already with the rapidity of a 
 lightning flash , I catch myself wonder what that mystic undeclared 
 something might be . at a glance I comprehend these primary detail of 
 my new acquaintance 's eminently prepossess appearance , and when my 
 hand drop from his close grasp I feel as if I have know he all my 
 life ! and now face to face with he in the bright lamp - light , I 
 remember my actual surrounding , - the bare cold room , the lack of 
 fire , the black soot that sprinkle the nearly carpetless floor , - my own 
 shabby clothe and deplorable aspect , as compare with this 
 regal - look individual , who carry the visible evidence of wealth 
 upon he in the superb russian sable that line and border his long 
 overcoat which he now partially unfastened and throw open with a 
 carelessly imperial air , the while he regard I , smile . 

 " I know I have come at an awkward moment , " he say - " I always do ! it be 
 my peculiar misfortune . well - breed people never intrude where they be 
 not want , - and in this particular I be afraid my manner leave much to 
 be desire . try to forgive I if you can , for the sake of this , " - and he 
 hold out a letter address to I in my friend Carrington 's familiar 
 handwriting . " and permit I to sit down while you read my credential . " 

 he take a chair and seat himself . I observe his handsome face and 
 easy attitude with renew admiration . 

 " no credential be necessary , " I say with all the cordiality I now 
 really feel - " I have already have a letter from Carrington in which he 
 speak of you in the high and most grateful term . but the fact 
 be - - well ! - really , prince , you must excuse I if I seem confused or 
 astonish ... I have expect to see quite an old man ... " 

 and I break off , somewhat embarrassed by the keen glance of the 
 brilliant eye that meet mine so fixedly . 

 " no one be old , my dear sir , nowadays ! " he declare lightly - " even the 
 grandmother and grandfather be frisky at fifty than they be at 
 fifteen . one do not talk of age at all now in polite society , - it be 
 ill - breed , even coarse . indecent thing be unmentionable - age have become 
 an indecent thing . it be therefore avoid in conversation . you expect 
 to see an old man you say ? well , you be not disappointed - I be old . 
 in fact you have no idea how very old I be ! " 

 I laugh at this piece of absurdity . 

 " why , you be young than I , " - I say - " or if not , you look it . " 

 " ah , my look belie I ! " he return gaily - " I be like several of the 
 most noted fashionable beauty , - much riper than I seem . but come , read 
 the introductory missive I have bring you , - I shall not be satisfy 
 till you do . " 

 thus request , and wish to prove myself as courteous as I have 
 hitherto be brusque , I at once open my friend 's note and read as 
 follow , - 

  Dear Geoffrey . 

  the bearer of this , Prince Rimânez , be a very distinguished scholar 
  and gentleman , ally by descent to one of the old family in 
  Europe , or for that matter , in the world . you , as a student and 
  lover of ancient history , will be interested to know that his 
  ancestor be originally prince of Chaldea , who afterwards settle 
  in Tyre , - from thence they go to Etruria and there continue 
  through many century , the last scion of the house be the very 
  gifted and genial personage who , as my good friend , I have the 
  pleasure of commending to your kind regard . certain troublous and 
  overpowering circumstance have force he into exile from his 
  native province , and deprive he of a great part of his 
  possession , so that he be , to a considerable extent a wanderer on 
  the face of the earth , and have travel far and see much , and have 
  a wide experience of man and thing . he be a poet and musician of 
  great skill , and though he occupy himself with the art solely for 
  his own amusement , I think you will find his practical knowledge of 
  literary matter eminently useful to you in your difficult career . I 
  must not forget to add that in all matter scientific he be an 
  absolute master . wish you both a cordial friendship , I be , dear 
  Geoffrey , 

  your sincerely 
  John Carrington . 

 the signature of ' boffle ' have evidently be deem out of place this 
 time and somehow I be foolishly vex at its omission . there seem to 
 be something formal and stiff in the letter , almost as if it have be 
 write to dictation , and under pressure . what give I this idea I know 
 not . I glance furtively at my silent companion , - he catch my stray 
 look and return it with a curiously grave fixity . fear lest my 
 momentary vague distrust of he have be reflect in my eye I make 
 haste to speak - 

 " this letter , prince , add to my shame and regret that I should have 
 greet you in so churlish a manner this evening . no apology can 
 condone my rudeness , - but you can not imagine how mortified I feel and 
 still feel , to be compel to receive you in this miserable den , - it be 
 not at all the sort of place in which I should have like to welcome 
 you .... " and I break off with a renew sense of irritation , remember 
 how actually rich I now be , and that in spite of this , I be oblige to 
 seem poor . meanwhile the prince waive aside my remark with a light 
 gesture of his hand . 

 " why be mortify ? " he demand . " rather be proud that you can dispense 
 with the vulgar appurtenance of luxury . genius thrive in a garret and 
 die in a palace , - be not that the generally accept theory ? " 

 " rather a wear - out and mistaken one I consider , " - I reply ; " Genius 
 might like to try the effect of a palace for once , - it usually die of 
 starvation . " 

 " true ! - but in thus die , think how many fool it afterwards fatten ! 
 there be an all - wise Providence in this , my dear sir ! Schubert perish 
 of want , - but see what large profit all the music - publisher have make 
 since out of his composition ! it be a most beautiful dispensation of 
 nature , - that honest folk should be sacrifice in order to provide for 
 the sustenance of knave ! " 

 he laugh , and I look at he in a little surprise . his remark touch 
 so near my own opinion that I wonder whether he be in jest or 
 earnest . 

 " you speak sarcastically of course ? " I say - " you do not really believe 
 what you say ? " 

 " oh , do I not ! " he return , with a flash of his fine eye that be 
 almost lightning - like in its intensity - " if I could not believe the 
 teaching of my own experience , what would be leave to I ? I always 
 realize the ' need must ' of thing - how do the old maxim go - ' need 
 must when the devil drive . ' there be really no possible contradiction 
 to offer to the accuracy of that statement . the devil drive the world , 
 whip in hand , - and oddly enough ,   consider that some belated folk 
 still fancy there be a God somewhere   succeed in manage his team 
 with extraordinary ease ! " his brow cloud and the bitter line about 
 his mouth deepen and harden , - anon he laugh again lightly and 
 continue - " but let we not moralize , - moral sicken the soul both in 
 church and out of it , - every sensible man hat to be tell what he 
  could be and what he will not   be . I be here to make friend with you if 
 you permit , - and to put an end to ceremony , will you accompany I back 
 to my hotel where I have order supper ? " 

 by this time I have become indescribably fascinated by his easy manner , 
 handsome presence and mellifluous voice , - the satirical turn of his 
 humour suited mine , - I feel we should get on well together , - and my 
 first annoyance at be discover by he in such poverty - stricken 
 circumstance somewhat abate . 

 " with pleasure ! " I reply - " but first of all , you must allow I to 
 explain matter a little . you have hear a good deal about my affair 
 from my friend John Carrington , and I know from his private letter to I 
 that you have come here out of pure kindness and goodwill . for that 
 generous intention I thank you ! I know you expect to find a poor 
 wretch of a literary man struggle with the dire circumstance of 
 disappointment and poverty , - and a couple of hour ago you would have 
 amply fulfil that expectation . but now , thing have change , - I have 
 receive news which completely alter my position , - in fact I have have a 
 very great and remarkable surprise this evening .... " 

 " an agreeable one I trust ? " interpose my companion suavely . 

 I smile . 

 " Judge for yourself ! " and I hand he the lawyer 's letter which 
 inform I of my suddenly acquire fortune . 

 he glance it through rapidly , - then fold and return it to I with a 
 courteous bow . 

 " I suppose I should congratulate you , " - he say - " and I do . though of 
 course this wealth which seem to content you , to I appear a mere 
 trifle . it can be quite conveniently run through and exhaust in about 
 eight year or less , therefore it do not provide absolute immunity 
 from care . to be rich , really rich , in my sense of the word , one should 
 have about a million a year . then one might reasonably hope to escape 
 the workhouse ! " 

 he laugh , - and I star at he stupidly , not know how to take his 
 word , whether as truth or idle boasting . five million of money a mere 
 trifle ! he go on without apparently notice my amazement - 

 " the inexhaustible greed of a man , my dear sir , can never be satisfied . 
 if he be not consume by desire for one thing , he be for another , and 
 his taste be generally expensive . a few pretty and unscrupulous woman 
 for example , would soon relieve you of your five million in the 
 purchase of jewel alone . horse - racing would do it still more quickly . 
 no , no , - you be not rich , - you be still poor , - only your need be no 
 long so press as they be . and in this I confess myself somewhat 
 disappoint , - for I come to you hop to do a good turn to some one 
 for once in my life , and to play the foster - father to a rise 
 genius - and here I be - forestall , - as usual ! it be a singular thing , 
 do you know , but nevertheless a fact , that whenever I have have any 
 particular intention towards a man I be always forestall ! it be 
 really rather hard upon I ! " he break off and raise his head in a 
 listening attitude . 

 " what be that ? " he ask . 

 it be the violinist next door play a well - know " Ave Maria . " I tell 
 he so . 

 " dismal , - very dismal ! " he say with a contemptuous shrug . " I hate all 
 that kind of mawkish devotional stuff . well ! - millionaire as you be , 
 and acknowledge lion of society as you shortly will be , there be no 
 objection I hope , to the propose supper ? and perhaps a music - hall 
 afterwards if you feel inclined , - what do you say ? " 

 he clap I on the shoulder cordially and look straight into my 
 face , - those wonderful eye of his , suggestive of both tear and fire , 
 fix I with a clear masterful gaze that completely dominate I . I 
 make no attempt to resist the singular attraction which now possess I 
 for this man whom I have but just meet , - the sensation be too strong and 
 too pleasant to be combat . only for one moment more I hesitate , 
 look down at my shabby attire . 

 " I be not fit to accompany you , prince , " I say - " I look more like a 
 tramp than a millionaire . " 

 he glance at I and smile . 

 " upon my life , so you do ! " he aver . - " but be satisfied ! - you be in 
 this respect very like many another Croesus . it be only the poor and 
 proud who take the trouble to dress well , - they and the dear ' naughty ' 
 lady , generally monopolize tasteful and become attire . an 
 ill - fitting coat often adorn the back of a Prime Minister , - and if you 
 see a woman clothe in clothe vilely cut and colour , you may be sure she 
 be eminently virtuous , renowned for good work , and probably a duchess ! " 
 he rise , draw his sable about he . 

 " what matter the coat if the purse be full ! " he continue gaily . - " let 
 it once be properly paragraph in the paper that you be a 
 millionaire , and doubtless some enterprise tailor will invent a 
 ' Tempest ' ulster colour softly like your present garb , an artistic 
 mildewy green ! and now come along , - your solicitor 's communication 
 should have give you a good appetite , or it be not so valuable as it 
 seem , - and I want you to do justice to my supper . I have my own chef 
 with I , and he be not without skill . I hope , by the way , you will at 
 least do I this much service , - that pende legal discussion and 
 settlement of your affair , you will let I be your banker ? " 

 this offer be make with such an air of courteous delicacy and 
 friendship , that I could do no more than accept it gratefully , as it 
 relieve I from all temporary embarrassment . I hastily write a few 
 line to my landlady , tell she she would receive the money owe to 
 she by post next day , - then , thrust my reject manuscript , my only 
 worldly possession , into my coat - pocket , I extinguish the lamp , and 
 with the new friend I have so suddenly gain , I leave my dismal lodging 
 and all its miserable association for ever . I little think the time 
 would come when I should look back to the time spend in that small mean 
 room as the good period of my life , - when I should regard the bitter 
 poverty I then endure , as the stern but holy angel mean to guide I to 
 the high and noblest attainment , - when I should pray desperately with 
 wild tear to be as I be then , rather than as I be now ! be it well or 
 ill for we I wonder , that the future be hide from our knowledge ? 
 should we steer our way clear from evil if we know its result ? it be 
 a doubtful question , - at anyrate my ignorance for the moment be indeed 
 bliss . I go joyfully out of the dreary house where I have live so long 
 among disappointment and difficulty , turn my back upon it with 
 such a sense of relief as could never be express in word , - and the 
 last thing I hear as I pass into the street with my companion , be a 
 plaintive long - draw wail of minor melody , which seem to be send after 
 I like a parting cry , by the unknown and invisible player of the 
 violin . 




 IV 


 Outside , the prince 's carriage wait , draw by two spirited black 
 horse caparison in silver ; magnificent thoroughbred , which paw the 
 ground and champ their bit impatient of delay , - at sight of his 
 master the smart footman in attendance throw the door open , touch his 
 hat respectfully . we step in , I precede my companion at his 
 express desire ; and as I sink back among the easy cushion , I feel the 
 complacent consciousness of luxury and power to such an extent that it 
 seem as if I have leave my day of adversity already a long way behind 
 I . hunger and happiness dispute my sensation between they , and I be 
 in that vague light - head condition common to long fasting , in which 
 nothing seem absolutely tangible or real . I know I should not properly 
 grasp the solid truth of my wonderful good luck till my physical need 
 be satisfied and I be , so to speak , once more in a naturally balanced 
 bodily condition . at present my brain be in a whirl , - my thought be 
 all dim and disconnected , - and I appear to myself to be in some 
 whimsical dream from which I should wake up directly . the carriage 
 roll on rubber - tyre wheel and make no noise as it go , - one could 
 only hear the even rapid trot of the horse . by - and - by I see in the 
 semi - darkness my new friend 's brilliant dark eye fix upon I with a 
 curiously intent expression . 

 " do you not feel the world already at your foot ? " he query half 
 playfully , half ironically - " like a football , wait to be kick ? it 
 be such an absurd world , you know - so easily move . wise man in all age 
 have do their good to make it less ridiculous , - with no result , 
 inasmuch as it continue to prefer folly to wisdom . a football , or let 
 we say a shuttlecock among world , ready to be toss up anyhow and 
 anywhere , provide the battledore be of gold ! " 

 " you speak a trifle bitterly , prince " - I say - " but no doubt you have 
 have a wide experience among man ? " 

 " I have , " he return with emphasis - " my kingdom be a vast one . " 

 " you be a rule power then ? " I exclaim with some 
 astonishment - " Yours be not a title of honour only ? " 

 " oh , as your rule of aristocracy go , it be a mere title of 
 honour " - he reply quickly - " when I say that my kingdom be a vast one , 
 I mean that I rule wherever man obey the influence of wealth . from this 
 point of view , be I wrong in call my kingdom vast ? - be it not almost 
 boundless ? " 

 " I perceive you be a cynic , " - I say - " yet surely you believe that 
 there be some thing wealth can not buy , - honour and virtue for 
 example ? " 

 he survey I with a whimsical smile . 

 " I suppose honour and virtue do exist - " he answer - " and when they 
 be existent of course they can not be buy . but my experience have 
 teach I that I can always buy everything . the sentiment call honour 
 and virtue by the majority of man be the most shifty thing 
 imaginable , - set sufficient cash down , and they become bribery and 
 corruption in the twinkling of an eye ! curious - very curious . I confess 
 I find a case of unpurchaseable integrity once , but only once . I may 
 find it again , though I consider the chance a very doubtful one . now to 
 revert to myself , pray do not imagine I be play the humbug with you 
 or pass myself off under a bogus title . I be a bona - fide prince , 
 believe I , and of such descent as none of your old family can 
 boast , - but my dominion be long since break up and my former subject 
 disperse among all nation , - anarchy , nihilism , disruption and 
 political trouble generally , compel I to be rather reticent concern 
 my affair . money I fortunately have in plenty , - and with that I pave my 
 way . some day when we be well acquaint , you shall know more of my 
 private history . I have various other name and title besides that on 
 my card - but I keep to the simple of they , because most people be 
 such bungler at the pronunciation of foreign name . my intimate friend 
 generally drop my title , and call I Lucio simply . " 

 " that be your christian name - ? " I begin . 

 " not at all - I have no ' christian ' name , " - he interrupt swiftly and 
 with anger - " there be no such thing as ' christian ' in my composition ! " 

 he speak with such impatience that for a moment I be at a loss for a 
 reply . at last - 

 " indeed ! " I murmur vaguely . 

 he burst out laugh . 

 " ' indeed ! ' that be all you can find to say ! indeed and again indeed the 
 word ' christian ' vexe I . there be no such creature alive . you be 
 not a Christian , - no one be really , - people pretend to be , - and in so 
 damnable an act of feigning be more blasphemous than any fall fiend ! 
 now I make no pretence of the kind , - I have only one faith - " 

 " and that be ? " - 

 " a profound and awful one ! " he say in thrill tone - " and the bad 
 of it be that it be true , - as true as the working of the Universe . but 
 of that hereafter , - it will do to talk of when we feel low - spirited and 
 wish to converse of thing grim and ghastly , - at present here we be at 
 our destination , and the chief consideration of our life ,   it be the 
 chief consideration of most man 's life   must be the excellence or 
 non - excellence of our food . " 

 the carriage stop and we descend . at first sight of the black 
 horse and silver trapping , the porter of the hotel and two or three 
 other servant rush out to attend upon we ; but the prince pass into 
 the hall without notice any of they and address himself to a 
 sober - look individual in black , his own private valet , who come 
 forward to meet he with a profound salutation . I murmur something 
 about wish to engage a room for myself in the hotel . 

 " oh , my man will see to that for you " - he say lightly - " the house be 
 not full , - at anyrate all the good room be not take ; and of course 
 you want one of the good . " 

 a star waiter , who up to that moment , have be note my shabby 
 clothe with that peculiar air of contempt commonly display by 
 insolent menial to those whom they imagine be poor , overheard these 
 word , and suddenly change the derisive expression of his foxy face , 
 bow obsequiously as I pass . a thrill of disgust run through I , 
 mingle with a certain angry triumph , - the hypocritical reflex of this 
 low fellow 's countenance , be , I know , a true epitome of what I should 
 find similarly reflect in the manner and attitude of all ' polite ' 
 society . for there the estimate of worth be no high than a common 
 servant 's estimate , and be take solely from the money standard ; - if you 
 be poor and dress shabbily you be thrust aside and ignore , - but if 
 you be rich , you may wear shabby clothe as much as you like , you be 
 still court and flatter , and invite everywhere , though you may be 
 the great fool alive or the bad blackguard unhung . with vague 
 thought such as these flit over my mind , I follow my host to his 
 room . he occupy nearly a whole wing of the hotel , have a large 
 drawing - room , dining - room and study en suite , fit up in the most 
 luxurious manner , besides bedroom , bathroom , and dressing - room , with 
 other room adjoining , for his valet and two extra personal attendant . 
 the table be lay for supper , and glitter with the costly glass , 
 silver and china , be furthermore adorn by basket of the most 
 exquisite fruit and flower , and in a few moment we be seat . the 
 prince 's valet act as head - waiter , and I notice that now this man 's 
 face , see in the full light of the electric lamp , seem very dark 
 and unpleasant , even sinister in expression , - but in the performance of 
 his duty he be unexceptionable , be quick , attentive , and 
 deferential , so much so that I inwardly reproach myself for take an 
 instinctive dislike to he . his name be Amiel , and I find myself 
 involuntarily watch his movement , they be so noiseless , - his very 
 step suggest the stealthy gliding of a cat or a tiger . he be 
 assist in his work by the two other attendant who serve as his 
 subordinate , and who be equally active and well - train , - and 
 presently I find myself enjoy the choice meal I have taste for 
 many and many a long day , flavour with such wine as connoisseur might 
 be apt to dream of , but never succeed in find . I begin to feel 
 perfectly at my ease , and talk with freedom and confidence , the strong 
 attraction I have for my new friend deepen with every moment I pass 
 in his company . 

 " will you continue your literary career now you have this little fortune 
 leave you ? " he inquire , when at the close of supper Amiel set the 
 choice cognac and cigar before we , and respectfully withdraw - " do you 
 think you will care to go on with it ? " 

 " certainly I shall " - I reply - " if only for the fun of the thing . you 
 see , with money I can force my name into notice whether the public like 
 it or not . no newspaper refuse pay advertisement . " 

 " true ! - but may not inspiration refuse to flow from a full purse and an 
 empty head ? " 

 this remark provoke I not a little . 

 " do you consider I empty - headed ? " I ask with some vexation . 

 " not at present . my dear Tempest , do not let either the Tokay we have 
 be drink , or the cognac we be go to drink , speak for you in 
 such haste ! I assure you I do not think you empty - headed , - on the 
 contrary , your head , I believe from what I have hear , have be and be 
 full of idea , - excellent idea , original idea , which the world of 
 conventional criticism do not want . but whether these idea will 
 continue to germinate in your brain , or whether , with the full purse , 
 they will cease , be now the question . great originality and inspiration , 
 strange to say , seldom endow the millionaire . inspiration be suppose to 
 come from above , - money from below ! in your case however both 
 originality and inspiration may continue to flourish and bring forth 
 fruit , - I trust they may . it often happen , nevertheless that when bag 
 of money fall to the lot of aspire genius , God depart and the devil 
 walk in . have you never hear that ? " 

 " never ! " I answer smile . 

 " well , of course the saying be foolish , and sound doubly ridiculous in 
 this age when people believe in neither God nor devil . it imply 
 however that one must choose an up or a down , - genius be the Up , money 
 be the down . you can not fly and grovel at the same instant . " 

 " the possession of money be not likely to cause a man to grovel " - I 
 say - " it be the one thing necessary to strengthen his soar power 
 and lift he to the great height . " 

 " you think so ? " and my host light his cigar with a grave and pre - occupy 
 air - " then I be afraid , you do not   know much about what I shall call 
 natural psychic . what belong to the earth tend earthward , - surely 
 you realize that ? gold most strictly belong to the earth , - you dig it 
 out of the ground , - you handle it and dispose of it in solid wedge or 
 bar - it be a substantial metal enough . Genius belong to nobody know 
 where , - you can not dig it up or pass it on , or do anything with it 
 except stand and marvel - it be a rare visitant and capricious as the 
 wind , and generally make sad havoc among the conventionality of man . 
 it be as I say an ' upper ' thing , beyond earthly smell and 
 savour , - and those who have it always live in unknown high latitude . 
 but money be a perfectly level commodity , - level with the ground ; - when 
 you have much of it , you come down solidly on your flat sol and down 
 you stay ! " 

 I laugh . 

 " upon my word you preach very eloquently against wealth ! " I say - " you 
 yourself be unusually rich , - be you sorry for it ? " 

 " no , I be not sorry , because be sorry would be no use " - he 
 return - " and I never waste my time . but I be tell you the 
 truth - Genius and great rich hardly ever pull together . now I , for 
 example , - you can not imagine what great capability I have once ! - a long 
 time ago - before I become my own master ! " 

 " and you have they still I be sure " - I aver , look expressively at 
 his noble head and fine eye . 

 the strange subtle smile I have notice once or twice before lighten 
 his face . " ah , you mean to compliment I ! " he say - " you like my 
 look , - many people do . yet after all there be nothing so deceptive as 
 one 's outward appearance . the reason of this be that as soon as 
 childhood be past , we be always pretend to be what we be not , - and 
 thus , with constant practice from our youth up , we manage to make our 
 physical frame complete disguise for our actual self . it be really 
 wise and clever of we , - for hence each individual be so much flesh - wall 
 through which neither friend nor enemy can spy . every man be a solitary 
 soul imprison in a self - make den , - when he be quite alone he know and 
 frequently hat himself , - sometimes he even get afraid of the gaunt 
 and murderous monster he keep hide behind his outwardly pleasant 
 body - mask , and hasten to forget its frightful existence in drink and 
 debauchery . that be what I do occasionally , - you would not think it of 
 I , would you ? " 

 " never ! " I reply quickly , for something in his voice and aspect move 
 I strangely - " you belie yourself , and wrong your own nature . " 

 he laugh softly . 

 " perhaps I do ! " he say carelessly - " this much you may believe of 
 I - that I be no bad than most man ! now to return to the subject of 
 your literary career , - you have write a book , you say , - well , publish 
 it and see the result - if you only make one ' hit ' that be something . and 
 there be way of arrange that the ' hit ' shall be make . what be your 
 story about ? I hope it be improper ? " 

 " it certainly be not ; " - I reply warmly - " it be a romance deal with 
 the noble form of life and high ambition ; - I write it with the 
 intention of elevate and purify the thought of my reader , and 
 wish if I could , to comfort those who have suffer loss or sorrow - " 

 Rimânez smile compassionately . 

 " ah , it will not   do ! " he interrupt - " I assure you it will not ; - it do not 
 fit the age . it might go down , possibly , if you could give a 
 ' first - night ' of it as it be to the critic , like one of my most 
 intimate friend , Henry Irving , - a ' first - night ' combine with an 
 excellent supper and any amount of good drink go . otherwise it be no 
 use . if it be to succeed by itself , it must not attempt to be 
 literature , - it must simply be indecent . as indecent as you can make it 
 without offend advanced woman , - that be give you a good wide 
 margin . put in as much as you can about sexual matter and the bearing 
 of child , - in brief , discourse of man and woman simply as cattle who 
 exist merely for breed purpose , and your success will be enormous . 
 there be not a critic living who will not   applaud you , - there be not a 
 school - girl of fifteen who will not gloat over your page in the silence 
 of her virginal bedroom ! " 

 such a flash of wither derision dart from his eye as startle 
 I , - I could find no word to answer he for the moment , and he go 
 on - 

 " what put it into your head , my dear Tempest , to write a book deal 
 with , as you say , ' the noble form of life ' ? there be no noble form 
 of life leave on this planet , - it be all low and commercial , - man be a 
 pigmy , and his aim be pigmy like himself . for noble form of life seek 
 other world ! - there be other . then again , people do not   want their 
 thought raise or purify in the novel they read for amusement - they 
 go to church for that , and get very bored during the process . and why 
 should you wish to comfort folk who , out of their own sheer stupidity 
 generally , get into trouble ? they would not   comfort you , - they would 
 not give you sixpence to save you from starvation . my good fellow , leave 
 your quixotism behind you with your poverty . live your life to 
 yourself , - if you do anything for other they will only treat you with 
 the black ingratitude , - so take my advice , and do not   sacrifice your 
 own personal interest for any consideration whatever . " 

 he rise from the table as he speak and stand with his back to the bright 
 fire , smoke his cigar tranquilly , - and I gaze at his handsome figure 
 and face with just the faint thrill of pained doubt darken my 
 admiration . 

 " if you be not so good - look I should call you heartless " - I say at 
 last - " but your feature be a direct contradiction to your word . you 
 have not really that indifference to human nature which you strive to 
 assume , - your whole aspect betoken a generosity of spirit which you 
 can not conquer if you would . besides , be you not always try to do 
 good ? " 

 he smile . 

 " always ! that is , I be always at work endeavour to gratify every 
 man 's desire . whether that be good of I , or bad , remain to be prove . 
 Men 's want be almost illimitable , - the only thing none of they ever 
 seem to wish , so far as I be concern , be to cut my acquaintance ! " 

 " why , of course not ! after once meet you , how could they ! " I say , 
 laugh at the absurdity of the suggestion . 

 he give I a whimsical side - look . 

 " their desire be not always virtuous , " he remark , turn to flick 
 off the ash of his cigar into the grate . 

 " but of course you do not gratify they in their vice ! " I rejoin , 
 still laugh - " that would be play the part of a benefactor somewhat 
 too thoroughly ! " 

 " ah now I see we shall flounder in the quicksand of theory if we go any 
 far " - he say - " you forget , my dear fellow , that nobody can decide 
 as to what be vice , or what be virtue . these thing be 
 chameleon - like , and take different colour in different country . 
 Abraham have two or three wife and several concubine , and he be the 
 very soul of virtue accord to sacred lore , - whereas my Lord Tom - Noddy 
 in London to - day have one wife and several concubine , and be really very 
 much like Abraham in other particular , yet he be consider a very 
 dreadful person . ' who shall decide when doctor disagree ! ' let us drop 
 the subject , as we shall never settle it . what shall we do with the rest 
 of the evening ? there be a stout - limbe , shrewd wench at the Tivoli , 
 dance her way into the affection of a ricketty little Duke , - shall we 
 go and watch the admirable contortion with which she be wriggle into 
 a fix position among the english aristocracy ? or be you tired , and 
 would you prefer a long night 's rest ? " 

 to tell the truth I be thoroughly fatigued , and mentally as well as 
 physically wear out with the excitement of the day , - my head too be 
 heavy with the wine to which I have so long be unaccustomed . 

 " upon my word I think I would rather go to bed than anything - " I 
 confess - " but what about my room ? " 

 " oh , Amiel will have attend to that for you , - we will ask he . " and he 
 touch the bell . his valet instantly appear . 

 " have you get a room for Mr Tempest ? " 

 " yes , your Excellency . an apartment in this corridor almost face your 
 Excellency 's suite . it be not as well furnish as it might be , but I 
 have make it as comfortable as I can for the night . " 

 " thank very much ! " I say - " I be greatly oblige to you . " 

 Amiel bow deferentially . 

 " thank you , sir . " 

 he retire , and I move to bid my host good - night . he take my proffered 
 hand , and hold it in his , look at I curiously the while . 

 " I like you , Geoffrey Tempest ; " he say - " and because I like you , and 
 because I think there be the making of something high than mere 
 earthy brute in you , I be go to make you what you may perhaps 
 consider rather a singular proposition . it be this , - that if you do not 
 like I , say so at once , and we will part now , before we have time to 
 know anything more of each other , and I will endeavour not to cross your 
 path again unless you seek I out . but if on the contrary , you do like 
 I , - if you find something in my humour or turn of mind congenial to 
 your own disposition , give I your promise that you will be my friend 
 and comrade for a while , say for a few month at any rate . I can take 
 you into the good society , and introduce you to the prettiest woman in 
 Europe as well as the most brilliant man . I know they all , and I believe 
 I can be useful to you . but if there be the small aversion to I 
 lurk in the depth of your nature " - here he pause , - then resume 
 with extraordinary solemnity - " in God 's name give it full way and let I 
 go , - because I swear to you in all sober earnest that I be not what I 
 seem ! " 

 strongly impressed by his strange look and strange manner , I hesitate 
 one moment , - and on that moment , have I but know it , hang my future . it 
 be true , - I have feel a pass shadow of distrust and repulsion for 
 this fascinating yet cynical man , and he seem to have guess it . but 
 now every suspicion of he vanish from my mind , and I clasp his hand 
 with renew heartiness . 

 " my dear fellow , your warning come too late ! " I say 
 mirthfully - " whatever you be , or whatever you choose to think you be , 
 I find you most sympathetic to my disposition , and I consider myself 
 most fortunate in know you . my old friend Carrington have indeed do 
 I a good turn in bring we together , and I assure you I shall be 
 proud of your companionship . you seem to take a perverse delight in 
 run yourself down ! - but you know the old adage , ' the devil be not so 
 black as he be paint ' ? " 

 " and that be true ! " he murmur dreamily - " poor devil ! his fault be no 
 doubt much exaggerated by the clergy ! and so we be to be friend ? " 

 " I hope so ! I shall not be the first to break the compact ! " 

 his dark eye rest upon I thoughtfully , yet there seem to be a 
 lurking smile in they as well . 

 " Compact be a good word " - he say - " so , - a compact we will consider it . 
 I mean to improve your material fortune , - you can dispense with that 
 aid now ; but I think I can still be of service in push you on in 
 society . and love - of course you will fall in love if you have not 
 already do so , - have you ? " 

 " not I ! " I answer quickly , and with truth - " I have see no woman yet 
 who perfectly fulfil my notion of beauty . " 

 he burst out laugh violently . 

 " upon my word you be not want in audacity ! " he say - " nothing but 
 perfect beauty will suit you , eh ? but consider , my friend , you , though a 
 good - look well - build man , be not yourself quite a Phoebus Apollo ! " 

 " that have nothing to do with the matter " - I rejoin - " a man should 
 choose a wife with a careful eye to his own personal gratification , in 
 the same way that he choose horse or wine , - perfection or nothing . " 

 " and the woman ? " - Rimânez demand , his eye twinkle . 

 " the woman have really no right of choice " - I respond , - for this be my 
 pet argument and I take pleasure in set it forth - " she must mate 
 wherever she have the chance of be properly maintain . a man be 
 always a man , - a woman be only a man 's appendage , and without beauty she 
 can not put forth any just claim to his admiration or his support . " 

 " right ! - very right , and logically argue ! " - he exclaim , become 
 preternaturally serious in a moment - " I myself have no sympathy with the 
 new idea that be in vogue concern the intellectuality of woman . she 
 be simply the female of man , - she have no real soul save that which be a 
 reflex of his , and be destitute of logic , she be incapable of form 
 a correct opinion on any subject . all the imposture of religion be keep 
 up by this unmathematical hysterical creature , - and it be curious , 
 consider how inferior a be she be , what mischief she have contrive 
 to make in the world , upset the plan of the wise king and 
 counsellor , who as mere man , should undoubtedly have master she ! and 
 in the present age she be become more than ever unmanageable . " 

 " it be only a pass phase " - I return carelessly - " a fad get up by a 
 few unloved and unlovable type of the feminine sex . I care very little 
 for woman - I doubt whether I shall ever marry . " 

 " well you have plenty of time to consider , and amuse yourself with the 
 fair one , en passant " - he say watch I narrowly - " and in the 
 meantime I can take you round the different marriage - market of the 
 world if you choose , though the large one of they all be of course 
 this very metropolis . splendid bargain to be have , my dear 
 friend ! - wonderful blonde and brunette specimen go really very 
 cheap . we will examine they at our leisure . I be glad you have yourself 
 decide that we be to be comrade , - for I be proud ; - I may say damnably 
 proud ; - and never stay in any man 's company when he express the 
 slight wish to be rid of I . good - night ! " 

 " good - night ! " I respond . we clasp hand again and they be still 
 interlocked , when a sudden flash of lightning blaze vividly across the 
 room , follow instantaneously by a terrific clap of thunder . the 
 electric light go out , and only the glow of the fire illumine our 
 face . I be a little startled and confused , - the prince stand still , 
 quite unconcerned , his eye shin like those of a cat in the darkness . 

 " what a storm ! " he remark lightly - " such thunder in winter be rather 
 unusual . Amiel ! " 

 the valet enter , his sinister countenance resemble a white mask make 
 visible in the gloom . 

 " these lamp have go out , " - say his master - " it be very odd that 
 civilized humanity have not yet learn the complete management of the 
 electric light . can you put they in order , Amiel ? " 

 " yes , your excellency . " and in a few moment , by some dexterous 
 manipulation which I do not understand and could not see , the 
 crystal - case jet shine forth again with renew brilliancy . another 
 peal of thunder crash overhead , follow by a downpour of rain . 

 " really remarkable weather for January , " - say Rimânez , again give I 
 his hand - " good - night my friend ! sleep well . " 

 " if the anger of the element will permit ! " I return , smile . 

 " oh , never mind the element . Man have nearly master they or soon will 
 do so , now that he be get gradually convince there be no deity to 
 interfere in his business . Amiel , show Mr Tempest to his room . " 

 Amiel obey , and cross the corridor , usher I into a large , 
 luxurious apartment , richly furnish , and light up by the blaze of a 
 bright fire . the comfort warmth shine welcome upon I as I enter , 
 and I who have not experience such personal luxury since my boyhood 's 
 day , feel more than ever overpower by the jubilant sense of my sudden 
 extraordinary good fortune . Amiel wait respectfully , now and then 
 furtively glance at I with an expression which to my fancy have 
 something derisive in it . 

 " be there anything I can do for you sir ? " he inquire . 

 " no thank you , " - I answer , endeavour to throw an accent of careless 
 condescension into my voice - for somehow I feel this man must be keep 
 strictly in his place - " you have be very attentive , - I shall not 
 forget it . " 

 a slight smile flicker over his feature . 

 " much oblige to you , sir . good - night . " 

 and he retire , leave I alone . I pace the room up and down more 
 dreamily than consciously , try to think , - try to set in order the 
 amazing event of the day , but my brain be still daze and confuse , 
 and the only image of actual prominence in my mind be the striking and 
 remarkable personality of my new friend Rimânez . his extraordinary good 
 look , his attractive manner , his curious cynicism which be so oddly 
 mix with some deep sentiment to which I could not give a name , all 
 the trifling yet uncommon peculiarity of his bearing and humour 
 haunt I and become indissolubly mingle as it be with myself and 
 all the circumstance concern I . I undress before the fire , 
 listen drowsily to the rain , and the thunder which be now die off 
 into sullen echo . 

 " Geoffrey Tempest , the world be before you - " I say , apostrophize 
 myself indolently - " you be a young man , - you have health , a good 
 appearance , and brain , - add to these you now have five million of 
 money , and a wealthy prince for your friend . what more do you want of 
 Fate or Fortune ? nothing , - except fame ! and that you will get easily , 
 for now - a - day even fame be purchaseable - like love . your star be in the 
 ascendant , - no more literary drudgery for you my boy ! - pleasure and 
 profit and ease be yours to enjoy for the rest of your life . you be a 
 lucky dog ! - at last you have your day ! " 

 I fling myself upon the soft bed , and settle myself to sleep , - and as I 
 doze off , I still hear the rumble of heavy thunder in the distance . 
 once I fancy I hear the prince 's voice call " Amiel ! Amiel ! " with a 
 wildness resemble the shriek of an angry wind , - and at another moment 
 I start violently from a profound slumber under the impression that 
 someone have approach and be look fixedly at I . I sit up in bed , 
 peer into the darkness , for the fire have go out ; - then I turn on 
 a small electric night - lamp at my side which fully illumine the 
 room , - there be no one there . yet my imagination play I such trick 
 before I could rest again that I think I hear a hiss whisper near 
 I that say - 

 " Peace ! trouble he not . let the fool in his folly sleep ! " 




 V 


 the next morning on rise I learn that ' his excellency ' as Prince 
 Rimânez be call by his own servant and the employés of the ' Grand , ' 
 have go out riding in the Park , leave I to breakfast alone . I 
 therefore take that meal in the public room of the hotel , where I be 
 wait upon with the utmost obsequiousness , in spite of my shabby 
 clothe , which I be of course still compel to wear , have no 
 change . when would I be pleased to lunch ? at what hour would I dine ? 
 should my present apartment be retain ? - or be it not satisfactory ? 
 would I prefer a ' suite ' similar to that occupy by his excellency ? all 
 these deferential question first astonish and then amuse I , - some 
 mysterious agency have evidently convey the rumour of my wealth among 
 those well fit to receive it , and here be the first result . in reply 
 I say my movement be uncertain , - I should be able to give definite 
 instruction in the course of a few hour , and that in the meantime I 
 retain my room . the breakfast over I sally forth to go to my 
 lawyer , and be just about to order a hansom when I see my new friend 
 come back from his ride . he bestrode a magnificent chestnut mare , 
 whose wild eye and strained quivering limb show she be fresh from a 
 hard gallop and be scarcely yet satisfied to be under close control . 
 she curvet and dance among the cart and cab in a somewhat risky 
 fashion , but she have her master in Rimânez , who if he have look 
 handsome by night look still more so by day , with a slight colour 
 warm the natural pallor of his complexion and his eye sparkle with 
 all the z of exercise and enjoyment . I wait for his approach , as 
 do also Amiel , who as usual time his appearance in the hotel corridor 
 in exact accordance with the moment of his master 's arrival . Rimânez 
 smile as he catch sight of I , touch his hat with the handle of his 
 whip by way of salutation . 

 " you sleep late , Tempest " - he say , as he dismount and throw the rein 
 to a groom who have canter up after he , - " to - morrow you must come with 
 I and join what they call in fashionable slang parlance the Liver 
 Brigade . once upon a time it be consider the height of indelicacy and 
 low breeding to mention the ' liver ' or any other portion of one 's 
 internal machinery , - but we have do with all that now , and we find a 
 peculiar satisfaction in discoursing of disease and unsavoury medical 
 matter generally . and in the Liver Brigade you see at a glance all 
 those interesting fellow who have sell themselves to the devil for the 
 sake of the flesh - pot of Egypt , - man who eat till they be well - nigh 
 bursting , and then prance up and down on good horse , - much too 
 respectable beast by the way to bear such bestial burden - in the hope 
 of get out of their poison blood the evil they have themselves put 
 in . they think I one of they , but I be not . " 

 he pat his mare and the groom lead she away , the foam of her hard ride 
 still fleck her glossy chest and foreleg . 

 " why do you join the procession then ? " I ask he , laugh and 
 glance at he with undisguised approval as I speak , for he seem more 
 admirably build than ever in his well - fit riding gear - " you be a 
 fraud ! " 

 " I be ! " he respond lightly - " and do you know I be not the only one in 
 London ! where be you off to ? " 

 " to those lawyer who write to I last night ; - Bentham and Ellis be the 
 name of the firm . the soon I interview they the well , - do not   you 
 think so ? " 

 " yes - but see here , " - and he draw I aside - " you must have some ready 
 cash . it do not   look well to apply at once for advance , - and there be 
 really no necessity to explain to these legal man that you be on the 
 verge of starvation when their letter arrive . take this 
 pocket - book , - remember you promise to let I be your banker , - and on 
 your way you might go to some well - repute tailor and get properly 
 rig out . Ta - ta ! " 

 he move off at a rapid pace , - I hurry after he , touch to the quick 
 by his kindness . 

 " but wait - I say - Lucio ! " and I call he thus by his familiar name for 
 the first time . he stop at once and stand quite still . 

 " well ? " he say , regard I with an attentive smile . 

 " you do not   give I time to speak " - I answer in a low voice , for we 
 be stand in one of the public corridor of the hotel - " the fact be 
 I have some money , or rather I can get it directly , - Carrington send I 
 a draft for fifty pound in his letter - I forgot to tell you about it . 
 it be very good of he to lend it to I , - you have well have it as 
 security for this pocket - book , - by - the - bye how much be there inside it ? " 

 " five hundred , in bank note of ten and twenty , " - he respond with 
 business - like brevity . 

 " five hundred ! my dear fellow , I do not   want all that . it be too much ! " 

 " well have too much than too little nowadays , " - he retort with a 
 laugh - " my dear Tempest , do not   make such a business of it . five hundred 
 pound be really nothing . you can spend it all on a dressing - case for 
 example . well send back John Carrington 's draft , - I do not   think much 
 of his generosity consider that he come into a mine worth a hundred 
 thousand pound sterling , a few day before I leave Australia . " 

 I hear this with great surprise , and , I must admit with a slight 
 feeling of resentment too . the frank and generous character of my old 
 chum ' boffle ' seem to darken suddenly in my eye , - why could he not 
 have tell I of his good fortune in his letter ? be he afraid I might 
 trouble he for further loan ? I suppose my look express my 
 thought , for Rimânez , who have observe I intently , presently add - 

 " do he not tell you of his luck ? that be not very friendly of he - but 
 as I remark last night , money often spoil a man . " 

 " oh I daresay he mean no slight by the omission , " I say hurriedly , 
 force a smile - " no doubt he will make it the subject of his next 
 letter . now as to this five hundred " - 

 " keep it , man , keep it " - he interpose impatiently - " what do you talk 
 about security for ? have not   I get you as security ? " 

 I laugh . " well , I be fairly reliable now " - I say - " and I be not go 
 to run away . " 

 " from I ? " he query , with a half cold half kind glance ; " no , - I 
 fancy not ! " 

 he wave his hand lightly and leave I , and I , put the leather case 
 of note in my inner breast - pocket , hail a hansom and be drive off 
 rapidly to Basinghall Street where my solicitor await I . 

 arrive at my destination , I send up my name , and be receive at once 
 with the utmost respect by two small chip of man in rusty black who 
 represent ' the firm . ' at my request they send down their clerk to pay 
 and dismiss my cab , while I , open Lucio 's pocket book , ask they to 
 change I a ten - pound note into gold and silver which they do with 
 ready good - will . then we go into business together . my deceased 
 relative , whom I have never see as far as I myself remember , but who 
 have see I as a motherless baby in my nurse 's arm , have leave I 
 everything he possess unconditionally , include several rare 
 collection of picture , jewel and curio . his will be so concisely 
 and clearly word that there be no possibility of any legal 
 hair - splitting over it , - and I be inform that in a week or ten day 
 at the utmost everything would be in order and at my sole disposition . 

 " you be a very fortunate man Mr Tempest ; " - say the senior partner Mr 
 Bentham , as he fold up the last of the paper we have be look 
 through and put it by - " at your age this princely inheritance may be 
 either a great boon to you or a great curse , - one never know . the 
 possession of such enormous wealth involve great responsibility . " 

 I be amuse at what I consider the impertinence of this mere servant 
 of the law in presume to moralize on my luck . 

 " many people would be glad to accept such responsibility and change 
 place with I " - I say with a flippant air - " you yourself , for 
 example ? " 

 I know this remark be not in good taste , but I make it wilfully , 
 feel that he have no business to preach to I as it be on the 
 responsibility of wealth . he take no offence however , - he merely give 
 I an observant side - glance like that of some meditative crow . 

 " no Mr Tempest , no " - he say drily - " I do not think I should at all be 
 disposed to change place with you . I feel very well satisfied as I be . 
 my brain be my bank , and bring I in quite sufficient interest to live 
 upon , which be all that I desire . to be comfortable , and pay one 's way 
 honestly be enough for I . I have never envy the wealthy . " 

 " Mr Bentham be a philosopher , " - interpose his partner , Mr Ellis 
 smile - " in our profession Mr Tempest , we see so many up and down of 
 life , that in watch the variable fortune of our client , we 
 ourselves learn the lesson of content . " 

 " ah , it be a lesson that I have never master till now ! " I respond 
 merrily - " but at the present moment I confess myself satisfied . " 

 they each give I a formal little bow , and Mr Bentham shake hand . 

 " business be conclude , allow I to congratulate you , " he say 
 politely - " of course , if you should wish at any time to entrust your 
 legal affair to other hand , my partner and myself be perfectly 
 willing to withdraw . your deceased relative have the high confidence 
 in we .... " 

 " as I have also , I assure you , " - I interrupt quickly - " pray do I the 
 favour to continue manage thing for I as you do for my relative , 
 and be assure of my gratitude in advance . " 

 both little man bow again , and this time Mr Ellis shake hand . 

 " we shall do our good for you , Mr Tempest , shall we not Bentham ? " 
 Bentham nod gravely . " and now what do you say - shall we mention it 
 Bentham ? - or shall we not mention it ? " 

 " perhaps , " respond Bentham sententiously - " it would be as well to 
 mention it . " 

 I glance from one to the other , not understand what they mean . Mr 
 Ellis rub his hand and smile deprecatingly . 

 " the fact be Mr Tempest , your deceased relative have one very curious 
 idea - he be a shrewd man and a clever one , but he certainly have one 
 very curious idea - and perhaps if he have follow it up to any extent , 
 it might - yes , it might have land he in a lunatic asylum and 
 prevent his disposing of his extensive fortune in the - er - the very 
 just and reasonable manner he have do . happily for himself and - er - for 
 you , he do not follow it up , and to the last he retain his admirable 
 business quality and high sense of rectitude . but I do not think he 
 ever quite dispossess himself of the idea itself , do he Bentham ? " 

 Bentham gaze meditatively at the round black mark of the gas - burner 
 where it darken the ceiling . 

 " I think not , - no , I think not , " he answer - " I believe he be 
 perfectly convinced of it . " 

 " and what be it ? " I ask , get impatient - " do he want to bring out 
 some patent ? - a new notion for a fly - machine , and get rid of his 
 money in that way ? " 

 " no , no , no ! " and Mr Ellis laugh a soft pleasant little laugh over my 
 suggestion - " no , my dear sir - nothing of a purely mechanical or 
 commercial turn captivate his imagination . he be too , - er - yes , I 
 think I may say too profoundly opposed to what be call ' progress ' in 
 the world to aid it by any new invention or other mean whatever . you 
 see it be a little awkward for I to explain to you what really seem to 
 be the most absurd and fantastic notion , - but - to begin with , we never 
 really know how he make his money , do we Bentham ? " 

 Bentham shake his head and purse his lip closely together . 

 " we have to take charge of large sum , and advise as to investment and 
 other matter , - but it be not our business to inquire where the cash 
 come from in the first place , be it , Bentham ? " 

 again Bentham shake his head solemnly . 

 " we be entrust with it ; " - go on his partner , press the tip of 
 his finger together caressingly as he speak - " and we do our good to 
 fulfil that trust - with - er - with discretion and fidelity . and it be 
 only after we have be for many year connect in business that our 
 client mention - er - his idea ; - a most erratic and extraordinary one , 
 which be briefly this , - that he have sell himself to the devil , and that 
 his large fortune be one result of the bargain ! " 

 I burst out laugh heartily . 

 " what a ridiculous notion ! " I exclaim - " poor man ! - a weak spot in his 
 brain somewhere evidently , - or perhaps he use the expression as a mere 
 figure of speech ? " 

 " I think not ; " - respond Mr Ellis half interrogatively , still caress 
 his finger - " I think our client do not use the phrase ' sell to the 
 devil ' as a figure of speech merely , Mr Bentham ? " 

 " I be positive he do not , " - say Bentham seriously - " he speak of the 
 ' bargain ' as an actual and accomplished fact . " 

 I laugh again with a trifle less boisterousness . 

 " well , people have all sort of fancy now - a - day " - I say ; " what with 
 blavatskyism , Besantism and hypnotism , it be no wonder if some folk 
 still have a faint credence in the silly old superstition of a devil 's 
 existence . but for a thoroughly sensible man .... " 

 " yes - er , yes ; " - interrupt Mr Ellis - " your relative , Mr Tempest , be 
 a thoroughly sensible man , and this - er - this idea be the only fancy 
 that ever appear to have take root in his eminently practical mind . 
 be only an idea , it seem hardly worth mentioning - but perhaps it be 
 well - Mr Bentham agree with I - that we have mention it . " 

 " it be a satisfaction and relief to ourselves , " - say Mr Bentham , " to 
 have have it mention . " 

 I smile , and thank they , rise to go . they bow to I once more , 
 simultaneously , look almost like twin brother , so identically have 
 their united practice of the law impress itself upon their feature . 

 " good - day Mr Tempest , " - say Mr Bentham - " I need scarcely say that we 
 shall serve you as we serve our late client , to the good of our 
 ability . and in matter where advice may be pleasant or profitable , we 
 may possibly be of use to you . may we ask whether you require any cash 
 advance immediately ? " 

 " no , thank you , " - I answer , feel grateful to my friend Rimânez for 
 have place I in a perfectly independent position to confront these 
 solicitor - " I be amply provide . " 

 they seem , I fancy , a trifle surprised at this , but be too 
 discreet to offer any remark . they write down my address at the Grand 
 Hotel , and send their clerk to show I to the door . I give this man 
 half - a - sovereign to drink my health which he very cheerfully promise to 
 do , - then I walk round by the Law Courts , try to realize that I be 
 not in a dizzy dream , but that I be actually and solidly , five time a 
 millionaire . as luck would have it , in turn a corner I jostle up 
 against a man come the other way , the very publisher who have return 
 I my reject manuscript the day before . 

 " Hullo ! " he exclaim stop short . 

 " Hullo ! " I rejoin . 

 " where be you off to ? " he go on - " go to try and place that 
 unlucky novel ? my dear boy , believe I it will never do as it be .... " 

 " it will do , it shall do ; " - I say calmly - " I be go to publish it 
 myself . " 

 he start . " publish it yourself ! good heaven ! - it will cost 
 you - ah ! - sixty or seventy , perhaps a hundred pound . " 

 " I do not   care if it cost I a thousand ! " 

 a red flush come into his face , and his eye open in astonishment . 

 " I think ... excuse I ... " he stammer awkwardly ; " I think money 
 be scarce with you - - " 

 " it be , " I answer drily - " it be not   now . " 

 then , his utterly bewildered look , together with the whole 
 topsy - turviness of thing in my altered position , strike I so forcibly 
 that I burst out laugh , wildly , and with a prolonged noise and 
 violence that apparently alarm he , for he begin look nervously 
 about he in all direction as if meditate flight . I catch he by the 
 arm . 

 " look here man , " I say , try to conquer my almost hysterical 
 mirth - " I be not mad - do not   you think it , - I be only a - millionaire ! " and 
 I begin laugh again ; the situation seem to I so sublimely 
 ridiculous . but the worthy publisher do not see it at all - and his 
 feature express so much genuine alarm that I make a further effort to 
 control myself and succeed . " I assure you on my word of honour I be not 
 joke - it be a fact . last night I want a dinner , and you , like a good 
 fellow , offer to give I one , - to - day I possess five million of 
 money ! do not   stare so ! do not   have a fit of apoplexy ! and as I have tell 
 you , I shall publish my book myself at my own expense , and it shall 
 succeed ! oh I be in earnest , grim earnest , grim as death ! - I have   more than 
 enough in my pocketbook to pay for its publication now ! " 

 I loose my hold of he , and he fall back stupefied and confuse . 

 " God bless my soul ! " he mutter feebly - " it be like a dream ! - I be 
 never more astonished in my life ! " 

 " nor I ! " I say , another temptation to laughter threaten my 
 composure , - " but strange thing happen in life , as in fiction . and that 
 book which the builder - I mean the reader - reject , shall be the 
 headstone of the corner - or - the success of the season ! what will you 
 take to bring it out ? " 

 " take ? I ? I bring it out ! " 

 " yes , you - why not ? if I offer you a chance to turn an honest penny 
 shall your pay pack of ' reader ' prevent your accept it ? Fie ! you 
 be not a slave , - this be a free country . I know the kind of people who 
 ' read ' for you , - the gaunt unlovable spinster of fifty , - the dyspeptic 
 book - worm who be a ' literary failure ' and can find nothing else to do 
 but scrawl growl comment on the manuscript of promise work , - why 
 in heaven 's name should you rely on such incompetent opinion ? I will pay 
 you for the publication of my book at as stiff a price as you choose and 
 something over for good - will . and I guarantee you another thing - it 
 shall not only make my name as an author , but your as a publisher . I will 
 advertise royally , and I will work the press . everything in this world can 
 be do for money ... " 

 " stop , stop , " - he interrupt . - " this be so sudden ! you must let I 
 think of it - you must give I time to consider - - " 

 " take a day for your meditation then , " I say - " but no long . for if 
 you do not   say yes , I will get another man , and he will have the big picking 
 instead of you ! be wise in time , my friend ! - good - day ! " 

 he run after I . 

 " stay , - look here ! you be so strange , so wild - so erratic you know ! your 
 head seem quite turn ! " 

 " it be ! the right way round this time ! " 

 " dear dear I , " and he smile benevolently - " why , you do not   give I a 
 chance to congratulate you . I really do , you know - I congratulate you 
 sincerely ! " and he shake I by the hand quite fervently . " and as regard 
 the book I believe there be really no fault find with it in the 
 matter of literary style or quality , - it be simply too - too 
 transcendental , and unlikely therefore to suit the public taste . the 
 Domestic - Iniquity line be what we find pay well at present . but I will 
 think about it - where will a letter find you ? " 

 " Grand Hotel , " I respond , inwardly amuse at his puzzled and anxious 
 expression - I know he be already mentally calculate how much he could 
 make out of I in the pursuit of my literary whim - " come there , and 
 lunch or dine with I to - morrow if you like - only send I a word 
 beforehand . remember , I give you just a day 's grace to decide , - it must 
 be yes or no , in twenty - four hour ! " 

 and with this I leave he , star vaguely after I like a man who have 
 see some nameless wonder drop out of the sky at his foot . I go on , 
 laugh to myself inaudibly , till I see one or two passer - by look 
 at I so surprisedly that I come to the conclusion that I must put a 
 disguise on my thought if I would not be take for a madman . I walk 
 briskly , and presently my excitement cool down . I resume the normal 
 condition of the phlegmatic Englishman who consider it the height of 
 bad form to display any personal emotion whatever , and I occupy the 
 rest of the morning in purchase some ready - make apparel which by 
 unusual good luck happen to fit I , and also in give an extensive , 
 not to say extravagant order to a fashionable tailor in Sackville Street 
 who promise I everything with punctuality and despatch . I next send 
 off the rent I owe to the landlady of my former lodging , add five 
 pound extra by way of recognition of the poor woman 's long patience in 
 give I credit , and general kindness towards I during my stay in her 
 dismal house , - and this do I return to the Grand in high spirit , 
 look and feel very much the well for my ready - make outfit . a 
 waiter meet I in the corridor and with the most obsequious deference , 
 inform I that ' his excellency the prince ' be wait luncheon for I 
 in his own apartment . Thither I repair at once , and find my new 
 friend alone in his sumptuous drawing - room , stand near the full light 
 of the large window and hold in his hand an oblong crystal case 
 through which he be look with an almost affectionate solicitude . 

 " ah , Geoffrey ! here you be ! " he exclaim - " I imagine you would get 
 through your business by lunch time , so I wait . " 

 " very good of you ! " I say , please at the friendly familiarity he 
 display in thus call I by my christian name - " what have you get 
 there ? " 

 " a pet of mine , " - he answer , smile slightly - " do you ever see 
 anything like it before ? " 




 VI 


 I approach and examine the box he hold . it be perforate with finely 
 drill hole for the admission of air , and within it lie a brilliant 
 wing insect colour with all the tint and half - tint of the rainbow . 

 " be it alive ? " I ask . 

 " it be alive , and have a sufficient share of intelligence , " - reply 
 Rimânez . " I feed it and it know I , - that be the utmost you can say of 
 the most civilized human being ; they know what feed they . it be quite 
 tame and friendly as you perceive , " - and open the case he gently 
 advance his forefinger . the glitter beetle 's body palpitate with 
 the hue of an opal ; its radiant wing expand , and it rise at once to 
 its protector 's hand and clung there . he lift it out and hold it 
 aloft , then shake it to and fro lightly , he exclaim - 

 " Off , Sprite ! fly , and return to I ! " 

 the creature soar away through the room and round and round the 
 ceiling , look like a beautiful iridescent jewel , the whirr of its 
 wing make a faint buzzing sound as it fly . I watch it fascinate , 
 till after a few graceful movement hither and thither , it return to 
 its owner 's still outstretche hand , and again settle there make no 
 further attempt to fly . 

 " there be a well - wear platitude which declare that ' in the midst of 
 life we be in death ' " - say the prince then softly , bend his dark 
 deep eye on the insect 's quivering wing - " but as a matter of fact that 
 maxim be wrong as so many trite human maxim be . it should be ' in the 
 midst of death we be in life . ' this creature be a rare and curious 
 production of death , but not I believe the only one of its kind . other 
 have be find under precisely similar circumstance . I take possession 
 of this one myself in rather a weird fashion , - will the story bore you ? " 

 " on the contrary " - I rejoin eagerly , my eye fix on the radiant 
 bat - shape thing that glitter in the light as though its vein be 
 phosphorescent . 

 he pause a moment , watch I . 

 " well , - it happen simply thus , - I be present at the uncasing of an 
 egyptian female mummy ; - her talisman describe she as a princess of a 
 famous royal house . several curious jewel be tie round her neck , and 
 on her chest be a piece of beat gold quarter of an inch thick . 
 Underneath this gold plate , her body be swathe round and round in an 
 unusual number of scented wrapping ; and when these be remove it be 
 discover that the mummified flesh between her breast have decay 
 away , and in the hollow or nest thus form by the process of 
 decomposition , this insect I hold be find alive , as brilliant in 
 colour as it be now ! " 

 I could not repress a slight nervous shudder . 

 " horrible ! " I say - " I confess , if I be you , I should not care to make 
 a pet of such an uncanny object . I should kill it , I think . " 

 he keep his bright intent gaze upon I . 

 " why ? " he ask . " I be afraid , my dear Geoffrey , you be not disposed to 
 study science . to kill the poor thing who manage to find life in the 
 very bosom of death , be a cruel suggestion , be it not ? to I , this 
 unclassified insect be a valuable proof   if I need one   of the 
 indestructibility of the germ of conscious existence ; it have eye , and 
 the sens of taste , smell , touch and hearing , - and it gain these 
 together with its intelligence , out of the dead flesh of a woman who 
 live , and no doubt love and sin and suffer more than four 
 thousand year ago ! " he break off , - then suddenly add - " all the same 
 I frankly admit to you that I believe it to be an evil creature . I do 
 indeed ! but I like it none the less for that . in fact I have rather a 
 fantastic notion about it myself . I be much inclined to accept the idea 
 of the transmigration of soul , and so I please my humour sometimes by 
 think that perhaps the princess of that Royal egyptian house have a 
 wicked , brilliant , vampire soul , - and that ... here it be ! " 

 a cold thrill run through I from head to foot at these word , and as I 
 look at the speaker stand opposite I in the wintry light , dark and 
 tall , with the ' wicked , brilliant , vampire soul ' cling to his hand , 
 there seem to I to be a sudden hideousness declare in his excessive 
 personal beauty . I be conscious of a vague terror , but I attribute it 
 to the gruesome nature of the story , and , determine to combat my 
 sensation , I examine the weird insect more closely . as I do so , its 
 bright beady eye sparkle , I think , vindictively , and I step back , 
 vex with myself at the foolish fear of the thing which overpower I . 

 " it be certainly remarkable , " - I murmur - " no wonder you value it , - as 
 a curiosity . its eye be quite distinct , almost intelligent in fact . " 

 " no doubt she have beautiful eye , " - say Rimânez smile . 

 " she ? whom do you mean ? " 

 " the princess , of course ! " he answer , evidently amuse ; " the dear dead 
 lady , - some of whose personality must be in this creature , see that 
 it have nothing but her body to nourish itself upon . " 

 and here he replace the creature in its crystal habitation with the 
 utmost care . 

 " I suppose " - I say slowly , " you , in your pursuit of science , would 
 infer from this that nothing actually perish completely ? " 

 " exactly ! " return Rimânez emphatically . " there , my dear Tempest , be 
 the mischief , - or the deity , - of thing . nothing can be entirely 
 annihilate ; - not even a thought . " 

 I be silent , watch he while he put the glass case with its uncanny 
 occupant away out of sight . 

 " and now for luncheon , " he say gaily , pass his arm through 
 mine - " you look twenty per cent . well than when you go out this 
 morning , Geoffrey , so I conclude your legal matter be disposed of 
 satisfactorily . and what else have you do with yourself ? " 

 seat at table with the dark - face Amiel in attendance , I relate my 
 morning 's adventure , dwell at length on my chance meeting with the 
 publisher who have on the previous day refuse my manuscript , and who 
 now , I feel sure , would be only too glad to close with the offer I have 
 make he . Rimânez listen attentively , smile now and then . 

 " of course ! " he say , when I have conclude . " there be nothing in the 
 least surprising in the conduct of the worthy man . in fact I think he 
 show remarkable discretion and decency in not at once jump at your 
 proposition , - his pleasant hypocrisy in retire to think it over , show 
 he to be a person of tact and foresight . do you ever imagine that a 
 human being or a human conscience exist that could not be buy ? my 
 good fellow , you can buy a king if you only give a long price enough ; 
 and the Pope will sell you a specially reserved seat in his heaven if 
 you will only hand he the cash down while he be on earth ! nothing be 
 give free in this world save the air and the sunshine , - everything else 
 must be buy , - with blood , tear and groan occasionally , - but 
 oftenest with money . " 

 I fancy that Amiel , behind his master 's chair , smile darkly at 
 this , - and my instinctive dislike of the fellow keep I more or less 
 reticent concern my affair till the luncheon be over . I could not 
 formulate to myself any substantial reason for my aversion to this 
 confidential servant of the prince 's , - but do what I would the aversion 
 remain , and increase each time I see his sullen , and as I think , 
 sneer feature . yet he be perfectly respectful and deferential ; I 
 could find no actual fault with he , - nevertheless when at last he 
 place the coffee , cognac , and cigar on the table and noiselessly 
 withdraw , I be conscious of a great relief , and breathe more freely . 
 as soon as we be alone , Rimânez light a cigar and settle himself for a 
 smoke , look over at I with a personal interest and kindness which 
 make his handsome face more than ever attractive . 

 " now let we talk , " - he say - " I believe I be at present the good friend 
 you have , and I certainly know the world well than you do . what do you 
 propose to make of your life ? or in other word how do you mean to begin 
 spend your money ? " 

 I laugh . " well , I shall not   provide fund for the building of a church , 
 or the endowment of a hospital , " - I say - " I shall not even start a Free 
 Library , for these institution , besides become centre for infectious 
 disease , generally get preside over by a committee of local grocer 
 who presume to consider themselves judge of literature . my dear Prince 
 Rimânez , I mean to spend my money on my own pleasure , and I daresay I 
 shall find plenty of way to do it . " 

 Rimânez fan away the smoke of his cigar with one hand , and his dark 
 eye shine with a peculiarly vivid light through the pale grey float 
 haze . 

 " with your fortune , you could make hundred of miserable people 
 happy ; " - he suggest . 

 " thank , I would rather be happy myself first " - I answer gaily - " I 
 daresay I seem to you selfish , - you be philanthropic I know ; I be not . " 

 he still regard I steadily . 

 " you might help your fellow - worker in literature .... " 

 I interrupt he with a decided gesture . 

 " that I will never do , my friend , though the heavens should crack ! my 
 fellow - worker in literature have kick I down at every opportunity , 
 and do their good to keep I from earn a bare livelihood , - it be my 
 turn at kick now , and I will show they as little mercy , as little 
 help , as little sympathy as they have show I ! " 

 " revenge be sweet ! " he quote sententiously - " I should recommend your 
 start a high - class half - crown magazine . " 

 " why ? " 

 " can you ask ? just think of the ferocious satisfaction it would give you 
 to receive the manuscript of your literary enemy , and reject they ! to 
 throw their letter into the waste - paper basket , and send back their 
 poem , story , political article and what not , with ' return with 
 thank ' or ' not up to our mark ' type - write on the back thereof ! to 
 dig knife into your rival through the medium of anonymous criticism ! 
 the howl joy of a savage with twenty scalp at his belt would be tame 
 in comparison to it ! I be an editor once myself , and I know ! " 

 I laugh at his whimsical earnestness . 

 " I daresay you be right , " - I say - " I can grasp the vengeful position 
 thoroughly ! but the management of a magazine would be too much trouble 
 to I , - too much of a tie . " 

 " do not   manage it ! follow the example of all the big editor , and live 
 out of the business altogether , - but take the profit ! you never see the 
 real editor of a lead daily newspaper you know , - you can only 
 interview the sub . the real man be , accord to the season of the 
 year , at Ascot , in Scotland , at Newmarket , or winter in Egypt , - he be 
 suppose to be responsible for everything in his journal , but he be 
 generally the last person who know anything about it . he rely on his 
 ' staff ' - a very bad crutch at time , - and when his ' staff ' be in a 
 difficulty , they get out of it by say they be unable to decide 
 without the editor . meanwhile the editor be mile away , comfortably free 
 from worry . you could bamboozle the public in that way if you like . " 

 " I could , but I should not   care to do so , " I answer - " if I have a 
 business I would not neglect it . I believe in do thing thoroughly . " 

 " so do I ! " respond Rimânez promptly . " I be a very thorough - go 
 fellow myself , and whatever my hand findeth to do , I do it with my 
 might ! - excuse I for quote Scripture ! " he smile , a little ironically 
 I think , then resume - " well , in what , at present do your idea of 
 enjoy your heritage consist ? " 

 " in publish my book , " I answer . " that very book I could get no one 
 to accept , - I tell you , I will make it the talk of London ! " 

 " possibly you will " - he say , look at I through half - close eye and 
 a cloud of smoke , - " London easily talk . particularly on unsavoury and 
 questionable subject . therefore , - as I have already hint , - if your 
 book be a judicious mixture of Zola , Huysmans and Baudelaire , or have 
 for its heroine a ' modest ' maid who consider honourable marriage a 
 ' degradation , ' it would be quite sure of success in these day of new 
 Sodom and Gomorrah . " here he suddenly spring up , and fling away his 
 cigar , confront I . " why do not the heavens rain fire on this accursed 
 city ! it be ripe for punishment , - full of abhorrent creature not worth 
 the torturing in hell to which it be say liar and hypocrite be 
 condemn ! Tempest , if there be one human being more than another that I 
 utterly abhor , it be the type of man so common to the present time , the 
 man who huddle his own loathly vice under a cloak of assume 
 broad - mindedness and virtue . such an one will even deify the loss of 
 chastity in woman by the name of ' purity , ' - because he know that it be 
 by her moral and physical ruin alone that he can gratify his brutal 
 lust . rather than be such a sanctimonious coward I would openly 
 proclaim myself vile ! " 

 " that be because yours be a noble nature " - I say - " you be an exception 
 to the rule . " 

 " an exception ? I ? " - and he laugh bitterly - " yes , you be right ; I be 
 an exception among man perhaps , - but I be one with the beast in 
 honesty ! the lion do not assume the manner of the dove , - he loudly 
 announce his own ferocity . the very cobra , stealthy though its 
 movement be , evince its meaning by a warn hiss or rattle . the 
 hungry wolf 's bay be hear far down the wind , intimidate the hurrying 
 traveller among the waste of snow . but man give no clue to his 
 intent - more malignant than the lion , more treacherous than the snake , 
 more greedy than the wolf , he take his fellow - man 's hand in pretended 
 friendship , and an hour later defame his character behind his 
 back , - with a smile face he hide a false and selfish heart , - fling 
 his pigmy mockery at the riddle of the Universe , he stand gibe at 
 God , feebly a - straddle on his own earth - grave - Heavens ! " - here he 
 stop short with a passionate gesture - " what should the Eternities do 
 with such a thankless , blind worm as he ! " 

 his voice ring out with singular emphasis , - his eye glow with a fiery 
 ardour ; startle by his impressive manner I let my cigar die out and 
 star at he in mute amazement . what an inspire countenance ! - what an 
 imposing figure ! - how sovereignly supreme and almost god - like in his 
 look he seem at the moment ; - and yet there be something terrifying 
 in his attitude of protest and defiance . he catch my wondering 
 glance , - the glow of passion fade from his face , - he laugh and 
 shrug his shoulder . 

 " I think I be bear to be an actor " - he say carelessly - " now and then 
 the love of declamation master I . then I speak - as Prime Ministers and 
 man in Parliament speak - to suit the humour of the hour , and without 
 mean a single word I say ! " 

 " I can not accept that statement " - I answer he , smile a little - " you 
 do mean what you say , - though I fancy you be rather a creature of 
 impulse . " 

 " do you really ! " he exclaim - " how wise of you ! - good Geoffrey Tempest , 
 how very wise of you ! but you be wrong . there never be a be create 
 who be less impulsive , or more charge with set purpose than I. Believe 
 I or not as you like , - belief be a sentiment that can not be force . if 
 I tell you that I be a dangerous companion , - that I like evil thing 
 well than good , - that I be not a safe guide for any man , what would 
 you think ? " 

 " I should think you be whimsically fond of under - estimate your own 
 quality " - I say , re - light my cigar , and feel somewhat amuse by 
 his earnestness - " and I should like you just as well as I do 
 now , - perhaps well , - though that would be difficult . " 

 at these word , he seat himself , bend his stedfast dark eye full 
 upon I . 

 " Tempest , you follow the fashion of the pretty woman about 
 town , - they always like the great scoundrel ! " 

 " but you be not a scoundrel ; " - I rejoin , smoke peacefully . 

 " no , - I be not a scoundrel , but there be a good deal of the devil in I . " 

 " all the well ! " I say , stretch myself out in my chair with lazy 
 comfort - " I hope there be something of he in I too . " 

 " do you believe in he ? " ask Rimânez smile . 

 " the devil ? of course not ! " 

 " he be a very fascinating legendary personage ; " - continue the prince , 
 light another cigar and begin to puff at it slowly - " and he be 
 the subject of many a fine story . picture his fall from 
 heaven ! - ' Lucifer Son of the Morning ' - what a title , and what a 
 birthright ! to be bear of the morning imply to be a creature form of 
 translucent light undefile , with all the warm rise of a million orb of 
 day colour his bright essence , and all the lustre of fiery planet 
 flame in his eye . splendid and supreme , at the right hand of deity 
 itself he stand , this majestic arch - angel , and before his unwearied 
 vision roll the grand creative splendour of God 's thought and 
 dream . all at once he perceive in the vista of embryonic thing a new 
 small world , and on it a be form itself slowly as it be into the 
 Angelic likeness , - a be weak yet strong , sublime yet foolish , - a 
 strange paradox , destine to work its way through all the phase of 
 life , till imbibe the very breath and soul of the Creator it should 
 touch Conscious Immortality , - Eternal Joy . then Lucifer , full of wrath , 
 turn on the Master of the Spheres , and fling forth his reckless 
 defiance , cry aloud - ' Wilt thou make of this slight poor creature an 
 Angel even as I ? I do protest against thee and condemn ! Lo , if thou 
 mak Man in our image I will destroy he utterly , as unfit to share 
 with I the splendour of Thy Wisdom , - the glory of Thy love ! ' and the 
 Voice Supreme in accent terrible and beautiful reply ; ' Lucifer , Son 
 of the Morning , full well dost thou know that never can an idle or 
 waste word be speak before I . for Free - will be the gift of the 
 immortal ; therefore what thou sayest , thou must need do ! fall , proud 
 Spirit from thy high estate ! - thou and thy companion with thee ! - and 
 return no more till Man himself redeem thee ! each human soul that yield 
 unto thy tempting shall be a new barrier set between thee and heaven ; 
 each one that of its own choice doth repel and overcome thee , shall lift 
 thee nearer thy lose home ! when the world reject thee , I will pardon 
 and again receive thee , - but not till then . ' " 

 " I never hear exactly that version of the legend before , " - I 
 say , - " the idea that Man should redeem the devil be quite new to I . " 

 " be it ? " and he look at I fixedly - " well - it be one form of the 
 story , and by no mean the most unpoetical . poor Lucifer ! his punishment 
 be of course eternal , and the distance between himself and Heaven must 
 be rapidly increase every day , - for Man will never assist he to 
 retrieve his error . Man will reject God fast enough and gladly 
 enough - but never the devil . Judge then , how , under the peculiar 
 circumstance of his doom , this ' Lucifer , Son of the morning , ' Satan , or 
 whatever else he be call , must hate Humanity ! " 

 I smile . " well he have one remedy leave to he " - I observe - " he need not 
 tempt anybody . " 

 " you forget ! - he be bind to keep his word , accord to the 
 legend " - say Rimânez - " he swear before God that he would destroy man 
 utterly , - he must therefore fulfil that oath , if he can . angel , it 
 would seem , may not swear before the Eternal without endeavour at 
 least to fulfil their vow , - man swear in the name of God every day 
 without the slight intention of carry out their promise . " 

 " but it be all the veri nonsense , " - I say somewhat impatiently - " all 
 these old legend be rubbish . you tell the story well , and almost as if 
 you believe in it , - that be because you have the gift of speak with 
 eloquence . nowadays no one believe in either devil or angel ; - I , for 
 example , do not even believe in the soul . " 

 " I know you do not " - he answer suavely - " and your scepticism be very 
 comfortable because it relieve you of all personal responsibility . I 
 envy you ! for - I regret to say , I be compel to believe in the soul . " 

 " compel ! " I echo - " that be absurd - no one can compel you to accept 
 a mere theory . " 

 he look at I with a flitting smile that darken rather than 
 lighten his face . 

 " true ! very true ! there be no compelling force in the whole 
 Universe , - Man be the supreme and independent creature , - master of all 
 he survey and own no other dominion save his personal desire . 
 true - I forgot ! let we avoid theology , please , and psychology also , - let 
 we talk about the only subject that have any sense or interest in 
 it - namely , money . I perceive your present plan be definite , - you wish 
 to publish a book that shall create a stir and make you famous . it seem 
 a modest enough campaign ! have you no wide ambition ? there be several 
 way , you know , of get talk about . shall I enumerate they for your 
 consideration ? " 

 I laugh . " if you like ! " 

 " well , in the first place I should suggest your get yourself 
 properly paragraph . it must be know to the press that you be an 
 exceedingly rich man . there be an Agency for the circulation of 
 paragraph , - I daresay they will do it sufficiently well for about ten or 
 twenty guineas . " 

 I open my eye a little at this . 

 " oh , be that the way these thing be do ? " 

 " my dear fellow , how else should they be do ? " he demand somewhat 
 impatiently - " do you think anything in the world be do without 
 money ? be the poor , hard - work journalist your brother or your 
 bosom friend that they should lift you into public notice without 
 get something for their trouble ? if you do not manage they properly 
 in this way , they will abuse you quite heartily and free of cost , - that I 
 can promise you ! I know a ' literary agent , ' a very worthy man too , who 
 for a hundred guineas down , will so ply the paragraph wheel that in a 
 few week it shall seem to the outside public that Geoffrey Tempest , the 
 millionaire , be the only person worth talk about , and the one 
 desirable creature whom to shake hand with be next in honour to meet 
 Royalty itself . " 

 " secure he ! " I say indolently - " and pay he two hundred guinea ! so 
 shall all the world hear of I ! " 

 " when you have be paragraph thoroughly , " go on Rimânez - " the next 
 move will be a dash into what be call ' swagger ' society . this must be 
 do cautiously and by degree . you must be present at the first Levée 
 of the season , and later on , I will get you an invitation to some great 
 lady 's house , where you will meet the Prince of Wales privately at 
 dinner . if you can oblige or please his Royal Highness in any way so 
 much the well for you , - he be at least the most popular royalty in 
 Europe , so it should not be difficult to you to make yourself agreeable . 
 follow upon this event , you must purchase a fine country seat , and 
 have that fact ' paragraph ' - then you can rest and look 
 round , - Society will have take you up , and you will find yourself in 
 the swim ! " 

 I laugh heartily , - well entertain by his fluent discourse . 

 " I should not , " he resume - " propose your put yourself to the 
 trouble of get into Parliament . that be no long necessary to the 
 career of a gentleman . but I should strongly recommend your win the 
 Derby . " 

 " I daresay you would ! " I answer mirthfully - " it be an admirable 
 suggestion , - but not very easy to follow ! " 

 " if you wish to win the Derby , " he rejoin quietly - " you shall win 
 it . I will guarantee both horse and jockey ! " 

 something in his decisive tone impress I , and I lean forward to 
 study his feature more closely . 

 " be you a worker of miracle ? " I ask he jestingly - " do you mean it ? " 

 " try I ! " he respond - " shall I enter a horse for you ? " 

 " you can not ; it be too late , " I say . " you would need to be the devil 
 himself to do it . besides I do not   care about race . " 

 " you will have to amend your taste then , " - he reply - " that be , if you 
 want to make yourself agreeable to the english aristocracy , for they be 
 interested in little else . no really great lady be without her bet 
 book , though she may be deficient in her knowledge of spelling . you may 
 make the big literary furore of the season , and that will count as 
 nothing among ' swagger ' people , but if you win the Derby you will be a 
 really famous man . personally speak I have a great deal to do with 
 racing , - in fact I be devoted to it . I be always present at every great 
 race , - I never miss one ; I always bet , and I never lose ! and now let I 
 proceed with your social plan of action . after win the Derby you 
 will enter for a yacht race at Cowes , and allow the Prince of Wales to 
 beat you just narrowly . then you will give a grand dinner , arrange by a 
 perfect chef , - and you will entertain his Royal Highness to the 
 strain of ' Britannia rule the wave , ' which will serve as a pretty 
 compliment . you will allude to the same well - wear song in a graceful 
 speech , - and the probable result of all this will be one , or perhaps two 
 Royal invitation . so far , so good . with the heat of summer you will go 
 to Homburg to drink the water there whether you require they or 
 not , - and in the autumn you will assemble a shooting - party at the 
 country seat before - mention which you will have purchase , and invite 
 Royalty to join you in kill the poor little partridge . then your 
 name in society may be consider as make , and you can marry whatever 
 fair lady happen to be in the market ! " 

 " thank ! - much obliged ! " and I give way to hearty laughter - " upon my 
 word Lucio , your programme be perfect ! it lack nothing ! " 

 " it be the orthodox round of social success , " say Lucio with admirable 
 gravity - " intellect and originality have nothing whatever to do with 
 it , - only money be need to perform it all . " 

 " you forget my book " - I interpose - " I know there be some intellect in 
 that , and some originality too . surely that will give I an extra lift 
 up the height of fashionable light and lead . " 

 " I doubt it ! " he answer - " I very much doubt it . it will be receive 
 with a certain amount of favour of course , as a production of a rich man 
 amuse himself with literature as a sort of whim . but , as I tell you 
 before , genius seldom develop itself under the influence of wealth . 
 then again ' swagger ' folk can never get it out of their fuddle head 
 that literature belong to Grub Street . great poet , great philosopher , 
 great romancist be always vaguely allude to by ' swagger ' society as 
 ' those sort of people . ' those sort of people be so ' interesting ' say 
 the blue - blooded noodle deprecatingly , excuse themselves as it be 
 for know any member of the class literary . you can fancy a ' swagger ' 
 lady of Elizabeth 's time ask a friend - ' o do you mind , my dear , if I 
 bring one Master William Shakespeare to see you ? he write play , and 
 do something or other at the Globe theatre , - in fact I be afraid he 
 act a little - he be not very well off poor man , - but these sort of 
 people be always so amusing ! ' now you , my dear Tempest , be not a 
 Shakespeare , but your million will give you a well chance than he 
 ever have in his life - time , as you will not have to sue for patronage , or 
 practise a reverence for ' my lord ' or ' my lady , ' - these exalt 
 personage will be only too delighted to borrow money of you if you will 
 lend it . " 

 " I shall not lend , " - I say . 

 " nor give ? " 

 " nor give . " 

 his keen eye flash approval . 

 " I be very glad , " he observe , " that you be determined not to ' go about 
 do good ' as the canting humbug say , with your money . you be wise . 
 spend on yourself , - because your very act of spending can not but benefit 
 other through various channel . now I pursue a different course . I 
 always help charity , and put my name on subscription - list , - and I 
 never fail to assist a certain portion of clergy . " 

 " I rather wonder at that - " I remark - " especially as you tell I you 
 be not a Christian . " 

 " yes , - it do seem strange , - do not   it ? " - he say with an 
 extraordinary accent of what might be term apologetic derision - " but 
 perhaps you do not   look at it in the proper light . many of the clergy be 
 do their utmost good to destroy religion , - by can not , by hypocrisy , 
 by sensuality , by sham of every description , - and when they seek my 
 help in this noble work , I give it , - freely ! " 

 I laugh " you must have your joke evidently " - I say , throw the end 
 of my finished cigar into the fire - " and I see you be fond of 
 satirize your own good action . Hullo , what be this ? " 

 for at that moment Amiel enter , bear a telegram for I on a silver 
 salver . I open it , - it be from my friend the publisher , and run as 
 follow - 

 " Accept book with pleasure . send manuscript immediately . " 

 I show this to Rimânez with a kind of triumph . he smile . 

 " of course ! what else do you expect ? only the man should have word 
 his telegram differently , for I do not suppose he would accept the book 
 with pleasure if he have to lay out his own cash upon it . ' accept money 
 for publishing book with pleasure ' should have be the true message of 
 the wire . well , what be you go to do ? " 

 " I shall see about this at once " - I answer , feel a thrill of 
 satisfaction that at last the time of vengeance on certain of my enemy 
 be approach - " the book must be hurry through the press as quickly 
 as possible , - and I shall take a particular pleasure in personally 
 attend to all the detail concern it . for the rest of my plan , - " 

 " leave they to I ! " say Rimânez lay his finely shaped white hand 
 with a masterful pressure on my shoulder ; " leave they to I ! - and be 
 sure that before very long I shall have set you aloft like the bear who 
 have successfully reach the bun on the top of a grease pole , - a 
 spectacle for the envy of man , and the wonder of angel ! " 




 VII 


 the next three or four week fly by in a whirl of excitement , and by 
 the time they be end I find it hard to recognize myself in the 
 indolent , listless , extravagant man of fashion I have so suddenly become . 
 sometimes at stray and solitary moment the past turn back upon I 
 like a revolving picture in a glass with a flash of unwelcome 
 recollection , and I see myself worn and hungry , and shabbily clothe , 
 bend over my writing in my dreary lodging , wretched , yet amid all my 
 wretchedness receive curious comfort from my own thought which 
 create beauty out of penury , and love out of loneliness . this creative 
 faculty be now dormant in I , - I do very little , and think less . but 
 I feel certain that this intellectual apathy be but a pass phase , - a 
 mental holiday and desirable cessation from brain - work to which I be 
 deservedly entitle after all my suffering at the hand of poverty and 
 disappointment . my book be nearly through the press , - and perhaps the 
 chief pleasure of any I now enjoy be the correction of the proof 
 as they pass under my supervision . yet even this , the satisfaction of 
 authorship , have its drawback , - and my particular grievance be somewhat 
 singular . I read my own work with gratification of course , for I be not 
 behind my contemporary in think well of myself in all I do , - but 
 my complacent literary egoism be mix with a good deal of disagreeable 
 astonishment and incredulity , because my work , write with enthusiasm 
 and feel , propound sentiment and inculcated theory which I 
 personally do not believe in . now , how have this happen , I ask 
 myself ? why have I thus invite the public to accept I at a false 
 valuation ? I pause to consider , - and I find the suggestion puzzle . 
 how come I to write the book at all , see that it be utterly unlike 
 I as I now know myself ? my pen , consciously or unconsciously , have 
 write down thing which my reasoning faculty entirely 
 repudiate , - such as belief in a God , - trust in the eternal 
 possibility of man 's diviner progress , - I credit neither of these 
 doctrine . when I imagine such transcendental and foolish dream I be 
 poor , - starve , - and without a friend in the world ; - remember all 
 this , I promptly set down my so - call ' inspiration ' to the action of an 
 ill - nourish brain . yet there be something subtle in the teaching of 
 the story , and one afternoon when I be revise some of the last proof 
 sheet I catch myself think that the book be noble than its 
 writer . this idea smite I with a sudden pang , - I push my paper 
 aside , and walk to the window , look out . it be rain hard , and 
 the street be black with mud and slush , - the foot - passenger be 
 drench and miserable , - the whole prospect be dreary , and the fact 
 that I be a rich man do not in the least lift from my mind the 
 depression that have steal on I unawares . I be quite alone , for I have 
 my own suite of room now in the hotel , not far from those occupy by 
 Prince Rimânez ; I also have my own servant , a respectable , good sort of 
 fellow whom I rather like because he share to the full the instinctive 
 aversion I feel for the prince 's man , Amiel . then I have my own carriage 
 and horse with attendant coachman and groom , - so that the prince and I , 
 though the most intimate friend in the world , be able to avoid that 
 ' familiarity which breed contempt ' by keep up our own separate 
 establishment . on this particular afternoon I be in a more miserable 
 humour than ever my poverty have bring upon I , yet from a strictly 
 reasonable point of view I have nothing to be miserable about . I be in 
 full possession of my fortune , - I enjoy excellent health , and I have 
 everything I want , with the add consciousness that if my want 
 increase I could gratify they easily . the ' paragraph wheel ' under 
 Lucio 's management have be work with such good effect that I have see 
 myself mention in almost every paper in London and the province as 
 the ' famous millionaire , ' - and for the benefit of the public , who be 
 sadly uninstructed on these matter , I may here state as a very plain 
 unvarnished truth , that for forty pound , 1   a well - know ' agency ' will 
 guarantee the insertion of any paragraph , provide it be not 
 libellous , in no less than four hundred newspaper . the art of ' boom ' 
 be thus easily explain , and level - head people will be able to 
 comprehend why it be that a few name of author be constantly 
 mention in the press , while other , perhaps more deserving , remain 
 ignore . merit count as nothing in such circumstance , - money win the 
 day . and the persistent paragraphing of my name , together with a 
 description of my personal appearance and my ' marvellous literary 
 gift , ' combine with a deferential and almost awe - strike allusion to 
 the ' million ' which make I so interesting -   the paragraph be write 
 out by Lucio and hand for circulation to the ' agency ' aforesaid with 
 ' money down '   - all this I say bring upon I two infliction , - first , 
 any amount of invitation to social and artistic function , - and 
 secondly , a continuous stream of beg - letter . I be compel to 
 employ a secretary , who occupy a room near my suite , and who be keep 
 hard at work all day . needless to say I refuse all appeal for 
 money ; - no one have help I in my distress , with the exception of my 
 old chum ' boffle , ' - no one save he have give I even so much as a word 
 of sympathy , - I be resolve now to be as hard and as merciless as I have 
 find my contemporary . I have a certain grim pleasure in reading 
 letter from two or three literary man , ask for work ' as secretary or 
 companion , ' or fail that , for the loan of a little cash to ' tide over 
 present difficulty . ' one of these applicant be a journalist on the 
 staff of a well - know paper who have promise to find I work , and who 
 instead of do so , have , as I afterwards learn , strongly dissuade 
 his editor from give I any employment . he never imagine that Tempest 
 the millionaire , and Tempest the literary hack , be one and the same 
 person , - so little do the majority think that wealth can ever fall to 
 the lot of author ! I write to he myself however and tell he what I 
 deem it well he should know , add my sarcastic thank for his 
 friendly assistance to I in time of need , - and herein I taste 
 something of the sharp delight of vengeance . I never hear from he 
 again , and I be pretty sure my letter give he material not only for 
 astonishment but meditation . 

 yet with all the advantage over both friend and enemy which I now 
 possess I could not honestly say I be happy . I know I could have 
 every possible enjoyment and amusement the world have to offer , - I know I 
 be one of the most envy among man , and yet , - as I stand look out 
 of the window at the persistently fall rain , I be conscious of a 
 bitterness rather than a sweetness in the full cup of fortune . many 
 thing that I have imagine would give I intense satisfaction have fall 
 curiously flat . for example , I have flood the press with the most 
 carefully word and prominent advertisement of my forthcoming book , 
 and when I be poor I have picture to myself how I should revel in do 
 this , - now that it be do I care nothing at all about it . I be 
 simply weary of the sight of my own advertise name . I certainly do 
 look forward with very genuine feeling and expectation to the 
 publication of my work when that should be an accomplished fact , - but 
 to - day even that idea have lose some of its attractiveness owe to this 
 new and unpleasant impression on my mind that the content of that book 
 be as utterly the reverse of my own true thought as they could well 
 be . a fog begin to darken down over the street in company with the 
 rain , - and disgust with the weather and with myself , I turn away 
 from the window and settle into an arm - chair by the fire , poke the 
 coal till it blaze , and wonder what I should do to rid my mind of 
 the gloom that threaten to envelop it in as thick a canopy as that of 
 the London fog . a tap come at the door , and in answer to my somewhat 
 irritable " come in ! " Rimânez enter . 

 " what , all in the dark Tempest ! " he exclaim cheerfully - " why do not   you 
 light up ? " 

 " the fire 's enough , " - I answer crossly - " enough at any rate to think 
 by . " 

 " and have you be think ? " he inquire laugh - " do not   do it . it be a 
 bad habit . no one think now - a - day , - people can not   stand it - their head 
 be too frail . once begin to think and down go the foundation of 
 society , - besides thinking be always dull work . " 

 " I have find it so , " I say gloomily - " Lucio , there be something wrong 
 about I somewhere . " 

 his eye flash keen , half - amuse inquiry into mine . 

 " Wrong ? oh no , surely not ! what can there be wrong about you , Tempest ? 
 be you not one of the rich man live ? " 

 I let the satire pass . 

 " listen , my friend , " I say earnestly - " you know I have be busy for 
 the last fortnight correct the proof of my book for the press , - do 
 you not ? " 

 he nod with a smile air . 

 " well I have arrive almost at the end of my work and I have come to the 
 conclusion that the book be not I , - it be not a reflex of my feeling 
 at all , - and I can not understand how I come to write it . " 

 " you find it stupid perhaps ? " say Lucio sympathetically . 

 " no , " I answer with a touch of indignation - " I do not find it stupid . " 

 " dull then ? " 

 " no , - it be not dull . " 

 " melodramatic ? " 

 " no , - not melodramatic . " 

 " well , my good fellow , if it be not dull or stupid or melodramatic , what 
 be it ! " he exclaim merrily - " it must be something ! " 

 " yes , - it be this , - it be beyond I altogether . " and I speak with some 
 bitterness . " quite beyond I . I could not write it now , - I wonder I 
 could write it then . Lucio , I daresay I be talk foolishly , - but it 
 seem to I I must have be on some high altitude of thought when I 
 write the book , - a height from which I have since fall . " 

 " I be sorry to hear this , " he answer , with twinkle eye - " from what 
 you say it appear to I you have be guilty of literary sublimity . oh 
 bad , very bad ! nothing can be bad . to write sublimely be a grievous 
 sin , and one which critic never forgive . I be really grieve for you , my 
 friend - I never think your case be quite so desperate . " 

 I laugh in spite of my depression . 

 " you be incorrigible , Lucio ! " I say - " but your cheerfulness be very 
 inspiriting . all I want to explain to you be this , - that my book 
 express a certain tone of thought which purport to be mine , be 
 not I , - in short , I , in my present self have no sympathy with it . I 
 must have change very much since I write it . " 

 " change ? why yes , I should think so ! " and Lucio laugh heartily - " the 
 possession of five million be bind to change a man considerably for 
 the well - or bad ! but you seem to be worry yourself most absurdly 
 about nothing . not one author in many century write from his own 
 heart or as he truly feel - when he do , he become well - nigh immortal . 
 this planet be too limited to hold more than one Homer , one Plato , one 
 Shakespeare . do not   distress yourself - you be neither of these three ! 
 you belong to the age , Tempest , - it be a decadent ephemeral age , and 
 most thing connect with it be decadent and ephemeral . any era that 
 be dominate by the love of money only , have a rotten core within it and 
 must perish . all history tell we so , but no one accept the lesson of 
 history . observe the sign of the time , - art be make subservient to the 
 love of money - literature , politic and religion the same , - you can not 
 escape from the general disease . the only thing to do be to make the 
 good of it , - no one can reform it - least of all you , who have so much 
 of the lucre give to your share . " 

 he pause , - I be silent , watch the bright fire - glow and the dropping 
 red cinder . 

 " what I be go to say now , " he proceed in soft , almost melancholy 
 accent - " will sound ridiculously trite , - still it have the perverse 
 prosiness of truth about it . it be this - in order to write with intense 
 feeling , you must first feel . very likely when you write this book of 
 your , you be almost a human hedge - hog in the way of feeling . every 
 prickly point of you be erect and responsive to the touch of all 
 influence , pleasant or the reverse , imaginative or realistic . this be a 
 condition which some people envy and other would rather dispense with . 
 now that you , as a hedge - hog , have no further need for either alarm , 
 indignation or self - defence , your prickle be soothe into an agreeable 
 passiveness , and you partially cease to feel . that be all . the ' change ' 
 you complain of be thus account for ; - you have nothing to feel 
 about , - hence you can not comprehend how it be that you ever feel . " 

 I be conscious of irritation at the calm conviction of his tone . 

 " do you take I for such a callous creature as all that ? " I 
 exclaim - " you be mistaken in I , Lucio . I feel most keenly - - " 

 " what do you feel ? " he inquire , fix his eye steadily upon 
 I - " there be hundred of starve wretch in this metropolis , - man 
 and woman on the brink of suicide because they have no hope of anything 
 in this world or the next , and no sympathy from their kind - do you feel 
 for they ? do their grief affect you ? you know they do not , - you 
 know you never think of they , - why should you ? one of the chief 
 advantage of wealth be the ability it give we to shut out other 
 people 's misery from our personal consideration . " 

 I say nothing , - for the first time my spirit chafe at the truth of his 
 word , principally because they be true . alas , Lucio ! - if I have 
 only know then what I know now ! 

 " yesterday , " he go on in the same quiet voice - " a child be run over 
 here , just opposite this hotel . it be only a poor child , - mark that 
 ' only . ' its mother run shriek out of some back - street hard by , in 
 time to see the little bleed body cart up in a mangle heap . she 
 strike wildly with both hand at the man who be try to lead she 
 away , and with a cry like that of some hurt savage animal fall face 
 forward in the mud - dead . she be only a poor woman , - another ' only . ' 
 there be three line in the paper about it head ' Sad Incident . ' the 
 hotel - porter here witness the scene from the door with as compose a 
 demeanor as that of a fop at the play , never relax the serene majesty 
 of his attitude , - but about ten minute after the dead body of the woman 
 have be carry out of sight , he , the imperial , gold - button being , 
 become almost crook - back in his servile haste to run and open the door 
 of your brougham , my dear Geoffrey , as you drive up to the entrance . 
 this be a little epitome of life as it be live now - a - day , - and yet the 
 canting cleric swear we be all equal in the sight of heaven ! we may 
 be , though it do not look much like it , - and if we be , it do not 
 matter , as we have cease to care how heaven regard we . I do not   want to 
 point a moral , - I simply tell you the ' sad incident ' as it 
 occur , - and I be sure you be not the least sorry for the fate of 
 either the child who be run over , or its mother who die in the sharp 
 agony of a suddenly break heart . now do not   say you be , because I know 
 you be not ! " 

 " how can one feel sorry for people one do not know or have never 
 see , - " I begin . 

 " exactly ! - how be it possible ? and there we have it - how can one feel , 
 when one 's self be so thoroughly comfortable as to be without any other 
 feel save that of material ease ? thus , my dear Geoffrey , you must be 
 content to let your book appear as the reflex and record of your past 
 when you be in the prickly or sensitive stage , - now you be encase 
 in a pachydermatous covering of gold , which adequately protect you from 
 such influence as might have make you start and writhe , perhaps even 
 roar with indignation , and in the access of fierce torture , stretch out 
 your hand and grasp - quite unconsciously - the wing thing call 
 Fame ! " 

 " you should have be an orator , " - I say , rise and pace the room to 
 and fro in vexation , - " but to I your word be not console , and I do 
 not think they be true . fame be easily enough secure . " 

 " pardon I if I be obstinate ; " - say Lucio with a deprecatory 
 gesture - " Notoriety be easily secure - very easily . a few critic who 
 have din with you and have their fill of wine , will give you notoriety . 
 but fame be the voice of the whole civilized public of the world . " 

 " the public ! " I echo contemptuously - " the public only care for trash . " 

 " it be a pity you should appeal to it then ; " - he respond with a 
 smile - " if you think so little of the public why give it anything of 
 your brain ? it be not worthy of so rare a boon ! come , come Tempest , - do 
 not join in the snarl of unsuccessful author who take refuge , when 
 mark unsaleable , in pour out abuse on the public . the public be the 
 author 's good friend and true critic . but if you prefer to despise it , 
 in company with all the very little literature - monger who form a mutual 
 admiration society , I tell you what to do , - print just twenty copy of 
 your book and present these to the lead reviewer , and when they have 
 write you up   as they will do - I will take care of that   let your 
 publisher advertise to the effect that the ' First and Second Large 
 Editions ' of the new novel by Geoffrey Tempest , be exhaust , one 
 hundred thousand copy have be sell in a week ! if that do not 
 waken up the world in general , I shall be much surprised ! " 

 I laugh , - I be gradually get into a well humour . 

 " it would be quite as fair a plan of action as be adopt by many modern 
 publisher , " I say - " the loud hawking of literary ware now - a - day 
 remind I of the rival shouting of costermonger in a low 
 neighbourhood . but I will not go quite so far , - I will win my fame 
 legitimately if I can . " 

 " you can not ! " declare Lucio with a serene smile - " it be impossible . you 
 be too rich . that of itself be not legitimate in Literature , which 
 great art generally elect to wear poverty in its button - hole as a 
 flower of grace . the fight can not be equal in such circumstance . the 
 fact that you be a millionaire must weigh the balance apparently in 
 your favour for a time . the world can not resist money . if I , for 
 example , become an author , I should probably with my wealth and 
 influence , burn up every one else 's laurel . suppose that a desperately 
 poor man come out with a book at the same time as you do , he will have 
 scarcely the ghost of a chance against you . he will not be able to 
 advertise in your lavish style , - nor will he see his way to dine the 
 critic as you can . and if he should happen to have more genius than 
 you , and you succeed , your success will not be legitimate . but after 
 all , that do not matter much - in Art , if in nothing else , thing 
 always right themselves . " 

 I make no immediate reply , but go over to my table , roll up my 
 correct proof and direct they to the printer , - then ring the 
 bell I give the packet to my man , Morris , bid he post it at once . 
 this do , I turn again towards Lucio and see that he still sit by the 
 fire , but that his attitude be now one of brood melancholy , and that 
 he have cover his eye with one hand on which the glow from the flame 
 shine red . I regret the momentary irritation I have feel against he 
 for tell I unwelcome truth , - and I touch he lightly on the 
 shoulder . 

 " be you in the dump now Lucio ? " I say - " I be afraid my depression 
 have prove infectious . " 

 he move his hand and look up , - his eye be large and lustrous as 
 the eye of a beautiful woman . 

 " I be think , " he say , with a slight sigh - " of the last word I 
 utter just now , - thing always right themselves . curiously enough in 
 art they always do , - no charlatanism or sham last with the god of 
 Parnassus . but in other matter it be different . for instance I shall 
 never right myself ! life be hateful to I at time , as it be to 
 everybody . " 

 " perhaps you be in love ? " I say with a smile . 

 he start up . 

 " in love ! by all the heaven and all the earth too , that suggestion 
 wake I with a vengeance ! in love ! what woman alive do you think could 
 impress I with the notion that she be anything more than a frivolous 
 doll of pink and white , with long hair frequently not her own ? and as 
 for the tom - boy tennis - player and giantess of the era , I do not 
 consider they woman at all , - they be merely the unnatural and strut 
 embryo of a new sex which will be neither male nor female . my dear 
 Tempest , I hate woman . so would you if you know as much about they as I 
 do . they have make I what I be , and they keep I so . " 

 " they be to be much complimented then , " - I observe - " you do they 
 credit ! " 

 " I do ! " he answer slowly - " in more way than one ! " a faint smile be 
 on his face , and his eye brighten with that curious jewel - like gleam 
 I have notice several time before . " believe I , I shall never contest 
 with you such a slight gift as woman 's love , Geoffrey . it be not worth 
 fight for . and apropos of woman , that remind I , - I have promise 
 to take you to the Earl of Elton 's box at the Haymarket to - night , - he be 
 a poor peer , very gouty and somewhat heavily flavour with port - wine , 
 but his daughter , Lady Sibyl , be one of the belle of England . she be 
 present last season and create quite a furore . will you come ? " 

 " I be quite at your disposition " - I say , glad of any excuse to escape 
 the dullness of my own company and to be in that of Lucio , whose talk , 
 even if its satire gall I occasionally , always fascinate my mind and 
 remain in my memory - " what time shall we meet ? " 

 " go and dress now , and join I at dinner , " - he answer ; " and we will 
 drive together to the theatre afterwards . the play be on the usual theme 
 which have lately become popular with stage - manager , - the glorification 
 of a ' fall ' lady , and the exhibition of she as an example of something 
 superlatively pure and good , to the astonished eye of the innocent . as 
 a play it be not worth see , - but perhaps Lady Sibyl be . " 

 he smile again as he stand face I , - the light flame of the fire have 
 die down to a dull uniform coppery red , - we be almost in darkness , 
 and I press the small button near the mantelpiece that flood the 
 room with electric light . his extraordinary beauty then strike I afresh 
 as something altogether singular and half unearthly . 

 " do not   you find that people look at you very often as you pass , Lucio ? " 
 I ask he suddenly and impulsively . 

 he laugh . " not at all . why should they ? every man be so intent on his 
 own aim , and think so much of his own personality that he would 
 scarcely forget his ego if the very devil himself be behind he . 
 woman look at I sometimes , with the affected coy and kitten - like 
 interest usually exhibit by the frail sex for a personable man . " 

 " I can not blame they ! " I answer , my gaze still rest on his stately 
 figure and fine head with as much admiration as I might have feel for a 
 noble picture or statue - " what of this Lady Sibyl we be to meet 
 to - night , - how do she regard you ? " 

 " Lady Sibyl have never see I , " - he reply - " and I have only see she 
 at a distance . it be chiefly for the purpose of an introduction to she 
 that the Earl have ask we to his box this evening . " 

 " ha ha ! Matrimony in view ! " I exclaim jestingly . 

 " yes - I believe Lady Sibyl be for sale , " - he answer with the callous 
 coldness that occasionally distinguish he and make his handsome 
 feature look like an impenetrable mask of scorn - " but up to the present 
 the bid have not be sufficiently high . and I shall not purchase . I 
 have tell you already , Tempest , I hate woman . " 

 " seriously ? " 

 " most seriously . woman have always do I harm , - they have wantonly 
 hinder I in my progress . and why I specially abominate they be , that 
 they have be gift with an enormous power for do good , and that 
 they let this power run to waste and will not use it . their deliberate 
 enjoyment and choice of the repulsive , vulgar and common - place side of 
 life disgust I . they be much less sensitive than man , and infinitely 
 more heartless . they be the mother of the human race , and the fault 
 of the race be chiefly due to they . that be another reason for my 
 hatred . " 

 " do you want the human race to be perfect ? " I ask 
 astonish - " because , if you do , you will find that impossible . " 

 he stand for a moment apparently lose in thought . 

 " everything in the Universe be perfect , " - he say , " except that curious 
 piece of work - man . have you never think out any reason why he should 
 be the one flaw , - the one incomplete creature in a matchless creation ? " 

 " no , I have not , " - I reply - " I take thing as I find they . " 

 " so do I , " - and he turn away , " and as I find they , so they find 
  I ! Au revoir ! dinner in an hour 's time remember ! " 

 the door open and close - he be go . I remain alone for a little , 
 think what a strange disposition be his , - what a curious mixture of 
 philosophy , worldliness , sentiment and satire seem to run like the 
 vein of a leaf through the variable temperament of this brilliant , 
 semi - mysterious personage who have by mere chance become my great 
 friend . we have now be more or less together for nearly a month , and I 
 be no close to the secret of his actual nature than I have be at 
 first . yet I admire he more than ever , - without his society I feel 
 life would be deprive of half its charm . for though , attract as human 
 moth will be by the glare of my glitter million , number of 
 so - call ' friend ' now surround I , there be not one among they who 
 so dominate my every mood and with whom I have so much close sympathy 
 as this man , - this masterful , half cruel , half kind companion of my 
 day , who at time seem to accept all life as the veri bagatelle , 
 and myself as a part of the trivial game . 


   1   a fact . 




 VIII 


 no man , I think , ever forget the first time he be bring face to face 
 with perfect beauty in woman . he may have catch fleeting glimpse of 
 loveliness on many fair face often , - bright eye may have flash on 
 he like star - beam , - the hue of a dazzle complexion may now and then 
 have charm he , or the seductive outline of a graceful figure ; - all 
 these be as mere peep into the infinite . but when such vague and 
 pass impression be suddenly draw together in one focus , - when all 
 his dreamy fancy of form and colour take visible and complete 
 manifestation in one living creature who look down upon he as it be 
 from an empyrean of untouched maiden pride and purity , it be more to his 
 honour than his shame , if his sens swoon at the ravish vision , and 
 he , despite his rough masculinity and brute strength , become nothing 
 but the mere slave to passion . in this way be I overwhelmed and 
 conquer without any chance of deliverance when Sibyl Elton 's violet 
 eye , lift slowly from the shadow of their dark lash , rest upon I 
 with that indefinable expression of mingled interest and indifference 
 which be suppose to indicate high breeding , but which more frequently 
 intimidate and repulse the frank and sensitive soul . the Lady Sibyl 's 
 glance repel , but I be none the less attract . Rimânez and I have 
 enter the Earl of Elton 's box at the Haymarket between the first and 
 second act of the play , and the Earl himself , an unimpressive , 
 bald - headed , red - faced old gentleman , with fuzzy white whisker , have 
 rise to welcome we , seize the prince 's hand and shake it with 
 particular effusiveness .   I learn afterwards that Lucio have lend he a 
 thousand pound on easy term , a fact which partly account for the 
 friendly fervour of his greeting .   his daughter have not move ; but a 
 minute or two later when he address she somewhat sharply , say 
 " Sibyl ! Prince Rimânez and his friend , Mr Geoffrey Tempest , " she turn 
 her head and honour we both with the chill glance I have endeavour 
 to describe , and the very faint possible bow as an acknowledgment of 
 our presence . her exquisite beauty smite I dumb and foolish , - I could 
 find nothing to say , and stand silent and confused , with a strange 
 sensation of bewilderment upon I . the old Earl make some remark about 
 the play , which I scarcely hear though I answer vaguely and at 
 hap - hazard , - the orchestra be play abominably as be usual in 
 theatre , and its brazen din sound like the noise of the sea in my 
 ear , - I have not much real consciousness of anything save the wondrous 
 loveliness of the girl who face I , clothe in pure white , with a few 
 diamond shin about she like stray dewdrop on a rose . Lucio speak to 
 she , and I listen . 

 " at last , Lady Sibyl , " he say , bend towards she deferentially . " at 
 last I have the honour of meet you . I have see you often , as one 
 see a star , - at a distance . " 

 she smile , - a smile so slight and cold that it scarcely lift the 
 corner of her lovely lip . 

 " I do not think I have ever see you , " she reply . " and yet there be 
 something oddly familiar in your face . I have hear my father speak of 
 you constantly , - I need scarcely say his friend be always mine . " 

 he bow . 

 " to merely speak to Lady Sibyl Elton be count sufficient to make the 
 man so privileged happy , " he say . " to be her friend be to discover the 
 lose paradise . " 

 she flush , - then grow suddenly very pale , and shiver , she draw she 
 cloak towards she . Rimânez wrap its perfumed silken fold carefully 
 round her beautiful shoulder , - how I grudge he the dainty task ! he 
 then turn to I , and place a chair just behind her . 

 " will you sit here Geoffrey ? " he suggest - " I want to have a moment 's 
 business chat with Lord Elton . " 

 recover my self - possession a little , I hasten to take the chance he 
 thus generously give I to ingratiate myself in the young lady 's favour , 
 and my heart give a foolish bound of joy because she smile 
 encouragingly as I approach she . 

 " you be a great friend of Prince Rimânez ? " she ask softly , as I sit 
 down . 

 " yes , we be very intimate , " I reply - " he be a delightful companion . " 

 " so I should imagine ! " and she look over at he where he sit next to 
 her father talk earnestly in low tone - " he be singularly handsome . " 

 I make no reply . of course Lucio 's extraordinary personal attractiveness 
 be undeniable , - but I rather grudge her praise bestow on he just 
 then . her remark seem to I as tactless as when a man with one pretty 
 woman beside he loudly admire another in her hearing . I do not myself 
 assume to be actually handsome , but I know I be well look than the 
 ordinary run of man . so out of sudden pique I remain silent , and 
 presently the curtain rise and the play be resume . a very questionable 
 scene be enact , the ' woman with the past ' be well to the front of 
 it . I feel disgusted at the performance and look at my companion to 
 see if they too be similarly move . there be no sign of disapproval 
 on Lady Sibyl 's fair countenance , - her father be bend forward 
 eagerly , apparently gloat over every detail , - Rimânez wear that 
 inscrutable expression of his in which no feeling whatever could be 
 discern . the ' woman with the past ' go on with her hysterical 
 sham - heroic , and the mealy - mouthed fool of a hero declare she to be a 
 ' pure angel wrong , ' and the curtain fall amid loud applause . one 
 energetic hiss come from the gallery , affect the occupant of the 
 stall to scandalize amazement . 

 " England have progress ! " say Rimânez in soft half - banter 
 tone - " once upon a time this play would have be hoot off the stage 
 as likely to corrupt the social community . but now the only voice of 
 protest come from the ' low ' class . " 

 " be you a democrat , prince ? " inquire Lady Sibyl , wave her fan 
 indolently to and fro . 

 " not I ! I always insist on the pride and supremacy of worth , - I do not 
 mean money value , but intellect . and in this way I foresee a new 
 aristocracy . when the High grow corrupt , it fall and become the 
 Low ; - when the low educate itself and aspire , it become the High . 
 this be simply the course of nature . " 

 " but , God bless my soul ! " exclaim Lord Elton - " you do not   call this 
 play low or immoral do you ? it be a realistic study of modern social 
 life - that be what it be . these woman you know , - these poor soul with a 
 past - be very interesting ! " 

 " very ! " murmur his daughter . - " in fact it would seem that for woman 
 with no such ' past ' there can be no future ! Virtue and modesty be quite 
 out of date , and have no chance whatever . " 

 I lean towards she , half whispering , 

 " Lady Sibyl , I be glad to see this wretched play offend you . " 

 she turn her deep eye on I in mingled surprise and amusement . 

 " oh no , it do not , " she declare - " I have see so many like it . and I 
 have read so many novel on just the same theme ! I assure you , I be 
 quite convinced that the so - call ' bad ' woman be the only popular type 
 of our sex with man , - she get all the enjoyment possible out of 
 life , - she frequently make an excellent marriage , and have , as the 
 Americans say ' a good time all round . ' it be the same thing with our 
 convict criminal , - in prison they be much well feed than the honest 
 working - man . I believe it be quite a mistake for woman to be 
 respectable , - they be only consider dull . " 

 " ah , now you be only joke ! " I say with an indulgent smile . " you know 
 that in your heart you think very differently ! " 

 she make no answer , as just then the curtain go up again , disclose 
 the unclean ' lady ' of the piece , " have a good time all round " on board 
 a luxurious yacht . during the unnatural and stilte dialogue which 
 follow , I withdraw a little back into the shadow of the box , and all 
 that self - esteem and assurance of which I have be suddenly deprive by 
 a glance at Lady Sibyl 's beauty , come back to I , and a perfectly stolid 
 coolness and composure succeed to the first feverish excitement of my 
 mind . I recall Lucio 's word - " I believe Lady Sibyl be for 
 sale " - and I think triumphantly of my million . I glance at the old 
 earl , abjectly pull at his white whisker while he listen anxiously 
 to what be evidently money scheme propound by Lucio . then my gaze 
 come back appraisingly to the lovely curve of Lady Sibyl 's milk - white 
 throat , her beautiful arm and bosom , her rich brown hair of the shade 
 of a ripe chestnut , her delicate haughty face , languid eye and 
 brilliant complexion , - and I murmur inwardly - " all this loveliness be 
 purchaseable , and I will purchase it ! " at that very instant she turn 
 to I and say - 

 " you be the famous Mr Tempest , be you not ? " 

 " Famous ? " I echo with a deep sense of gratification - " well , - I be 
 scarcely that , - yet ! my book be not publish ... " 

 her eyebrow arch themselves surprisedly . 

 " your book ? I do not know you have write one ? " 

 my flattered vanity sink to zero . 

 " it have be extensively advertise , " I begin impressively , - but she 
 interrupt I with a laugh . 

 " oh I never read advertisement , - it be too much trouble . when I ask if 
 you be the famous Mr Tempest , I mean to say be you the great 
 millionaire who have be so much talk of lately ? " 

 I bow a somewhat chill assent . she look at I inquisitively over the 
 lace edge of her fan . 

 " how delightful it must be for you to have so much money ! " she 
 say - " and you be young too , and good - look . " 

 pleasure take the place of vex amour - propre and I smile . 

 " you be very kind , Lady Sibyl ! " 

 " why ? " she ask laughing , - such a delicious little low laugh - " because 
 I tell you the truth ? you be young and you be good - look ! 
 millionaire be generally such appalling creature . Fortune , while 
 give they money , frequently deprive they of both brain and personal 
 attractiveness . and now do tell I about your book ! " 

 she seem to have suddenly dispense with her former reserve , and 
 during the last act of the play , we converse freely , in whisper which 
 assist we to become almost confidential . her manner to I now be full 
 of grace and charm , and the fascination she exert over my sens 
 become complete . the performance over , we all leave the box together , and 
 as Lucio be still apparently engross with Lord Elton I have the 
 satisfaction of escort Lady Sibyl to her carriage . when her father 
 join she , Lucio and I both stand together look in at the window of 
 the brougham , and the Earl , get hold of my hand shake it up and down 
 with boisterous friendliness . 

 " come and dine , - come and dine ! " he splutter excitedly ; " come - let I 
 see , - this be Tuesday - come on Thursday . short notice and no ceremony ! 
 my wife be paralyse I be sorry to say , - she can not   receive , - she can only 
 see a few people now and then when she be in the humour , - her sister 
 keep house and do the honours , - Aunt Charlotte , eh Sibyl ? - ha - ha - ha ! 
 the Deceased Wife 's Sister 's Bill would never be any use to I , for if 
 my wife be to die I should not   be anxious to marry Miss Charlotte 
 Fitzroy ! ha ha ha ! a perfectly unapproachable woman sir ! - a model , - ha 
 ha ! come and dine with we , Mr Tempest , - Lucio , you bring he along with 
 you , eh ? we have   get a young lady stay with we , - an american , dollar , 
 accent and all , - and by Jove I believe she want to marry I ha ha ha ! 
 and be wait for Lady Elton to go to a well world first , ha ha ! come 
 along - come and see the little american , eh ? Thursday shall it be ? " 

 over the fair feature of Lady Sibyl there pass a faint shadow of 
 annoyance at her father 's allusion to the " little american , " but she 
 say nothing . only her look appear to question our intention as well 
 as to persuade our will , and she seem satisfied when we both accept 
 the invitation give . another apoplectic chuckle from the Earl and a 
 couple of handshake , - a slight graceful bow from her lovely ladyship , 
 as we raise our hat in farewell , and the Elton equipage roll away , 
 leave we to enter our own vehicle , which amid the officious roaring 
 of street - boy and policeman have just manage to draw up in front of the 
 theatre . as we drive off , Lucio peer inquisitively at I - I could see 
 the steely glitter of his fine eye in the semi - darkness of the 
 brougham , - and say - 

 " well ? " 

 I be silent . 

 " do not   you admire she ? " he go on - " I must confess she be cold , - a very 
 chilly vestal indeed , - but snow often cover volcano ! she have good 
 feature , and a naturally clear complexion . " 

 despite my intention to be reticent , I could not endure this tame 
 description . 

 " she be perfectly beautiful , " - I say emphatically . " the dull eye 
 must see that . there be not a fault to be find with she . and she be 
 wise to be reserve and cold - be she too lavish of her smile and too 
 seductive in manner , she might drive many man not only into folly , but 
 madness . " 

 I feel rather than see the cat - like glance he flash upon I . 

 " positively , Geoffrey , I believe that notwithstanding the fact that we 
 be only in February , the wind blow upon you due south , bring with 
 it odour of rose and orange - blossom ! I fancy Lady Sibyl have powerfully 
 impress you ? " 

 " do you wish I to be impress ? " I ask . 

 " I ? my dear fellow , I wish nothing that you yourself do not wish . I 
 accommodate my way to my friend ' humour . if ask for my opinion I 
 should say it be rather a pity if you be really smite with the young 
 lady , as there be no obstacle to be encounter . a love - affair , to be 
 conduct with spirit and enterprise should always bristle with 
 opposition and difficulty , real or invent . a little secrecy and a good 
 deal of wrong - doing , such as sly assignation and the telling of any 
 amount of lie - such thing add to the agreeableness of love - making on 
 this planet - " 

 I interrupt he . 

 " see here , Lucio , you be very fond of allude to ' this ' planet as if 
 you know anything about other planet " - I say impatiently . " this 
 planet , as you somewhat contemptuously call it , be the only one we 
 have any business with . " 

 he bend his pierce look so ardently upon I that for the moment I be 
 startle . 

 " if that be so , " he answer , " why in Heaven 's name do you not let the 
 other planet alone ? why do you strive to fathom their mystery and 
 movement ? if man , as you say , have no business with any planet save 
 this one why be they ever on the alert to discover the secret of 
 mighty world , - a secret which haply it may some day terrify they to 
 know ! " 

 the solemnity of his voice and the inspire expression of his face awe 
 I . I have no reply ready , and he go on - 

 " do not let we talk , my friend , of planet , not even of this particular 
 pin 's point among they know as Earth . let we return to a well 
 subject - the Lady Sibyl . as I have already say , there be no obstacle 
 in the way of your wooing and win she , if such be your desire . 
 Geoffrey Tempest , as mere author of book would indeed be insolent to 
 aspire to the hand of an earl 's daughter , but Geoffrey Tempest , 
 millionaire , will be a welcome suitor . poor Lord Elton 's affair be in 
 a bad way - he be almost out - at - elbow ; - the american woman who be 
 boarding with he - - " 

 " boarding with he ! " I exclaim - " surely he do not keep a 
 boarding - house ? " 

 Lucio laugh heartily . 

 " no , no ! - you must not put it so coarsely , Geoffrey . it be simply this , 
 that the Earl and Countess of Elton give the prestige of their home and 
 protection to Miss Diana Chesney   the American aforesaid   for the 
 trifling sum of two thousand guineas per annum . the Countess being 
 paralyze , be oblige to hand over her duty of chaperonage to her 
 sister Miss Charlotte Fitzroy , - but the halo of the coronet still hover 
 over Miss Chesney 's brow . she have her own suite of room in the house , 
 and go wherever it be proper for she to go , under Miss Fitzroy 's care . 
 Lady Sibyl do not like the arrangement , and be therefore never see 
 anywhere except with her father . she will not join in companionship with 
 Miss Chesney , and have say so pretty plainly . " 

 " I admire she for it ! " I say warmly - " I really be surprised that Lord 
 Elton should condescend - - " 

 " condescend to what ? " inquire Lucio - " condescend to take two thousand 
 guineas a year ? good heavens man , there be no end of lord and lady 
 who will readily agree to perform such an act of condescension . ' blue ' 
 blood be get thin and poor , and only money can thicken it . Diana 
 Chesney be worth over a million dollar and if Lady Elton be to die 
 conveniently soon , I should not be surprised to see that ' little 
 American ' step triumphantly into her vacant place . " 

 " what a state of topsy - turveydom ! " I say , half angrily . 

 " Geoffrey , my friend , you be really amazingly inconsistent ! be there a 
 more flagrant example of topsy - turveydom than yourself for instance ? six 
 week ago , what be you ? a mere scribbler , with fluttering of the 
 wing of genius in your soul , but many uncertainty as to whether those 
 wing would ever be strong enough to lift you out of the rut of 
 obscurity in which you flounder , struggle and grumble at adverse 
 fate . now , as millionaire , you think contemptuously of an Earl , because 
 he venture quite legitimately to add a little to his income by boarding 
 an american heiress and launch she into society where she would never 
 get without he . and you aspire , or probably mean to aspire to the hand 
 of the Earl 's daughter , as if you yourself be a descendant of king . 
 nothing can be more topsy - turvey than your condition ! " 

 " my father be a gentleman , " I say , with a touch of hauteur , " and a 
 descendant of gentleman . we be never common folk , - our family be one 
 of the most highly esteemed in the county . " 

 Lucio smile . 

 " I do not doubt it , my dear fellow , - I do not in the least doubt it . but 
 a simple ' gentleman ' be a long way below - or above - an Earl . have it 
 which side you choose ! - because it really do not   matter nowadays . we 
 have come to a period of history when rank and lineage count as nothing 
 at all , owe to the profoundly obtuse stupidity of those who happen to 
 possess it . so it chance , that as no resistance be make , brewer be 
 create peer of the realm , and ordinary tradesman be knight , and the 
 very old family be so poor that they have to sell their estate and 
 jewel to the high bidder , who be frequently a vulgar ' railway - king ' 
 or the introducer of some new manure . you occupy a well position than 
 such , since you inherit your money with the farth satisfaction that 
 you do not know how it be make . " 

 " true ! " I answer meditatively , - then , with a sudden flash of 
 recollection I add - " by the way I never tell you that my deceased 
 relative imagine that he have sell his soul to the devil , and that this 
 vast fortune of his be the material result ! " 

 Lucio burst into a violent fit of laughter . 

 " no ! not possible ! " he exclaim derisively - " what an idea ! I suppose he 
 have a screw loose somewhere ! imagine any sane man believe in a devil ! 
 ha , ha , ha ! and in these advanced day too ! well , well ! the folly of 
 human imagination will never end ! here we be ! " - and he spring lightly 
 out as the brougham stop at the Grand Hotel - " I will say good - night 
 to you , Tempest . I have   promise to go and have a gamble . " 

 " a gamble ? where ? " 

 " at one of the select private club . there be any amount of they in 
 this eminently moral metropolis - no occasion to go to Monte Carlo ! will 
 you come ? " 

 I hesitate . the fair face of Lady Sibyl haunt my mind , - and I feel , 
 with a no doubt foolish sentimentality , that I would rather keep my 
 thought of her sacred , and unpollute by contact with thing of low 
 tone . 

 " not to - night ; " - I say , - then half smile , I add - " it must be rather 
 a one - sided affair for other man to gamble with you , Lucio ! you can 
 afford to lose , - and perhaps they can not . " 

 " if they can not , they should not   play , " - he answer - " a man should at 
 least know his own mind and his own capacity ; if he do not , he be no 
 man at all . as far as I have learn by long experience , those who 
 gamble like it , and when they like it , I like it . I will take you with 
 I to - morrow if you care to see the fun , - one or two very eminent man 
 be member of the club , though of course they would not   have it know 
 for world . you shall not   lose much - I will see to that . " 

 " all right , - to - morrow it shall be ! " - I respond , for I do not wish to 
 appear as though I grudge lose a few pound at play - " but to - night I 
 think I will write some letter before go to bed . " 

 " yes - and dream of Lady Sibyl ! " say Lucio laugh - " if she fascinate 
 you as much when you see she again on Thursday you have well begin the 
 siege ! " 

 he wave his hand gaily , and re - enter his carriage , be drive off at 
 a furious pace through the drift fog and rain . 




 IX 


 my publisher , John Morgeson , - the estimable individual who have first 
 refuse my book , and who now , move by self - interest , be devote his 
 energy assiduously to the business of launch it in the most modern 
 and approve style , be not like Shakespeare 's Cassio , strictly ' an 
 honourable man . ' neither be he the respectable chief of a 
 long - establish firm whose system of the cheating of author , mellow 
 by time , have become almost sacred ; - he be a ' new ' man , with new way , 
 and a good stock of new push and impudence . all the same , he be clever , 
 shrewd and diplomatic , and for some reason or other , have secure the 
 favour of a certain portion of the press , many of the daily and 
 weekly always give special prominence to his publication over the 
 head of other far more legitimately deal firm . he enter into a 
 partial explanation of his method , when , on the morning after my first 
 meeting with the Earl of Elton and his daughter , I call upon he to 
 inquire how thing be go with regard to my book . 

 " we shall publish next week , " - he say , rub his hand complacently , 
 and address I with all the deference due to my banking account - " and 
 as you do not   mind what you spend , I will tell you just what I propose to 
 do . I intend to write out a mystify paragraph of about some seventy 
 line or so , describe the book in a vague sort of way as ' likely to 
 create a new era of thought ' - or , ' ere long everybody who be anybody 
 will be compel to read this remarkable work , ' - or ' as something 
 that must be welcome to all who would understand the drift of one of the 
 most delicate and burn question of the time . ' these be all stock 
 phrase , use over and over again by the reviewer , - there be no 
 copyright in they . and the last one always ' tell ' wonderfully , 
 consider how old it be , and how often it have be make to do duty , 
 because any allusion to a ' delicate and burn question ' make a 
 number of people think the novel must be improper , and they send for it 
 at once ! " 

 he chuckle at his own perspicuity , and I sit silent , study he with 
 much inward amusement . this man on whose decision I have humbly and 
 anxiously wait not so many week ago be now my pay tool , - ready to 
 obey I to any possible extent for so much cash , - and I listen to he 
 indulgently while he go on unravel his scheme for the 
 gratification of my vanity , and the pocketing of his extra . 

 " the book have be splendidly advertise " - he go on ; " it could not 
 have be more lavishly do . order do not come in very fast yet - but 
 they will , - they will . this paragraph of mine , which will take the shape 
 of a ' leaderette , ' I can get insert in about eight hundred to a 
 thousand newspaper here and in America . it will cost you , - say a 
 hundred guineas - perhaps a trifle more . do you mind that ? " 

 " not in the least ! " I reply , still vastly amuse . 

 he meditate a moment , - then draw his chair close to mine and lower 
 his voice a little . 

 " you understand I suppose , that I shall only issue two hundred and fifty 
 copy at first ? " 

 this limited number seem to I absurd , and I protest vehemently . 

 " such an idea be ridiculous ! " I say - " you can not supply the trade with 
 such a scanty edition . " 

 " wait , my dear sir , wait , - you be too impatient . you do not give I 
 time to explain . all these two hundred and fifty will be give away by 
 I in the proper quarter on the day of publication , - never mind 
 how , - they must be give away - " 

 " why ? " 

 " why ? " and the worthy Morgeson laugh sweetly - " I see , my dear Mr 
 Tempest , you be like most man of genius - you do not understand 
 business . the reason why we give the first two hundred and fifty copy 
 away be in order to be able to announce at once in all the paper that 
 ' the First Large Edition of the New Novel by Geoffrey Tempest being 
 exhausted on the day of publication , a Second be in Rapid Preparation . ' 
 you see we thus hoodwink the public , who of course be not in our 
 secret , and be not to know whether an edition be two hundred or two 
 thousand . the Second Edition will of course be ready behind the scene , 
 and will consist of another two hundred and fifty . " 

 " do you call that course of procedure honest ? " I ask quietly . 

 " honest ? my dear sir ! honest ? " and his countenance wear a virtuously 
 injure expression - " of course it be honest ! look at the daily paper ! 
 such announcement appear every day - in fact they be get rather too 
 common . I freely admit that there be a few publisher here and there 
 who stick up for exactitude and go to the trouble of not only give the 
 number of copy in an Edition , but also publish the date of each one 
 as it be issue , - this may be principle if they like to call it so , but 
 it involve a great deal of precise calculation and worry ! if the public 
 like to be deceive , what be the use of be exact ! now , to 
 resume , - your second edition will be send off ' on sale or return ' to 
 provincial bookseller , and then we shall announce - " in consequence of 
 the Enormous Demand for the new novel by Geoffrey Tempest , the large 
 Second Edition be out of print . a Third will be issue in the course of 
 next week . " and so on , and so on , till we get to the sixth or seventh 
 edition   always number two hundred and fifty each   in three volume ; 
 perhaps we can by skilful management work it to a tenth . it be only a 
 question of diplomacy and a little dexterous humbugging of the trade . 
 then we shall arrive at the one - volume issue , which will require 
 different handling . but there be time enough for that . the frequent 
 advertisement will add to the expense a bit , but if you do not   mind - " 

 " I do not   mind anything , " I say - ' so long as I have my fun . " 

 " your fun ? " he query surprisedly - " I think it be fame you want , 
 more than fun ! " 

 I laugh aloud . 

 " I be not such a fool as to suppose that fame be secure by 
 advertisement , " I say - " for instance I be one of those who think the 
 fame of Millais as an artist be mar when he degrade himself to the 
 level of paint the little green boy blow bubble of Pears 's Soap . 
 that be an advertisement . and that very incident in his career , 
 trifle though it seem , will prevent his ever stand on the same 
 dignified height of distinction with such master in art as Romney , Sir 
 Peter Lely , Gainsborough or Reynolds . " 

 " I believe there be a great deal of justice in what you say ; " and 
 Morgeson shake his head wisely - " view from a purely artistic and 
 sentimental standpoint you be right . " and he become suddenly downcast 
 and dubious . " yes , - it be a most extraordinary thing how fame do 
 escape people sometimes just when they seem on the point of grasp it . 
 they be ' boom ' in every imaginable way , and yet after a time nothing 
 will keep they up . and there be other again who get kick and 
 buffet and mock and deride - - " 

 " like Christ ? " I interpose with a half smile . he look shocked , - he 
 be a non - conformist , - but remember in time how rich I be , he bow 
 with a meek patience . 

 " yes " - and he sigh - " as you suggest , Mr Tempest , like Christ . mock 
 and deride and oppose at every turn , - and yet by the queer caprice 
 of destiny , they succeed in win a world - wide fame and power - - " 

 " like Christ again ! " I say mischievously , for I love to jar his 
 non - conformist conscience . 

 " exactly ! " he pause , look piously down . then with a return of 
 secular animation he add - " but I be not think of the Great Example 
 just then , Mr Tempest - I be think of a woman . " 

 " indeed ! " I say indifferently . 

 " yes - a woman , who despite continue abuse and opposition be rapidly 
 become celebrate . you be sure to hear of she in literary and social 
 circle " - and he give I a furtive glance of doubtful inquiry - " but she 
 be not rich , you know , - only famous . however , - we have nothing to do 
 with she just now - so let we return to business . the one uncertain point 
 in the matter of your book 's success be the attitude of the critic . 
 there be only six lead man who do the review , and between they they 
 cover all the english magazine and some of the American too , as well as 
 the London paper . here be their name " - and he hand I a pencil 
 memorandum , - " and their address , as far as I can ascertain they , or 
 the address of the paper for which they most frequently write . the 
 man at the head of the list , David McWhing , be the most formidable of 
 the lot . he write everywhere about everything , - be a Scotchman he be 
 bind to have his finger in every pie . if you can secure mcwhing , you 
 need not trouble so much about the other , as he generally give the 
 ' lead , ' and have his own way with the editor . he be one of the ' personal 
 friend ' of the editor of the Nineteenth Century for example , and you 
 would be sure to get a notice there , which would otherwise be 
 impossible . no reviewer can review anything for that magazine unless 
 he be one of the editor 's friend . 2   you must manage mcwhing , or 
 he might , just for the sake of ' show off , ' cut you up rather 
 roughly . " 

 " that would not matter , " I say , divert at the idea of ' manage 
 mcwhing , ' - " a little slating always help a book to sell . " 

 " in some case it do , " - and Morgeson stroke his thin beard 
 perplexedly - " but in other it most emphatically do not . where there 
 be any very decide or daring originality , adverse criticism be always 
 the most effective . but a work like yours require foster with 
 favour , - want ' boom ' in short - - " 

 " I see ! " and I feel distinctly annoyed - " you do not   think my book 
 original enough to stand alone ? " 

 " my dear sir ! - you be really - really - ! what shall I say ? " and he 
 smile apologetically - " a little brusque ? I think your book show 
 admirable scholarship and delicacy of thought , - if I find fault with it 
 at all , it be perhaps because I be dense . the only thing it lack in my 
 opinion be what I should call tenaciousness , for want of a well 
 expression , - the quality of hold the reader 's fancy fix like a 
 nail . but after all this be a common failing of modern literature ; few 
 author feel sufficiently themselves to make other feel . " 

 I make no reply for a moment . I be think of Lucio 's remark on this 
 very same subject . 

 " well ! " I say at last - " if I have no feeling when I write the book , I 
 certainly have none now . why man , I feel every line of it ! - painfully 
 and intensely ! " 

 " ay , ay indeed ! " say Morgeson soothingly - " or perhaps you think you 
 feel , which be another very curious phase of the literary temperament . 
 you see , to convince people at all , you must first yourself be 
 convince . the result of this be generally a singular magnetic 
 attraction between author and public . however I be a bad hand at 
 argument , - and it be possible that in hasty reading I may have gather 
 a wrong impression of your intention . anyhow the book shall be a 
 success if we can make it so . all I venture to ask of you be that you 
 should personally endeavour to manage mcwhing ! " 

 I promise to do my good , and on this understanding we part . I 
 realise that Morgeson be capable of great discernment than I have 
 imagine , and his observation have give I material for thought which 
 be not altogether agreeable . for if my book , as he say , lack 
 tenacity , why then it would not take root in the public mind , - it would 
 be merely the ephemeral success of a season , - one of those brief ' boom ' 
 in literary ware for which I have such unmitigated contempt , - and Fame 
 would be as far off as ever , except that spurious imitation of it which 
 the fact of my million have secure . I be in no good humour that 
 afternoon , and Lucio see it . he soon elicit the sum and substance of 
 my interview with Morgeson , and laugh long and somewhat uproariously 
 over the propose ' manage ' of the redoubtable mcwhing . he glance at 
 the five name of the other lead critic and shrug his shoulder . 

 " Morgeson be quite right , " - he say - " mcwhing be intimate with the rest 
 of these fellow - they meet at the same club , dine at the same cheap 
 restaurant and make love to the same paint ballet - girl . all in a 
 comfortable little fraternal union together , and one oblige the other 
 on their several journal when occasion offer . oh yes ! I should make up 
 to mcwhing if I be you . " 

 " but how ? " I demand , for though I know McWhing 's name well enough 
 have see it sign ad nauseam to literary article in almost every 
 paper extant , I have never meet the man ; " I can not ask any favour of a 
 press critic . " 

 " of course not ! " and Lucio laugh heartily again - " if you be to do 
 such an idiotic thing what a slating you would get for your pain ! there be 
 no sport a critic love so much as the flaying of an author who have make 
 the mistake of lower himself to the level of ask favour of his 
 intellectual inferior ! no , no , my dear fellow ! - we shall manage mcwhing 
 quite differently , - I know he , though you do not . " 

 " come , that be good news ! " I exclaim - " upon my word Lucio , you seem to 
 know everybody . " 

 " I think I know most people worth know - " respond Lucio 
 quietly - " though I by no mean include Mr McWhing in the category of 
 worthiness . I happen to make his personal acquaintance in a somewhat 
 singular and exciting manner . it be in Switzerland , on that awkward 
 ledge of rock know as the Mauvais Pas . I have be some week in the 
 neighbourhood on business of my own , and be surefoote and fearless , 
 be frequently allow by the guide to volunteer my service with 
 theirs . in this capacity of amateur guide , capricious destiny give I 
 the pleasure of escort the timid and bilious mcwhing across the 
 chasm of the Mer de Glace , and I converse with he in the choice 
 French all the while , a language of which , despite his boast 
 erudition , he be deplorably ignorant . I know who he be I must tell 
 you , as I know most of his craft , and have long be aware of he as one 
 of the authorise murderer of aspire genius . when I get he on the 
 Mauvais Pas , I see that he be seize with vertigo ; I hold he firmly by 
 the arm and address he in sound strong English thus - ' Mr McWhing , you 
 write a damnable and scurrilous article against the work of a certain 
 poet ' and I name the man - ' an article that be a tissue of lie from 
 begin to end , and which by its cruelty and venom embitter a life 
 of brilliant promise , and crush a noble spirit . now , unless you 
 promise to write and publish in a lead magazine a total recantation 
 of this your crime when you get back to England , - if you get 
 back ! - give that wrong man the ' honourable mention ' he rightly 
 deserve , - down you go ! I have but to loosen my hold ! ' Geoffrey , you 
 should have see mcwhing then ! he whine , he wriggle , he clung ! never 
 be an oracle of the press in such an unoracular condition . 
 ' murder ! - murder ! ' he gasp , but his voice fail he . above he 
 tower the snow peak like the summit of that fame he could not reach 
 and therefore grudge to other , - below he the glitter ice - wave 
 yawn in deep transparent hollow of opaline blue and green , - and afar 
 off the tinkle cowbell echo through the still air , suggestive of 
 safe green pasture and happy home . ' murder ! ' he whisper gurglingly . 
 ' Nay ! ' say I , " tis I should cry Murder ! - for if ever an arrest hand 
 hold a murderer , mine hold one now ! your system of slay be bad 
 than that of the midnight assassin , for the assassin can but kill the 
 body , - you strive to kill the soul . you can not succeed , ' tis true , but 
 the mere attempt be devilish . no shout , no struggle will serve you 
 here , - we be alone with Eternal Nature , - give the man you have 
 slander his tardy recognition , or else , as I say before - down you 
 go ! ' well , to make my story short , he yield , and swear to do as I bid 
 he , - whereupon place my arm round he as though he be my tender 
 twin - brother , I lead he safely off the Mauvais Pas and down the kindly 
 hill , where , what with the fright and the remain of vertigo , he fall 
 a'weeping grievously . would you believe it , that before we reach 
 Chamounix we have become the good friend in the world ? he explain 
 himself and his rascally mode of action , and I nobly exonerate 
 he , - we exchange card , - and when we part , this same author 's 
 bug - bear McWhing , overcome with sentiment and whisky toddy   he be a 
 scotchman you know   swear that I be the grand fellow in the world , 
 and that if ever he could serve I he would . he know my princely title 
 by this time , but he would have give I a still high name . ' you be 
 not - hic - a poet yourself ? ' he murmur , lean on I fondly as he 
 roll to bed . I tell he no . ' I be sorry - very ! ' he declare , the tear 
 of whisky rise to his eye , ' if you have be I would have do a great 
 thing for you , - I would have boom you , - for nothing ! ' I leave he 
 snore nobly , and see he no more . but I think he will recognize I , 
 Geoffrey ; - I will go and look he up personally . by all the god ! - if he 
 have only know who hold he between life and death upon the Mauvais 
 Pas ! " 

 I star , puzzle . 

 " but he do know " - I say - " do you not say you exchange card ? " 

 " true , but that be afterwards ! " and Lucio laugh ; " I assure you , my 
 dear fellow , we can ' manage ' mcwhing ! " 

 I be intensely interested in the story as he tell it , - he have such a 
 dramatic way of speak and look , while his very gesture bring 
 the whole scene vividly before I like a picture . I speak out my thought 
 impulsively . 

 " you would certainly have make a superb actor , Lucio ! " 

 " how do you know I be not one ? " he ask with a flash glance , then he 
 add quickly - " no , - there be no occasion to paint the face and prance 
 over the board before a row of tawdry footlight like the pay mime , 
 in order to be histrionically great . the fine actor be he who can play 
 the comedy of life perfectly , as I aspire to do . to walk well , talk 
 well , smile well , weep well , groan well , laugh well - and die well ! - it 
 be all pure acting , - because in every man there be the dumb dreadful 
 immortal Spirit who be real , - who can not act , - who be , - and who steadily 
 maintain an infinite though speechless protest against the body 's lie ! " 

 I say nothing in answer to this outburst , - I be begin to be use 
 to his shift humour and strange utterance , - they increase the 
 mysterious attraction I have for he , and make his character a perpetual 
 riddle to I which be not without its subtle charm . every now and then 
 I realize , with a faintly startled sense of self - abasement , that I be 
 completely under his dominance , - that my life be be entirely guide 
 by his control and suggestion , - but I argue with myself that surely it 
 be well it should be so , see he have so much more experience and 
 influence than I. we din together that night as we often do , and our 
 conversation be entirely take up with monetary and business concern . 
 under Lucio 's advice I be make several important investment , and 
 these matter give we ample subject for discussion . at about eleven 
 o'clock , it be a fine frosty evening and fit for brisk walking , we 
 go out , our destination be the private gambling club to which my 
 companion have volunteer to introduce I as a guest . it be situate at 
 the end of a mysterious little back street , not far from the respectable 
 precinct of Pall - Mall , and be an unpretentious look house enough 
 outside , but within , it be sumptuously though tastelessly furnish . 
 apparently , the premise be preside over by a woman , - a woman with 
 paint eye and dye hair who receive we first of all within the 
 lamp - light splendour of an anglo - japanese drawing - room . her look and 
 manner undisguisedly proclaim she as a demi - mondaine of the most 
 pronounce type , - one of those ' pure ' lady with a ' past ' who be 
 represent as such martyr to the vice of man . Lucio say something to 
 she apart , - whereupon she glance at I deferentially and smile , - then 
 rang the bell . a discreet look man - servant in sober black make his 
 appearance , and at a slight sign from his mistress who bow to I as I 
 pass she , proceed to show we upstairs . we trod on a carpet of the 
 softest feel , - in fact I notice that everything be render as 
 noiseless as possible in this establishment , the very door be 
 cover with thick baize and swing on silent hinge . on the upper 
 landing , the servant knock very cautiously at a side - door , - a key 
 turn in the lock , and we be admit into a long double room , very 
 brilliantly light with electric lamp , which at a first glance seem 
 crowded with man play at rouge et noir and baccarat . some look 
 up as Lucio enter and nod smilingly , - other glance inquisitively 
 at I , but our entrance be otherwise scarcely notice . Lucio draw I 
 along by the arm , sit down to watch the play , - I follow his example 
 and presently find myself infect by the intense excitement which 
 permeate the room like the silent tension of the air before a 
 thunderstorm . I recognise the face of many well know public man , - man 
 eminent in politic and society whom one would never have imagine 
 capable of support a gambling club by their presence and authority . 
 but I take care to betray no sign of surprise , and quietly observe the 
 game and the gamester with almost as impassive a demeanour as that of 
 my companion . I be prepared to play and to lose , - I be not prepare 
 however for the strange scene which be soon to occur and in which I , by 
 force of circumstance be compel to take a leading part . 


   2   the author have Mr Knowles 's own write authority for this fact . 




 X 


 as soon as the immediate game we be watch be finish , the player 
 rise , and greet Lucio with a good deal of eagerness and effusion . I 
 instinctively guess from their manner that they look upon he as an 
 influential member of the club , a person likely to lend they money to 
 gamble with , and otherwise to oblige they in various way , financially 
 speak . he introduce I to they all , and I be not slow to perceive 
 the effect my name have upon most of they . I be ask if I would join in 
 a game of baccarat , and I readily consent . the stake be ruinously 
 high , but I have no need to falter for that . one of the player near I 
 be a fair - haired young man , handsome in face and of aristocratic 
 bearing , - he have be introduce to I as Viscount Lynton . I notice he 
 particularly on account of the reckless way he have of double his 
 stake suddenly and apparently out of mere bravado , and when he lose , as 
 he mostly do , he laugh uproariously as though he be drunk or 
 delirious . on first begin to play I be entirely indifferent as to 
 the result of the game , care nothing at all as to whether I have 
 loss or gain . Lucio do not join we , but sit apart , quietly 
 observant , and watch I , so I fancy , more than anyone . and as 
 chance would have it , all the luck come my way , and I win steadily . the 
 more I win the more excited I became , till presently my humour change 
 and I be seize by a whimsical desire to lose . I suppose it be the 
 touch of some well impulse in my nature that make I wish this for 
 young Lynton 's sake . for he seem literally madden by my constant 
 winning , and continue his foolhardy and desperate play , - his young 
 face grow draw and sharply thin , and his eye glitter with a hungry 
 feverishness . the other gamester , though share in his run of 
 ill - luck , seem well able to stand it , or perhaps they conceal 
 their feeling more cleverly , - anyhow I know I catch myself very 
 earnestly wish that this devil 's luck of mine would desert I and set 
 in the young Viscount 's direction . but my wish be no use , - again and 
 again I gather up the stake , till at last the player rise , Viscount 
 Lynton among they . 

 " well , I be clean out ! " he say , with a loud force laugh . " you must 
 give I my chance of a revanche to - morrow , Mr Tempest ! " 

 I bow . 

 " with pleasure ! " 

 he call a waiter at the end of the room to bring he a brandy and 
 soda , and meanwhile I be surround by the rest of the man , all of they 
 repeat the Viscount 's suggestion of a ' revanche , ' and strenuously 
 urge upon I the necessity of return to the club the next night in 
 order to give they an opportunity of win back what they have lose . I 
 readily agree , and while we be in the midst of talk , Lucio suddenly 
 address young Lynton . 

 " will you make up another game with I ? " he inquire . " I will start the 
 bank with this , " - and he place two crisp note of five hundred pound 
 each on the table . 

 there be a moment 's silence . the Viscount be thirstily drink his 
 brandy - and - soda , and glance over the rim of his tall tumbler at the 
 note with covetous bloodshot eye , - then he shrug his shoulder 
 indifferently . " I can not   stake anything , " he say ; " I have   already tell you 
 I be clean out , - ' stony - break , ' as the slang go . it be no use my 
 joining . " 

 " sit down , sit down , Lynton ! " urge one man near he . " I will lend you 
 enough to go on with . " 

 " thank , I would rather not ! " he return , flush a little . " I be too much 
 in your debt already . awfully good of you all the same . you go on , you 
 fellow , and I will watch the play . " 

 " let I persuade you Viscount Lynton , " say Lucio , look at he with 
 his dazzle inscrutable smile - " just for the fun of the thing ! if you 
 do not feel justified in stake money , stake something trifle and 
 merely nominal , for the sake of see whether the luck will turn " - and 
 here he take up a counter - " this frequently represent fifty 
 pound , - let it represent for once something that be not valuable like 
 money , - your soul , for example ! " a burst of laughter break from all the 
 man . Lucio laugh softly with they . 

 " we all have , I hope , enough instruction in modern science to be aware 
 that there be no such thing as a soul in existence " - he continue . 
 " therefore , in propose it as a stake for this game at baccarat , I 
 really propose less than one hair of your head , because the hair be a 
 something , and the soul be a nothing ! come ! will you risk that 
 non - existent quantity for the chance of win a thousand pound ? " 

 the Viscount drain off the last drop of brandy , and turn upon we , 
 his eye flush mingled derision and defiance . 

 " do ! " he exclaim ; whereupon the party sit down . 

 the game be brief , - and in its rapid excitement , almost breathless . six 
 or seven minute suffice , and Lucio rise , the winner . he smile as he 
 point to the counter which have represent Viscount Lynton 's last 
 stake . 

 " I have win ! " he say quietly . " but you owe I nothing , my dear 
 Viscount , inasmuch as you risk - nothing ! we play this game simply 
 for fun . if soul have any existence of course I should claim your ; - I 
 wonder what I should do with it by the way ! " he laugh good - humouredly . 
 " what nonsense , be not   it ! - and how thankful we ought to be that we live 
 in advanced day like the present , when such silly superstition be 
 be sweep aside by the march of progress and pure Reason ! good - night ! 
 Tempest and I will give you , your full revenge to - morrow , - the luck be 
 sure to change by then , and you will probably have the victory . 
 again - good - night ! " 

 he hold out his hand , - there be a peculiar melting tenderness in his 
 brilliant dark eye , - an impressive kindness in his manner . something - I 
 could not tell what - hold we all for the moment spellbound as if by 
 enchantment , and several of the player at other table , hearing of the 
 eccentric stake that have be wager and lose , look over at we 
 curiously from a distance . Viscount Lynton , however , profess himself 
 immensely divert , and shake Lucio 's proffered hand heartily . 

 " you be an awfully good fellow ! " he say , speak a little thickly and 
 hurriedly - " and I assure you seriously if I have a soul I should be very 
 glad to part with it for a thousand pound at the present moment . the 
 soul would not   be an atom of use to I and the thousand pound would . but 
 I feel convinced I shall win to - morrow ! " 

 " I be equally sure you will ! " return Lucio affably , " in the meantime , 
 you will not find my friend here , Geoffrey Tempest , a hard creditor , - he 
 can afford to wait . but in the case of the lost soul , " - here he pause , 
 look straight into the young man 's eye , - " of course I can not 
 afford to wait ! " 

 the Viscount smile vaguely at this pleasantry , and almost immediately 
 afterwards leave the club . as soon as the door have close behind he , 
 several of the gamester exchange sententious nod and glance . 

 " ruin ! " say one of they in a sotto - voce . 

 " his gambling debt be more than he can ever pay " - add another - " and 
 I hear he have lose a clear fifty thousand on the turf . " 

 these remark be make indifferently , as though one should talk of the 
 weather , - no sympathy be express , - no pity waste . every gambler 
 there be selfish to the core , and as I study their hardened face , a 
 thrill of honest indignation move I , - indignation mingle with shame . 
 I be not yet altogether callous or cruel - hearted , though as I look 
 back upon those day which now resemble a wild vision rather than a 
 reality , I know that I be become more and more of a brutal egoist 
 with every hour I live . still I be so far then from be utterly 
 vile , that I inwardly resolve to write to Viscount Lynton that very 
 evening , and tell he to consider his debt to I cancel , as I should 
 refuse to claim it . while this thought be pass through my mind , I 
 meet Lucio 's gaze fix steadily upon I . he smile , - and presently 
 sign to I to accompany he . in a few minute we have leave the club , 
 and be out in the cold night air under a heaven of frostily sparkle 
 star . stand still for a moment , my companion lay his hand on my 
 shoulder . 

 " Tempest , if you be go to be kind - hearted or sympathetic to 
 undeserve rascal , I shall have to part company with you ! " he say , 
 with a curious mixture of satire and seriousness in his voice - " I see by 
 the expression of your face that you be meditate some silly 
 disinterested action of pure generosity . now you might just as well flop 
 down on these pave stone and begin say prayer in public . you want 
 to let Lynton off his debt , - you be a fool for your pain . he be a bear 
 scoundrel , - and have never see his way to be anything else , - why 
 should you compassionate he ? from the time he first go to college 
 till now , he have be do nothing but live a life of degraded 
 sensuality , - he be a worthless rake , less to be respect than an honest 
 dog ! " 

 " yet some one love he I daresay ! " I say . 

 " some one love he ! " echo Lucio with inimitable disdain - " Bah ! three 
 ballet girl live on he if that be what you mean . his mother love 
 he , - but she be dead , - he break her heart . he be no good I tell 
 you , - let he pay his debt in full , even to the soul he stake so 
 lightly . if I be the devil now , and have just win the strange game we 
 play to - night , I suppose accord to priestly tradition , I should be 
 pile up the fire for Lynton in high glee , - but be what I be , I say 
 let the man alone to make his own destiny , - let thing take their 
 course , - and as he choose to risk everything , so let he pay 
 everything . " 

 we be by this time walk slowly into Pall Mall , - I be on the point 
 of make some reply , when catch sight of a man 's figure on the 
 opposite side of the way , not far from the Marlborough Club , I utter 
 an involuntary exclamation . 

 " why there he be ! " I say - " there be Viscount Lynton ! " 

 Lucio 's hand close tightly on my arm . 

 " you do not   want to speak to he now , surely ! " 

 " no . but I wonder where he be go ? he walk rather unsteadily . " 

 " Drunk , most probably ! " 

 and Lucio 's face present the same relentless expression of scorn I have 
 so often see and marvel at . 

 we pause a moment , watch the Viscount stroll aimlessly up and 
 down in front of the club , - till all at once he seem to come to a 
 sudden resolution , and stop short , he shout , 

 " Hansom ! " 

 a silent - wheel smart vehicle come bowl up immediately . give some 
 order to the driver , he jump in . the cab approach swiftly in our 
 direction , - just as it pass we the loud report of a pistol crash on 
 the silence . 

 " Good God ! " I cry reel back a step or two - " he have shoot himself ! " 

 the hansom stop , - the driver spring down , - club - porter , waiter , 
 policeman and no end of people start up from Heaven know where , be 
 on the scene on an instant , - I rush forward to join the rapidly 
 gathering throng , but before I could do so , Lucio 's strong arm be 
 throw round I , and he drag I by main force away . 

 " keep cool , Geoffrey ! " he say - " do you want to be call up to 
 identify ? and betray the club and all its member ? not while I be here 
 to prevent you ! check your mad impulse , my good fellow , - they will lead 
 you into no end of difficulty . if the man 's dead he be dead , and 
 there be an end of it . " 

 " Lucio ! you have no heart ! " I exclaim , struggle violently to escape 
 from his hold - " how can you stop to reason in such a case ! think of it ! 
  I be the cause of all the mischief ! - it be my cursed luck at baccarat 
 this evening that have be the final blow to the wretched young fellow 's 
 fortune , - I be convinced of it ! - I shall never forgive myself - " 

 " upon my word , Geoffrey , your conscience be very tender ! " he answer , 
 hold my arm still more closely and hurry I away despite 
 myself - " you must try and toughen it a little if you want to be 
 successful in life . your ' curse luck ' you think , have cause Lynton 's 
 death ? surely it be a contradiction in term to call luck ' curse , ' - and 
 as for the Viscount , he do not need that last game at baccarat to 
 emphasise his ruin . you be not to blame . and for the sake of the club , 
 if for nothing else , I do not intend either you or myself to be mix up 
 in a case of suicide . the coroner 's verdict always dispose of these 
 incident comfortably in two word - ' temporary insanity . ' " 

 I shudder . my soul sicken as I think that within a few yard of we 
 be the bleed corpse of the man I have so lately see alive and speak 
 with , - and notwithstanding Lucio 's word I feel as if I have murder 
 he . 

 " ' temporary insanity ' " - repeat Lucio again , as if speak to 
 himself - " all remorse , despair , outraged honour , waste love , together 
 with the scientific modern theory of reasonable Nothingness - Life a 
 nothing , God a nothing , - when these drive the distracted human unit to 
 make of himself also a nothing , ' temporary insanity ' cover up his 
 plunge into the infinite with an untruthful pleasantness . however , after 
 all , it be as Shakespeare say , a mad world ! " 

 I make no answer . I be too overcome by my own miserable sensation . I 
 walk along almost unconscious of movement , and as I star 
 bewilderedly up at the star they dance before my sight like firefly 
 whirling in a mist of miasma . presently a faint hope occur to I . 

 " perhaps , " I say , " he have not really kill himself ? it may be only an 
 attempt ? " 

 " he be a capital shot " - return Lucio composedly , - " that be his one 
 quality . he have no principle , - but he be a good marksman . I can not 
 imagine his missing aim . " 

 " it be horrible ! an hour ago alive , ... and now ... I tell you , Lucio , 
 it be horrible ! " 

 " what be ? death ? it be not half so horrible as life live wrongly , " - he 
 respond , with a gravity that impress I in spite of my emotion and 
 excitement - " believe I , the mental sickness and confusion of a wilfully 
 degraded existence be bad torture than be contain in the priestly 
 notion of Hell . come come , Geoffrey , you take this matter too much to 
 heart , - you be not to blame . if Lynton have give himself the ' happy 
 dispatch ' it be really the good thing he could do , - he be of no use to 
 anybody , and he be well out of it . it be positively weak of you to 
 attach importance to such a trifle . you be only at the beginning of 
 your career - - " 

 " well , I hope that career will not lead I into any more such tragedy 
 as the one enact to - night , " - I say passionately - " if it do , it will 
 be entirely against my will ! " 

 Lucio look at I curiously . 

 " nothing can happen to you against your will " - he reply ; " I suppose 
 you wish to imply that I be to blame for introduce you to the club ? my 
 good fellow , you need not have go there unless you have choose to do 
 so ! I do not bind and drag you there ! you be upset and unnerved , - come 
 into my room and take a glass of wine , - you will feel more of a man 
 afterwards . " 

 we have by this time reach the hotel , and I go with he passively . 
 with equal passiveness I drink what he give I , and stand , glass in 
 hand , watch he with a kind of morbid fascination as he throw off his 
 fur - line overcoat and confront I , his pale handsome face strangely 
 set and stern , and his dark eye glitter like cold steel . 

 " that last stake of Lynton 's , ... to you - " I say falteringly - " his 
 soul - - " 

 " which he do not believe in , and which you do not believe in ! " 
 return Lucio , regard I fixedly . " why do you now seem to tremble at 
 a mere sentimental idea ? if fantastic notion such as God , the Soul , and 
 the Devil be real fact , there would perhaps be cause for trembling , 
 but be only the brainsick imagination of superstitious mankind , 
 there be nothing in they to awaken the slight anxiety or fear . " 

 " but you " - I begin - " you say you believe in the soul ? " 

 " I ? I be brainsick ! " and he laugh bitterly - " have you not find that 
 out yet ? much learning hath drive I mad , my friend ! science have lead I 
 into such deep well of dark discovery , that it be no wonder if my 
 sens sometimes reel , - and I believe - at such insane moment - in the 
 Soul ! " 

 I sigh heavily . 

 " I think I will go to bed , " I answer . " I be tired out , - and absolutely 
 miserable ! " 

 " alas , poor millionaire ! " say Lucio gently , - " I be sorry , I assure you , 
 that the evening have end so disastrously . " 

 " so be I ! " I return despondently . 

 " imagine it ! " he go on , dreamily regard I - " if my belief , - my 
 crack - brain theory , - be worth anything , - which they be not - I 
 could claim the only positive exist part of our late acquaintance 
 Viscount Lynton ! but , - where and how to send in my account with he ? if 
 I be Satan now .... " 

 I force a faint smile . 

 " you would have cause to rejoice ! " I say . 

 he move two pace towards I , and lay his hand gently on my 
 shoulder . 

 " no , Geoffrey " - and his rich voice have a strange soft music in it - " no , 
 my friend ! if I be Satan I should probably lament ! - for every lose 
 soul would of necessity remind I of my own fall , my own despair , - and 
 set another bar between myself and heaven ! remember , - the very Devil 
 be an Angel once ! " 

 his eye smile , and yet I could have swear there be tear in they . I 
 wring his hand hard , - I feel that notwithstanding his assumed coldness 
 and cynicism , the fate of young Lynton have affect he profoundly . my 
 liking for he gain new fervour from this impression , and I go to 
 bed more at ease with myself and thing in general . during the few 
 minute I spend in undressing I become even able to contemplate the 
 tragedy of the evening with less regret and great calmness , - for it 
 be certainly no use worry over the irrevocable , - and , after all , 
 what interest have the Viscount 's life for I ? none . I begin to ridicule 
 myself for my own weakness and disinterested emotion , - and presently , 
 be thoroughly fatigue , fall sound asleep . towards morning however , 
 perhaps about four or five o'clock , I wake suddenly as though touch by 
 an invisible hand . I be shiver violently , and my body be bath in 
 a cold perspiration . in the otherwise dark room there be something 
 strangely luminous , like a cloud of white smoke or fire . I start up , 
 rub my eye , - and star before I for a moment , doubt the 
 evidence of my own sens . for , plainly visible and substantially 
 distinct , at a distance of perhaps five pace from my bed , stand three 
 figure , muffle in dark garment and closely hood . so solemnly inert 
 they be , - so heavily do their sable drapery fall about they that it 
 be impossible to tell whether they be man or woman , - but what 
 paralyse I with amazement and terror be the strange light that play 
 around and above they , - the spectral , wandering , chill radiance that 
 illumine they like the ray of a faint wintry moon . I strove to cry 
 out , - but my tongue refuse to obey I - and my voice be strangle in my 
 throat . the three remain absolutely motionless , - and again I rub my 
 eye , wonder if this be a dream or some hideous optical delusion . 
 tremble in every limb , I stretch my hand towards the bell intend 
 to ring violently for assistance , - when - a Voice , low and thrill with 
 intense anguish , cause I to shrink back appalled , and my arm fall 
 nerveless at my side . " misery ! " 

 the word strike the air with a harsh reproachful clang , and I nearly 
 swoon with the horror of it . for now one of the Figures move , and a 
 face gleam out from beneath its hooded wrapping - a face white as 
 white marble and fix into such an expression of dreadful despair as 
 freeze my blood . then come a deep sigh that be more like a death - groan , 
 and again the word , " misery ! " shudder upon the silence . 

 Mad with fear , and scarcely know what I do , I spring from the bed , 
 and begin desperately to advance upon these fantastic masquerader , 
 determine to seize they and demand the meaning of this practical and 
 untimely jest , - when suddenly all three lift their head and turn 
 their face on I , - such face ! - indescribably awful in their pallid 
 agony , - and a whisper more ghastly than a shriek , penetrate the very 
 fibre of my consciousness - " misery ! " 

 with a furious bound I fling myself upon they , - my hand strike empty 
 space . yet there - distinct as ever - they stand , glower down upon I , 
 while my clench fist beat impotently through and beyond their 
 seemingly corporeal shape ! and then - all at once - I become aware of 
 their eye , - eye that watch I pitilessly , stedfastly , and 
 disdainfully , - eye that like witch - fire , seem to slowly burn 
 terrific meaning into my very flesh and spirit . convulse and almost 
 frantic with the strain on my nerve , I abandon myself to 
 despair , - this awful sight mean death I think , - my last hour have 
 surely come ! then - I see the lip of one of those dreadful face move 
 ... some superhuman instinct in I leap to life , ... in some strange 
 way I think I know , or guess the horror of what that next utterance 
 would be , ... and with all my remain force I cry out - 

 " no ! no ! not that eternal doom ! ... not yet ! " 

 fight the vacant air , I strove to beat back those intangible weird 
 shape that loom above I , wither up my soul with the fix stare 
 of their angry eye , and with a choke call for help , I fall , as it 
 be , into a pit of darkness , where I lay mercifully unconscious . 




 XI 


 how the ensue hour between this horrible episode and full morning 
 elapse I do not know . I be dead to all impression . I wake at last , or 
 rather recover my sens to see the sunlight pour pleasantly 
 through the half - draw curtain at my window , and to find myself in bed 
 in as restful a position as though I have never leave it . be it then 
 merely a vision I have see ? - a ghastly sort of nightmare ? if so , it be 
 surely the most abhorrent illusion ever evolve from dreamland ! it could 
 not be a question of health , for I have never feel well in my life . I 
 lie for some time quiescent , think over the matter , with my eye 
 fix on that part of the room where those Three Shapes have seemingly 
 stand ; but I have lately get into such a habit of cool self - analysis , 
 that by the time my valet bring my early cup of coffee , I have decide 
 that the whole thing be a dreadful fantasy , bear of my own imagination , 
 which have no doubt be unduly excited by the affair of Viscount 
 Lynton 's suicide . I soon learn that there be no room leave for doubt 
 as to that unhappy young nobleman 's actual death . a brief account of it 
 be in the morning paper , though as the tragedy have occur so late at 
 night there be no detail . a vague hint of ' money difficulty ' be 
 throw out in one journal , - but beyond that , and the statement that the 
 body have be convey to the mortuary there to await an inquest , there 
 be nothing say , either personal or particular . I find Lucio in the 
 smoking - room , and it be he who first silently point out to I the 
 short paragraph head ' Suicide of a Viscount . ' 

 " I tell you he be a good shot ! " he comment . 

 I nod . somehow I have cease to feel much interest in the subject . my 
 emotion of the previous evening have apparently exhaust all my stock of 
 sympathy and leave I coldly indifferent . absorb in myself and my own 
 concern , I sit down to talk and be not long before I have give a full 
 and circumstantial account of the spectral illusion which have so 
 unpleasantly trouble I during the night . Lucio listen , smile 
 oddly . 

 " that old Tokay be evidently too strong for you ! " he say , when I have 
 conclude my story . 

 " do you give I old Tokay ? " I respond laugh - " then the mystery be 
 explain ! I be already overwrought , and need no stimulant . but what 
 trick the imagination play we to be sure ! you have no idea of the 
 distinct manner in which those three phantom assert themselves ! the 
 impression be extraordinarily vivid . " 

 " no doubt ! " and his dark eye study I curiously . " impression often 
  be very vivid . see what a marvellously real impression this world 
 make upon we , for example ! " 

 " ah ! but then the world be real ! " I answer . 

 " be it ? you accept it as such , I daresay , and thing be as they appear 
 to each separate individual . no two human being think alike ; hence 
 there may be conflict opinion as to the reality or non - reality of 
 this present world . but we will not take unnecessary plunge into the 
 infinite question of what be , as contrast with what appear to be . I 
 have some letter here for your consideration . you have lately speak of 
 buy a country estate - what say you to Willowsmere Court in 
 Warwickshire ? I have have my eye on that place for you , - it seem to I 
 just the very thing . it be a magnificent old pile ; part of it date from 
 Elizabeth 's time . it be in excellent repair ; the ground be most 
 picturesque , the classic river Avon wind with rather a broad sweep 
 through the park , - and the whole thing , with a great part of the 
 furniture include , be to be sell for a mere song ; - fifty thousand 
 pound cash . I think you have well go in for it ; it would just suit 
 your literary and poetic taste . " 

 be it my fancy , or have his musical voice the faint touch of a sneer 
 as he utter the last word ? I would not allow myself to think this 
 possible , and answer quickly , - 

 " anything you recommend must be worth look at , and I will certainly 
 go and see it . the description sound well , and Shakespeare 's country 
 always appeal to I . but would not   you like to secure it for yourself ? " 

 he laugh . 

 " not I ! I live nowhere for long . I be of a roving disposition , and be 
 never happy tie down to one corner of the earth . but I suggest 
 Willowsmere to you for two reason , - first that it be charming and 
 perfectly appoint ; secondly , that it will impress Lord Elton 
 considerably if he know you be go to buy it . " 

 " how so ? " 

 " why , because it use to be his property " - return Lucio quietly - " till 
 he get into the hand of the Jews . he give they willowsmere as security 
 for loan , and latterly they have step in as owner . they have   sell 
 most of the picture , china , bric - a - brac and other valuable . by the 
 way , have you notice how the legende God still appear to protect the 
 house of Israel ? particularly the ' base usurer ' who be allow to get 
 the unhappy Christian into his clutch nine time out of ten ? and no 
 remedy drop from heaven ! the Jew always triumph . rather inconsistent 
 be not   it , on the part of an equitable deity ! " his eye flash strange 
 scorn . Anon he resume - " as a result of Lord Elton 's unfortunate 
 speculation , and the Jews ' admirable shrewdness , Willowsmere , as I tell 
 you be in the market , and fifty thousand pound will make you the envy 
 owner of a place worth a hundred thousand . " 

 " we dine at the Eltons ' to - night , do we not ? " I ask musingly . 

 " we do . you can not have forget that engagement and Lady Sibyl so soon 
 surely ! " he answer laugh . 

 " no , I have not forget " - I say at last , after a little silence . " and 
 I will buy this Willowsmere . I will telegraph instruction to my lawyer 
 at once . will you give I the name and address of the agent ? " 

 " with pleasure , my dear boy ! " and Lucio hand I a letter contain 
 the particular concern the sale of the estate and other item . " but 
 be you not make up your mind rather suddenly ? had not   you well 
 inspect the property first ? there may be thing you object to - - " 

 " if it be a rat - infest barrack , " I say resolutely - " I would still 
 buy it ! I shall settle the matter at once . I wish to let Lord Elton know 
 this very night that I be the future owner of Willowsmere ! " 

 " good ! " - and my companion thrust his arm through mine as we leave the 
 smoking - room together - " I like your swiftness of action Geoffrey . it be 
 admirable ! I always respect determination . even if a man make up his 
 mind to go to hell , I honour he for keep to his word , and go 
 there straight as a die ! " 

 I laugh , and we part in high good - humour , - he to fulfil a club 
 engagement , I to telegraph precise instruction to my legal friend 
 Messrs Bentham and Ellis , for the immediate purchase in my name at all 
 cost , risk or inconvenience , of the estate know as Willowsmere Court 
 in the county of Warwick . 

 that evening I dress with more than common care , give my man Morris 
 almost as much trouble as if I have be a fidgetty woman . he wait upon 
 I however with exemplary patience , and only when I be quite ready do 
 he venture to utter what have evidently be on his mind for some time . 

 " excuse I sir , " - he then observe - " but I daresay you have   notice that 
 there be something unpleasant - like about the prince 's valet , Amiel ? " 

 " well , he be rather a down - look fellow if that be what you mean , " - I 
 reply - " but I suppose there be no harm in he . " 

 " I do not   know about that sir , " - answer Morris severely ; " he do a 
 great many strange thing I do assure you . downstair with the servant 
 he go on something surprising . sing and act and dance too , as if he 
 be a whole music - hall . " 

 " really ! " I exclaim in surprise - " I should never have think it . " 

 " nor should I sir , but it be a fact . " 

 " he must be rather an amusing fellow then , " - I continue , wonder that 
 my man should take the accomplishment of Amiel in such an injure 
 manner . 

 " oh , I do not   say anything against his amusingness , " - and Morris rub 
 his nose with a doubtful air - " it be all very well for he to cut caper 
 and make himself agreeable if he like , - but it be the deceit of he that 
 surprise I sir . you would think to look at he that he be a decent sort 
 of dull chap with no idea beyond his duty , but really sir , it be quite 
 the contrary , if you will believe I . the language he use when he be up to 
 his game downstairs be something frightful ! and he actually swear he 
 learn it from the gentleman of the turf , sir ! last night he be play 
 acting , and take off all the fashionable folk , - then he take to 
 hypnotising - and upon my word it make my blood run cold . " 

 " why , what do he do ? " I ask with some curiosity . 

 " well , sir , he take one of the scullery - maid and sit she in a chair and 
 just point at she . point at she and grin , for all the world like 
 a devil out of a pantomime . and though she be generally a respectable 
 sober young woman , if she do not   get up with a screech and commence 
 dancing round and round like a lunatic , while he keep on pointing . and 
 presently she get to jump and lift her skirt that high that it 
 be positively scandalous ! some of we try to stop she and could not ; 
 she be like mad , till all at once number twenty - two bell rang - that be 
 the prince 's room , - and he just catch hold of she , set she down in her 
 chair again and clap his hand . she come to directly , and do not   know 
 a bit what she have be do . then twenty - two bell ring again , and the 
 fellow roll up his eye like a clergyman and say , ' let we pray ! ' and 
 off he go . " 

 I laugh . 

 " he seem to have a share of humour at anyrate , " - I say ; " I should not 
 have think it of he . but do you think these antic of his be 
 mischievous ? " 

 " well that scullery girl be very ill to - day , " - reply Morris ; " I expect 
 she will have to leave . she have what she call the ' jump ' and none of we 
 dare tell she how she get they . no sir , believe I or not as you like , 
 there be something very queer about that Amiel . and another thing I want 
 to know be this - what do he do with the other servant ? " 

 " what do he do with the other servant ? " I repeat 
 bewilderedly - " what on earth do you mean ? " 

 " well sir , the prince have a chef of his own have not   he ? " say Morris 
 enumerate on his finger - " and two personal attendant besides 
 Amiel , - quiet fellow enough who help in the waiting . then he have a 
 coachman and groom . that make six servant altogether . now none of 
 these except Amiel be ever see in the hotel kitchen . the chef send 
 all the meal in from somewhere , in a heated receptacle - and the two 
 other fellow be never see except when wait at table , and they 
 do not   live in their own room all day , though they may sleep 
 there , - and nobody know where the carriage and horse be put up , or 
 where the coachman and groom lodge . certain it be that both they and the 
  chef board out . it seem to I very mysterious . " 

 I begin to feel quite unreasonably irritated . 

 " look here , Morris , " I say - " there be nothing more useless or more 
 harmful than the habit of inquire into other people 's affair . the 
 prince have a right to live as he like , and do as he please with his 
 servant - I be sure he pay royally for his privilege . and whether his 
 cook life in or out , up in the sky or down in a cellar be no matter 
 of mine . he have be a great traveller and no doubt have his 
 peculiarity ; and probably his notion concern food be very 
 particular and fastidious . but I do not   want to know anything about his 
 ménage . if you dislike Amiel , it be easy to avoid he , but for goodness 
 sake do not   go make mystery where none exist . " 

 Morris look up , then down , and fold one of my coat with special 
 care . I see I have effectually check his flow of confidence . 

 " very well , sir , " - he observe , and say no more . 

 I be rather divert than otherwise at my servant 's solemn account of 
 Amiel 's peculiarity as exhibit among his own class , - and when we 
 be drive to Lord Elton 's that evening I tell something of the story 
 to Lucio . he laugh . 

 " Amiel 's spirit be often too much for he , " - he say - " he be a perfect 
 imp of mischief and can not always control himself . " 

 " why , what a wrong estimate I have form of he ! " I say - " I think he 
 have a peculiarly grave and somewhat sullen disposition . " 

 " you know the trite say - appearance be deceptive ? " go on my 
 companion lightly - " it be extremely true . the profess humourist be 
 nearly always a disagreeable and heavy man personally . as for Amiel , he 
 be like I in the respect of not be at all what he seem . his only 
 fault be a tendency to break the bound of discipline , but otherwise he 
 serve I well , and I do not inquire far . be Morris disgusted or 
 alarm ? " 

 " neither I think , " I respond laugh - " he merely present himself to 
 I as an example of outraged respectability . " 

 " ah then , you may be sure that when the scullery - maid be dancing , he 
 observe her step with the close nicety ; " say Lucio - " very 
 respectable man be always particular of inspection into these matter ! 
 Soothe his ruffled feeling , my dear Geoffrey , and tell he that Amiel 
 be the very soul of virtue ! I have have he in my service for a long 
 time , and can urge nothing against his character as a man . he do not 
 pretend to be an angel . his trick of speech and behaviour be the result 
 of a too constant repression of his natural hilarity , but he be really 
 an excellent fellow . he dabble in hypnotic science when he be with I 
 in India ; I have often warn he of the danger there be in practise 
 this force on the uninitiated . but - a scullery - maid ! - heavens ! - there 
 be so many scullery - maid ! one more or less with the ' jump ' will not 
 matter . this be Lord Elton 's . " 

 the carriage stop before a handsome house situate a little back from 
 Park Lane . we be admit by a man - servant gorgeous in red plush , 
 white silk hose and powdered wig , who pass we on majestically to his 
 twin - brother in height and appearance , though perhaps a trifle more 
 disdainful in bearing , and he in his turn usher we upstairs with the 
 air of one who should say " see to what ignominious degradation a cruel 
 fate reduce so great a man ! " in the drawing - room we find Lord Elton , 
 stand on the hearth - rug with his back to the fire , and directly 
 opposite he in a low arm chair , recline an elegantly attired young 
 lady with very small foot . I mention the foot , because as I enter they 
 be the most prominent part of her person , be well stretch out 
 from beneath the would - be concealment of sundry flounce petticoat 
 towards the warmth of the fire which the Earl rather inconsiderately 
 screen from view . there be another lady in the room sit bolt 
 upright with hand neatly fold on her lap , and to she we be first of 
 all introduce when Lord Elton 's own effusive greeting be over . 

 " Charlotte , allow I , - my friend , Prince Lucio Rimânez - Mr Geoffrey 
 Tempest ; gentleman , my sister - in - law , Miss Charlotte Fitzroy . " 

 we bow ; the lady give we a dignified bend of the head . she be an 
 impose look spinster , with a curious expression on her feature 
 which be difficult to construe . it be pious and prim , but it also 
 suggest the idea that she must have see something excessively 
 improper once in her life and have never be able to forget it . the 
 purse - up mouth , the round pale - colour eye and the chronic air of 
 insult virtue which seem to pervade she from head to foot all help 
 to deepen this impression . one could not look at Miss Charlotte long 
 without begin to wonder irreverently what it be that have in she 
 long past youth so outrage the cleanly propriety of her nature as to 
 leave such indelible trace on her countenance . but I have since see 
 many english woman look so , especially among the particularly ' high 
 breed , ' old and plain - feature of the " upper ten . " very different be the 
 saucy and bright physiognomy of the young lady to whom we be next 
 present , and who , raise herself languidly from her reclining 
 position , smile at we with encourage familiarity as we make our 
 salutation . 

 " Miss Diana Chesney , " - say the Earl glibly - " you perhaps know she 
 father , prince , - you must have hear of he at any rate - the famous 
 Nicodemus Chesney , one of the great railway - king . " 

 " of course I know he " - respond Lucio warmly - " who do not ! I have 
 meet he often . a charming man , gift with most remarkable humour and 
 vitality - I remember he perfectly . we see a good deal of each other in 
 Washington . " 

 " do you though ? " say Miss Chesney with a somewhat indifferent 
 interest , - " he be a queer sort of man to my thinking ; rather a cross 
 between the ticket - collector and custom - house officer combine , you 
 know ! I never see he but what I feel I must start on a journey 
 directly - railway seem to be write all over he . I tell he so . I say 
 ' Pa , if you do not   carry railway - track in your face you would be well 
 look . ' and you find he humorous , do you ? " 

 laugh at the novel and free way in which this young person criticise 
 her parent , Lucio protest that he do . 

 " well I do not , " - confess Miss Chesney - " but that may be because I have 
 hear all his story over and over again , and I have   read most of they in 
 book besides , - so they be not much account to I . he tell some of they 
 to the Prince of Wales whenever he can get a chance , - but he do not   try 
 they off on I any more . he be a real clever man too ; he be make his pile 
 quick than most . and you be quite right about his vitality , - my ! - his 
 laugh take you into the middle of next week ! " 

 her bright eye flash merrily as she take a comprehensive survey of 
 our amused face . 

 " think I be irreverent , do not   you ? " she go on - " but you know Pa be not a 
 ' stage parent ' all dress out in lovely white hair and 
 benediction , - he be just an accommodate railway - track , and he would not 
 like to be reverence . do sit down , will not   you ? " - then turn her pretty 
 head coquettishly towards her host - " make they sit down , Lord Elton , - I 
 hate to see man stand . the superior sex , you know ! besides you be so 
 tall , " she add , glance with unconcealed admiration at Lucio 's 
 handsome face and figure , " that it be like peer up an apple - tree at 
 the moon to look at you ! " 

 Lucio laugh heartily , and seat himself near she - I follow his 
 example ; the old Earl still keep his position , leg a - straddle , on the 
 hearth - rug , and beam benevolence upon we all . certainly Diana Chesney 
 be a captivating creature ; one of those surface - clever american woman 
 who distinctly divert man 's mind without in the least rouse their 
 passion . 

 " so you be the famous Mr Tempest ? " she say , survey I 
 critically - " why , it be simply splendid for you be not   it ? I always say 
 it be no use have a heap of money unless you be young , - if you be old , 
 you only want it to fill your doctor 's pocket while he try to mend 
 your poor tucker - out constitution . I once know an old lady who be 
 leave a legacy of a hundred thousand pound when she be ninety - five . 
 poor old dear , she cry over it . she just have sense enough to 
 understand what a good time she could not   have . she live in bed , and her 
 only luxury be a halfpenny bun dip in milk for her tea . it be all 
 she care for . " 

 " a hundred thousand pound would go a long way in bun ! " I say 
 smile . 

 " would not   it just ! " and the fair Diana laugh - " but I guess you will 
 want something a little more substantial for your cash Mr Tempest ! a 
 fortune in the prime of life be worth have . I suppose you be one of 
 the rich man about just now , be not   you ? " 

 she put the question in a perfectly naïve frank manner and seem to be 
 unconscious of any undue inquisitiveness in it . 

 " I may be one of the rich , " - I reply , and as I speak the thought 
 flash suddenly across I how recently I have be one of the 
 poor ! - " but my friend here , the prince , be far rich than I. " 

 " be that so ! " and she star straight at Lucio , who meet her gaze with an 
 indulgent , half satirical smile - " well now ! I guess Pa be no well than 
 a sort of pauper after all ! why , you must have the world at your foot ! " 

 " pretty much so , " - reply Lucio composedly - " but then , my dear Miss 
 Chesney , the world be so very easily bring to one 's foot . surely you 
 know that ? " 

 and he emphasize the word by an expressive look of his fine eye . 

 " I guess you mean compliment , " - she reply unconcernedly - " I do not 
 like they as a rule , but I will forgive you this once ! " 

 " do ! " say Lucio , with one of his dazzle smile that cause she to 
 stop for a moment in her voluble chatter and observe he with mingle 
 fascination and wonderment . 

 " and you too be young , like Mr Tempest , " - she resume presently . 

 " pardon I ! " interrupt Lucio - " I be many year old . " 

 " really ! " exclaim Lord Elton at this juncture - " you do not   look it , 
 do he Charlotte ? " 

 Miss Fitzroy thus appeal to , raise her elegant tortoise - shell - frame 
 glass to her eye and peer critically at we both . 

 " I should imagine the prince to be slightly the senior of Mr 
 Tempest " - she remark in precise high - breed accent - " but only very 
 slightly . " 

 " anyhow , " resume Miss Chesney " you be young enough , to enjoy your 
 wealth be not   you ? " 

 " young enough , or old enough ; - just as you please ; " - say Lucio with a 
 careless shrug - " but as it happen - I do not enjoy it ! " 

 Miss Chesney 's whole aspect now express the most lively astonishment . 

 " what do money do for you ? " go on Lucio , his eye dilate with that 
 strange and wistful expression which have often excite my 
 curiosity - " the world be at your foot , perhaps ; yes - but what a world ! 
 what a trumpery clod of kickable matter ! wealth act merely as a kind of 
 mirror to show you human nature at its bad . man skulk and fawn about 
 you , and lie twenty time in as many hour in the hope to propitiate you 
 and serve their own interest ; prince of the blood willingly degrade 
 themselves and their position to borrow cash of you , - your intrinsic 
 merit   if you have any   be think nothing of , - your full pocket be 
 your credential with king , prime minister and councillor ! you may 
 talk like a fool , laugh like a hyena and look like a baboon , but if the 
 chink - chink of your gold be only sufficiently loud , you may soon find 
 yourself din with the queen if such be your ambition . if , on the 
 contrary you happen to be truly great , brave , patient , and enduring , 
 with a spark in you of that genius which strengthen life and make it 
 well worth living , - if you have thought which take shape in work that 
 shall endure when kingdom be sweep away like dust before the wind , and 
 if , with all this you be yet poor in current coin , why then , - you shall 
 be spurn by all the crown dummy of the world , - you shall be 
 snub by the affluent starch - maker and the Croesus who live on a 
 patent pill , - the tradesman from whom you buy bedstead and kitchen 
 ware , can look down upon you with lordly scorn , for do he not by 
 virtue of his wealth alone , drive a four - in - hand , and chat on easy and 
 almost patronize term with the Prince of Wales ? the wealthy denizen 
 of Snob - land delight in ignore Nature 's elect nobleman . " 

 " but supposing " say Miss Chesney quickly , " you happen to be a Nature 's 
 nobleman yourself , and have the advantage of wealth besides , surely you 
 must fairly allow that to be rather a good thing , must not   you ? " 

 Lucio laugh a little - 

 " I will retort upon you in your own word fair lady , and say ' I guess 
 you mean compliment . ' what I venture to imply however , be that even 
 when wealth do fall to the lot of one of these ' nature 's nobleman , ' it 
 be not because of his innate nobility that he win social distinction . 
 it be simply because he be rich . that be what vex I . I for example , 
 have endless friend who be not my friend so much as the friend of my 
 income . they do not trouble to inquire as to my antecedent , - what I be 
 or where I come from be of no importance . neither be they concerned in 
 how I live or what I do ; whether I be sick or well , happy or unhappy , be 
 equally with they a matter of indifference . if they know more about I , 
 it would perhaps be well in the long run . but they do not want to 
 know , - their aim be simple and unconcealed , - they wish to make as much 
 out of I , and secure as much advantage to themselves by their 
 acquaintance with I as possible . and I give they their full way , - they 
 get all they want , - and more ! " 

 his musical voice linger with a curiously melancholy impressiveness on 
 the last word , - and this time , not only Miss Chesney , but we all , look 
 at he as though draw by some irresistible magnetic spell , and for a 
 moment there be silence . 

 " very few people have any real friend , " - say Lord Elton presently . 
 " and in that respect I suppose we be none of we bad off than Socrates , 
 who use to keep two chair only in his house ' one for myself , and 
 another for a friend - when I find he ! ' but you be a universal 
 favourite Lucio , - a most popular fellow - and I think you be rather hard 
 on your set . People must look after themselves you know - eh ? " 

 Lucio bow his head gravely . 

 " they must indeed , " he reply - " especially as the late news of 
 science be that God have give up the business . " 

 Miss Fitzroy look displeased , - but the Earl laugh uproariously . at 
 that moment a step be hear outside , approach the open doorway of 
 the drawing - room , and Miss Chesney 's quick ear catch the sound . she 
 shake herself out of her reclining attitude instantly and sit erect . 

 " it be Sibyl ! " she say with a half - laugh half - apologetic flash of her 
 brown eye at we all - " I never can loll before Sibyl ! " 

 my heart beat fast as the woman whom poet might have call the goddess 
 of their dream , but whom I be now dispose to consider as an object of 
 beauty lawfully open to my purchase , enter , clothe in simple white , 
 unrelieved by any ornament save a golden waistbelt of antique 
 workmanship , and a knot of violet nestle among the lace at her bosom . 
 she look far lovely than when I have first see she at the theatre ; 
 there be a deep light in her eye and a more roseate flush on her 
 cheek , while her smile as she greet we be positively dazzle . 
 something in her presence , her movement , her manner , send such a tide 
 of passion through I that for a moment my brain whirl in a dizzy 
 maze , and despite the cold calculation I have make in my own mind as to 
 the certainty I have of win she for my wife , there be a wondrous 
 charm of delicate dignity and unapproachableness about she that cause 
 I for the moment to feel ashamed , and incline to doubt even the power 
 of wealth to move this exquisite lily of maidenhood from her sequester 
 peace . ah , what fool man be ! how little do we dream of the canker at 
 the heart of these woman ' lily ' that look so pure and full of grace ! 

 " you be late , Sibyl , " say her aunt severely . 

 " be I ? " she respond with languid indifference - " so sorry ! papa , be 
 you an extemporize fire - screen ? " 

 Lord Elton hastily move to one side , render suddenly conscious of his 
 selfish monopoly of the blaze . 

 " be you not cold , Miss Chesney ? " continue Lady Sibyl , in accent of 
 study courtesy - " would you not like to come near the fire ? " 

 Diana Chesney have become quite subdue , almost timid in fact . 

 " thank - you ! " - she murmur , and her eye droop with what might have 
 be call retire maiden modesty , have not Miss Chesney 's quality 
 soar far beyond that trite description . 

 " we hear some shocking news this morning , Mr Tempest , " say Lady Sibyl , 
 look at Lucio rather than at I - " no doubt you read it in the 
 paper , - an acquaintance of ours , Viscount Lynton , shoot himself last 
 night . " 

 I could not repress a slight start . Lucio give I a warning glance , and 
 take it upon himself to reply . 

 " yes , I read a brief account of the affair - terrible indeed ! I also know 
 he slightly . " 

 " do you ? well , he be engage to a friend of mine , " go on Lady 
 Sibyl - " I myself think she have have a lucky escape , because though he be 
 an agreeable man enough in society , he be a great gambler , and very 
 extravagant , and he would have run through her fortune very quickly . but 
 she can not be bring to see it in that light , - she be dreadfully upset . 
 she have set her heart on be a Viscountess . " 

 " I guess , " say Miss Chesney demurely , with a sly sparkle of her 
 eye - " it be not only Americans who run after title . since I have   be 
 over here I have   know several real nice girl marry downright mean 
 dough - head just for the sake of be call ' my lady ' or ' your grace . ' 
 I like a title very well myself - but I also like a man attach to it . " 

 the Earl smother a chuckle laugh , - Lady Sibyl gaze meditatively 
 into the fire and go on as though she have not hear . 

 " of course my friend will have other chance , - she be young and 
 handsome - but I really think , apart from the social point of view , that 
 she be a little in love with the Viscount - - " 

 " nonsense ! nonsense ! " say her father somewhat testily . " you always have 
 some romantic notion or other in your head Sibyl , - one ' season ' ought to 
 have cure you of sentiment - ha - ha - ha ! she always know he be a 
 dissolute rascal , and she be go to marry he with her eye wide open 
 to the fact . when I read in the paper that he have blow his brain out 
 in a hansom , I say ' bad taste - bad taste ! spoil a poor cabby 's 
 stock - in - trade to satisfy a selfish whim ! ' ha - ha ! - but I think it be 
 a good riddance of bad rubbish . he would have make any woman 's life 
 utterly miserable . " 

 " no doubt he would ! " respond Lady Sibyl , listlessly ; " but , all the 
 same , there be such a thing as love sometimes . " 

 she raise her beautiful liquid eye to Lucio 's face , but he be not 
 look her way , and her stedfast gaze meet mine instead . what my look 
 express I know not ; but I see the rich blood mantle warmly in her 
 cheek , and a tremor seem to pass through her frame , - then she grow 
 very pale . at that moment one of the gorgeous footman appear at the 
 doorway . 

 " Dinner be serve , my lud . " 

 " good ! " and the Earl proceed to ' pair ' us all . " Prince , will you take 
 Miss Fitzroy , - Mr Tempest , my daughter fall to your escort , - I will 
 follow with Miss Chesney . " 

 we set off in this order down the stair , and as I walk behind Lucio 
 with Lady Sibyl on my arm , I could not help smile at the extreme 
 gravity and earnestness with which he be discuss church matter with 
 Miss Charlotte , and the sudden enthusiasm that apparently seize that 
 dignified spinster at some of his remark on the clergy , which take the 
 form of the most affectionate and respectful eulogy , and be totally 
 the reverse of the idea he have exchange with I on the same subject . 
 some spirit of mischief be evidently move he to have a solemn joke 
 with the high - breed lady he escort , and I note his behaviour with a 
 good deal of inward amusement . 

 " then you know the dear Canon ? " I hear Miss Charlotte say . 

 " most intimately ! " reply Lucio with fervour - " and I assure you I be 
 thankful to have the privilege of know he . a truly perfect 
 man ! - almost a saint - if not quite ! " 

 " so pure - minded ! " sigh the spinster . 

 " so free from every taint of hypocrisy ! " murmur Lucio with intense 
 gravity . 

 " ah yes ! yes indeed ! and so - - " 

 here they pass into the dining - room and I could hear no more . I 
 follow with my beautiful partner , and in another minute we be all 
 seat at table . 




 XII 


 the dinner go on in the fashion of most dinner at great 
 house , - commence with arctic stiffness and formality , thaw 
 slightly towards the middle course , and attain to just a pleasant 
 warmth of mutual understanding when ice and dessert give warning of its 
 approach close . conversation at first flag unaccountably , but 
 afterwards brighten under Lucio 's influence to a certain gaiety . I do 
 my good to entertain Lady Sibyl , but find she like most ' society ' 
 beauty , somewhat of a vague listener . she be certainly cold , and in a 
 manner irresponsive , - moreover I soon decide that she be not 
 particularly clever . she have not the art of sustain or appear to 
 sustain interest in any one subject ; on the contrary , she have , like many 
 of her class , an irritate habit of mentally drift away from you 
 into an absorb reverie of her own in which you have no part , and which 
 plainly show you how little she care for anything you or anyone else 
 happen to be say . many little random remark of hers however 
 imply that in she apparently sweet nature there lurk a vein of 
 cynicism and a certain contempt for man , and more than once her light 
 word sting my sense of self - love almost to resentment , while they 
 strengthen the force of my resolve to win she and bend that proud 
 spirit of hers to the meekness befit the wife of a millionaire 
 and - a genius . a genius ? yes , - God help I ! - that be what I judge 
 myself to be . my arrogance be two - fold , - it arise not only from what I 
 imagine to be my quality of brain , but also from the knowledge of what 
 my wealth could do . I be perfectly positive that I could buy Fame , - buy 
 it as easily as one buy a flower in the market , - and I be more than 
 positive that I could buy love . in order to commence prove the truth 
 of this , I throw out a ' feeler ' towards my object . 

 " I believe , " I say suddenly , address the Earl - " you use to live in 
 Warwickshire at Willowsmere Court do you not ? " 

 Lord Elton flush an apoplectic red , and swallow a gulp of champagne 
 hastily . 

 " yes - er - yes . I - er have the place for some time , - rather a bore to keep 
 up , - want quite an army of servant . " 

 " just so ; " I reply with a nod of appreciative comprehension - " I 
 presume it will require a considerable domestic retinue . I have arrange 
 to purchase it . " 

 Lady Sibyl 's frigid composure be at last disturb - she look 
 strangely agitated , - and the Earl star till his eye seem likely to 
 fall out of his head . 

 " you ? you be go to buy Willowsmere ? " he ejaculate . 

 " yes . I have wire to my lawyer to settle the matter as quickly as 
 possible " - and I glance at Lucio whose steel - bright eye be fix on 
 the Earl with curious intentness , - " I like Warwickshire , - and as I shall 
 entertain a great deal I think the place will suit I perfectly . " 

 there be a moment 's silence . Miss Charlotte Fitzroy sigh deeply , and 
 the lace bow on her severely part hair tremble visibly . Diana Chesney 
 look up with inquisitive eye and a little wonder smile . 

 " Sibyl be bear at Willowsmere , " - say the Earl presently in rather a 
 husky voice . 

 " a new charm be add to its possession by that knowledge , " - I say 
 gently , bow to Lady Sibyl as I speak - " have you many recollection of 
 the place ? " 

 " indeed , indeed I have ! " she answer with a touch of something like 
 passion vibrate in her accent - " there be no corner of the world I 
 love so well ! I use to play on the lawn under the old oak - tree , and I 
 always gather the first violet and primrose that come out on the 
 bank of the Avon . and when the hawthorn be in full flower I use to 
 make believe that the park be fairyland and I the fairy queen - - " 

 " as you be and be ! " interpose Lucio suddenly . 

 she smile and her eye flash , - then she go on more quietly - 

 " it be all very foolish , but I love Willowsmere , and love it still . 
 and I often see in the field on the other side of the river which do 
 not belong to the estate , a little girl about my own age , play all by 
 herself and make long daisy - chain and buttercup ball , - a little girl 
 with long fair curl and a sweet baby face . I want to know she and 
 speak to she , but my nurse would never let I because she be suppose 
 to be ' beneath ' I . " Lady Sibyl 's lip curl scornfully at this 
 recollection . " yet she be well - bear ; she be the orphan child of a very 
 distinguished scholar and gentleman , and have be adopt by the 
 physician who attend her mother 's deathbe , she have no living 
 relative leave to take care of she . and she - that little fair - haired 
 girl , - be Mavis Clare . " 

 as this name be utter , a sort of hush fall on our party as though an 
 ' Angelus ' have ring ; and Lucio look across at I with peculiar 
 intentness ask , 

 " have you never hear of Mavis Clare , Tempest ? " 

 I think a moment before reply . yes , - I have hear the 
 name , - connect with literature in some dim and distant way , but I 
 could not remember when or how . for I never pay any attention to the 
 name of woman who choose to associate themselves with the Arts , as I have 
 the usual masculine notion that all they do , whether in painting , music 
 or writing , must of necessity be trash and unworthy of comment . woman , 
 I loftily consider , be create to amuse man , - not to instruct they . 

 " Mavis Clare be a genius , " - Lady Sibyl say presently - " if Mr Tempest 
 have not hear of she , there be no doubt he will hear . I often regret 
 that I never make her acquaintance in those old day at 
 Willowsmere , - the stupidity of my nurse often rankle in my mind . 
 ' beneath I ' - indeed ! - and how very much she be above I now ! she still 
 live down there , - her adopt parent be dead and she rent the lovely 
 little house they inhabit . she have buy some extra land about it and 
 improve the place wonderfully . indeed I have never see a more ideal 
 poet 's corner than Lily Cottage . " 

 I be silent , feel somewhat in the background on account of my 
 ignorance as to the gift and the position of the individual they all 
 seem to recognize as a celebrity of importance . 

 " rather an odd name , Mavis , be not   it ? " - I at last venture to observe . 

 " yes , - but it suit she wonderfully . she sing quite as sweetly as any 
 thrush , so she merit her designation . " 

 " what have she do in literature ? " I continue . 

 " oh , - only a novel ! " reply Lucio with a smile - " but it have a quality 
 unusual to novel ; it live ! I hope , Tempest , that your forthcoming work 
 will enjoy the same vitality . " 

 here Lord Elton who have be more or less brood darkly over his glass 
 of wine ever since I have mention my purchase of Willowsmere , rouse 
 himself from his reverie . 

 " why , God bless my soul ! " he exclaim - " you do not   mean to tell I you 
 have write a novel Mr Tempest ? "   be it possible he have never notice 
 all the prominent advertisement of my book in every paper , I think 
 indignantly !   " what do you want to do that for , with your immense 
 position ? " 

 " he hanker after fame ! " say Lucio half kindly , half satirically . 

 " but you have   get fame ! " declare the Earl emphatically - " everybody know 
 who you be by this time . " 

 " ah , my dear lord , that be not enough for the aspiration of my gifted 
 friend " - respond Lucio , speak for I , his eye darken with that 
 mystic shadow of mingled sorrow and scorn which so frequently cloud 
 their lustrous brilliancy ; " he do not particularly care for the 
 ' immense position ' that be due to wealth alone , because that do not 
 lift he a jot high than Maple of Tottenham Court Road . he seek to 
 soar beyond the furniture man , - and who shall blame he ? he would be 
 know for that indescribable quality call Genius , - for high thought , 
 poetry , divine instinct , and prophetic probing into the heart of 
 humanity , - in short , for the power of the Pen , which topple down great 
 kingdom like card - house and stick foolscap on the head of king . 
 generally it be the moneyless man or woman who be endow with this 
 unpurchaseable power , - this independence of action and indifference to 
 opinion , - the wealthy seldom do anything but spend or hoard . but Tempest 
 mean to unite for once in his own person the two most strenuously 
 oppose force in nature , - genius and cash , - or in other word , God and 
 Mammon . " 

 Lady Sibyl turn her head towards I ; - there be a look of doubt and 
 wonder on her beautiful face . 

 " I be afraid , " - she say half smile , " that the claim of society will 
 take up too much of your time , Mr Tempest , to allow you to continue the 
 writing of book . I remember you tell I the other evening that you be 
 about to publish a novel . I suppose you be - originally I mean - an 
 author by profession ? " 

 a curious sense of anger burn dully within I . ' originally ' an author ? 
 be I not one still ? be I to be give credit for nothing but my 
 banking - book ? ' originally ' ? why , I have never be an actual ' author ' 
 till now , - I have simply be a wandering literary hack , - a stray ' super ' 
 of Grub Street , occasionally engage to write article ' to order ' on 
 any subject that come uppermost , at a starvation rate of pay , without 
 any visible prospect of rise from that low and dirty rung of the 
 literary ladder . I feel myself grow red , then pale , - and I see that 
 Lucio be look at I fixedly . 

 " I be an author , Lady Sibyl " - I say at last - " and I hope I may soon 
 prove my right to be acknowledge as one . ' author ' be in my opinion , a 
 prouder title than king , and I do not think any social claim will deter 
 I from follow the profession of literature , which I look upon as the 
 high in the world . " 

 Lord Elton fidgette uneasily in his chair . 

 " but your people " - he say - " your family - be they literary ? " 

 " no member of my family be now live , " - I answer somewhat 
 stiffly - " my father be John Tempest of Rexmoor . " 

 " indeed ! " and the Earl 's face brighten considerably - " Dear I , dear 
 I ! I use to meet he often in the hunt field year ago . you come of 
 a fine old stock , sir ! - the Tempests of Rexmoor be well and honourably 
 know in county chronicle . " 

 I say nothing , feel a trifle heated in temper , though I could not 
 have quite explain why . 

 " one begin to wonder , " - say Lucio then in his soft smooth 
 accent - " when one be the descendant of a good English county family , - a 
 distinct cause for pride ! - and moreover have the still more substantial 
 fact of a large fortune to support that high lineage , why one should 
 trouble to fight for merely literary honour ! you be far too modest in 
 your ambition , Tempest ! - high - seated as you be upon bank - note and 
 bullion , with all the glory of effulgent county chronicle behind you , 
 you still stoop to clutch the laurel ! Fie , my dear fellow ! you degrade 
 yourself by this desire to join the company of the immortal ! " 

 his satirical tone be not lose upon the company ; and I , who see that 
 in his own special way he be defend the claim of literature against 
 those of mere place and money , feel soothed and grateful . the Earl 
 look a trifle annoyed . 

 " that be all very fine , " he say - " but you see it be not   as if Mr Tempest 
 be drive by necessity to write for his living " - 

 " one may love work for the work 's sake without any actual necessity for 
 do it , " - I interpose - " for example , - this Mavis Clare you speak 
 of , - be she , - a woman , - drive by necessity ? " 

 " Mavis Clare have not   a penny in the world that she do not earn , " - say 
 Lord Elton gruffly - " I suppose that if she do not write she would 
 starve . " 

 Diana Chesney laugh . 

 " I guess she be a long way off starvation just now , " - she remark , her 
 brown eye twinkle - " why , she be as proud as the proud , - drive in 
 the Park in her victoria and pair with the good in the land , and know 
 all the ' swagger ' people . she be nowhere near Grub Street I should say . 
 I hear she be a splendid business woman , and more than a match for the 
 publisher all round . " 

 " well I should rather doubt that , " - say the Earl with a chuckle . " it 
 need the devil himself to match the publisher . " 

 " you be right ! " - say Lucio - " in fact I daresay that in the various 
 ' phase ' or transmigration of the spirit into differ form of earthy 
 matter , the devil   should he exist at all   have frequently become a 
 publisher , - and a particularly benevolent publisher too ! - by way of 
 diversion . " 

 we all smile . 

 " well , I should imagine Mavis Clare to be a match for anybody or 
 anything , " - say Lady Sibyl - " of course she be not rich , - but she spend 
 her money wisely and to effective advantage . I do not know she 
 personally , - I wish I do ; but I have read her book , which be quite 
 out of the common . she be a most independent creature too ; quite 
 indifferent to opinion " - 

 " I suppose she must be extremely plain then " - I observe ; " plain woman 
 always try to do something more or less startling in order to attract 
 the attention deny to their personality . " 

 " true , - but that would not apply to Miss Clare . she be pretty , and know 
 how to dress besides . " 

 " such a virtue in literary woman ! " exclaim Diana Chesney - " some of 
 they be such dowdy ! " 

 " Most people of culture , " go on Lady Sibyl - " in our set at any rate , 
 be accustom to look upon Miss Clare as quite an exception to the 
 usual run of author . she be charming in herself as well as in her 
 book , and she go everywhere . she write with inspiration , - and always 
 have something so new to say - " 

 " that of course all the critic be down upon she ? " query Lucio . 

 " oh , naturally ! but we never read review . " 

 " nor anyone else I should hope , " - say Lord Elton with a laugh - " except 
 the fellow who write they , ha - ha - ha ! I call it damned 
 impertinence - excuse the word - on the part of a newspaper hack to 
 presume to teach I what I ought to read , or what I ought to 
 appreciate . I be quite capable of form my own judgment on any book 
 that ever be write . but I avoid all the confound ' new ' 
 poet , - avoid them like poison , sir - ha - ha ! anything but a ' new ' poet ; 
 the old one be good enough for I ! why sir , these reviewer who give 
 themselves such air with a pennorth of ink and a pen , be mostly 
 half - grow half - educate boy who for a couple of guineas a week 
 undertake to tell the public what they think of such and such a book , 
 as if anyone care a jot about their green opinion ! ridiculous - quite 
 ridiculous ! - what do they take the public for I wonder ! editor of 
 responsible journal ought to know well than to employ such young 
 coxcomb just because they can get they cheap - - " 

 at this juncture the butler come up behind his master 's chair and 
 whisper a few word . the Earl 's brow cloud , - then he address his 
 sister - in - law , - 

 " Charlotte , Lady Elton send word that she will come into the 
 drawing - room to - night . perhaps you have well go and see that she be 
 make comfortable . " and , as Miss Charlotte rise , he turn to we 
 say - " my wife be seldom well enough to see visitor , but this evening 
 she feel inclined for a little change and distraction from the monotony 
 of her sick - room . it will be very kind of you two gentleman to entertain 
 she , - she can not speak much , but her hearing and sight be excellent , 
 and she take great interest in all that be go on . dear dear I ! " and 
 he heave a short trouble sigh - " she use to be one of the bright of 
 woman ! " 

 " the sweet Countess ! " murmur Miss Chesney with patronizing 
 tenderness - " she be quite lovely still ! " 

 Lady Sibyl glance at she with a sudden haughty frown which show I 
 plainly what a rebellious temper the young beauty hold in control ; and I 
 fall straightway more in love , - accord to my idea of love , - than 
 ever . I confess I like a woman to have a certain amount of temper . I 
 can not endure your preternaturally amiable female who can find nothing 
 in all the length or breadth of the globe to move she to any other 
 expression than a fatuous smile . I love to see the danger - flash in 
 bright eye , - the delicate quiver of pride in the line of a lovely 
 mouth , and the warm flush of indignation on fair cheek . it all suggest 
 spirit , and untamed will ; and rous in a man the love of mastery that 
 be bear in his nature , urge he to conquer and subdue that which seem 
 unconquerable . and all the desire of such conquest be strong within I , 
 when at the close of dinner I rise and hold the door open for the lady 
 to pass out of the room . as the fair Sibyl go , the violet she wear at 
 her bosom drop . I pick they up and make my first move . 

 " may I keep these ? " I say in a low tone . 

 her breath come and go quickly , - but she look straight in my eye 
 with a smile that perfectly comprehend my hidden meaning . 

 " you may ! " she answer . 

 I bow , - close the door behind she , and secrete the flower , 
 return , well - satisfy , to my place at table . 




 xiii 


 leave with myself and Lucio , Lord Elton throw off all reserve , and become 
 not only familiar , but fawn in his adulation of we both . an abject 
 and pitiable desire to please and propitiate we express itself in his 
 every look and word ; and I firmly believe that if I have coolly and 
 brutally offer to buy his fair daughter by private treaty for a 
 hundred thousand pound , that sum to be pay down to he on the day of 
 marriage , he would have gladly agree to sell . apart however from his 
 personal covetousness , I feel and know that my projected courtship of 
 Lady Sibyl would of necessity resolve itself into something more or less 
 of a market bargain , unless indeed I could win the girl 's love . I mean 
 to try and do this , but I fully realize how difficult , nay , almost 
 impossible it would be for she to forget the fact of my unhampere and 
 vast fortune , and consider I for myself alone . Herein be one of the 
 blessing of poverty which the poor be frequently too apt to forget . a 
 moneyless man if he win a woman 's love know that such love be genuine 
 and untainted by self - interest ; but a rich man can never be truly 
 certain of love at all . the advantage of a wealthy match be constantly 
 urge upon all marriageable girl by both their parent and 
 friend , - and it would have to be a very unsophisticated feminine nature 
 indeed that could contemplate a husband possess five million of 
 money , without a touch of purely interested satisfaction . a very wealthy 
 man can never be sure even of friendship , - while the high , strong 
 and noble kind of love be nearly always deny to he , in this way 
 carry out the fulfilment of those strange but true word - " how hardly 
 shall he that be a rich man , enter the Kingdom of Heaven ! " the heaven of 
 a woman 's love , try and prove true through disaster and 
 difficulty , - of her unflinche faithfulness and devotion in day of 
 toil and bitter anguish , - of her heroic self - abnegation , sweetness and 
 courage through the dark hour of doubt and disappointment ; - this 
 bright and splendid side of woman 's character be reserve by Divine 
 ordinance for the poor man . the millionaire can indeed we d whomsoever he 
 please among all the beauty of the world , - he can deck his wife in 
 gorgeous apparel , load she with jewel and look upon she in all the 
 radiance of her richly adorn loveliness as one may look upon a perfect 
 statue or matchless picture , - but he can never reach the deep secret 
 of her soul or probe the well - spring of her finer nature . I think 
 this even thus early in the beginning of my admiration for Lady Sibyl 
 Elton , though I do not then dwell upon it as I have often do since . I 
 be too elated with the pride of wealth to count the possibility of 
 subtle loss amid so many solid gain ; and I enjoy to the full and 
 with a somewhat contemptuous malice the humble prostration of a ' belted 
 Earl ' before the dazzle mine of practically unlimited cash as 
 represent to he in the person of my brilliant comrade and myself . I 
 take a curious sort of pleasure in patronize he , and address he 
 with a protect air of indulgent kindness whereat he seem gratify . 
 inwardly I laugh as I think how differently matter would have 
 stand , suppose I have be indeed no more than ' author ' ! I might have 
 prove to be one of the great writer of the age , but if , with that , 
 I have be poor or only moderately well off , this same half bankrupt 
 Earl who privately board an american heiress for two thousand guinea 
 a year , would have deem it a ' condescension ' to so much as invite I 
 to his house , - would have look down upon I from his title 
 nothingness and perhaps carelessly allude to I as ' a man who 
 write - er - yes - er - rather clever I believe ! ' and then would have 
 think no more about I . for this very cause as ' author ' still , though 
 millionaire , I take a fantastic pleasure in humiliate his lordship as 
 much as possible , and I find the good way to do this be to talk about 
 Willowsmere . I see that he wince at the very name of his lost estate , 
 and that notwithstanding this , he could not avoid show his anxiety as 
 to my intention with regard to its occupation . Lucio , whose wisdom and 
 foresight have suggest my become the purchaser of the place , assist 
 I in the most adroit fashion to draw he out and to make his character 
 manifest , and by the time we have finish our cigar and coffee I know 
 that the ' proud ' Earl of Elton , who could trace his lineage to the 
 early day of the Crusaders , be as ready to bend his back and crawl 
 in the dust for money as the veri hotel - porter expectant of a 
 sovereign ' tip . ' I have never entertain a high opinion of the 
 aristocracy , and on this occasion it be certainly not improve , but 
 remembering that the spendthrift nobleman beside I be the father of 
 Lady Sibyl , I treat he on the whole with more respect than his mean 
 and grasp nature deserve . 

 on return to the drawing - room after dinner I be strike by the chill 
 weirdness that seem to be impart to it by the addition of Lady 
 Elton 's couch , which , place near the fire , suggest a black 
 sarcophagus in bulk and outline . it be practically a narrow bed on 
 wheel , though partially disguise by a silk coverlet drape skilfully 
 so as to somewhat hide its coffin - like shape . the extended figure of the 
 paralyse Countess herself present a death - like rigidity ; but her face 
 as she turn it towards we on our entrance , be undisfigure as yet and 
 distinctly handsome , her eye especially be large , clear , and almost 
 brilliant . her daughter introduce we both in a low tone , and she move 
 her head slightly by way of acknowledgment , study we curiously the 
 while . 

 " well , my dear " - say Lord Elton briskly , " this be an unexpected 
 pleasure ! it be nearly three month since you honour we with your 
 company . how do you feel ? " 

 " well , " she reply slowly , yet distinctly , her gaze now fix with 
 wonder intentness on Prince Rimânez . 

 " Mother find the room rather cold " - explain Lady Sibyl - " so we 
 bring she as near to the fire as possible . it be cold " - and she 
 shiver - " I fancy it must be freeze hard . " 

 " where be Diana ? " ask the Earl , look about in search of that lively 
 young lady . 

 " Miss Chesney have go to her own room to write a letter ; " reply his 
 daughter somewhat frigidly - " she will be back directly . " 

 at this moment Lady Elton feebly raise her hand and point to Lucio , 
 who have move aside to answer some question ask of he by Miss 
 Charlotte . 

 " who be that ? " she murmur . 

 " why , mother dear , I tell you " - say Lady Sibyl gently - " that be Prince 
 Lucio Rimânez , Papa 's great friend . " 

 the Countess 's pallid hand still remain lift , as though it be 
 freeze in air . 

 " what be he ? " the slow voice again inquire , - and then the hand 
 drop suddenly like a dead thing . 

 " Now Helena , you must not excite yourself " - say her husband , bend 
 over her couch with real or assumed anxiety ; " surely you remember all I 
 have tell you about the prince ? and also about this gentleman , Mr 
 Geoffrey Tempest ? " 

 she nod , and her eye , turn reluctantly away from Rimânez , 
 regard I fixedly . 

 " you be a very young man to be a millionaire , " - be her next word , 
 utter with evident difficulty - " be you married ? " 

 I smile , and answer in the negative . her look wander from I to 
 her daughter 's face , - then back to I again with a singularly intent 
 expression . finally , the potent magnetism of Lucio 's presence again 
 attract she , and she indicate he by a gesture . 

 " ask your friend ... to come here ... and speak to I . " 

 Rimânez turn instinctively at her request , and with his own peculiar 
 charm and gallant grace of bear , come to the side of the paralysed 
 lady , and take her hand , kiss it . 

 " your face seem familiar to I , " - she say , speak now , as it seem , 
 with great ease - " have I ever meet you before ? " 

 " dear lady , you may have do so " - he reply in dulcet tone and with a 
 most captivating gentleness of manner - " it occur to I , now I think of 
 it , that year ago , I see once , as a pass vision of loveliness , in 
 the hey - day of youth and happiness , Helena Fitzroy , before she be 
 Countess of Elton . " 

 " you must have be a mere boy - a child , - at that time ! " she murmur 
 faintly smile . 

 " not so ! - for you be still young , Madame , and I be old . you look 
 incredulous ? alas , why be it I wonder , I may not look the age I be ! Most 
 of my acquaintance spend a great part of their life in try to look 
 the age they be not ; and I never come across a man of fifty who be not 
 proud to be consider thirty - nine . my desire be more laudable , - yet 
 honourable eld refuse to impress itself upon my feature . it be quite a 
 sore point with I I assure you . " 

 " well , how old be you really ? " ask Lady Sibyl smile at he . 

 " ah , I dare not tell you ! " he answer , return the smile ; " but I 
 ought to explain that in my counting I judge age by the working of 
 thought and feel , more than by the passing of year . thus it should 
 not surprise you to hear that I feel myself old , - old as the world ! " 

 " but there be scientist who say that the world be young ; " I observe , 
 " and that it be only now begin to feel its force and put forth its 
 vigour . " 

 " such optimistic wise - acre be wrong , " he answer , - " the world be a 
 veritable husk of a planet ; humanity have nearly complete all its 
 allotted phase , and the end be near . " 

 " the end ? " echo Lady Sibyl , - " do you believe the world will ever come 
 to an end ? " 

 " I do , most certainly . or , to be more correct , it will not actually 
 perish , but will simply change . and the change will not agree with the 
 constitution of its present inhabitant . they will call the 
 transformation the Day of Judgment . I should imagine it would be a fine 
 sight . " 

 the Countess gaze at he wonderingly , - Lady Sibyl seem amuse . 

 " I would rather not witness it , " - say Lord Elton gruffly . 

 " oh , why ? " and Rimânez look about with quite a cheerful air - " a final 
 glimpse of the planet ere we a scend or de scend to our future home 
 elsewhere , would be something to remember ! Madame " - here he address 
 Lady Elton ; " be you fond of music ? " 

 the invalid smile gratefully , and bent her head in acquiescence . Miss 
 Chesney have just enter the room and hear the question . 

 " do you play ? " she exclaim vivaciously , touch he on the arm with 
 her fan . 

 he bow . " I do . in an erratic sort of fashion . I also sing . music have 
 always be one of my passion . when I be very young , - age ago , - I 
 use to imagine I could hear the angel Israfel chant his strophe 
 amid the golden glow of heavenly glory , - himself white - wing and 
 wonderful , with a voice out - ring beyond the verge of paradise ! " 

 as he speak , a sudden silence fall upon we all . something in his accent 
 touch my heart to a strange sense of sorrow and yearning , and the 
 Countess of Elton 's dark eye , languid with long suffering , grow soft as 
 though with repressed tear . 

 " sometimes , " he continue more lightly - " just at odd moment - I like to 
 believe in Paradise . it be a relief , even to a hardened sinner like 
 myself , to fancy that there may exist something in the way of a world 
 well than this one . " 

 " surely sir , " say Miss Charlotte Fitzroy severely - " you believe in 
 Heaven ? " 

 he look at she and smile slightly . 

 " Madame , forgive I ! I do not believe in the clerical heaven . I know you 
 will be angry with I for this frank confession ! but I can not picture 
 the angel in white smock with goose wing , or the deity as a somewhat 
 excitable personage with a beard . personally I should decline to go to 
 any heaven which be only a city with golden street ; and I should 
 object to a sea of glass , resent it as a want of invention on the 
 part of the creative intelligence . but - - do not frown , dear Miss 
 Fitzroy ! - I do believe in Heaven all the same , - a different kind of 
 heaven , - I often see it in my dream ! " 

 he pause , and again we be all silent , gaze at he . Lady Sibyl 's 
 eye indeed , rest upon he with such absorb interest , that I became 
 somewhat irritated , and be glad , when turn towards the Countess once 
 more , he say quietly . 

 " shall I give you some music now , Madame ? " 

 she murmur assent , and follow he with a vaguely uneasy glance as he 
 cross over to the grand piano and sit down . I have never hear he 
 either play or sing ; in fact so far as his accomplishment go , I know 
 nothing of he as yet except that he be a perfect master of the art of 
 horsemanship . with the first few bar he strike I half start from my 
 chair in amazement ; - could a mere pianoforte produce such sound ? - or 
 be there some witchery hide in the commonplace instrument , unguessed 
 by any other performer ? I star around I , bewildered , - I see Miss 
 Charlotte drop her knitting abstractedly , - Diana Chesney , lie lazily 
 back in one corner of the sofa , half close her eyelid in dreamy 
 ecstasy , - Lord Elton stand near the fire rest one arm on the 
 mantelpiece and shade his fuzzy brow with his hand , - and Lady Sibyl 
 sit beside her mother , her lovely face pale with emotion , while on the 
 worn feature of the invalided lady there be an expression of mingle 
 pain and pleasure difficult to describe . the music swell into 
 passionate cadence , - melody cross and re - cross each other like 
 ray of light glitter among green leaf , - voice of bird and 
 stream and tossing waterfall chime in with song of love and playful 
 merriment ; - anon come wilder strain of grief and angry clamour ; cry 
 of despair be hear echo through the thunderous noise of some 
 relentless storm , - farewell everlastingly shriek amid sob of 
 reluctant shuddering agony ; - and then , as I listen , before my eye a 
 black mist gather slowly , and I think I see great rock burst 
 asunder into flame , and drift island in a sea of fire , - face , 
 wonderful , hideous , beautiful , peer at I out of a darkness denser 
 than night , and in the midst of this there come a tune , complete in 
 sweetness and suggestion , - a pierce sword - like tune that plunge into 
 my very heart and rankle there , - - my breath fail I , - my sens 
 swam , - I feel that I must move , speak , cry out , and implore that this 
 music , this horribly insidious music should cease ere I swoon with the 
 voluptuous poison of it , - when , with a full chord of splendid harmony 
 that roll out upon the air like a break wave , the intoxicating 
 sound ebb away into silence . no one speak , - our heart be yet 
 beat too wildly with the pulsation rouse by that wondrous lyric 
 storm . Diana Chesney be the first to break the spell . 

 " well , that beat everything I have   ever hear ! " she murmur tremulously . 

 I could say nothing , - I be too occupy with my own thought . something 
 in the music have instill itself into my blood , or so I fancy , and 
 the cling subtle sweetness of it , move I to strange emotion that 
 be neither wise , nor worthy of a man . I look at Lady Sibyl ; she be 
 very pale , - her eye be cast down and her hand be tremble . on a 
 sudden impulse I rise and go to Rimânez where he still sit at the 
 piano , his hand dumbly wander over the key . 

 " you be a great master " - I say - " a wonderful performer ! but do you 
 know what your music suggest ? " 

 he meet my fix gaze , shrug his shoulder , and shake his head . 

 " Crime ! " I whisper - " you have rouse in I evil thought of which I be 
 ashamed . I do not think that be possible to so divine an art . " 

 he smile , and his eye glitter with the steely brightness of star on 
 a wintry night . 

 " art take its colour from the mind , my dear friend ; " - he say - " if you 
 discover evil suggestion in my music , the evil , I fear , must be in your 
 own nature . " 

 " or in your ! " I say quickly . 

 " or in mine ; " - he agree coldly - " I have often tell you I be no saint . " 

 I stand hesitatingly , look at he . for one moment his great personal 
 beauty appear hateful to I , though I know not why . then the feeling 
 of distrust and repulsion slowly pass , leave I humiliate and 
 abash . 

 " Pardon I , Lucio ! " I murmur regretfully - " I speak in haste ; but truly 
 your music almost put I in a state of frenzy , - I never hear anything 
 in the least like it - - " 

 " nor I , " - say Lady Sibyl , who just then move towards the piano - " it 
 be marvellous ! do you know , it quite frighten I ? " 

 " I be sorry ! " he answer with a penitent air - " I know I be quite a 
 failure as a pianist - I be not sufficiently ' restrain , ' as the press 
 man would say . " 

 " a failure ? good God ! " exclaim Lord Elton at this juncture - " why , if 
 you play like that in public , you would drive everyone frantic ! " 

 " with alarm ? " query Lucio , laugh - " or with disgust ? " 

 " Nonsense ! you know what I mean very well . I have always have a contempt 
 for the piano as an instrument , but by Jove ! I never hear such music as 
 yours even in a full orchestra . it be extraordinary ! - it be positively 
 magnificent ! where in the world do you study ? " 

 " in Nature 's conservatoire ; " - reply Rimânez lazily . " my first 
 ' maestro ' be an amiable nightingale . he , sing on a branch of fir 
 when the moon be full , explain with liquid - note patience , how to 
 construct and produce a pure roulade , cadenza and trill , - and when I have 
 learn thus far , he show I all the most elaborate method of 
 apply rhythmic tune to the upward and downward rush of the wind , thus 
 supply I with perfect counterpoint . chord I learn from old 
 Neptune , who be good enough to toss a few of his large billow to the 
 shore for my special benefit . he nearly deafen I with his 
 instruction , be somewhat excitable and loud - voice , - but on find 
 I an apt pupil , he draw back his wave to himself with so much delicacy 
 among the pebble and sand , that at once I master the secret of 
 play arpeggi . once too I have a finishing lesson from a Dream , - a 
 mystic thing with wild hair and wing - it sing one word in my ear , and 
 the word be unpronounceable in mortal speech , - but after many effort I 
 discover it lurk in the scale of sound . the good part of it all 
 be , that my instructor ask no fee ! " 

 " I think you be a poet as well as a musician , " - say Lady Sibyl . 

 " a poet ! spare I ! - my dear young lady , why be you so cruel as to load 
 I with so vile an imputation ! well be a murderer than a poet , - one be 
 treat with much more respect and courteous consideration , - by the 
 press at anyrate . the murderer 's breakfast - menu will be give due place 
 in many of the most estimable journal , - but the poet 's lack of both 
 breakfast and dinner will be deem his fitting reward . call I a 
 live - stock producer , a horse - breeder , a timber - merchant , - anything but a 
 poet ! why even Tennyson become an amateur milkman to somewhat conceal 
 and excuse the shame and degradation of write verse ! " 

 we all laugh . 

 " well , you must admit , " say Lord Elton , " that we have   have rather too much 
 of poet lately . it be no wonder we be sick of they , and that poetry have 
 fall into disrepute . poet be such a quarrelsome lot too - effeminate , 
 pule , unmanly humbug ! " 

 " you be speak of the newly ' discover ' one of course , " say 
 Lucio - " yes , they be a weedy collection . I have sometimes think that 
 out of pure philanthropy I would start a bon - bon manufactory , and employ 
 they to write motto for the cracker . it would keep they out of 
 mischief and provide they with a little pocket - money , for as matter 
 stand they do not make a farthing by their book . but I do not call they 
 ' poet ' at all , - they be mere rhymer . one or two real poet do exist , 
 but , like the prophet of Scripture , they be not ' in society , ' nor can 
 they get their log roll by any of their contemporary . they be not 
 favourite with any ' set ' ; that be why I be afraid my dear friend 
 Tempest will never be accept as the genius he be ; society will be too 
 fond of he to let he go down into dust and ash to gather the 
 laurel . " 

 " it be not necessary to go down into dust and ash for that , " I say . 

 " I assure you it be ! - " he answer gaily - " positively imperative . the 
 laurel flourish good so , - it will not grow in a hot - house . " 

 at that moment Diana Chesney approach . 

 " Lady Elton would like to hear you sing , prince - " she say - " will you 
 give we that pleasure ? do ! something quite simple , you know , - it will 
 set our nerve straight after your terribly beautiful music ! you would 
 hardly believe it perhaps , - but I really feel quite unstrung ! " 

 he fold his hand with a droll air of penitence . 

 " forgive I ! " he say , " I be always , as the church service say , do 
 those thing I ought not to do . " 

 Miss Chesney laugh , a trifle nervously . 

 " oh , I forgive you ! " she reply - " on condition that you sing . " 

 " I obey ! " and with that he turn again to the piano , and play a 
 strange wild minor accompaniment sing the follow stanzas : 

  Sleep , my Belovëd , sleep ! 
  be patient ! - we shall keep 
  our secret closely hide 
  beneath the coffin - lid , - 
  there be no other place in earth or air 
  for such a love as ours , or such despair ! 
  and neither hell nor heaven shall care to win 
  our loathëd soul , rejoice in their sin ! 

  Sleep ! - for my hand be sure , - 
  the cold steel bright and pure 
  strike through thy heart and mine 
  shed our blood like wine ; - 
  Sin 's sweetness be too sweet , and if the shame 
  of love must be our curse , we hurl the blame 
  back on the god who give we love with breath 
  and torture we from passion into death ! 

 this strange song , sing in the most glorious of baritone , full and 
 rich , and vibrate with power and sweetness , have a visibly thrill 
 effect upon we all . again we be strike dumb with surprise and 
 something like fear , - and again Diana Chesney break the silence . 

 " you call that simple ! " she say , half petulantly . 

 " quite so . love and Death be the simple thing in the world " - reply 
 Lucio . - " the ballad be a mere trifle , - it be entitle ' the last 
 Love - Song ' and be suppose to be the utterance of a lover about to kill 
 his mistress and himself . such event happen every day , - you know that 
 by the newspaper , - they be perfectly common - place - - " 

 he be interrupt by a sharp clear voice ring imperatively across 
 the room - 

 " where do you learn that song ? " 




 XIV 


 it be the paralysed Countess who speak . she have manage to partly raise 
 herself on her couch , and her face express positive terror . her 
 husband hurry to her side , - and , with a curiously cynical smile on his 
 lip , Rimânez rise from the piano . Miss Charlotte , who have sit rigidly 
 upright and silent for some time , hasten to attend upon her sister , 
 but Lady Elton be singularly excited , and appear to have gain a 
 sudden access of unnatural vigour . 

 " go away , - I be not ill , " - she say impatiently - " I feel well , - much 
 well than I have do for month . the music do I good . " and 
 address her husband , she add - " ask your friend to come and sit here 
 by I , - I want to talk to he . he have a magnificent voice , - and - I know 
 that song he sing , - I remember read it - in a manuscript album - long 
 ago . I want to know where he find it - " 

 Rimânez here advanced with his gentle tread and courteous bearing , and 
 Lord Elton give he a chair beside the invalid . 

 " you be work miracle on my wife , " - he say - " I have not see she so 
 animate for year . " 

 and leave the two to talk , he cross over to where Lady Sibyl , myself 
 and Miss Chesney be all seat in a group , chat more or less 
 unrestrainedly . 

 " I have just be express the hope that you and your daughter will 
 pay I a visit at Willowsmere , Lord Elton , " I say . 

 his brow contract a little , but he force a smile . " we shall be 
 delighted , " - he mumble - " when do you take possession ? " 

 " as soon as it be at all feasible " - I reply - " I shall wait in town 
 till the next Levée be over , as both my friend and myself have arrange 
 to be present . " 

 " oh - ah - yes ! - er - yes ! that be always advisable . and it be not half such 
 a troublesome business as a Drawing - room be for the lady . it be soon 
 over , - and low bodice be not de rigeur - ha - ha - ha ! who be your 
 presenter ? " 

 I name a distinguished personage , closely connect with the Court , and 
 the Earl nod . 

 " a very good man , - you could not have a well " - he say 
 complacently - " and this book of your , - when do it come out ? " 

 " next week . " 

 " we must get it , - we must certainly get it , " - say Lord Elton , assume 
 interest , - " Sybil , you must put it down on your library list . " 

 she assent , though , as I think a trifle indifferently . 

 " on the contrary you must allow I to present it to you ; " I say - " it 
 will be a pleasure to I which I hope you will not deny . " 

 " you be very kind , " - she answer , lift her beautiful eye to mine 
 as she speak - " but the librarian at Mudie 's be sure to send it - he know 
 I read everything . though I confess I never buy any book except those 
 by Mavis Clare . " 

 again that woman 's name ! I feel annoyed , but take care not to show my 
 annoyance . 

 " I shall be jealous of Mavis Clare , " I say playfully . 

 " Most man be ! " she reply quietly . 

 " you be indeed an enthusiastic partisan of her ! " I exclaim , somewhat 
 surprised . 

 " yes , I suppose I be . I like to see any member of my sex distinguish 
 herself as nobly as she do . I have no genius of my own , and that be 
 one of the reason why I honour it so much in other woman . " 

 I be about to make some suitable compliment by way of response to this 
 remark , when we be all violently startled from our seat by a most 
 horrible cry , - a gasp scream such as might be wring from some 
 torture animal . aghast at the sound we stand for a moment inert , 
 star at Rimânez , who come quickly towards we with an air of grave 
 concern . 

 " I be afraid , " he say softly - " that the Countess be not so 
 well , - perhaps you have well go to she - " 

 another shriek interrupt his word , and transfix with horror we see 
 Lady Elton struggle in the throe of some sudden and terrific 
 convulsion , her hand beat the air as if she be fight with an 
 unseen enemy . in one second her face undergo such hideous contortion 
 as rob it of all human semblance , and between the agonized panting 
 of her difficult breath , her half - choke voice could be hear uttering 
 wild cry - 

 " mercy ! - mercy ! - oh God - God ! tell Sibyl ! - pray - pray to God , - pray - " 

 and with that she fall heavily back , speechless and unconscious . 

 all be instant confusion . Lady Sibyl rush to her mother 's side , with 
 Miss Charlotte , - Diana Chesney hang back trembling and afraid , - Lord 
 Elton spring to the bell and ring it furiously . 

 " fetch the doctor ! " he cry to the startled servant - " Lady Elton have 
 have another shock ! she must be take to her room at once ! " 

 " can I be of any service ? " I inquire , with a side - glance at Rimânez , 
 who stand gravely apart , a statuesquely compose figure of silence . 

 " no no , - thank all the same ! " and the Earl press my hand 
 gratefully - " she should not have come downstairs , - it have be too 
 exciting for she . Sybil , do not   look at she , my dear - it will only 
 unnerve you , - Miss Chesney , pray go to your room , - Charlotte can do all 
 that be possible - - " 

 as he speak two of the man - servant come in to carry the insensible 
 countess upstairs , - and as they slowly bear she on her coffin - like 
 couch past I , one of they draw the coverlet across her face to conceal 
 it . but not so quickly that I could not see the awful change impress 
 upon it , - the indelible horror that be stamp on the drawn 
 feature , - horror such as surely never be see except in a painter 's 
 idea of some lose soul in torment . the eye be roll up and fix in 
 their socket like ball of glass , and in they also be freeze the same 
 frenzied desperate look of fear . it be a dreadful face ! - so dreadful in 
 its ghastly immovableness that I be all at once remind of my hideous 
 vision of the previous night , and the pallid countenance of the three 
 phantom that have scar I in my sleep . Lady Elton 's look now 
 resemble theirs ! sicken and appal I avert my eye , and be glad 
 to see Rimânez take farewell of his host , the while he express his 
 regret and sympathy with he in his domestic affliction . I myself , 
 approach Lady Sibyl , press her cold and tremble hand in mine , and 
 respectfully kiss it . 

 " I be deeply sorry ! " I murmur - " I wish I could do anything to console 
 you ! " 

 she look at I with dry calm eye . 

 " thank - you . but the doctor have always say that my mother would have 
 another shock deprive she of speech . it be very sad ; she will probably 
 live for some year like that . " 

 I again express my sympathy . 

 " may I come and inquire about you all to - morrow ? " I ask . 

 " it will be very kind of you , " - she answer quietly . 

 " shall I see you if I come ? " I say in a low tone . 

 " if you wish it , - certainly ! " 

 our eye meet ; and I know by instinct that she read my thought . I 
 press her hand again and be not repulse , - then bow profoundly , I 
 leave she to make my adieux to Lord Elton and Miss Chesney , who seem 
 terribly upset and frightened . Miss Charlotte Fitzroy have leave the room 
 in attendance on her sister , and she do not return to bid we 
 good - night . Rimânez linger a moment behind I to say another word or 
 two to the Earl , and when he join I in the hall and throw on his 
 opera - coat , he be smile to himself somewhat singularly . 

 " an unpleasant end for Helena , Countess of Elton " - he say , when we be 
 in our brougham , drive away - " paralysis be perhaps the bad of all 
 the physical punishment that can befall a ' rapid ' lady . " 

 " be she ' rapid ' ? " 

 " well , - perhaps ' rapid ' be too mild a term , but I can find no 
 other ; " - he answer - " when she be young , - she be barely fifty 
 now , - she do everything that could be do by woman at she bad and 
 wildest . she have score of lover , - and I believe one of they clear 
 off her husband 's turf - debt , - the Earl consent gladly , - on a rather 
 press occasion . " 

 " what disgraceful conduct ! " I exclaim . 

 he look at I with an expression of cynical amusement . 

 " think so ? the ' upper ten ' quite condone that sort of thing in their own 
 set now - a - day . it be all right . if a lady have lover , and her husband 
 beam benevolence on the situation what can be say ? nothing . how very 
 tender your conscience be , Geoffrey ! " 

 I sit silent , think . my companion light a cigarette and offer I one . 
 I take it mechanically without light it . 

 " I make a mistake this evening , " - he go on - " I should not have sing 
 that ' last love - song . ' the fact be , the word be write by one of her 
 ladyship 's former admirer , a man who be something of a poet in his 
 way , - and she have an idea that she be the only person live who have 
 ever see the line . she want to know if I know the man who compose 
 they , and I be able to say that I do - very intimately . I be just 
 explain how it be , and why I know he so well , when the distressing 
 attack of convulsion come on , and finish our conversation . " 

 " she look horrible ! " I say . 

 " the paralysed Helen of a modern Troy ? yes , - her countenance at the last 
 be certainly not attractive . beauty combine with wantonness 
 frequently end in the draw twitch , fix eye and helpless limb of 
 life - in - death . it be Nature 's revenge on the outraged body , - and do you 
 know , Eternity 's revenge on the impure Soul be extremely similar ? " 

 " what do you know about it ? " I say , smile in spite of myself as I 
 look at his fine face , expressive of perfect health and splendid 
 intellectuality - " your absurd fancy about the soul be the only trace 
 of folly I discover in you . " 

 " really ? well I be glad I have something of the fool in my 
 disposition , - foolishness be the only quality that make wisdom 
 possible . I confess I have odd , very odd notion about the soul . " 

 " I will excuse they - " I say , laugh - God forgive I , in my own 
 insensate blind conceit , - the while he regard I fixedly - " in fact I 
 will excuse anything for the sake of your voice . I do not flatter you , 
 Lucio , - you sing like an angel . " 

 " do not   use impossible comparison ; " - he reply - " have you ever hear an 
 angel sing ? " 

 " yes ! " I answer smile - " I have , - this very night ! " 

 he turn deadly pale . 

 " a very open compliment ! " he say , force a laugh , - and with almost 
 rough haste , he suddenly let down the window of the carriage though the 
 night be bitter cold - " this vehicle be suffocate I , - let we have 
 some air . see how the star be shin ! - like great crown 
 jewel - Deity 's regalia ! hard frost , like hard time , bring noble work 
 into prominence . yonder , far off , be a star you can hardly perceive ; red 
 as a cinder at time and again blue as the lightning , - I can always 
 discover it , though many can not . it be Algol , - judge by superstitious 
 folk to be an evil star . I love it chiefly on account of its bad 
 reputation , - it be no doubt much malign . it may be a cold quarter of 
 hell where weep spirit sit freeze in ice make of their own congeal 
 tear , - or it may be a preparatory school for Heaven - who know ! yonder 
 too , shin Venus , - your star Geoffrey ! - for you be in love my 
 friend ! - come confess it ! be you not ? " 

 " I be not sure ; " - I answer slowly - " the phrase ' in love ' scarcely 
 describe my present feeling .... " 

 " you have drop these , " - he say suddenly , pick up a fast fade 
 knot of violet from the floor of the brougham and hold they towards 
 I . he smile , as I utter an exclamation of annoyance . they be Lady 
 Sibyl 's flower which I have inadvertently let fall , and I see he know 
 it . I take they from his hand in silence . 

 " my dear fellow , do not try to hide your intention from your good 
 friend , " - he say seriously and kindly - " you wish to marry the Earl of 
 Elton 's beautiful daughter , and you shall . trust I ! - I will do 
 everything I can to promote your desire . " 

 " you will ? " I exclaim with unconcealed delight , for I fully recognise 
 the influence he have over Sibyl 's father . 

 " I will , I promise - " he answer gravely - " I assure you that such a 
 marriage would be one after my own heart . I will do all I can for 
 you , - and I have make many match in my time ! " 

 my heart beat high with triumph , - and when we part that night I wring 
 his hand fervently and tell he I be devoutly grateful to the fate for 
 send I such a good friend as he be . 

 " grateful to - whom do you say ? " he ask with a whimsical look . 

 " to the Fates ! " 

 " be you really ? they be very ugly sister I believe . perhaps they be 
 your ghostly visitor of last night ! " 

 " God forbid ! " I ejaculate . 

 " ah ! God never forbid the fulfilment of his own law ! " he answer - " to 
 do so he would have to destroy himself . " 

 " if he exist at all ! " I say carelessly . 

 " true ! if - ! " 

 and with this , we separate to our different quarter in the ' Grand . ' 




 XV 


 after that evening I become a regular and welcome visitor at Lord 
 Elton 's house , and be soon on term of the most friendly intimacy with 
 all the member of his family , include even the severely pious Miss 
 Charlotte Fitzroy . it be not difficult for I to see that my 
 matrimonial aspiration be suspect , - and though the encouragement I 
 receive from Lady Sibyl herself be so slight as to make I doubtful 
 whether after all my hope of win she would ever be realize , the 
 Earl make no secret of his delight at the idea of secure I as a 
 son - in - law . such wealth as mine be not to be meet with every day , - and 
 even have I be a blackleg of the turf or a retired jockey , instead of 
 an ' author , ' I should , with five million at my back , have be 
 consider quite as desirable a suitor for the Lady Sibyl 's hand . 
 Rimânez scarcely ever go with I to the elton ' now , plead as 
 excuse much press business and many social engagement . I be not 
 altogether sorry for this . greatly as I admire and honour he , his 
 extraordinary physical beauty and fascination of manner be in 
 dangerous contrast to my merely ' ordinary good - look ' personality , and 
 it seem to I impossible that any woman , see much of he , could be 
 expect to give I the preference . all the same I have no fear that he 
 would ever voluntarily become my rival , - his antipathy to woman be too 
 deep - rooted and sincere for that . on this point indeed his feeling be 
 so strong and passionate that I often wonder why the society siren 
 who eagerly court his attention remain so blind and unconscious to 
 the chill cynicism that lurk beneath his seem courtesy , - the 
 cutting satire that be couple with apparent compliment , and the 
 intensity of hatred that flame under the assumed expression of admire 
 homage in his flash eye . however it be not my business to point out 
 to those who could not , or would not , see the endless peculiarity of 
 my friend 's variable disposition . I do not pay much heed to they even 
 so far as I myself be concern , for I have grow accustomed to the 
 quick change he be will not to ring on all the gamut of human feeling , and 
 absorb in my own life - scheme I do not trouble myself to intimately 
 study the man who have in a couple of month become my fidus Achates . I 
 be engross at the moment in do all I could to increase the Earl of 
 Elton 's appreciative sense of my value as a man and a millionaire , and 
 to this end I pay some of his press debt , lend he a large sum of 
 money without demand interest or promise of repayment , and stock 
 his cellar with present of such rare old wine as he have not be able 
 to afford to purchase for himself for many year . thus be confidence 
 easily engender between we , even to that point of affection which 
 display itself in his lordship 's readiness to thrust his arm through 
 mine when we saunter together down Piccadilly , and his call I ' my 
 dear boy ' in public . never shall I forget the bewildered amazement of 
 the scrubby little editor of a sixpenny magazine who meet I face to face 
 thus accompany in the Park one morning ! that he know the Earl of Elton 
 by sight be evident , and that he also know I his apoplectic stare 
 confess . he have pompously refuse to even read any of my offer 
 contribution on the ground that I have ' no name , ' - and now - ! he would 
 have give a month 's salary if I have but condescend to recognize he ! 
 I do not so condescend , - but pass he by , listen to , and laugh 
 with my intended future father - in - law , who be retail an extremely 
 ancient joke for my benefit . the incident be slight , even 
 trumpery , - yet it put I in a good humour , for one of the chief 
 pleasure I have out of my wealth be the ability to repay with vengeful 
 interest all the contempt and insult that have beat I back from every 
 chance of earn a livelihood while I be poor . 

 in all my visit to the Eltons , I never see the paralyse Countess 
 again . since the last terrible visitation of her dread disease , she have 
 not move . she merely live and breathe - no more . Lord Elton tell I 
 that the bad part of her illness at present , so far as it affect 
 those who have to attend upon she , be the particularly hideous 
 alteration of her face . 

 " the fact be , " he say , not without a shudder - ' she be dreadful to look 
 at , - positively dreadful ! - no long human , you know . she use to be a 
 lovely woman , - now she be literally frightful . her eye 
 especially ; - they be as scared and wild as if she have see the devil . 
 quite an awful expression I assure you ! - and it never alter . the 
 doctor can do nothing - and of course it be very try for Sibyl , and 
 everybody . " 

 I assent sympathetically ; and realise that a house hold such a 
 figure of live death within it must of necessity be more or less 
 gloomy and depress to a young and vigorous nature , I lose no 
 opportunity of give Lady Sibyl whatever slight pleasure be in my 
 power to procure , for her distraction and entertainment . costly flower , 
 box for the opera and ' first night ' at the play , - every sort of 
 attention that a man can pay to a woman without be consider 
 officious or intrusive I offer , and be not repulse . everything 
 progress well and favourably towards the easy attainment of my 
 wish , - I have no difficulty , no trouble of any kind , - and I 
 voluntarily lead a life of selfishly absorb personal gratification , 
 be commend and encourage therein by a whole host of flatterer and 
 interested acquaintance . Willowsmere Court be mine , and every 
 newspaper in the kingdom have comment on the purchase , in either 
 servile or spiteful paragraph . my lawyer have warmly congratulate I 
 on the possession of so admirable a property which they , in strict 
 accordance with what they conceive to be their duty , have personally 
 inspect and approve . the place be now in the hand of a firm of 
 decorator and furnisher , recommend by Rimânez , and it be expect 
 to be in perfect order for my habitation in early summer , at which time 
 I purpose entertain a large house - party of more or less 
 distinguished people . 

 meantime , what I have once consider would be the great event of my 
 life , take place , - namely the publication of my book . trumpet forth by 
 the most heraldic advertisement , it be at last launch on the 
 uncertain and fluctuate tide of public favour , and special ' advance ' 
 copy be send to the office of every magazine and journal in London . 
 the day after this be do , Lucio , as I now familiarly call he , come 
 in to my room with a mysterious and mischievous air . 

 " Geoffrey , " he say - " I be go to lend you five hundred pound ! " 

 I look up with a smile . 

 " what for ? " 

 he hold out a cheque towards I . glance at it I see that the sum he 
 mention be fill in and endorse with his signature , but that the 
 name of the person to whom the money be to be make payable , have not yet 
 be write . 

 " well ? what do it mean ? " 

 " it mean " - reply he - " that I be go to see Mr McWhing this morning . 
 I have an appointment with he at twelve . you , as Geoffrey Tempest , the 
 author of the book Mr McWhing be go to criticise and make a ' boom ' 
 of , could not possibly put your name to such a cheque . it would not be 
 ' good form ' - it might crop up afterwards and so betray ' the secret of 
 the prison - house . ' but for I it be another affair . I be go to ' pose ' 
 as your businessman - your ' literary agent ' who pocket ten per cent . of 
 the profit and want to make a ' big thing ' out of you , and I be go to 
 talk the matter over with the perfectly practical mcwhing who have , like 
 every true Scot , a keen eye for the main chance . of course it will be in 
 confidence , - strict confidence ! " and he laugh - " it be all a question of 
 business you know , - in these commercial day , literature have become a 
 trade like everything else , and even critic only work for what pay 
 they . as indeed why should they not ? " 

 " do you mean to tell I McWhing will take that five hundred ? " I ask 
 dubiously . 

 " I mean to tell you nothing of the kind . I would not put the matter so 
 coarsely for the world ! this money be not for mcwhing , - it be for a 
 literary charity . " 

 " indeed ! I think you have an idea perhaps of offer a bribe .... " 

 " Bribe ! Good Heavens ! bribe a critic ! impossible , my good 
 Geoffrey ! - such a thing be never hear of - never , never , never ! " and he 
 shake his head and roll up his eye with infinite solemnity - " no no ! 
 press people never take money for anything - not even for ' boom ' a new 
 gold - mining company , - not even for put a notice of a fashionable 
 concert into the Morning Post . everything in the English press be the 
 just expression of pure and lofty sentiment , believe I ! this little 
 cheque be for a charity of which Mr McWhing be chief patron , - you see 
 the Civil List pension all go by favour to the wrong person nowadays ; 
 to the keeping of lunatic versifier and retire actress who never 
 could act - the actual bona - fide ' genius ' never get anything out of 
 Government , and moreover would scorn to take a farthing from that 
 penurious body , which grudge he anything high than a 
 money - recognition . it be as great an insult to offer a beggarly pension 
 of fifty or a hundred pound a year to a really great writer as to give 
 he a knighthood , - and we can not fall much low than to be a knight , as 
 knight go . the present five hundred pound will help to relieve certain 
 ' poor and proud ' but press literary case know to mcwhing alone ! " 
 his expression at this moment be so extraordinary , that I entirely 
 fail to fathom it . " I have no doubt I shall be able to represent the 
 benevolent and respectable literary agent to perfection - of course I 
 shall insist on my ten per cent . ! " - and he begin laugh again . " but I 
 can not   stop to discuss the matter now with you - I be off . I promise 
 McWhing to be with he at twelve o'clock precisely , and it be now 
 half - past - eleven . I shall probably lunch with he , so do not   wait for I . 
 and concern the five hundred , you need not   be in my debt an hour 
 long than you like - I will take a cheque for the money back from you 
 this evening . " 

 " all right " - I say - " but perhaps the great oracle of the clique will 
 reject your proposal with scorn . " 

 " if he do , then be Utopia realize ! " - reply Lucio , carefully draw 
 on his glove as he speak - " where be a copy of your book ? ah - here be 
 one - smell newly of the press , " and he slip the volume into his 
 overcoat pocket ; " allow I , before departure , to express the opinion 
 that you be a singularly ungrateful fellow , Geoffrey ! here be I , 
 perfectly devoted to your interest , - and despite my princedom actually 
 prepare to ' pose ' to mcwhing as your ' act manager ' pro tem , and 
 you have not   so much as a thank - you to throw at I ! " 

 he stand before I smile , the personification of kindness and good 
 humour . I laugh a little . 

 " mcwhing will never take you for an act manager or literary 
 agent , " - I say - " you do not   look it . if I seem churlish I be sorry - but 
 the fact be I be disgusted ... " 

 " at what ? " he inquire , still smile . 

 " oh , at the humbug of everything , " - I answer impatiently ; " the stupid 
 farce of it all . why should not   a book get notice on its own merit 
 without any appeal to cliquism and influential wire - pull on the 
 press ? " 

 " exactly ! " and he delicately flick a grain of dust off his coat while 
 speak - " and why should not   a man get receive in society on his own 
 merit , without any money to recommend he or any influential friend to 
 back he up ? " 

 I be silent . 

 " the world be as it be make , " - he go on , regard I fixedly - " it be 
 move by the low and pettiest motif , - it work for the most 
 trivial , ridiculous and perishable aim . it be not a paradise . it be not 
 a happy family of united and affectionate brother . it be an 
 over - populate colony of jabbering and quarrelsome monkey , who fancy 
 they be man . philosopher in old day try to teach it that the 
 monkey - type should be exterminate for the growth and encouragement of a 
 nobler race , - but they preach in vain - there never be enough real 
 man alive to overcome the swarm majority of the beast . God himself , 
 they say , come down from Heaven to try and set wrong thing right , and 
 to restore if possible his own deface image to the general aspect of 
 humanity , - and even he fail . " 

 " there be very little of God in this world " - I say bitterly ; " there be 
 much more Devil ! " 

 he smile , - a musing , dreamy smile that transfigure his countenance and 
 make he look like a fine Apollo absorb in the thought of some new and 
 glorious song . 

 " no doubt ! " he say , after a little pause - " mankind certainly prefer the 
 devil to any other deity , - therefore if they elect he as their 
 representative , it be scarcely to be wonder at that he govern where 
 he be ask to govern . and yet - do you know Geoffrey - this devil , - if 
 there be one , - can hardly , I think , be quite so bad as his detractor 
 say . I myself do not   believe he be a whit bad than a nineteenth - century 
 financier ! " 

 I laugh aloud at the comparison . 

 " after that , " I say - " you have well go to McWhing . I hope you will 
 tell he that I be the triple essence of all the new ' discovery ' 
 roll into one ! " 

 " never fear ! " return Lucio , - " I have   learn all my stock - phrase by 
 heart - a ' star of the first magnitude ' etc . , - I have   read the Athenæum 
 till I have   get the lingo of the literary auctioneer well - nigh perfect , 
 and I believe I shall acquit myself admirably . Au revoir ! " 

 he be go ; and I , after a little desultory look over my paper , 
 go out to lunch at Arthur 's , of which club I be now a member . on my 
 way I stop to look in at a bookseller 's window to see if my 
 ' immortal ' production be yet on show . it be not , - and the volume put 
 most conspicuously to the front among all the ' new book ' be one 
 entitle ' difference . by Mavis Clare . ' act on a sudden impulse I 
 go in to purchase it . 

 " have this a good sale ? " I ask , as the volume be hand to I . 

 the clerk at the counter open his eye wide . 

 " sale ? " he echo - " well , I should think so - rather ! why everybody be 
 read it ! " 

 " indeed ! " and I turn over the uncut page carelessly - " I see no 
 allusion whatever to it in the paper . " 

 the clerk smile and shrug his shoulder . 

 " no - and you be not likely to , sir " - he say - " Miss Clare be too popular 
 to need review . besides , a large number of the critic , - the 
 ' log - roller ' especially , be mad against she for her success , and the 
 public know it . only the other day a man come in here from one of the 
 big newspaper office and tell I he be take a few note on the book 
 which have the large sale , - would I tell he which author 's work be 
 most in demand ? I say Miss Clare take the lead , - as she do , - and he 
 get into a regular rage . say he - ' that be the answer I have   have all along 
 the line , and however true it be , it be no use to I because I dare not 
 mention it . my editor would instantly scratch it out - he hat Miss 
 Clare . ' ' a precious editor you have   get ! ' I say , and he look rather 
 queer . there be nothing like journalism , sir , for the suppression of 
 truth ! " 

 I smile , and go away with my purchase , convince that I have waste a 
 few shilling on a mere piece of woman 's trash . if this Mavis Clare be 
 indeed so ' popular , ' then her work must naturally be of the ' penny 
 dreadful ' order , for I , like many another literary man , labour under 
 the ludicrous inconsistency of consider the public an ' ass ' while I 
 myself desire nothing so much as the say ' ass 's ' applause and 
 approval ! - and therefore I could not imagine it capable of voluntarily 
 select for itself any good work of literature without guidance from 
 the critic . of course I be wrong ; the great mass of the public in 
 all nation be always lead by some instinctive sense of right , that 
 move they to reject the false and unworthy , and select the true . 
 completely prepare , like most man of my type to sneer and cavil at the 
 book , chiefly because it be write by a feminine hand , I sit down in a 
 retire corner of the club reading - room , and begin to cut and skim the 
 page . I have not read many sentence before my heart sink with a heavy 
 sense of fear and , - jealousy ! - the slow fire of an insidious envy begin 
 to smoulder in my mind . what power have so gift this author - this mere 
  woman , - that she should dare to write well than I ! and that she 
 should force I , by the magic of her pen to mentally acknowledge , albeit 
 with wrath and shame , my own inferiority ! clearness of thought , 
 brilliancy of style , beauty of diction , all these be her , unite to 
 consummate ease of expression and artistic skill , - and all at once , in 
 the very midst of reading , such a violent impulse of insensate rage 
 possess I that I fling the book down , dread to go on with it . the 
 potent , resistless , unpurchaseable quality of Genius ! - ah , I be not yet 
 so blind by my own conceit as to be unable to recognize that divine 
 fire when I see it flash up from every page as I see it now ; but , to 
 be compel to give that recognition to a woman 's work , gall and 
 irritate I almost beyond endurance . woman , I consider , should be 
 keep in their place as man 's drudge or toy - as wife , mother , 
 nurse , cook , mender of sock and shirt , and housekeeper 
 generally , - what right have they to intrude into the realm of art and 
 snatch the laurel from their master ' brow ! if I could but get the 
 chance of review this book , I think to myself savagely ! - I would 
 misquote , misrepresent , and cut it to shred with a joy too great for 
 word ! this Mavis Clare , ' unsex , ' as I at once call she in my own 
 mind simply because she have the power I lack , - write what she have to 
 say with a gracious charm , freedom , and innate consciousness of 
 strength , - a strength which force I back upon myself and fill I 
 with the bitter humiliation . without know she I hat she , - this 
 woman who could win fame without the aid of money , and who be crown 
 so brightly and visibly to the world that she be beyond criticism . I 
 take up her book again and try to cavil at it , - over one or two dainty 
 bit of poetic simile and sentiment I laugh , - enviously . when I leave 
 the club later in the day , I take the book with I , divide between a 
 curious desire to read it honestly through with justice to it and its 
 author , and an impulse to tear it asunder and fle it into the road to 
 be crush in the mud under roll cab and cart wheel . in this strange 
 humour Rimânez find I , when at about four o'clock he return from his 
 mission to David McWhing , smile and - triumphant . 

 " congratulate I Geoffrey ! " he exclaim as he enter my 
 room - " Congratulate I , and yourself ! I be minus the five hundred 
 pound cheque I show you this morning ! " 

 " mcwhing have pocket it then , " - I say sullenly - " all right ! much good 
 may it do he , and his ' charity ' ! " 

 Rimânez give I a quick observant glance . 

 " why , what have happen to you since we part ? " he inquire , throw 
 off his overcoat and sit down opposite to I - " you seem out of 
 temper ! yet you ought to be a perfectly happy man - for your high 
 ambition be about to be gratify . you say you wish to make your book 
 and yourself ' the talk of London , ' - well , within the next two or three 
 week you will see yourself praise in a very large number of 
 influential newspaper as the new discover ' genius ' of the day , 
 only a little way remove from Shakespeare himself   three of the big 
 lead magazine be guarantee to say that   and all this through the 
 affability of Mr McWhing , and the trifling sum of five hundred pound ! 
 and be you not satisfied ? really , my friend , you be become 
 difficult ! - I warn you that too much good fortune spoil a man . " 

 with a sudden movement I fling down Mavis Clare 's book before he . 

 " look at this " - I say - " do she pay five hundred pound to David 
 McWhing 's charity ? " 

 he take up the volume and glance at it . 

 " certainly not . but then , - she get slander - not criticize ! " 

 " what do that matter ! " I retort - " the man from whom I buy this 
 book say that everybody be read it . " 

 " exactly ! " and Rimânez survey I with a curious expression , half of 
 pity , half of amusement - " but you know the old axiom , my dear 
 Geoffrey ? - ' you may lead a horse to the water but you can not make he 
 drink . ' which statement , interpret for the present occasion , mean 
 that though certain log - roller , head by our estimable friend McWhing , 
 may drag the horse - i.e. the public , up to their own particularly 
 prepared literary trough , they can not force it to swallow the mixture . 
 the horse frequently turn tail and run away in search of its own 
 provender , - it have do so in the case of Miss Clare . when the public 
 choose an author for themselves , it be a dreadful thing of course for 
 other author , - but it really can not   be help ! " 

 " why should they choose Mavis Clare ? " I demand gloomily . 

 " ah , why indeed ! " he echo smile - " mcwhing would tell you they do it 
 out of sheer idiotcy ; - the public would answer that they choose she 
 because she have genius . " 

 " Genius ! " I repeat scornfully - " the public be perfectly incapable of 
 recognize such a quality ! " 

 " you think so ? " he say still smile - " you really think so ? in that 
 case it be very odd be not   it , how everything that be truly great in art 
 and literature become so widely known and honour , not only in this 
 country but in every civilized land where people think or study ? you 
 must remember that all the very famous man and woman have be steadily 
 ' write down ' in their day , even to the late English Laureate , 
 Tennyson , who be ' criticize ' for the most part in the pure 
 billingsgate , - it be only the mediocrity who be ever ' write up . ' it 
 seem as if the stupid public really have a hand in select these 
 ' great , ' for the reviewer would never stand they at any price , till 
 drive to acknowledge they by the popular force majeure . but 
 consider the barbarous want of culture and utter foolishness of the 
 public , Geoffrey , what I wonder at , be that you should care to appeal 
 to it at all ! " 

 I sit silent , - inwardly chafe under his remark . 

 " I be afraid - " he resume , rise and take a white flower from one of 
 the vas on the table to pin in his button - hole - " that Miss Clare be 
 go to be a thorn in your side , my friend ! a man rival in literature 
 be bad enough , - but a woman rival be too much to endure with any amount 
 of patience ! however you may console yourself with the certainty that 
  she will never get ' boom , ' - while you - thank to my tender fostering 
 of the sensitive and high - principle mcwhing , will be the one delightful 
 and unique ' discovery ' of the press for at least one month , perhaps two , 
 which be about as long as any ' new star of the first magnitude ' last in 
 the latter - day literary sky . shooting - star all of they ! - such as poor 
 old forget Béranger sing of - 

  " les etoile qui filent , 
  ' Qui filent , - qui filent - et disparaissent ! ' " 

 " except - Mavis Clare ! " I say . 

 " true ! except Mavis Clare ! " and he laugh aloud , - a laugh that jar 
 upon I because there be a note of mockery in it - " she be a small 
 fixture in the vast heaven , - or so it seem - revolve very contentedly 
 and smoothly in her own appoint orbit , - but she be not and never will 
 be attend by the brilliant meteor - flame that will burst round you , 
 my excellent fellow , at the signal of mcwhing ! Fie Geoffrey ! - get over 
 your sulk ! jealous of a woman ! be ashamed , - be not woman the inferior 
 creature ? , and shall the mere spectre of a feminine fame cause a 
 five - fold millionaire to abase his lofty spirit in the dust ? conquer 
 your strange fit of the spleen , Geoffrey , and join I at dinner ! " 

 he laugh again as he leave the room , - and again his laughter irritate 
 I . when he have go , I give way to the base and unworthy impulse that 
 have for some minute be rankle within I , and sit down at my 
 writing table , pen a hasty note to the editor of a rather powerful 
 magazine , a man whom I have formerly know and work for . he be aware 
 of my altered fortune and the influential position I now occupy , and 
 I feel confident he would be glad to oblige I in any matter if he 
 could . my letter , mark ' private and confidential ' contain the 
 request that I might be permit to write for his next number , an 
 anonymous ' slash ' review of the new novel entitle ' difference ' by 
 Mavis Clare . 




 XVI 


 it be almost impossible for I to describe the feverish , irritated and 
 contradictory state of mind in which I now begin to pass my day . with 
 the absolute fixity of my fortune , my humour become more changeful 
 than the wind , and I be never absolutely content for two hour 
 together . I join in every sort of dissipation common to man of the 
 day , who with the usual inanity of noodle , plunge into the filth of 
 life merely because to be morally dirty be also at the moment 
 fashionable and much applaud by society . I gamble recklessly , solely 
 for the reason that gambling be consider by many leader of the 
 ' upper ten ' as indicative of ' manliness ' and ' show grit . ' 

 " I hate a fellow who grudge lose a few pound at play , " - say one of 
 these ' distinguish ' title ass to I once - " it show such a cowardly 
 and currish disposition . " 

 guide by this ' new ' morality , and wish to avoid the possibility of 
 be call " cowardly and currish , " I indulge in baccarat and other 
 ruinous game almost every night , willingly lose the ' few pound ' 
 which in my case mean a few hundred , for the sake of my occasional 
 winning , which place a number of ' noble ' rake and blue - blooded 
 blackleg in my power for ' debt of honour , ' which be suppose to be 
 more strictly attend to and more punctually pay than any debt in the 
 world , but which , as far as I be concern , be still owe . I also 
 bet heavily , on everything that could be make the subject of a 
 bet , - and not to be behind my peer in ' style ' and ' knowledge of the 
 world ' I frequent low house and allow a few half - nude brandy - soak 
 dancer and vulgar music - hall ' artiste ' to get a couple of thousand 
 pound worth of jewel out of I , because this sort of thing be call 
 ' see life ' and be deem part of a ' gentleman 's ' diversion . 
 Heavens ! - what beast we all be , I and my aristocratic boon 
 companion ! - what utterly worthless , useless , callous scoundrel ! - and 
 yet , - we associate with the good and the high in the land ; - the 
 fair and noblest lady in London receive we in their house with 
 smile and softly - word flattery - we - whose presence reek with 
 vice ; we , ' young man of fashion ' whom , if he have know our life as they 
 be , an honest cobbler work patiently for daily bread , might have 
 spat upon , in contempt and indignation that such low rascal should be 
 permit to burden the earth ! sometimes , but very seldom , Rimânez 
 join our gambling and music - hall party , and on such occasion I 
 notice that he , as it be , ' let himself go ' and become the wild of 
 we all . but though wild he be never coarse , - as we be ; his deep and 
 mellow laughter have a sonorous richness in it that be totally unlike 
 the donkey 's ' hee - haw ' of our ' cultured ' mirth , - his manner be never 
 vulgar ; and his fluent discourse on man and thing , now witty and 
 satirical , now serious almost to pathos , strangely affect many of 
 those who hear he talk , myself most of all . once , I remember , when we 
 be return late from some foolish carouse , - I with three young son 
 of english peer , and Rimânez walk beside we , - we come upon a poorly 
 clothe girl sob and cling to the iron rail outside a closed 
 church door . 

 " oh God ! " she wail - " oh dear God ! do help I ! " 

 one of my companion seize she by the arm with a lewd jest , when all at 
 once Rimânez step between . 

 " leave she alone ! " he say sternly - " let she find God if she can ! " 

 the girl look up at he terrify , her eye stream with tear , and 
 he drop two or three gold piece into her hand . she break out cry 
 afresh . 

 " oh God bless you ! " she cry wildly - " God bless you ! " 

 he raise his hat and stand uncover in the moonlight , his dark beauty 
 soften by a strangely wistful expression . 

 " I thank you ! " he say simply - " you make I your debtor . " 

 and he pass on ; we follow , somewhat subdued and silence , though one 
 of my lordle friend snigger idiotically . 

 " you pay dearly for that blessing , Rimânez ! " he say - " you give she 
 three sovereign ; - by Jove ! I would have have something more than a blessing 
 if I have be you . " 

 " no doubt ! " return Rimânez - " you deserve more , - much more ! I hope you 
 will get it ! a blessing would be of no advantage whatever to you ; - it 
 be , to I . " 

 how often I have think of this incident since ! I be too dense to 
 attach either meaning or importance to it then , - self - absorb as I be , 
 I pay no attention to circumstance which seem to have no connection 
 with my own life and affair . and in all my dissipation and so - call 
 amusement , a perpetual restlessness consume I , - I obtain no real 
 satisfaction out of anything except my slow and somewhat tantalizing 
 courtship of Lady Sibyl . she be a strange girl ; she know my intention 
 towards she well enough ; yet she affect not to know . each time I 
 venture to treat she with more than the usual deference , and to infuse 
 something of the ardour of a lover into my look or manner , she feign 
 surprise . I wonder why it be that some woman be so fond of play the 
 hypocrite in love ? their own instinct teach they when man be amorous ; 
 but unless they can run the fox to earth , or in other word , reduce 
 their suitor to the low pitch of grovel appeal , and force they 
 to such abasement that the poor passion - drive fool be ready to fle 
 away life , and even honour , dearer than life , for their sake , their 
 vanity be not sufficiently gratify . but who , or what be I that I 
 should judge of vanity , - I whose egregious and flagrant self - approbation 
 be of such a character that it blind I to the perception and 
 comprehension of everything in which my own Ego be not represent ! and 
 yet , - with all the morbid interest I take in myself , my surrounding , my 
 comfort , my social advancement , there be one thing which soon become a 
 torture to I , - a veritable despair and loathing , - and this , strange to 
 say , be the very triumph I have most look forward to as the crown and 
 summit of all my ambitious dream . my book , - the book I have presume to 
 consider a work of genius , - when it be launch on the tide of 
 publicity and criticism , resolve itself into a sort of literary monster 
 that haunt my day and night with its hateful presence ; the thick , 
 black - letter , lie advertisement scatter broadcast by my 
 publisher , flare at I with an offensive insistence in every paper I 
 casually open . and the praise of the reviewer ! ... the exaggerated , 
 preposterous , fraudulent ' boom ' ! good God ! - how sicken it be ! - how 
 fulsome ! every epithet of flattery bestow upon I fill I with 
 disgust , and one day when I take up a lead magazine and see a long 
 article upon the ' extraordinary brilliancy and promise ' of my book , 
 compare I to a new Æschylus and Shakespeare combine , with the 
 signature of David McWhing append to it , I could have thrash that 
 erudite and assuredly purchase Scot within an inch of his life . the 
 chorus of eulogy be well - nigh universal ; I be the ' genius of the 
 day ' - the ' hope of the future generation , ' - I be the " Book of the 
 Month , " - the great , the witty , most versatile , most brilliant 
 scribble pigmy that have ever honour a pot of ink by use it ! of 
 course I figure as McWhing 's ' discovery , ' - five hundred pound bestow 
 on his mysterious ' charity ' have so sharpen his eyesight that he have 
 perceive I shin brightly on the literary horizon before anyone else 
 have do so . the press follow his ' lead ' obediently , - for though the 
 press , - the English press at least , - be distinctly unbribable , the 
 owner of newspaper be not insensible to the advantage of largely 
 pay advertisement . moreover , when Mr McWhing announce I as his 
 ' find ' in the oracular style which distinguish he , some other 
 literary gentleman come forward and write effective article about I , 
 and send I their composition carefully mark . I take the hint , - write 
 at once to thank they , and invite they to dinner . they come , and 
 feast royally with Rimânez and myself ; -   one of they write an ' Ode ' to 
 I afterwards , - and at the conclusion of the revel , we send two of the 
 ' oracle ' home , considerably overcome by champagne , in a carriage with 
 Amiel to look after they , and help they out at their own door . and my 
 ' boom ' expand , - London ' talk ' as I have say it should ; the growling 
 monster metropolis discuss I and my work in its own independent and 
 peculiar fashion . the ' upper ten ' subscribed to the circulate 
 library , and these admirable institution make a two or three hundred 
 copy do for all demand , by the simple expedient of keep 
 subscriber wait five or six week till they grow tired of ask for 
 the book , and forget all about it . apart from the library , the public 
 do not take I up . from the glowing criticism that appear in all the 
 paper , it might have be suppose that ' everybody who be anybody ' be 
 read my ' wonderful ' production . such however be not the case . People 
 speak of I as ' the great millionaire , ' but they be indifferent to the 
 bid I have make for literary fame . the remark they usually make to I 
 wherever I go be - " you have write a novel , have not   you ? what an odd 
 thing for you to do ! " - this , with a laugh ; - " I have not   read it , - I have 
 so little time - I must ask for it at the library . " of course a great 
 many never do ask , not deem it worth their while ; and I whose money , 
 combine with the resistless influence of Rimânez , have start the 
 favourable criticism that flood the press , find out that the 
 majority of the public never read criticism at all . hence , my anonymous 
 review of Mavis Clare 's book make no effect whatever on her 
 popularity , though it appear in the most prominent manner . it be a 
 sheer waste of labour , - for everywhere this woman author be still 
 look upon as a creature of altogether fine clay than ordinary , and 
 still her book be eagerly devour and question and admire ; and 
 still it sell by thousand , despite a lack of all favourable criticism 
 or prominent advertisement . no one guess that I have write what I be 
 now perfectly willing to admit be a brutally wanton misrepresentation 
 of her work , - no one , except Rimânez . the magazine in which it appear 
 be a notable one , circulate in every club and library , and he , take 
 it up casually one afternoon , turn to that article at once . 

 " you write this ! " he say , fix his eye upon I , - " it must have be 
 a great relief to your mind ! " 

 I say nothing . 

 he read on in silence for a little ; then lay down the magazine look 
 at I with a curiously scrutinize expression . 

 " there be some human being so constitute , " he say , " that if they have 
 be with Noah in the ark accord to the silly old legend , they would 
 have shoot the dove bear the olive - leaf , directly it come in sight 
 over the waste of water . you be of that type Geoffrey . " 

 " I do not see the force of your comparison , " I murmur . 

 " do you not ? why , what harm have this Mavis Clare do to you ? your 
 position be entirely opposed . you be a millionaire ; she be a 
 hard - work woman dependent on her literary success for a livelihood , 
 and you , roll in wealth do your good to deprive she of the mean of 
 existence . do this redound to your credit ? she have win her fame by her 
 own brain and energy alone , - and even if you dislike her book need you 
 abuse she personally as you have do in this article ? you do not know 
 she ; you have never see she , ... " 

 " I hate woman who write ! " I say vehemently . 

 " why ? because they be able to exist independently ? would you have they 
 all the slave of man 's lust or convenience ? my dear Geoffrey , you be 
 unreasonable . if you admit that you be jealous of this woman 's 
 celebrity and grudge it to she , then I can understand your spite , for 
 jealousy be capable of murder a fellow - creature with either the 
 dagger or the pen . " 

 I be silent . 

 " be the book such wretched stuff as you make it out to be ? " he ask 
 presently . 

 " I suppose some people might admire it , " - I say curtly , " I do not . " 

 this be a lie ; and of course he know it be a lie . the work of Mavis 
 Clare have excite my most passionate envy , - while the very fact that 
 Sibyl Elton have read her book before she have think of look at mine , 
 have accentuate the bitterness of my feeling . 

 " well , " say Rimânez at last , smile as he finish read my 
 onslaught - " all I can say Geoffrey , be that this will not touch Mavis 
 Clare in the least . you have overshoot the mark , my friend ! her public 
 will simply cry " what a shame ! " and clamour for her work more than ever . 
 and as for the woman herself , - she have a merry heart , and she will laugh 
 at it . you must see she some day . " 

 " I do not   want to see she , " I say . 

 " probably not . but you will scarcely be able to avoid do so when you 
 live at Willowsmere Court . " 

 " one be not oblige to know everybody in the neighbourhood , " - I observe 
 superciliously . 

 Lucio laugh aloud . 

 " how well you carry your fortune , Geoffrey ! " he say - " for a poor devil 
 of a Grub - street hack who lately be at a loss for a sovereign , how 
 perfectly you follow the fashion of your time ! if there be one man more 
 than another that move I to wonder admiration it be he who assert 
 his wealth strenuously in the face of his fellow , and who comport 
 himself in this world as though he could bribe death and purchase the 
 good - will of the Creator . it be such splendid effrontery , - such 
 superlative pride ! now I , though over - wealthy myself , be so curiously 
 constitute that I can not wear my bank - note in my countenance as it 
 be , - I have put in a claim for intellect as well as gold , - and 
 sometimes , do you know , in my travel round the world , I have be so 
 far honour as to be take for quite a poor man ! now you will never 
 have that chance again ; - you be rich and you look it ! " 

 " and you , - " I interrupt he suddenly , and with some warmth - " do you 
 know what you look ? you imply that I assert my wealth in my face ; do 
 you know what you assert in your every glance and gesture ? " 

 " I can not imagine ! " he say smile . 

 " Contempt for we all ! " I say - " immeasurable contempt , - even for I , 
 whom you call friend . I tell you the truth , Lucio , - there be time , 
 when in spite of our intimacy I feel that you despise I . I daresay you 
 do ; you have an extraordinary personality unite to extraordinary 
 talent ; you must not however expect all man to be as self - restrain 
 and as indifferent to human passion as yourself . " 

 he give I a swift , search glance . 

 " expect ! " he echo - " my good fellow , I expect nothing at all , - from 
 man . they , on the contrary , - at least all those I know - expect 
 everything from I . and they get it , - generally . as for ' despise ' you , 
 have I not say that I admire you ? I do . I think there be something 
 positively stupendous in the brilliant progress of your fame and rapid 
 social success . " 

 " my fame ! " I repeat bitterly - " how have it be obtain ? what be it 
 worth ? " 

 " that be not the question ; " he retort with a little smile ; " how 
 unpleasant it must be for you to have these gouty twinge of conscience 
 Geoffrey ! of course no fame be actually worth much now - a - day , - because 
 it be not classic fame , strong in reposeful old - world dignity , - it be 
 blatant noisy notoriety merely . but your , such as it be , be perfectly 
 legitimate , judge by its common - sense commercial aspect , which be the 
 only aspect in which anyone look at anything . you must bear in mind 
 that no one work out of disinterestedness in the present age , - no 
 matter how purely benevolent an action may appear on the surface , self 
 lie at the bottom of it . once grasp this fact , and you will perceive 
 that nothing could be fair or more straightforward than the way you 
 have obtain your fame . you have not ' buy ' the incorruptible British 
 Press ; you could not do that ; that be impossible , for it be immaculate , 
 and bristle stiffly all over with honourable principle . there be no 
 english paper exist that would accept a cheque for the insertion of a 
 notice or a paragraph ; not one ! " his eye twinkle merrily , - then he 
 go on - " no , - it be only the Foreign Press that be corrupt , so the 
 British Press say ; - John Bull look on virtuously aghast at journalist 
 who , in dire stress of poverty , will actually earn a little extra pay 
 for write something or somebody ' up ' or ' down . ' thank Heaven , he 
 employ no such journalist ; his pressman be the very soul of 
 rectitude , and will stoically subsist on a pound a week rather than take 
 ten for a casual job ' to oblige a friend . ' do you know Geoffrey , when 
 the Judgment Day arrive , who will be among the first saint to ascend 
 to Heaven with the sounding of trumpet ? " 

 I shake my head , half vex , half amuse . 

 " all the English   not foreign   editor and journalist ! " say Lucio with 
 an air of pious rapture - " and why ? because they be so good , so just , so 
 unprejudiced ! their foreign brother will be reserve for the eternal 
 dance of devil of course - but the Britishers will pace the golden 
 street sing Alleluia ! I assure you I consider british journalist 
 generally the noble example of incorruptibility in the world - they 
 come next to the clergy as representative of virtue , and exponent of 
 the three evangelical counsel , - voluntary poverty , chastity , and 
 obedience ! " such mockery glitter in his eye , that the light in they 
 might have be the reflection of clash steel . " be console , 
 Geoffrey , " he resume - " your fame be honourably win . you have simply , 
 through I , approach one critic who write in about twenty newspaper 
 and influence other to write in other twenty , - that critic be a 
 noble creature ,   all critic be noble creature   have a pet ' society ' 
 for the relief of author in need   a noble scheme you will own   and to 
 this charity I subscribe out of pure benevolence , five hundred pound . 
 move by my generosity and consideration ,   particularly as I do not ask 
 what become of the five hundred   McWhing ' oblige ' I in a little 
 matter . the editor of the paper for which he write accept he as a 
 wise and witty personage ; they know nothing about the charity or the 
 cheque , - it be not necessary for they to know . the whole thing be really 
 quite a reasonable business arrangement ; - it be only a self - torment 
 analyst like you who would stop to think of such a trifle a second 
 time . " 

 " if McWhing really and conscientiously admire my book for itself ; " I 
 begin . 

 " why should you imagine he do not ? " ask Lucio - " Myself , I believe 
 that he be a perfectly sincere and honorable man . I think he mean all 
 he say and write . I consider that if he have find your work not worthy 
 of his commendation , he would have send I back that cheque for five 
 hundred pound , tear across in a noble scorn ! " 

 and with this , throw himself back in his chair , he laugh till the 
 tear come into his eye . 

 but I could not laugh ; I be too weary and depressed . a heavy sense of 
 despair be on my mind ; I feel that the hope which have cheer I in my 
 day of poverty , - the hope of win real Fame , so widely different a 
 thing to notoriety , have vanish . there be some quality in the subtle 
 glory which could not be win by either purchase or influence . the praise 
 of the press could not give it . Mavis Clare , work for her bread , have 
 it , - I , with million of money , have not . like a fool I have think to 
 buy it ; I have yet to learn that all the good , great , purest and 
 worthy thing in life be beyond all market - value and that the gift 
 of the god be not for sale . 

 about a fortnight after the publication of my book , we go to Court , my 
 comrade and I , and be present by a distinguished officer connect 
 with the immediate and intimate surrounding of the royal household . it 
 be a brilliant scene enough , - but , without doubt , the most brilliant 
 personage there be Rimânez . I be fairly startled at the stately and 
 fascinating figure he make in his court suit of black velvet and steel 
 ornament ; accustom as I be to his good look , I have never see they 
 so enhance by dress as on this occasion . I have be tolerably well 
 satisfied with my own appearance in the regulation costume till I see 
 he ; then my personal vanity suffer a decided shock , and I realize 
 that I merely serve as a foil to show off and accentuate the superior 
 attraction of my friend . but I be not envious of he in any way , - on 
 the contrary I openly express the admiration I frankly feel . 

 he seem amuse . " my dear boy , it be all flunkeydom ; " he say - " all 
 sham and humbug . look at this - " and he draw his light court rapier from 
 its sheath - " there be no real use in this flimsy blade , - it be merely an 
 emblem of dead chivalry . in old time , if a man insult you , or 
 insult a woman you admire , out flash a shin point of temper 
 Toledo steel that could lunge - so ! " and he throw himself into a fencing 
 attitude of incomparable grace and ease - " and you prick the blackguard 
 neatly through the rib or arm and give he cause to remember you . but 
 now - " and he thrust the rapi back in its place - " man carry toy like 
 these as a melancholy sign to show what bold fellow they be once , and 
 what spiritless craven they be now , - rely no more on themselves for 
 protection , but content to go about yell ' Police ! Police ! ' at the 
 least threat of injury to their worthless person . come , it be time we 
 start , Geoffrey ! - let we go and bow our head before another human 
 unit form precisely like ourselves , and so act in defiance of death 
 and the deity , who declare all man to be equal ! " 

 we enter our carriage and be soon on our way to St James 's Palace . 

 " his Royal Highness the Prince of Wales be not exactly the Creator of 
 the universe ; " - say Lucio suddenly , look out of the window as we 
 approach the line of soldiery on guard outside . 

 " why no ! " I answer laugh - " what do you say that for ? " 

 " because there be as much fuss about he as if he be , - in fact , more . 
 the Creator do not get half as much attention bestow upon he as 
 Albert Edward . we never attire ourselves in any special way for enter 
 the presence of God ; we do not   put so much as a clean mind on . " 

 " but then , " - I say indifferently - " God be non e , - and Albert Edward 
 be est . " 

 he smile , - and his eye have a scornful gleam in their dark centre . 

 " that be your opinion ? " he query - " well , it be not original , - many 
 choice spirit share it with you . there be at least one good excuse for 
 people who make no preparation to enter the presence of God , - in go 
 to church , which be call the ' house of God , ' they do not find God at 
 all ; they only discover the clergyman . it be somewhat of a 
 disappointment . " 

 I have no time to reply , as just then the carriage stop , and we 
 alight at the palace . through the intervention of the high Court 
 official who present we , we get a good place among the most 
 distinguished arrival , and during our brief wait , I be considerably 
 amuse by the study of their face and attitude . some of the man look 
 nervous , - other conceite ; one or two Radical notability comport 
 themselves with an air as if they and they alone be to be honour for 
 allow Royalty to hold these function at all ; a few gentleman have 
 evidently don their Levée dress in haste and carelessness , for the 
 piece of tissue - paper in which their steel or gilt coat - button have 
 be wrap by the tailor to prevent tarnish , be still unremove . 
 discover this fortunately before it be too late , they occupy 
 themselves by take off these paper and cast they on the floor , - an 
 untidy process at good , and one that make they look singularly 
 ridiculous and undignified . each man present turn to stare at Lucio ; 
 his striking personality attract universal attention . when we at last 
 enter the throne - room , and take our place in line , I be careful to 
 arrange that my brilliant companion should go up before I , as I have a 
 strong desire to see what sort of an effect his appearance would produce 
 on the Royal party . I have an excellent view of the Prince of Wales from 
 where I myself wait ; he make an imposing and kingly figure enough , in 
 full uniform with his various order glitter on his broad breast ; and 
 the singular resemblance discover by many people in he to Henry VIII . 
 strike I more forcibly than I should have think possible . his face 
 however express a far great good - humour than the picture lineament 
 of the capricious but ever popular ' bluff King Hal , ' - though on this 
 occasion there be a certain shade of melancholy , even sternness on his 
 brow , which give a firm character to his naturally mobile feature , - a 
 shadow , as I fancy of weariness , temper with regret , - the look of 
 one dissatisfied , yet resign . a man of blunt possibility he seem 
 to I , - of defeat aim , and thwart will . few of the other member of 
 the Royal family surround he on the daïs , possess the remarkable 
 attraction he have for any observant student of physiognomy , - most of 
 they be , or assume to be , stiff military figure merely who bend 
 their head as each guest file past with an automatic machine - like 
 regularity imply neither pleasure , interest , nor good - will . but the 
 Heir - Apparent to the great Empire in the world express in his very 
 attitude and look , an unaffected and courteous welcome to 
 all , - surround as he be , and as such in his position must ever be , by 
 toady , parasite , sycophant , hypocritical self - seeker , who would 
 never run the least risk to their own life to serve he , unless they 
 could get something personally satisfactory out of it , his presence 
 impress itself upon I as full of the suggestion of dormant but none 
 the less resolute power . I can not even now explain the singular 
 excitation of mind that seize I as our turn to be present 
 arrive ; - I see my companion advance , and hear the Lord Chamberlain 
 announce his name ; - ' Prince Lucio Rimânez ' ; and then ; - why then , - it 
 seem as if all the movement in the brilliant room suddenly come to a 
 pause ! every eye be fix on the stately form and noble countenance of 
 my friend as he bow with such consummate courtliness and grace as make 
 all other salutation seem awkward by comparison . for one moment he 
 stand absolutely still in front of the Royal daïs , - face the Prince as 
 though he seek to impress he with the fact of his presence 
 there , - and across the broad stream of sunshine which have be pour 
 into the room throughout the ceremony , there fall the sudden shadow of a 
 pass cloud . a fleeting impression of gloom and silence chill the 
 atmosphere , - a singular magnetism appear to hold all eye fix on 
 Rimânez ; and not a man either go or come , move . this intense hush 
 be brief as it be curious and impressive ; - the Prince of Wales start 
 slightly , and gaze at the superb figure before he with an expression 
 of eager curiosity and almost as if he be ready to break the frigid 
 bond of etiquette and speak , - then control himself with an evident 
 effort he give his usual dignified acknowledgment of Lucio 's profound 
 reverence , whereupon my comrade pass on , - slightly smile . I follow 
 next , - but naturally make no impression beyond the fact of exciting a 
 smother whisper from some - one among the less royalty who catch 
 the name ' Geoffrey Tempest , ' and at once murmur the magic word " five 
 million ! " - word which reach my ear and move I to the usual weary 
 contempt which be with I grow into a chronic malady . we be soon 
 out of the palace , and while wait for our carriage in the cover 
 court - yard entrance , I touch Rimânez on the arm . 

 " you make a veritable sensation Lucio ! " 

 " do I ? " he laugh . " you flatter I Geoffrey . " 

 " not at all . why do you stop so long in front of the daïs ? " 

 " to please my humour ! " he return indifferently - " and partly , to give 
 his Royal Highness the chance of remember I the next time he see 
 I . " 

 " but he seem to recognise you , " - I say - " have you meet he before ? " 

 his eye flash . " often ! but I have never till now make a public 
 appearance at St James 's . court costume and ' company manner ' make a 
 difference to the look of most man , - and I doubt , - yes , I very much 
 doubt , whether , even with his repute excellent memory for face , the 
 Prince really know I to - day for what I be ! " 




 XVII 


 it must have be about a week or ten day after the Prince of Wales 's 
 Levée that I have the strange scene with Sibyl Elton I be about to 
 relate ; a scene that leave a painful impression on my mind and should 
 have be sufficient to warn I of impend trouble to come have I not 
 be too egotistical to accept any portent that presage ill to myself . 
 arrive at Lord Elton 's house one evening , and ascend the stair to 
 the drawing - room as be now my usual custom , unannounced and without 
 ceremony , I find Diana Chesney there alone and in tear . 

 " why , what be the matter ? " I exclaim in a rallying tone , for I be on 
 very friendly and familiar term with the little american - " You , of all 
 people in the world , have a private ' weep ' ! have our dear railway papa 
 ' bust up ' ? " 

 she laugh , a trifle hysterically . 

 " not just yet , you bet ! " she answer , lift her wet eye to mine and 
 show that mischief still sparkle brightly in they , - " there be nothing 
 wrong with the fund as far as I know . I have   only have a , - - well , a sort 
 of rumpus here with Sibyl . " 

 " with Sibyl ? " 

 " yes , " - and she rest the point of her little embroidered shoe on a 
 footstool and look at it critically - " you see it be the Catsup 's ' at 
 home ' to - night , and I be invite and Sibyl 's invite ; Miss Charlotte be 
 knock up with nurse the Countess , and of course I make sure that 
 Sibyl would go . well , she never say a word about it till she come down 
 to dinner , and then she ask I what time I want the carriage . I say 
 ' be not   you go too ? ' and she look at I in that provoking way of 
 her , - you know ! - a look that take you in from your topmost hair to 
 your shoe - edge , - and answer ' do you think it possible ! ' well , I 
 flare up , and say of course I think it possible , - why should not   it 
 be possible ? she look at I in the same way again and say - ' to the 
  catsup ? with you ! ' now , you know , Mr Tempest , that be real 
 downright rudeness , and more than I could stand so I just give way to my 
 mind . ' look here , ' I say - ' though you be the daughter of an Earl , you 
 need not   turn up your nose at Mrs Catsup . she be not   half bad , - I do not 
 speak of her money , - but she be a real good sort , and have a kind heart , 
 which it appear to I be more than you have . Mrs Catsup would never 
 treat I as unkindly as you do . ' and then I choke , - I could have burst 
 out in a regular yell , if I have not   think the footman might be outside 
 the door listen . and Sibyl only smile , that patent ice - refrigerator 
 smile of her , and ask - ' would you prefer to live with Mrs Catsup ? ' of 
 course I tell she no , - nothing would induce I to live with Mrs Catsup , 
 and then she say - ' Miss Chesney , you pay my father for the protection 
 and guarantee of his name and position in english social circle , but 
 the companionship of my father 's daughter be not include in the 
 bargain . I have try to make you understand as distinctly as I can that 
 I will not be see in society with you , - not because I dislike you , - far 
 from it , - but simply because people would say I be act as your pay 
 companion . you force I to speak plainly , and I be sorry if I offend . as 
 for Mrs Catsup , I have only meet she once , and she seem to I very 
 common and ill - breed . besides I do not care for the society of 
 tradespeople . ' and with that she get up and sail out , - and I hear she 
 order the carriage for I at ten . it be come round directly , and just 
 look at my red eye ! it be awfully hard on I , - I know old Catsup make 
 his pile out of varnish , but varnish be as good as anything else in the 
 general market . and - - and - - it be all out now , Mr Tempest , - and you can 
 tell Sibyl what I have   say if you like ; I know you be in love with she ! " 

 I star , bewilder by her voluble and almost breathless outburst . 

 " really , Miss Chesney , " I begin formally . 

 " oh yes , Miss Chesney , Miss Chesney - it be all very well ! " she repeat 
 impatiently , snatch up a gorgeous evening cloak which I mutely 
 volunteer to put on , an offer she as mutely accept - " I be only a 
 girl , and it be not   my fault if I have   get a vulgar man for a father who 
 want to see I married to an english nobleman before he die , - that be 
  his look - out - I do not   care about it . english nobleman be a ricketty 
 lot in my opinion . but I have   as good a heart as anyone , and I could 
 love Sibyl if she would let I , but she will not   . she lead the life of an 
 ice - berg , and do not   care a rap for anyone . she do not   care for you , 
 you know ! - I wish she do , - she would be more human ! " 

 " I be very sorry for all this , " - I say , smile into the piquante face 
 of the really sweet - natured girl , and gently fasten the jewel 
 clasp of her cloak at her throat - " but you must not   mind it so much . you 
 be a dear little soul Diana , - kind and generous and impulsive and all 
 the rest of it , - but , - well - - english people be very apt to 
 misunderstand Americans . I can quite enter into your feeling , - still 
 you know Lady Sibyl be very proud - - " 

 " proud ! " she interrupt - " my ! I guess it must feel something splendid 
 to have an ancestor who be pike through the body on Bosworth field , 
 and leave there for the bird to eat . it seem to give a kind of 
 stiffness in the back to all the family ever afterwards . should not 
 wonder if the descendant of the bird who eat he feel kind stick up 
 about it too ! " 

 I laugh , - she laugh with I , and be quite herself again . 

 " if I tell you my ancestor be a Pilgrim Father , you would not   believe 
 I I expect ! " she say , the corner of her mouth dimple . 

 " I should believe anything from your lip ! " I declare gallantly . 

 " well , believe that , then ! swallow it down if you can ! I can not ! he be a 
 Pilgrim Father in the Mayflower , and he fall on his knee and thank 
 God as soon as he touch dry land in the true Pilgrim - Father way . but 
 he could not   hold a candle to the piked man at Bosworth . " 

 here we be interrupt by the entrance of a footman . 

 " the carriage be wait , Miss. " 

 " thank , - all right . good - night Mr Tempest , - you would well send word to 
 Sibyl you be here ; Lord Elton be din out , but Sibyl will be at home 
 all the evening . " 

 I offer she my arm , and escort she to the carriage , feel a little 
 sorry for she as she drive off in solitary state to the festive ' crush ' 
 of the successful varnisher . she be a good girl , a bright girl , a true 
 girl , - vulgar and flippant at time , yet on the whole sincere in her 
 well quality of character and sentiment , - and it be this very 
 sincerity which , be quite unconventional and not at all la mode , 
 be misunderstood , and would always be misunderstood by the high and 
 therefore more hypocritically polished circle of english society . 

 I return to the drawing - room slowly and meditatively , tell one of 
 the servant on my way to ask Lady Sibyl if she could see I for a few 
 moment . I be not keep wait long ; I have only pace the room twice up 
 and down when she enter , look so strangely wild and beautiful that 
 I could scarcely forbear utter an exclamation of wonder . she wear 
 white as be always her custom in the evening , - her hair be less 
 elaborately dress than usual , and cluster over her brow in loose 
 wavy mass , - her face be exceedingly pale , and her eye appear 
 large and dark by comparison - her smile be vague and fleeting like 
 that of a sleep - walker . she give I her hand ; it be dry and burn . 

 " my father be out - " she begin . 

 " I know . but I come to see you . may I stay a little ? " 

 she murmur assent , and sink listlessly into a chair , begin to play 
 with some rose in a vase on the table beside she . 

 " you look tired Lady Sibyl , " - I say gently - " be you not well ? " 

 " I be quite well - " she answer - " but you be right in say I be 
 tired . I be dreadfully tired ! " 

 " you have be do too much perhaps ? - your attendance on your mother 
 try you - - " 

 she laugh bitterly . 

 " attendance on my mother ! - pray do not credit I with so much devotion . 
 I never attend on my mother . I can not do it ; I be too much of a coward . 
 her face terrify I ; and whenever I do venture to go near she , she 
 try to speak , with such dreadful , such ghastly effort , as make she 
 more hideous to look at than anyone can imagine . I should die of fright 
 if I see she often . as it be , when I do see she I can scarcely 
 stand - and twice I have faint with the horror of it . to think of 
 it ! - that that live corpse with the fearful fix eye and distort 
 mouth should actually be my mother ! " 

 she shudder violently , and her very lip pal as she speak . I be 
 seriously concern , and tell she so . 

 " this must be very bad for your health , " - I say , draw my chair 
 close to her - " can you not get away for a change ? " 

 she look at I in silence . the expression of her eye thrill I 
 strangely , - it be not tender or wistful , but fierce , passionate and 
 commanding . 

 " I see Miss Chesney for a few moment just now " - I resume , - " she seem 
 very unhappy . " 

 " she have nothing to be unhappy about - " say Sibyl coldly - " except the 
 time my mother take in die . but she be young ; she can afford to wait 
 a little for the Elton coronet . " 

 " be not - - may not this be a mistaken surmise of your ? " I venture 
 gently - " whatever her fault , I think the girl admire and love you . " 

 she smile scornfully . 

 " I want neither her love nor her admiration , " - she say - " I have few 
 woman - friend and those few be all hypocrite whom I mistrust . when 
 Diana Chesney be my step - mother , we shall still be stranger . " 

 I feel I be on delicate ground , and that I could not continue the 
 conversation without the risk of give offence . 

 " where be your friend ? " ask Sibyl suddenly , apparently to change the 
 subject - " why do he so seldom come here now ? " 

 " Rimânez ? well , he be a very queer fellow , and at time take an 
 abhorrence for all society . he frequently meet your father at the club , 
 and I suppose his reason for not come here be that he hat woman . " 

 " all woman ? " she query with a little smile . 

 " without exception ! " 

 " then he hat I ? " 

 " I do not say that - " I answer quickly - " no one could hate you , Lady 
 Sibyl , - but truly , as far as Prince Rimânez be concern , I expect he 
 do not abate his aversion to womankind   which be his chronic malady 
 even for you . " 

 " so he will never marry ? " she say musingly . 

 I laugh . " oh , never ! that you may be quite sure of . " 

 still play with the rose near she , she relapse into silence . her 
 breath come and go quickly ; I see her long eyelash quiver against 
 the pale rose - leaf tint of her cheek , - the pure outline of her delicate 
 profile suggest to my mind one of Fra Angelico 's meditative saint or 
 angel . all at once , while I yet watch she admiringly , she suddenly 
 spring erect , crush a rose in her hand , - her head throw back , her 
 eye flash , her whole frame tremble . 

 " oh , I can not bear it ! " she cry wildly - " I can not bear it ! " 

 I start up astonished , and confront she . 

 " Sibyl ! " 

 " oh , why do not   you speak , and fill up the measure of my degradation ! " 
 she go on passionately - " why do not   you tell I , as you tell my 
 father , your purpose in come here ? - why do not   you say to I , as you 
 say to he , that your sovereign choice have fasten upon I , - that I be 
 the woman out of all the world you have elect to marry ! look at I ! " 
 and she raise her arm with a tragic gesture ; " be there any flaw in the 
 piece of good you wish to purchase ? this face be deem worthy of the 
 fashionable photographer 's pain ; worthy of be sell for a shilling as 
 one of England 's ' beauty , ' - this figure have serve as a model for the 
 showing - off of many a modiste 's costume , purchase at half - cost on the 
 understanding that I must state to my circle of acquaintance the name of 
 the maker or designer , - these eye , these lip , these arm be all your 
 for the buying ! why do you expose I to the shame of dally over your 
 bargain ? - by hesitate and consider as to whether , after all , I be 
 worthy of your gold ! " 

 she seem seize by some hysterical passion that convulse she , and in 
 mingled amazement , alarm and distress , I spring to she and catch she 
 hand in my own . 

 " Sibyl , Sibyl ! " I say - " hush - hush ! you be overwrought with fatigue 
 and excitement , - you can not know what you be say . my darling , what 
 do you take I for ? - what be all this nonsense in your mind about buy 
 and sell ? you know I love you , - I have make no secret of it , - you 
 must have see it in my face , - and if I have hesitate to speak , it be 
 because I fear your rejection of I . you be too good for I , 
 Sibyl , - too good for any man , - I be not worthy to win your beauty and 
 innocence . my love , my love - do not give way in this manner " - for as I 
 speak she clung to I like a wild bird suddenly cage - " what can I say 
 to you , but that I worship you with all the strength of my life , - I love 
 you so deeply that I be afraid to think of it ; it be a passion I dare 
 not dwell upon , Sibyl , - I love you too well , - too madly for my own 
 peace - - " 

 I tremble , and be silent , - her soft arm cling to I rob I of 
 a portion of my self - control . I kiss the ripple wave of her hair ; 
 she lift her head and look up at I , her eye alit with some strange 
 lustre that be not love as much as fear , - and the sight of her beauty 
 thus yield as it be to my possession , break down the barrier of 
 restraint I have hitherto impose upon myself . I kiss she on the 
 lip , - a long passionate kiss that , to my excited fancy , seem to 
 mingle our very being into one , - but while I yet hold she in my arm , 
 she suddenly release herself and push I back . stand apart from I 
 she tremble so violently that I fear she would fail , - and I take she 
 hand and make she sit down . she smile , - a very wan smile . 

 " what do you feel then ? " she ask . 

 " when , Sibyl ? " 

 " just now , - when you kiss I ? " 

 " all the joy of heaven and fire of hell in a moment ! " I say . 

 she regard I with a curious musing frown . 

 " strange ! do you know what I feel ? " 

 I shake my head smile , and press my lip on the soft small hand I 
 hold . 

 " nothing ! " she say , with a kind of hopeless gesture - " I assure you , 
 absolutely nothing ! I can not feel . I be one of your modern woman , - I can 
 only think , - and analyse . " 

 " think and analyse as much as you will , my queen , " - I answer 
 playfully - " if you will only think you can be happy with I . that be all 
 I desire . " 

 " can you be happy with I ? " she ask - " wait - do not answer for a 
 moment , till I tell you what I be . you be altogether mistake in I . " 
 she be silent for some minute , and I watch she anxiously . " I be 
 always intend for this " - she say slowly at last , - " this , to which I 
 have now come , - to be the property of a rich man . many man have look 
 at I with a view to purchase , but they could not pay the price my 
 father demand . pray do not look so distressed ! - what I say be quite 
 true and quite commonplace , - all the woman of the upper class , - the 
 unmarried one , - be for sale now in England as utterly as the 
 circassian girl in a barbarian slave - market . I see you wish to protest , 
 and assure I of your devotion , - but there be no need of this , - I be 
 quite sure you love I , - as much as any man can love , - and I be content . 
 but you do not know I really , - you be attract by my face and 
 form , - and you admire my youth and innocence , which you think I possess . 
 but I be not young - I be old in heart and feeling . I be young for a 
 little while at Willowsmere , when I live among flower and bird and 
 all the trustful honest creature of the wood and field , - but one 
 season in town be sufficient to kill my youth in I , - one season of 
 dinner and ball , and - fashionable novel - reading . now you have 
 write a book , and therefore you must know something about the duty 
 of authorship , - of the serious and even terrible responsibility writer 
 incur when they send out to the world book full of pernicious and 
 poisonous suggestion to contaminate the mind that have hitherto be 
 clean and undiseased . your book have a noble motive ; and for this I 
 admire it in many part , though to I it be not as convincing as it 
 might have be . it be well write too ; but I gain the impression 
 while read it , that you be not altogether sincere yourself in the 
 thought you strove to inculcate , - and that therefore you just miss 
 what you should have gain . " 

 " I be sure you be right , " - I say , with a wholesome pang of 
 humiliation - " the book be worthless as literature , - it be only the 
 ' boom ' of a season ! " 

 " at any rate , " - she go on , her eye darken with the intensity of 
 her feeling - " you have not pollute your pen with the vileness common to 
 many of the author of the day . I ask you , do you think a girl can read 
 the book that be now freely publish , and that her silly society 
 friend tell she to read , - ' because it be so dreadfully queer ! ' - and 
 yet remain unspoilt and innocent ? book that go into the detail of the 
 life of outcast ? - that explain and analyse the secret vice of 
 man ? - that advocate almost as a sacred duty ' free love ' and universal 
 polygamy ? - that see no shame in introduce into the circle of good 
 wife and pure - minded girl , a heroine who boldly seek out a man , any 
 man , in order that she may have a child by he , without the 
 ' degradation ' of marry he ? I have read all those book , - and what 
 can you expect of I ? not innocence , surely ! I despise man , - I despise 
 my own sex , - I loathe myself for be a woman ! you wonder at my 
 fanaticism for Mavis Clare , - it be only because for a time her book 
 give I back my self - respect , and make I see humanity in a nobler 
 light , - because she restore to I , if only for an hour , a kind of 
 glimmering belief in God , so that my mind feel refresh and cleanse . 
 all the same , you must not look upon I as an innocent young girl 
 Geoffrey , - a girl such as the great poet idealize and sing of , - I be a 
 contaminate creature , train to perfection in the lax moral and 
 prurient literature of my day . " 

 I look at she in silence , pain , startle , and with a sense of shock , 
 as though something indefinably pure and precious have crumble into dust 
 at my foot . she rise and begin pace the room restlessly , move to and 
 fro with a slow yet fierce grace that remind I against my wish and 
 will of the movement of some imprisoned and savage beast of prey . 

 " you shall not be deceive in I , " - she say , pause a moment and 
 eye I sombrely - " if you marry I , you must do so with a full 
 realization of the choice you make . for with such wealth as your , you 
 can of course we d any woman you fancy . I do not say you could find a 
 girl well than I be ; I do not think you could in my ' set , ' because 
 we be all alike , - all tar with the same brush , and fill with the 
 same merely sensual and materialistic view of life and its 
 responsibility as the admire heroine of the ' society ' novel we 
 read . away in the province , among the middle class it be possible you 
 might discover a really good girl of the pure blush - rise 
 innocence , - but then you might also find her stupid and unentertaining , 
 and you would not care for that . my chief recommendation be that I be 
 beautiful , - you can see that ; everybody can see that , - and I be not so 
 affect as to pretend to be unconscious of the fact . there be no sham 
 about my external appearance ; my hair be not a wig , - my complexion be 
 natural , - my figure be not the result of the corset - maker 's art , - my 
 eyebrow and eyelash be undyed . oh yes , - you can be sure that the 
 beauty of my body be quite genuine ! - but it be not the outward 
 expression of an equally beautiful soul . and this be what I want you to 
 understand . I be passionate , resentful , impetuous , - frequently 
 unsympathetic , and incline to morbidness and melancholy , and I confess 
 I have imbibe , consciously or unconsciously , that complete contempt of 
 life and disbelief in a God , which be the chief theme of nearly all the 
 social teaching of the time . " 

 she cease , - and I gaze at she with an odd sense of mingled worship and 
 disillusion , even as a barbarian might gaze at an idol whom he still 
 love , but whom he could no long believe in as divine . yet what she 
 say be in no way contrary to my own theory , - how then could I 
 complain ? I do not believe in a God ; why should I inconsistently feel 
 regret that she share my unbelief ? I have involuntarily clung to the 
 old - fashioned idea that religious faith be a sacred duty in womanhood ; 
 I be not able to offer any reason for this notion , unless it be the 
 romantic fancy of have a good woman to pray for one , if one have no 
 time and less inclination to pray for one 's self . however , it be 
 evident Sibyl be ' advanced ' enough to do without superstitious 
 observance ; she would never pray for I ; - and if we have child , she 
 would never teach they to make their first tender appeal to Heaven for 
 my sake or her . I smother a slight sigh , and be about to speak , when 
 she come up to I and lay she two hand on my shoulder . " you look 
 unhappy , Geoffrey , " - she say in gentle accent - " be console ! - it be 
 not too late for you to change your mind ! " 

 I meet the questioning glance of her eye , - beautiful , lustrous eye as 
 clear and pure as light itself . 

 " I shall never change , Sibyl , " I answer - " I love you , - I shall always 
 love you . but I wish you would not analyse yourself so pitilessly , - you 
 have such strange idea - " 

 " you think they strange ? " she say - " you should not , - in these ' new 
 woman ' day ! I believe that , thank to newspaper , magazine and 
 ' decadent ' novel , I be in all respect eminently fit to be a wife ! " 
 and she laugh bitterly - " there be nothing in the r"le of marriage that 
 I do not know , though I be not yet twenty . I have be prepare for a 
 long time to be sell to the high bidder , and what few silly notion I 
 have about love , - the love of the poet and idealist , - when I be a 
 dreamy child at Willowsmere , be all disperse and end . ideal love be 
 dead , - and bad than dead , be out of fashion . carefully instruct 
 as I have be in the worthlessness of everything but money , you can 
 scarcely be surprised at my speaking of myself as an object of sale . 
 marriage for I be a sale , as far as my father be concern , - for you 
 know well enough that however much you love I or I love you , he would 
 never allow I to marry you if you be not rich , and rich than most 
 man . I want you to feel that I fully recognize the nature of the bargain 
 strike ; and I ask you not to expect a girl 's fresh , confide love from 
 a woman as warp in heart and mind as I be ! " 

 " Sibyl , " - I say earnestly - " you wrong yourself ; I be sure you wrong 
 yourself ! you be one of those who can be in the world yet not of it ; 
 your mind be too open and pure to be sully , even by contact with evil 
 thing . I will believe nothing you say against your own sweet and noble 
 character , - and , Sibyl , let I again ask you not to distress I by this 
 constant harping on the subject of my wealth , or I shall be incline to 
 look upon it as a curse , - I should love you as much if I be poor - - " 

 " oh , you might love I " - she interrupt I , with a strange smile - " but 
 you would not dare to say so ! " 

 I be silent . suddenly she laugh , and link her arm caressingly 
 round my neck . 

 " there , Geoffrey ! " she say - " I have finish my discourse , - my bit of 
 Ibsenism , or whatever other ism affect I , - and we need not be 
 miserable about it . I have say what be in my mind ; I have tell you the 
 truth , that in heart I be neither young nor innocent . but I be no bad 
 than all my ' set ' so perhaps you have well make the good of I . I 
 please your fancy , do I not ? " 

 " my love for you can not be so lightly express , Sibyl ! " I answer in 
 rather a pained tone . 

 " never mind , - it be my humour so to express it " - she go on - " I please 
 your fancy , and you wish to marry I . well now , all I ask be , go to my 
 father and buy I at once ! conclude the bargain ! and when you have 
 buy I , - do not   look so tragic ! " and she laugh again - " and when you 
 have pay the clergyman , and pay the bridesmaid   with monogram locket 
 or brooch   and pay the guest   with wedding - cake and champagne   and 
 clear up all score with everybody , even to the last man who shut the 
 door of the nuptial brougham , - will you take I away , - far away from 
 this place - this house , where my mother 's face haunt I like a ghost in 
 the darkness ; where I be torture by terror night and day , - where I 
 hear such strange sound , and dream of such ghastly thing , - " here her 
 voice suddenly break , and she hide her face against my breast - " oh yes , 
 Geoffrey , take I away as quickly as possible ! let we never live in 
 hateful London , but at Willowsmere ; I may find some of the old joy 
 there , - and some of the happy bygone day . " 

 touch by the appeal pathos of her accent , I press she to my 
 heart , feel that she be scarcely accountable for the strange thing 
 she say in her evidently overwrought and excitable condition . 

 " it shall be as you wish , my darling , " I say - " the soon I have you 
 all to myself the well . this be the end of March , - will you be ready 
 to marry I in June ? " 

 " yes , " she answer , still hide her face . 

 " and now Sibyl , " I go on - " remember , - there must be no more talk of 
 money and bargaining . tell I what you have not yet tell I , - that you 
 love I , - and would love I even if I be poor . " 

 she look up , straightly and unflinchingly full into my eye . 

 " I can not tell you that , " - she say , - " I have tell you I do not believe 
 in love ; and if you be poor I certainly should not marry you . it would 
 be no use ! " 

 " you be frank , Sibyl ! " 

 " it be good to be frank , be it not ? " and she draw a flower from the knot 
 at her bosom , and begin fasten it in my coat - " Geoffrey what be the 
 good of pretence ? you would hate to be poor , and so should I. I do not 
 understand the verb ' to love , ' - now and then when I read a book by Mavis 
 Clare , I believe love may exist , but when I close the book my belief be 
 shut up with it . so do not ask for what be not in I . I be willing - even 
 glad to marry you ; that be all you must expect . " 

 " All ! " I exclaim , with a sudden mingling of love and wrath in my blood , 
 as I close my arm about she and kiss she passionately - " All ! - you 
 impassive ice - flower , it be not all ! - you shall melt to my touch and 
 learn what love be , - do not think you can escape its influence , you 
 dear , foolish , beautiful child ! your passion be asleep , - they must 
 wake ! " 

 " for you ? " she query , rest her head back against my shoulder , and 
 gaze up at I with a dreamy radiance in her lovely eye . 

 " for I ! " 

 she laugh . 

 " ' oh bid I love , and I will love ! ' " - she hum softly under her 
 breath . 

 " you will , you must , you shall ! " I say ardently . " I will be your master 
 in the art of love ! " 

 " it be a difficult art ! " she say - " I be afraid it will take a life - time 
 to complete my training , even with my ' master . ' " 

 and a smile still linger in her eye , give they a witch - like 
 glamour , when I kiss she again and bade her good - night . 

 " you will tell Prince Rimânez the news ? " she say . 

 " if you wish it . " 

 " of course I wish it . tell he at once . I should like he to know . " 

 I go down the stair , - she lean over the balustrade look after 
 I . 

 " good - night Geoffrey ! " she call softly . 

 " good - night Sibyl ! " 

 " be sure you tell Prince Rimânez ! " 

 her white figure disappear ; and I walk out of the house in a chaotic 
 state of mind , divide between pride , ecstasy and pain , - the engage 
 husband of an earl 's daughter , - the lover of a woman who have declare 
 herself incapable of love and destitute of faith . 




 xviii 


 look back through the space of only three year to this particular 
 period of my life , I can remember distinctly the singular expression of 
 Lucio 's face when I tell he that Sibyl Elton have accept I . his 
 sudden smile give a light to his eye that I have never see in they 
 before , - a brilliant yet sinister glow , strangely suggestive of some 
 inwardly suppress wrath and scorn . while I speak he be , to my 
 vexation , toy with that uncanny favourite of his , the 
 ' mummy - insect , ' - and it annoy I beyond measure to see the repulsive 
 pertinacity with which the glitter bat - like creature clung to his 
 hand . 

 " woman be all alike , " - he say with a hard laugh , when he have hear my 
 news , - " few of they have moral force enough to resist that temptation of 
 a rich marriage . " 

 I be irritated at this . 

 " it be scarcely fair of you to judge everything by the 
 money - standard , " - I say , - then , after a little pause I add what in my 
 own heart I know to be a lie , - " she , - Sibyl , - love I for myself 
 alone . " 

 his glance flash over I like lightning . 

 " oh ! - set the wind in that quarter ! why then , my dear Geoffrey , I 
 congratulate you more heartily than ever . to conquer the affection of 
 one of the proud girl in England , and win her love so completely as 
 to be sure she would marry you even if you have not a sou to bless 
 yourself with - this be a victory indeed ! - and one of which you may well 
 be proud . again and yet again I congratulate you ! " 

 toss the horrible thing he call his ' sprite ' off to fly on one of 
 its slow humming circuit round the room , he shake my hand fervently , 
 still smile , - and I , - feel instinctively that he be as fully aware 
 of the truth as I be , namely , that have I be a poor author with 
 nothing but what I could earn by my brain , the Lady Sibyl Elton would 
 never have look at I , much less agree to marry I , - keep silence 
 lest I should openly betray the reality of my position . 

 " you see " - he go on , with a cheerful relentlessness - " I be not aware 
 that any old - world romance grace the disposition of one so apparently 
 impassive as your beautiful fiancée . to love for love 's sake only , be 
 become really an obsolete virtue . I think Lady Sibyl be an 
 essentially modern woman , conscious of her position , and the necessity 
 there be for hold that position proudly before the world at all 
 cost , - and that the pretty pastoral sentiment of poetical Phyllises 
 and Amandas have no place in her nature . I be wrong , it seem ; and for 
 once I have be mistake in the fair sex ! " here he stretch out his 
 hand to the ' sprite , ' that now come wing its way back , and settle at 
 once on its usual resting - place ; " my friend , I assure you , if you have 
 win a true woman 's true love , you have a far great fortune than your 
 million , - a treasure that none can afford to despise . " 

 his voice soften , - his eye grow dreamy and less scornful , - and I 
 look at he in some astonishment . 

 " why Lucio , I think you hat woman ? " 

 " so I do ! " he reply quickly - " but do not forget why I hate they ! it be 
 because they have all the world 's possibility of good in their hand , 
 and the majority of they deliberately turn these possibility to evil . 
 man be influence entirely by woman , though few of they will own 
 it , - through woman they be lift to heaven or drive to hell . the 
 latter be the favourite course , and the one almost universally 
 adopt . " 

 his brow darken , and the line round his proud mouth grow hard and 
 stern . I watch he for a moment , - then with sudden irrelevance I 
 say - 

 " put that abominable ' sprite ' of yours away , will you ? I hate to see you 
 with it ! " 

 " what , my poor egyptian princess ! " he exclaim with a laugh - " why so 
 cruel to her Geoffrey ? if you have live in her day , you might have be 
 one of her lover ! she be no doubt a charming person , - I find she 
 charming still ! however , to oblige you - " and here , place the insect 
 in its crystal receptacle he carry it away to the other end of the 
 room . then , return towards I slowly , he say - " who know what the 
 ' sprite ' suffer as a woman , Geoffrey ! perhaps she make a rich 
 marriage , and repent it ! at anyrate I be sure she be much happy in 
 her present condition ! " 

 " I have no sympathy with such a ghastly fancy , " - I say abruptly - " I 
 only know that she or it be a perfectly loathsome object to I . " 

 " well , - some ' transmigrate ' soul be loathsome object to look 
 at ; " - he declare imperturbably - " when they be deprive of their 
 respectable two - legged fleshly covering , it be extraordinary what a 
 change the inexorable law of Nature make in they ! " 

 " what nonsense you talk , Lucio ! " I say impatiently - " how can you know 
 anything about it ! " 

 a sudden shadow pass over his face , give it a strange pallor and 
 impenetrability . 

 " have you forget " - he say in deliberately measure accent - " that 
 your friend John Carrington , when he write that letter of introduction I 
 bring from he to you , tell you in it , that in all matter scientific 
 I be an ' absolute master ? ' in these ' matter scientific ' you have not 
 test my skill , - yet you ask - ' how can I know ? ' I answer that I do 
 know - many thing of which you be ignorant . do not presume too much on 
 your own intellectual capability my friend , - lest I prove it 
 naught ! - lest I demonstrate to you , beyond all possibility of console 
 doubt , that the shred and stripping of that change you call death , be 
 only so many embryo of new life which you must live , whether you will 
 or no ! " 

 somewhat abash by his word and still more by his manner , I say - 

 " pardon I ! - I speak in haste of course , - but you know my theory - " 

 " most thoroughly ! " and he laugh , with an immediate resumption of his 
 old manner - " ' every man his own theory ' be the fashionable motto of the 
 hour . each little biped tell you that he have his ' own idea ' of God , and 
 equally ' his own ' idea of the Devil . it be very droll ! but let we return 
 to the theme of love . I feel I have not congratulate you half 
 enough , - for surely Fortune favour you singularly . out of the teem 
 mass of vain and frivolous femininity , you have secure a unique example 
 of beauty , truth and purity , - a woman , who apart from all self - interest 
 and worldly advantage , wed you , with five million , for yourself alone ! 
 the prettiest poem in the world could be make out of such an exquisitely 
 innocent maiden type ! you be one of the lucky man alive ; in fact , 
 you have nothing more to wish for ! " 

 I do not contradict he , though in my own mind I feel that the 
 circumstance of my engagement leave much to be desire . I , who scoff 
 at religion , wish it have form part of the character of my future 
 wife , - I , who sneer at sentiment , crave for some expression of it in 
 the woman whose beauty attract my desire . however I determinedly 
 smother all the premonition of my own conscience , and accept what 
 each day of my idle and useless life bring I without consider 
 future consequence . 

 the paper soon have the news that " a marriage have be arrange and will 
 shortly take place between Sibyl , only daughter of the Earl of Elton , 
 and Geoffrey Tempest , the famous millionaire . " not ' famous author ' mark 
 you ! - though I be still be loudly ' boom . ' Morgeson , my publisher , 
 could offer I no consolation as to my chance of win and keep a 
 steady future fame . the Tenth Edition of my book be announce , but we 
 have not actually dispose of more than two thousand copy , include a 
 one - volume issue which have be hastily thrust on the market . and the 
 work I have so mercilessly and maliciously slat , - ' difference ' by 
 Mavis Clare be in its thirtieth thousand ! I comment on this with some 
 anger to Morgeson , who be virtuously aggrieve at my complaint . 

 " dear I , Mr Tempest , you be not the only writer who have be ' boom ' 
 by the press and who nevertheless do not sell , " - he exclaim - " no one 
 can account for the caprice of the public ; they be entirely beyond the 
 most cautious publisher 's control or calculation . Miss Clare be a sore 
 subject to many author besides yourself , - she always ' take ' and no one 
 can help it . I sympathize with you in the matter heartily , but I be not 
 to blame . at any rate the reviewer be all with you , - their praise have 
 be almost unanimous . now Mavis Clare 's ' difference , ' though to my 
 think a very brilliant and powerful book , have be literally cut to 
 piece whenever it have be notice at all , - and yet the public go for 
 she and do not   go for you . it be not   my fault . you see people have get 
 Compulsory Education now , and I be afraid they begin to mistrust 
 criticism , prefer to form their own independent opinion ; if this be 
 so , of course it will be a terrible thing , because the most carefully 
 organize clique in the world will be powerless . everything have be 
 do for you that can be do , Mr Tempest , - I be sure I regret as much 
 as yourself that the result have not be all you expect or desire . 
 many author would not care so much for the public approval ; the 
 applause of cultured journalism such as you have obtain , would be more 
 than sufficient for they . " 

 I laugh bitterly . ' the applause of cultured journalism ! ' I think I 
 know something of the way in which such applause be win . almost I begin 
 to hate my million , - golden trash that could only secure I the 
 insincere flattery of fair - weather friend , - and that could not give I 
 fame , - such fame as have sometimes be grasp in a moment by a starving 
 and neglect genius , who in the very arm of death , succeed in 
 master the world . one day in a fit of disappointment and petulance I 
 say to Lucio - 

 " you have not keep all your promise , my friend ! - you tell I you could 
 give I fame ! " 

 he look at I curiously . 

 " do I ? well , - and be you not famous ? " 

 " no . I be merely notorious , " I retort . 

 he smile . 

 " the word fame , my good Geoffrey , trace to its origin mean ' a 
 breath ' - the breath of popular adulation . you have that - for your 
 wealth . " 

 " but not for my work ! " 

 " you have the praise of the reviewer ! " 

 " what be that worth ! " 

 " everything ! " he answer smile - " in the reviewer ' own opinion ! " 

 I be silent . 

 " you speak of work ; " he go on - " now the nature of work I can not 
 exactly express , because it be a divine thing and be judge by a divine 
 standard . one must consider in all work two thing ; first , the object 
 for which it be undertake , and secondly the way in which it be 
 perform . all work should have a high and unselfish intent , - without 
 this , it perish and be not consider work at all , - not at least by 
 the eternal judge invisible . if it be work , truly and nobly do in 
 every sense of the word , it carry with it its own reward , and the 
 laurel descend from heaven shape ready for wear , - no earthly power 
 can bestow they . I can not give you that fame , - but I have secure you 
 a very fair imitation of it . " 

 I be oblige to acquiesce , though more or less morosely , - whereat I see 
 that he be somewhat amused . unwilling to incur his contempt I say no 
 more concern the subject that be the near to my heart , and wear 
 out many sleepless hour at night in try to write a new 
 book , - something novel and daring , such as should force the public to 
 credit I with a little lofty status than that obtain by the 
 possession of a huge banking account . but the creative faculty seem 
 dead in I , - I be crush by a sense of impotence and failure ; vague 
 idea be in my brain that would not lend themselves to expression in 
 word , - and such a diseased love of hypercriticism control I , that 
 after a miserably nervous analysis of every page I write , I tear it up 
 as soon as it be write , thus reduce myself to a state of mind that 
 be almost unbearable . 

 early in April I make my first visit to Willowsmere , have receive 
 information from the head of the firm of decorator and furnisher 
 employ there , that their work be close on completion , and that they 
 would be glad of a visit of inspection from I . Lucio and I go down 
 together for the day , and as the train rush through a green and 
 smile landscape , bear we away from the smoke , dirt and noise of the 
 restless modern Babylon , I be conscious of a gradually deepen peace 
 and pleasure . the first sight of the place I have recklessly purchase 
 without so much as look at it , fill I with delight and admiration . 
 it be a beautiful old house , ideally English and suggestive of 
 home - happiness . Ivy and jessamine clung to its red wall and picturesque 
 gable , - through the long vista of the exquisitely woode ground , the 
 silver gleam of the Avon river could be discern , twist in and out 
 like a ribbon tie in true love - knot , - the tree and shrub be 
 sprout forth in all their fresh spring beauty , - the aspect of the 
 country be indescribably bright and soothing , and I begin to feel as if 
 a burden have be suddenly lift from my life leave I free to 
 breathe and enjoy my liberty . I stroll from room to room of my future 
 abode , admire the taste and skill with which the whole place have be 
 fit and furnish , down to the small detail of elegance , comfort 
 and convenience . here my Sibyl be bear , I think , with a lover - like 
 tenderness , - here she would dwell again as my wife , amid the lovely and 
 beloved surrounding of her childhood , - and we should be happy - yes , we 
 should be happy , despite all the dull and heartless social doctrine of 
 the modern world . in the spacious and beautiful drawing - room I stop 
 to look out from the window on the entrancing view of lawn and woodland 
 that stretch before I , - and as I look , a warm sense of gratitude 
 and affection fill I for the friend to whose good office I owe this 
 fair domain . turn , I grasp he by the hand . 

 " it be all your doing , Lucio ! " I say - " I feel I can never thank you 
 enough ! without you I should perhaps never have meet Sibyl , - I might 
 never have hear of she , or of Willowsmere ; and I never could have be 
 as happy as I be to - day ! " 

 " oh , you be happy then ? " he query with a little smile - " I fancy you 
 be not ! " 

 " well - I have not be as happy as I expect to be ; " I 
 confess , - " something in my sudden accession to wealth seem to have 
 drag I down rather than lift I up , - - it be strange - - " 

 " it be not strange at all " - he interrupt , - " on the contrary it be very 
 natural . as a rule the most miserable people in the world be the rich . " 

 " be you miserable , for instance ? " I ask , smile . 

 his eye rest on I with a dark and dreary pathos . 

 " be you too blind to see that I be ? " he answer , his accent 
 vibrate with intense melancholy - " can you think I be happy ? do 
 the smile I wear , - the disguising smile man put on as a mask to hide 
 their secret agony from the pitiless gaze of unsympathetic 
 fellow - creature , - persuade you that I be free from care ? as for my 
 wealth , - I have never tell you the extent of it ; if I do , it might 
 indeed amaze you , though I believe it would not now arouse your envy , 
 consider that your trifle five million have not be without 
 effect in depress your mind . but I , - I could buy up kingdom and be 
 none the poor , - I could throne and unthrone king and be none the 
 wiser , - I could crush whole country under the iron heel of financial 
 speculation , - I could possess the world , - and yet estimate it at no 
 high value than I do now , - the value of a grain of dust circle 
 through infinity , or a soap - bubble blow on the wind ! " 

 his brow knit , - his face express pride , scorn and sorrow . 

 " there be some mystery about you Lucio ; " - I say - " some grief or loss 
 that your wealth can not repair - and that make you the strange be you 
 be . one day perhaps you will confide in I ... " 

 he laugh loudly , - almost fiercely ; - and clap I heavily on the 
 shoulder . 

 " I will ! " he say - " I will tell you my history ! and you , excellent 
 agnostic as you be , shall ' minister to a mind disease , ' and ' pluck out 
 the memory of a rooted sorrow ! ' what a power of expression there be in 
 Shakespeare , the uncrowned but actual King of England ! not the ' rooted 
 sorrow ' alone be to be ' pluck out ' but the very ' memory ' of it . the 
 apparently simple line hold complex wisdom ; no doubt the poet know , or 
 instinctively guess the most terrible fact in all the Universe ... " 

 " and what be that ? " 

 " the eternal consciousness of memory - " he reply - " God can not 
 forget , - and in consequence of this , his creature may not ! " 

 I forbore to reply , but I suppose my face betray my thought , for the 
 cynical smile I know so well play round his mouth as he look at I . 

 " I go beyond your patience , do I not ! " he say , laugh again - " when I 
 mention God , - who be declare by certain scientist to be non - existent 
 except as a blind , indifferent natural Force or Atom - producer ; - you be 
 bored ! I can see that at a glance . pray forgive I ! let we resume our 
 tour of inspection through this charming abode . you will be very 
 difficult to satisfy if you be not a very emperor of contentment 
 here ; - with a beautiful wife and plenty of cash , you can well afford to 
 give fame the go - by . " 

 " I may win it yet ! " I say hopefully - " in this place , I feel I could 
 write something worthy of be write . " 

 " good ! the ' divine fluttering ' of wing thought be in your brain ! 
 Apollo grant they strength to fly ! and now let we have 
 luncheon , - afterwards we shall have time to take a stroll . " 

 in the dining - room I find an elegant repast prepare , which rather 
 surprise I , as I have give no order , have indeed forget to do 
 so . Lucio however have , it appear , not forget , and an advance 
 telegram from he have place certain caterer at Leamington on their 
 mettle , with the result that we sit down to a feast as delicate and 
 luxurious as any two epicure could desire . 

 " now I want you to do I a favour , Geoffrey , " - say Lucio , during our 
 luncheon - " you will scarcely need to reside here till after your 
 marriage ; you have too many engagement in town . you speak of 
 entertain a big house - party down here , - I would not   do that if I be 
 you , - it be not   worth while . you would have to get in a staff of 
 servant , and leave they all afterwards to their own device while you 
 be on your honeymoon . this be what I propose , - give a grand fête here 
 in honour of your betrothal to Lady Sibyl , in May - and let I be the 
 master of the revel ! " 

 I be in the mood to agree to anything , - moreover the idea seem an 
 excellent one . I say so and Rimânez go on quickly - 

 " you understand of course , that if I undertake to do a thing I always do 
 it thoroughly , and brook no interference with my plan . now as your 
 marriage will be the signal for our parting , - at any rate for a time , - I 
 should like to show my appreciation of your friendship , by organize a 
 brilliant affair of the kind I suggest , - and if you will leave it all to 
 I , I guarantee you shall hold such a fête as have never be see or 
 know in England . and it will be a personal satisfaction to I if you 
 consent to my proposal . " 

 " my dear fellow - " I answer - " of course I consent - willingly ! I give 
 you carte blanche , - do as you like ; do all you like ! it be most 
 friendly and kind of you ! but when be we to make this sensation ? " 

 " you be to be marry in June ? " he ask . 

 " yes , - in the second week of the month . " 

 " very well . the fête shall be hold on the twenty - second of May , - that 
 will give society time to recover from the effect of one burst of 
 splendour in order to be ready for another , - namely the wedding . now we 
 need not talk of this any more - it be settle , - the rest devolve on I . 
 we have   get three or four hour to spare before we take the train back to 
 town , - suppose we take a saunter through the ground ? " 

 I assent to this , and accompany he readily , feel in high spirit 
 and good humour . Willowsmere and its peaceful loveliness seem to 
 cleanse my mind of all corroding influence ; - the blessed silence of the 
 wood and hill , after the rush and roar of town life , soothe and 
 cheer I , and I walk beside my companion with a light heart and 
 smile face , - happy , and fill with a dim religious faith in the blue 
 sky , if not in the God beyond it . we saunter through the fair garden 
 which be now mine , and then out through the park into a lovely little 
 lane , - a true Warwickshire lane , where the celandine be strew the 
 grass with their bright gold coinage , and the star - wort thrust up fairy 
 bouquet of white bloom between buttercup and lover , and where the 
 hawthorn - bud be begin to show themselves like minute snow - pellet 
 among the glossy young green . a thrush warble melodiously , - a lark rose 
 from almost our very foot and fling itself joyously into the sky with a 
 wild outburst of song , - a robin hop through a little hole in the 
 hedge to look at we in blithe inquisitiveness as we pass . all at once 
 Lucio stop and lay his hand on my shoulder , - his eye have the 
 beautiful melancholy of a far - off longing which I could neither 
 understand nor define . 

 " listen , Geoffrey ! " he say - " listen to the silence of the earth while 
 the lark sing ! have you ever observe the receptive attitude in which 
 Nature seem to wait for sound divine ! " 

 I do not answer , - the silence around we be indeed impressive ; - the 
 warbling of the thrush have cease , and only the lark 's clear voice 
 peal over - head , echo sweetly through the stillness of the lane . 

 " in the clerical Heaven , " go on Lucio dreamily - " there be no bird . 
 there be only conceited human soul bray forth ' Alleluia ' ! no 
 flower be include , - no tree ; only ' golden street . ' what a poor and 
 barbarous conception ! as if a World inhabit by deity would not contain 
 the wonder , grace and beauty of all world ! even this little planet 
 be more naturally beautiful than the clerical Heaven , - that is , it be 
 beautiful wherever Man be not . I protest - I have always 
 protest , - against the creation of Man ! " 

 I laugh . 

 " you protest against your own existence then ! " I say . 

 his eye darken slowly to a sombre brood blackness . 

 " when the sea roar and fling itself in anger on the shore , it crave 
 its prey - Mankind ! - it seek to wash the fair earth clean of the puny 
 insect that trouble the planet 's peace ! it drown the noxious creature 
 when it can , with the aid of its sympathize comrade the wind ! when the 
 thunder crash down a second after the lightning , do it not seem to 
 you that the very cloud combine in the holy war ? the war against God 's 
 one mistake ; - the making of humanity , - the effort to sweep it out of the 
 universe as one erase a weak expression in an otherwise perfect Poem ! 
 you and I , for example , be the only discord in to - day 's woodland 
 harmony . we be not particularly grateful for life , - we certainly be 
 not content with it , - we have not the innocence of a bird or a flower . 
 we have more knowledge you will say , - but how can we be sure of that ? 
 our wisdom come from the devil in the first place , accord to the 
 legend of the tree of knowledge , - the fruit of which teach both good 
 and evil , but which still apparently persuade man to evil rather than 
 good , and lead he on to a considerable amount of arrogance besides , 
 for he have an idea he will be immortal as a god in the hereafter , - ye 
 majestic Heavens ! - what an inadequately stupendous fate for a grain of 
 worthless dust , - a dwarfish atom such as he ! " 

 " well , I have no idea of immortality " - I say - " I have tell you that 
 often . this life be enough for I , - I want and expect no other . " 

 " Aye , but if there be another ! " answer Lucio , fix I with a 
 steady look - " and - if you be not ask your opinion about it - but 
 simply plunge headlong into a state of terrible consciousness in which 
 you would rather not be - - " 

 " oh come , " I say impatiently - " do not let we theorise ! I be happy 
 to - day ! - my heart be as light as that of the bird singing in the sky ; I 
 be in the very good of humour , and could not say an unkind word to my 
 bad enemy . " 

 he smile . 

 " be that your humour ? " and he take I by the arm - " then there could be 
 no well opportunity for show you this pretty little corner of the 
 world ; " - and walk on a few yard , he dexterously turn I down a 
 narrow path , lead from the lane , and bring I face to face with a 
 lovely old cottage , almost bury in the green of the young spring 
 verdure , and surround by an open fence overgrow with hawthorn and 
 sweet - briar , - " keep firm hold over your temper Geoffrey , - and maintain 
 the benignant tranquillity of your mind ! - here dwell the woman whose 
 name and fame you hate , - Mavis Clare ! " 




 XIX 


 the blood rush to my face , and I stop abruptly . 

 " let we go back , " I say . 

 " why ? " 

 " because I do not know Miss Clare and do not want to know she . literary 
 woman be my abhorrence , - they be always more or less unsexed . " 

 " you be think of the ' New ' woman I suppose , - but you flatter 
 they , - they never have any sex to lose . the self - degrade creature who 
 delineate their fictional heroine as wallow in unchastity , and who 
 write freely on subject which man would hesitate to name , be unnatural 
 hybrid of no - sex . Mavis Clare be not one of they , - she be an 
 ' old - fashion ' young woman . Mademoiselle Derino , the dancer , be 
 ' unsexed , ' but you do not object to she on that score , - on the contrary 
 I believe you have show your appreciation of her talent by spend a 
 considerable amount of cash upon she . " 

 " that be not a fair comparison " - I answer hotly - " Mademoiselle Derino 
 amuse I for a time . " 

 " and be not your rival in art ! " say Lucio with a little malicious 
 smile - " I see ! still , - as far as the question of be ' unsex ' go , 
 I , personally , consider that a woman who show the power of her 
 intellect be more to be respect than the woman who show the power of 
 her leg . but man always prefer the leg , - just as they prefer the devil 
 to the deity . all the same , I think , as we have time to spare , we may as 
 well see this genius . " 

 " Genius ! " I echo contemptuously . 

 " feminine twaddler , then ! " he suggest , laugh - " let we see this 
 feminine twaddl . she will no doubt prove as amusing as Mademoiselle 
 Derino in her way . I shall ring the bell and ask if she be at home . " 

 he advance towards the creeper - cover porch , - but I stand back , 
 mortified and sullen , determine not to accompany he inside the house 
 if he be admit . suddenly a blithe peal of musical laughter sound 
 through the air , and a clear voice exclaim - 

 " oh Tricksy ! you wicked boy ! take it back directly and apologise ! " 

 Lucio peer through the fence , and then beckon to I energetically . 

 " there she be ! " he whisper , " there be the dyspeptic , sour , savage old 
 blue - stocking , - there , on the lawn , - by Heaven ! - she be enough to strike 
 terror into the heart of any man - and millionaire ! " 

 I look where he point , and see nothing but a fair - haired woman in a 
 white gown , sit in a low basket - chair , with a tiny toy terrier on 
 her lap . the terri be jealously guard a large square dog - biscuit 
 nearly as big as himself , and at a little distance off sit a magnificent 
 rough - coated St Bernard , wag his feathery tail to and fro , with 
 every sign of good - humour and enjoyment . the position be evident at a 
 glance , - the small dog have take his huge companion 's biscuit from he 
 and have convey it to his mistress , - a canine joke which seem to be 
 appreciate and understand by all the party concern . but as I 
 watch the little group , I do not believe that she whom I see be 
 Mavis Clare . that small head be surely never make for the wearing of 
 deathless laurel , but rather for a garland of rose ,   sweet and 
 perishable   twin by a lover 's hand . no such slight feminine creature 
 as the one I now look upon could ever be capable of the intellectual 
 grasp and power of ' difference , ' the book I secretly admire and 
 wonder at , but which I have anonymously strive to ' quash ' in its 
 successful career . the writer of such a work , I imagine , must need be 
 of a more or less strong physique , with pronounced feature and an 
 impressive personality . this butterfly - thing , play with her dog , be 
 no type of a ' blue - stocking , ' and I say as much to Lucio . 

 " that can not be Miss Clare , " I say - " more likely a visitor , - or perhaps 
 the companion - secretary . the novelist must be very different in 
 appearance to that frivolous young person in white , whose dress be 
 distinctly parisian , and who seem to have nothing whatever to do but 
 amuse herself . " 

 " Tricksy ! " say the clear voice again - " take back the biscuit and 
 apologise ! " 

 the tiny terrier look round with an innocently abstract air , as if 
 in the earnestness of his own thought , he have not quite catch the 
 meaning of the sentence . 

 " Tricksy ! " and the voice become more imperative - " take it back and 
 apologise ! " 

 with a comical expression of resignation to circumstance , ' Tricksy ' 
 seize the large biscuit , and hold it in his tooth with gingerly 
 care , jump from his mistress 's knee and trot briskly up to the St 
 Bernard who be still wag his tail and smile as visibly as dog 
 often can smile , restore his steal good with three short yapping 
 bark as much as to say " there ! take it ! " the St Bernard rise in all his 
 majestic bulk and sniff at it , - then sniff his small friend , 
 apparently in dignified doubt as to which be terri and which be 
 biscuit , - then lie down again , he give himself up to the pleasure of 
 munch his meal , the while " Tricksy " with wild bark of delight 
 perform a sort of mad war - dance round and round he by way of 
 entertainment . this piece of dog - comedy be still go on , when Lucio 
 turn away from his point of observation at the fence , and go up to 
 the gate , ring the bell . a neat maid - servant answer the summon . 

 " be Miss Clare at home ? " he ask . 

 " yes sir . but I be not sure whether she will receive you , - " the maid 
 reply - " unless you have an appointment ? " 

 " we have no appointment , " - say Lucio , - " but if you will take these 
 card , - " here he turn to I - " Geoffrey , give I one of your ! " I 
 comply , somewhat reluctantly . " if you will take these card " - he 
 resume - " to Miss Clare , it be just possible she may be kind enough to 
 see we . if not , it will be our loss . " 

 he speak so gently and with such an ingratiating manner that I could see 
 the servant be at once prepossess in his favour . 

 " step in , sir , if you please , - " she say smile and open the gate . 
 he obey with alacrity , - and I , who a moment ago have resolve not to 
 enter the place , find myself passively follow he under an archway 
 of sprout young leaf and early bud jessamine into ' Lily 
 Cottage ' - which be to prove one day , though I know it not then , the 
 only haven of peace and security I should ever crave for , - and , craving , 
 be unable to win ! 

 the house be much large than it look from the outside ; the 
 entrance - hall be square and lofty , and panel with fine old carve 
 oak , and the drawing - room into which we be show be one of the most 
 picturesque and beautiful apartment I have ever see . there be flower 
 everywhere , - book , - rare bit of china , - elegant trifle that only a 
 woman of perfect taste would have the sense to select and 
 appreciate , - on one or two of the side - table and on the grand piano 
 be autograph - portrait of many of the great celebrity in Europe . 
 Lucio stroll about the room , make soft comment . 

 " here be the Autocrat of all the Russias , " he say , pause before a 
 fine portrait of the Tsar - " sign by the imperial hand too . now what 
 have the ' feminine twaddl ' do to deserve that honour I wonder ! here 
 in strange contrast , be the wild - haired Paderewski , - and beside he the 
 perennial Patti , - there be her Majesty of Italy , and here we have the 
 Prince of Wales , - all autograph likeness . upon my word , Miss Clare 
 seem to attract a great many notability around she without the aid of 
 hard cash . I wonder how she do it , Geoffrey ? " - and his eye sparkle 
 half maliciously - " can it be a case of genius after all ? look at those 
 lily ! " and he point to a mass of white bloom in one of the 
 window - " be they not far more beautiful creature than man and woman ? 
 dumb - yet eloquent of purity ! - no wonder the painter choose they as the 
 only flower suitable for the adornment of angel . " 

 as he speak the door open , and the woman we have see on the lawn 
 enter , carry her toy terri on one arm . be she Mavis Clare ? or 
 some - one send to say that the novelist could not receive we ? I wonder 
 silently , look at she in surprise and something of confusion , - Lucio 
 advance with an odd mingling of humility and appeal in his manner which 
 be new to I . 

 " we must apologise for our intrusion , Miss Clare , " - he say - " but 
 happen to pass your house , we could not resist make an attempt to 
 see you . my name be - - Rimânez " - he hesitate oddly for a second , then 
 go on - " and this be my friend Mr Geoffrey Tempest , the author , - - " 
 the young lady raise her eye to mine with a little smile and courteous 
 bend of her head - " he have , as I daresay you know , become the owner of 
 Willowsmere Court . you will be neighbour , and I hope , friend . in any 
 case if we have commit a breach of etiquette in venture to call 
 upon you without previous introduction , you must try and forgive we ! it 
 be difficult , - to I impossible , - to pass the dwelling of a celebrity 
 without offer homage to the preside genius within . " 

 Mavis Clare , - for it be Mavis Clare , - seem not to have hear the 
 intend compliment . 

 " you be very welcome , " she say simply , advance with a pretty grace , 
 and extend her hand to each of we in turn , " I be quite accustomed to 
 visit from stranger . but I already know Mr Tempest very well by 
 reputation . will not   you sit down ? " 

 she motion we to chair in the lily - deck window - corner , and ring the 
 bell . she maid appear . 

 " Tea , Janet . " 

 this order give , she seat herself near we , still hold her little 
 dog curl up against she like a small ball of silk . I try to 
 converse , but could find nothing suitable to say , - the sight of she 
 fill I with too great a sense of self - reproach and shame . she be 
 such a quiet graceful creature , so slight and dainty , so perfectly 
 unaffected and simple in manner , that as I think of the slaughtering 
 article I have write against her work I feel like a low brute who have 
 be stone a child . and yet , - after all it be her genius I 
 hat , - the force and passion of that mystic quality which wherever it 
 appear , compel the world 's attention , - this be the gift she have that 
 I lack and covet . move by the most conflicting sensation I gaze 
 abstractedly out on the shady old garden , - I hear Lucio converse on 
 trifling matter of society and literature generally , and every now and 
 then her bright laugh ring out like a little peal of bell . soon I feel , 
 rather than see , that she be look steadily at I , - and turn , I 
 meet her eye , - deep dense blue eye , candidly grave and clear . 

 " be this your first visit to Willowsmere Court ? " she ask . 

 " yes , " I answer , make an effort to appear more at my ease - " I buy 
 the place , - on the recommendation of my friend the prince here , - without 
 look at it . " 

 " so I hear , " - she say , still observe I curiously - " and you be 
 satisfied with it ? " 

 " More than satisfied - I be delighted . it exceed all my good 
 expectation . " 

 " Mr Tempest be go to marry the daughter of the former owner of 
 Willowsmere , " - put in Lucio , - " no doubt you have see it announce in 
 the paper ? " 

 " yes ; " - she respond with a slight smile - " I have see it - and I think 
 Mr Tempest be much to be congratulate . Lady Sibyl be very lovely , - I 
 remember she as a beautiful child when I be a child myself - I never 
 speak to she , but I often see she . she must be charm at the prospect 
 of return as a bride to the old home she love so well . " 

 here the servant enter with the tea , and Miss Clare , put down her 
 tiny dog , go to the table to dispense it . I watch her move across 
 the room with a sense of vague wonder and reluctant admiration , - she 
 rather resemble a picture by Greuze in her soft white gown with a pale 
 rise nestle amid the old flemish lace at her throat , - and as she turn 
 her head towards we , the sunlight catch her fair hair and turn it to 
 the similitude of a golden halo circle her brow . she be not a 
 beauty ; but she possess an undoubted individual charm , - a delicate 
 attractiveness , which silently assert itself , as the breath of 
 honeysuckle hide in the tangle of a hedge , will delight the wayfarer 
 with sweet fragrance though the flower be unseen . 

 " your book be very clever , Mr Tempest " - she say suddenly , smile at 
 I - " I read it as soon as it come out . but do you know I think your 
 article be even cleverer ? " 

 I feel myself grow uncomfortably red in the face . 

 " to what article do you allude , Miss Clare ? " I stammer confusedly - " I 
 do not write for any magazine . " 

 " no ? " and she laugh gaily - " but you do on this occasion ! you ' slat ' 
 I very smartly ! - I quite enjoy it . I find out that you be the 
 author of the philippic , - not through the editor of the journal - oh no , 
 poor man ! he be very discreet ; but through quite another person who must 
 be nameless . it be very difficult to prevent I from find out 
 whatever I wish to know , especially in literary matter ! why , you look 
 quite unhappy ! " and her blue eye dance with fun as she hand I my 
 cup of tea - " you really do not   suppose I be hurt by your critique , do 
 you ? dear I , no ! nothing of that kind ever affront I , - I be far too 
 busy to waste any thought on review or reviewer . only your article be 
 so exceptionally funny ! " 

 " funny ? " I echo stupidly , try to smile , but fail in the effort . 

 " yes , funny ! " she repeat - " it be so very angry that it become 
 amusing . my poor ' difference ' ! I be really sorry it put you into such a 
 temper , - temper do exhaust one 's energy so ! " 

 she laugh again and sit down in her former place near I , regard I 
 with a frankly open and half humorous gaze which I find I could not 
 meet with any sort of composure . to say I feel foolish , would 
 inadequately express my sense of utter bafflement . this woman with her 
 young unclouded face , sweet voice and evidently happy nature , be not at 
 all the creature I have imagine she to be , - and I struggle to say 
 something , - anything , - that would furnish a reasonable and coherent 
 answer . I catch Lucio 's glance , - one of satirical amusement , - and my 
 thought grow more entangled than ever . a distraction however occur 
 in the behaviour of the dog Tricksy , who suddenly take up a position 
 immediately opposite Lucio , and lift his nose in air begin to howl 
 with a desolate loudness astonish in so small an animal . his mistress 
 be surprised . 

 " Tricksy , what be the matter ? " she exclaim , catch he up in her 
 arm where he hide his face shiver and moaning ; - then she look 
 steadily at Lucio - " I never know he do such a thing before " - she 
 say - " perhaps you do not like dog , Prince Rimânez ? " 

 " I be afraid they do not like I ! " he reply , deferentially . 

 " then pray excuse I a moment ! " she murmur , and leave the room , to 
 return immediately without her canine favorite . after this I notice 
 that her blue eye often rest on Lucio 's handsome countenance with a 
 bewildered and perplexed expression , as if she see something in his very 
 beauty that she dislike or distrust . meanwhile I have recover a 
 little of my usual self - possession , and I address she in a tone which 
 I mean to be kind , but which I know be somewhat patronizing . 

 " I be very glad , Miss Clare , that you be not offend at the article 
 you speak of . it be rather strong I admit , - but you know we can not all 
 be of the same opinion ... " 

 " indeed no ! " she say quietly and with a slight smile - " such a state of 
 thing would make a very dull world ! I assure you I be not and be not 
 in the least offend - the critique be a smart piece of writing , and 
 make not the slight effect on I or on my book . you remember what 
 Shelley write of critic ? no ? you will find the passage in his preface 
 to ' the Revolt of Islam , ' and it run thus , - ' I have seek to write as 
 I believe that Homer , Shakespeare , and Milton write , with an utter 
 disregard of anonymous censure . I be certain that calumny and 
 misrepresentation , though it may move I to compassion can not disturb my 
 peace . I shall understand the expressive silence of those sagacious 
 enemy who dare not trust themselves to speak . I shall endeavour to 
 extract from the midst of insult and contempt and malediction , those 
 admonition which may tend to correct whatever imperfection such 
 censurer may discern in my appeal to the Public . if certain critic 
 be as clear - sighted as they be malignant , how great would be the 
 benefit to be derive from their virulent writing ! as it be , I fear I 
 shall be malicious enough to be amuse with their paltry trick and lame 
 invective . should the public judge that my composition be worthless , I 
 shall indeed bow before the tribunal from which Milton receive his 
 crown of immortality , and shall seek to gather , if I live , strength from 
 that defeat , which may nerve I to some new enterprise of thought which 
 may not be worthless ! ' " 

 as she give the quotation , her eye darken and deepen , - her face be 
 light up as by some inward illumination , - and I discover the rich 
 sweetness of the voice which make the name of ' Mavis ' suit she so well . 

 " you see I know my Shelley ! " she say with a little laugh at her own 
 emotion - " and those word be particularly familiar to I , because I 
 have have they paint up on a panel in my study . just to remind I , in 
 case I should forget , what the really great genius of the world 
 thought of criticism , - because their example be very encouraging and 
 helpful to a humble little worker like myself . I be not a 
 press - favourite - and I never get good review , - but - " and she laugh 
 again - " I like my reviewer all the same ! if you have finish your tea , 
 will you come and see they ? " 

 come and see they ! what do she mean ? she seem delighted at my visible 
 surprise , and her cheek dimple with merriment . 

 " come and see they ! " she repeat - " they generally expect I at this 
 hour ! " 

 she lead the way into the garden , - we follow , - I , in a bewildered 
 confusion of mind , with all my idea respect ' unsexed female ' and 
 repulsive blue - stocking upset by the unaffected behaviour and charming 
 frankness of this ' celebrity ' whose fame I envy , and whose personality 
 I could not but admire . with all her intellectual gift she be yet a 
 lovable woman , - ah Mavis ! - how lovable and dear I be destine in misery 
 to know ! Mavis , Mavis ! - I whisper your sweet name in my solitude , - I see 
 you in my dream , and kneeling before you I call you Angel ! - my angel at 
 the gate of a lose Paradise , whose Sword of Genius turn every way , 
 keep I back from all approach to my forfeited Tree of Life ! 




 XX 


 Scarcely have we step out on the lawn before an unpleasant incident 
 occur which might have end dangerously . at his mistress 's approach 
 the big St Bernard dog rise from the sunny corner where he have be 
 peacefully doze , and prepare to greet she , - but as soon as he 
 perceive we he stop short with an ominous growl . before Miss Clare 
 could utter a warning word , he make a couple of huge bound and sprang 
 savagely at Lucio as though to tear he in piece , - Lucio with admirable 
 presence of mind catch he firmly by the throat and force he 
 backwards . Mavis turn deathly pale . 

 " let I hold he ! he will obey I ! " she cry , place her little hand 
 on the great dog 's neck - " Down , Emperor ! down ! how dare you ! down sir ! " 

 in a moment ' Emperor ' drop to the ground , and crouch abjectly at 
 her foot , breathe heavily and tremble in every limb . she hold he by 
 the collar , and look up at Lucio who be perfectly compose , though 
 his eye flash dangerously . 

 " I be so very sorry ! " she murmur , - " I forgot , - you tell I dog do not 
 like you . but what a singularly marked antipathy , be it not ? I can not 
 understand it . Emperor be generally so good - nature , - I must apologize 
 for his bad conduct - it be quite unusual . I hope he have not hurt you ? " 

 " not at all ! " return Lucio affably but with a cold smile ; " I hope I 
 have not hurt he , - or distress you ! " 

 she make no reply , but lead the St Bernard away and be absent for a few 
 minute . while she be go , Lucio 's brow cloud , and his face grow 
 very stern . 

 " what do you think of she ? " he ask I abruptly . 

 " I hardly know what to think , " I answer abstractedly - " she be very 
 different to what I imagine . her dog be rather unpleasant company ! " 

 " they be honest animal ! " he say morosely - " they be no doubt 
 accustomed to candour in their mistress , and therefore object to 
 personify lie . " 

 " speak for yourself ! " I say irritably - " they object to you , chiefly . " 

 " be I not fully aware of that ? " he retort - " and do I not speak for 
 myself ? you do not suppose I would call you a personify lie , do 
 you , - even if it be true ! I would not be so uncivil . but I be a living 
 lie , and know it I admit it , which give I a certain claim to 
 honesty above the ordinary run of man . this woman - wearer of laurels be a 
 personify truth ! - imagine it ! - she have no occasion to pretend to be 
 anything else than she be ! no wonder she be famous ! " 

 I say nothing , as just then the subject of our conversation return , 
 tranquil and smile , and do she good , with the tact and grace of a 
 perfect hostess , to make we forget her dog 's ferocious conduct , by 
 escort we through all the prettiest turn and twist path of her 
 garden , which be quite a bower of spring beauty . she talk to we both 
 with equal ease , brightness and cleverness , though I observe that she 
 study Lucio with close interest , and watch his look and movement 
 with more curiosity than like . pass under an arching grove of 
 bud syringas , we presently come to an open court - yard pave with 
 blue and white tile , have in its centre a picturesque dove - cote build 
 in the form of a chinese pagoda . here pausing , Mavis clap her hand . 
 a cloud of dove , white , grey , brown , and opalescent answer the 
 summon , circle round and round her head , and fly down in excited 
 group at her foot . 

 " here be my reviewer ! " she say laugh - " be they not pretty 
 creature ? the one I know well be name after their respective 
 journal , - there be plenty of anonymous one of course , who flock in 
 with the rest . here , for instance , be the ' Saturday Review ' " - and she 
 pick up a strut bird with coral - tint foot , who seem to rather 
 like the attention show to he - " he fight with all his companion and 
 drive they away from the food whenever he can . he be a quarrelsome 
 creature ! " - here she stroke the bird 's head - " you never know how to 
 please he , - he take offence at the corn sometimes and will only eat 
 pea , or vice versa . he quite deserve his name , - go away , old boy ! " 
 and she fling the pigeon in the air and watch it soar up and 
 down - " he be such a comical old grumbler ! there be the ' Speaker ' " - and 
 she point to a fat fussy fantail - " he strut very well , and fancy 
 he be important , you know , but he be not . over there be ' public 
 opinion , ' - that one half - asleep on the wall ; next to he be the 
 ' spectator , ' - you see he have two ring round his eye like spectacle . 
 that brown creature with the fluffy wing all by himself on that 
 flower - pot be the ' Nineteenth Century , ' - the little bird with the green 
 neck be the ' Westminster Gazette , ' and the fat one sit on the 
 platform of the cote be the ' Pall - Mall . ' he know his name very 
 well - see ! " and she call merrily - " Pall Mall ! come boy ! - come here ! " 
 the bird obey at once , and fly down from the cote settle on her 
 shoulder . " there be so many other , - it be difficult to distinguish 
 they sometimes , " - she continue , - " whenever I get a bad review I name a 
 pigeon , - it amuse I . that draggle - tail one with the muddy foot be 
 the ' Sketch , ' - he be not at all a well - breed bird I must tell you ! - that 
 smart - look dove with the purple breast be the ' Graphic , ' and that 
 bland old grey thing be the ' I. L. N. ' short for ' Illustrated London 
 News . ' those three white one be respectively ' Daily Telegraph , ' 
 ' Morning Post , ' and ' Standard . ' now see they all ! " and take a cover 
 basket from a corner she begin to scatter corn and pea and various 
 grain in lavish quantity all over the court . for a moment we could 
 scarcely see the sky , so thickly the bird flock together , struggle , 
 fighting , swoop downward , and soar upwards , - but the wingëd 
 confusion soon give place to something like order when they be all on 
 the ground and busy , select their respective favourite food from the 
 different sort provide for their choice . 

 " you be indeed a sweet - natured philosopher " - say Lucio smile , " if 
 you can symbolize your adverse reviewer by a flock of dove ! " 

 she laugh merrily . 

 " well , it be a remedy against all irritation , " - she return ; " I use to 
 worry a good deal over my work , and wonder why it be that the press 
 people be so unnecessarily hard upon I , when they show so much 
 leniency and encouragement to far bad writer , - but after a little 
 serious consideration , find that critical opinion carry no sort of 
 conviction whatever to the public , I determine to trouble no more about 
 it , - except in the way of dove ! " 

 " in the way of dove , you feed your reviewer , " - I observe . 

 " exactly ! and I suppose I help to feed they even as woman and man ! " she 
 say - " they get something from their editor for ' slash ' my 
 work , - and they probably make a little more out of sell their ' review 
 copy . ' so you see the dove - emblem hold good throughout . but you have 
 not see the ' athenæum , ' - oh , you must see he ! " 

 with laughter still lurk in her blue eye , she take we out of the 
 pigeon - court , and lead the way round to a sequestered and shady corner of 
 the garden , where , in a large aviary - cage fit up for its special 
 convenience , sit a solemn white owl . the instant it perceive we , it 
 become angry , and ruffle up its downy feather , roll its glistening 
 yellow eye vindictively and open its beak . two small owl sit in 
 the background , press close together , - one grey , the other brown . 

 " cross old boy ! " say Mavis , address the spiteful - look creature 
 in the sweetest of accent - " have not   you find any mouse to kill to - day ? 
 oh , what wicked eye ! - what a snappy mouth ! " then turn to we , she 
 go on - " be not   he a lovely owl ? do not   he look wise ? - but as a matter 
 of fact he be just as stupid as ever he can be . that be why I call he 
 the ' athenæum ' ! he look so profound , you would fancy he know everything , 
 but he really think of nothing but kill mouse all the time , - which 
 limit his intelligence considerably ! " 

 Lucio laugh heartily , and so do I , - she look so mischievous and 
 merry . 

 " but there be two other owl in the cage " - I say - " what be their 
 name ? " 

 she hold up a little finger in playful warning . 

 " ah , that would be tell secret ! " she say - " they be all the 
 ' athenæum ' - the holy Three , - a sort of literary Trinity . but why a 
 trinity I do not venture to explain ! - it be a riddle I must leave you to 
 guess ! " 

 she move on , and we follow across a velvety grass - plot border with 
 bright spring - flower , such as crocus , tulip , anemone , and 
 hyacinth , and presently pause she ask - " would you care to see my 
 work - room ? " 

 I find myself agree to this proposition with an almost boyish 
 enthusiasm . Lucio glance at I with a slight half - cynical smile . 

 " Miss Clare , be you go to name a pigeon after Mr Tempest ? " he 
 inquire - " he play the part of an adverse critic , you know - but I 
 doubt whether he will ever do so again ! " 

 she look round at I and smile . 

 " oh , I have be merciful to Mr Tempest , " - she reply ; " he be among the 
 anonymous bird whom I do not specially recognise ! " 

 she step into the arched embrasure of an open window which front 
 the view of the grass and flower , and enter with she we find 
 ourselves in a large room , octagonal in shape , where the first object 
 that attract and rivet the attention be a marble bust of the 
 Pallas Athene whose grave impassive countenance and tranquil brow 
 directly face the sun . a desk strew with paper occupy the left - hand 
 side of the window - nook , - in a corner drape with olive - green velvet , 
 the white presence of the Apollo Belvedere teach in his inscrutable yet 
 radiant smile , the lesson of love and the triumph of fame , - and number 
 of book be about , not range in formal row on shelf as if they 
 be never read , but place on low table and wheeled stand , that they 
 might be easily take up and glance at . the arrangement of the wall 
 chiefly excite my interest and admiration , for these be divide into 
 panel , and every panel have , inscribe upon it in letter of gold , some 
 phrase from the philosopher , or some verse from the poet . the passage 
 from Shelley which Mavis have recently quote to we , occupy , as she have 
 say , one panel , and above it hang a beautiful bas - relief of the drown 
 poet copy from the monument at Via Reggio . another and broad panel 
 hold a fine engraving of Shakespeare , and under the picture appear the 
 line - 

  " to thine own self be true , 
  and it must follow as the night the day , 
  thou canst not then be false to any man . " 

 Byron be represent , - also Keats ; but it would have take more than a 
 day to examine the various suggestive quaintness and individual charm 
 of this ' workshop ' as its owner call it , though the hour be to come 
 when I should know every corner of it by heart , and look upon it as a 
 haunt outlaw of bygone age look upon ' sanctuary . ' but now time give 
 we little pause , - and when we have sufficiently express our pleasure 
 and gratitude for the kindness with which we have be receive , Lucio , 
 glance at his watch , suggest departure . 

 " we could stay on here for an indefinite period Miss Clare , " - he say 
 with an unwonted softness in his dark eye ; " it be a place for peace and 
 happy meditation , - a restful corner for a tired soul . " he check a 
 slight sigh , - then go on - " but train wait for no man , and we be 
 return to town to - night . " 

 " then I will not detain you any long , " say our young hostess , lead 
 the way at once by a side - door , through a passage fill with flower 
 plant , into the drawing - room where she have first entertain we - " I 
 hope , Mr Tempest , " she add , smile at I , - " that now we have meet , you 
 will no long desire to qualify as one of my pigeon ! it be scarcely 
 worth while ! " 

 " Miss Clare , " I say , now speak with unaffected sincerity - " I assure 
 you , on my honour , I be very sorry I write that article against you . if 
 I have only know you as you be - " 

 " oh , that should make no difference to a critic ! " she answer merrily . 

 " it would have make a great difference to I " - I declare ; " you be so 
 unlike the objectionable ' literary woman , ' - " I pause , and she regard 
 I smilingly with her bright clear candid eye , - then I add - " I must 
 tell you that Sibyl , - Lady Sibyl Elton - be one of your most ardent 
 admirer . " 

 " I be very pleased to hear that , " - she say simply - " I be always glad 
 when I succeed in win somebody 's approval and liking . " 

 " do not everyone approve and admire you ? " ask Lucio . 

 " oh no ! by no mean ! the ' Saturday ' say I only win the applause of 
 shop - girl ! " and she laugh - " poor old ' Saturday ' ! - the writer on its 
 staff be so jealous of any successful author . I tell the Prince of 
 Wales what it say the other day , and he be very much amused . " 

 " you know the Prince ? " I ask , in a little surprise . 

 " well , it would be more correct to say that he know I , " she 
 reply - " he have be very amiable in take some little interest in my 
 book . he know a good deal about literature too , - much more than people 
 give he credit for . he have be here more than once , - and have see I 
 feed my reviewer - the pigeon , you know ! he rather enjoy the fun I 
 think ! " 

 and this be all the result of the ' slat ' the press give to Mavis 
 Clare ! simply that she name she dove after her critic , and feed they 
 in the presence of whatever royal or distinguished visitor she might 
 have   and I afterwards learn she have many   amid , no doubt , much 
 laughter from those who see the ' spectator'-pigeon fighting for grain 
 of corn , or the ' Saturday Review ' pigeon quarrel over pea ! 
 evidently no reviewer , spiteful or otherwise , could affect the vivacious 
 nature of such a mischievous elf as she be . 

 " how different you be - how widely different - to the ordinary run of 
 literary people ! " I say involuntarily . 

 " I be glad you find I so , " - she answer - " I hope I be different . as 
 a rule literary people take themselves far too seriously , and attach too 
 much importance to what they do . that be why they become such bore . I 
 do not   believe anyone ever do thoroughly good work who be not perfectly 
 happy over it , and totally indifferent to opinion . I should be quite 
 content to write on , if I only have a garret to live in . I be once very 
 poor , - shockingly poor ; and even now I be not rich , but I have   get just 
 enough to keep I work steadily , which be as it should be . if I have 
 more , I might get lazy and neglect my work , - then you know Satan might 
 step into my life , and it would be a question of idle hand and mischief 
 to follow , accord to the adage . " 

 " I think you would have strength enough to resist Satan , - " say Lucio , 
 look at she stedfastly , with sombre scrutiny in his expressive eye . 

 " oh , I do not   know about that , - I could not be sure of myself ! " and she 
 smile - " I should imagine he must be a dangerously fascinating 
 personage . I never picture he as the possessor of hoof and a 
 tail , - common - sense assure I that no creature present himself under 
 such an aspect would have the slight power to attract . Milton 's 
 conception of Satan be the fine " - and her eye darken swiftly with 
 the intensity of her thought - " a mighty Angel fall ! - one can not but 
 be sorry for such a fall , if the legend be true ! " 

 there be a sudden silence . a bird sing outside , and a little breeze 
 sway the lily in the window to and fro . 

 " good - bye , Mavis Clare ! " say Lucio very softly , almost tenderly . his 
 voice be low and tremulous - his face grave and pale . she look up at 
 he in a little surprise . 

 " good - bye ! " she rejoin , extend her small hand . he hold it a 
 moment , - then , to my secret astonishment , know his aversion to woman , 
 stoop and kiss it . she flush rosily as she withdraw it from his 
 clasp . 

 " be always as you be Mavis Clare ! " - he say gently - " let nothing change 
 you ! keep that bright nature of your , - that unruffled spirit of quiet 
 contentment , and you may wear the bitter laurel of fame as sweetly as a 
 rose ! I have see the world ; I have travel far , and have meet many 
 famous man and woman , - king and queen , senator , poet and 
 philosopher , - my experience have be wide and varied , so that I be not 
 altogether without authority for what I say , - and I assure you that the 
 Satan of whom you be able to speak with compassion , can never trouble 
 the peace of a pure and contented soul . like consort with like , - a 
 fall angel seek the equally fall , - and the devil , - if there be 
 one , - become the companion of those only who take pleasure in his 
 teaching and society . legend say he be afraid of a crucifix , - but if he 
 be afraid of anything I should say it must be of that ' sweet content ' 
 concern which your country 's Shakespeare sing , and which be a well 
 defence against evil than the church or the prayer of the clergy ! I 
 speak as one have the right of age to speak , - I be so many many year 
 old than you ! - - you must forgive I if I have say too much ! " 

 she be quite silent ; evidently move and surprise at his word ; and 
 she gaze at he with a vaguely wonder , half - awed expression , - an 
 expression which change directly I myself advance to make my adieu . 

 " I be very glad to have meet you , Miss Clare , " - I say - " I hope we shall 
 be friend ! " 

 " there be no reason why we should be enemy I think , " she respond 
 frankly - " I be very pleased you come to - day . if ever you want to ' slate ' 
 I again , you know your fate ! - you become a dove , - nothing more ! 
 good - bye ! " 

 she salute we prettily as we pass out , and when the gate have close 
 behind we we hear the deep and joyous baying of the great dog 
 ' Emperor , ' evidently release from ' durance vile ' immediately on our 
 departure . we walk on for some time in silence , and it be not till we 
 have re - enter the ground of Willowsmere , and be make our way to 
 the drive where the carriage which be to take we to the station already 
 await we , that Lucio say - 

 " well ; now , what do you think of she ? " 

 " she be as unlike the accept ideal of the female novelist as she can 
 well be , " I answer , with a laugh . 

 " accepted ideal be generally mistaken one , " - he observe , watch I 
 narrowly - " an accept ideal of divinity in some church picture be an 
 old man 's face set in a triangle . the accept ideal of the devil be a 
 nondescript creature , with horn , hoof   one of they cloven   and a tail , 
 as Miss Clare just now remark . the accept ideal of beauty be the 
 Venus de Medicis , - whereas your Lady Sibyl entirely transcend that much 
 over - rat statue . the accept ideal of a poet be Apollo , - he be a 
 god , - and no poet in the flesh ever approach the god - like ! and the 
 accept ideal of the female novelist , be an elderly , dowdy , spectacled , 
 frowsy fright , - Mavis Clare do not fulfil this description , yet she be 
 the author of ' difference . ' now McWhing , who thrash she continually 
 in all the paper he can command , be elderly , ugly , spectacled and 
 frowsy , - and he be the author of - nothing ! woman - author be invariably 
 suppose to be hideous , - man - author for the most part be hideous . 
 but their hideousness be not note or insist upon , - whereas , no matter 
 how good - look woman - writer may be , they still pass under 
 press - comment as fright , because the fiat of press - opinion consider 
 they ought to be fright , even if they be not . a pretty authoress be an 
 offence , - an incongruity , - a something that neither man nor woman care 
 about . man do not   care about she , because be clever and independent , 
 she do not often care about they , - woman do not   care about she , because 
 she have the effrontery to combine attractive look with intelligence , 
 and she make an awkward rival to those who have only attractive look 
 without intelligence . so wag the world ! - 

  o wild world ! - circle through æon untold , - 
  ' mid fire of sunrise and sunset , - through flash of silver and 
  gold , - 
  Grain of dust in a storm , - atom of sand by the sea , - 
  what be your worth , o world , to the Angels of God and I ! 

 he sing this quite suddenly , his rich baritone peal out musically on 
 the warm silent air . I listen entrance . 

 " what a voice you have ! " I exclaim - " what a glorious gift ! " 

 he smile , and sing on , his dark eye flash - 

  o wild world ! mote in a burn ray 
  Flung from the spherical Heavens million of space away - 
  Sink in the ether or soar ! live with the planet or die ! - 
  what should I care for your fate , who be one with the Infinite Sky ! 

 " what strange song be that ? " I ask , startle and thrill by the 
 passion of his voice - " it seem to mean nothing ! " 

 he laugh , and take my arm . 

 " it do mean nothing ! " he say - " all drawing - room song mean nothing . 
 mine be a drawing - room song - calculate to waken emotional impulse in 
 the unloved spinster religiously incline ! " 

 " nonsense ! " I say , smile . 

 " exactly ! that be what I say . it be nonsense ! " here we come up to the 
 carriage which wait for we - " just twenty minute to catch the train , 
 Geoffrey ! off we go ! " 

 and off we do go , - I watch the red gable roof of Willowsmere Court 
 shin in the late sunshine , till a turn in the road hide they from 
 view . 

 " you like your purchase ? " query Lucio presently . 

 " I do . immensely ! " 

 " and your rival , Mavis Clare ? do you like she ? " 

 I pause a moment , then answer frankly , 

 " yes . I like she . and I will admit something more than that to you now . 
 I like her book . it be a noble work , - worthy of the most highly - gift 
 man . I always like it - and because I like it , I slat it . " 

 " rather a mysterious course of procedure ! " and he smile ; " can you not 
 explain ? " 

 " of course I can explain , " - I say - " Explanation be easy . I envy she 
 power - I envy it still . her popularity cause I a smarting sense of 
 injury , and to relieve it I write that article against she . but I shall 
 never do anything of the kind again . I shall let she grow her laurel in 
 peace . " 

 " Laurels have a habit of grow without any permission , " - observe 
 Lucio significantly - " in all sort of unexpected place too . and they 
 can never be properly cultivate in the force - house of criticism . " 

 " I know that ! " I say quickly , my thought revert to my own book , and 
 all the favourable criticism that have be heap upon it - " I have 
 learn that lesson thoroughly , by heart ! " 

 he look at I fixedly . 

 " it be only one of many you may have yet to learn " - he say - " it be a 
 lesson in fame . your next course of instruction will be in love ! " 

 he smile , - but I be conscious of a certain dread and discomfort as he 
 speak . I think of Sibyl and her incomparable beauty - - Sibyl , who have 
 tell I she could not love , - have we both to learn a lesson ? and should 
 we master it ? - or would it master we ? 




 XXI 


 the preparation for my marriage now go on apace , - shoal of present 
 begin to arrive for Sibyl as well as for myself , and I be introduce to 
 an hitherto undemonstrate phase   as far as I personally be concern 
 of the vulgarity and hypocrisy of fashionable society . everyone know the 
 extent of my wealth , and how little real necessity there be for 
 offer I or my bride - elect costly gift ; nevertheless , all our 
 so - call ' friend ' and acquaintance , strove to outvie each other in 
 the gross cash - value , if not in the good taste , of their various 
 donation . have we be a young couple bravely begin the world on 
 true love , in more or less uncertainty as to our prospect and future 
 income , we should have receive nothing either useful or 
 valuable , - everyone would have try to do the present - giving in as 
 cheap and mean a way as possible . instead of handsome service of solid 
 silver , we should have have a meagre collection of plat teaspoon ; 
 instead of costly edition of book sumptuously enrich with fine steel 
 engraving , we might possibly have have to express our gratitude for a 
 ten - shill Family Bible . of course I fully realize the actual nature 
 and object of the lavish extravagance display on this occasion by our 
 social ' set , ' - their gift be merely so many bribe , send with a 
 purpose which be easy enough to fathom . the donor wish to be invite 
 to the wedding in the first place , - after that , they seek to be 
 include in our visit - list , and foresaw invitation to our dinner 
 and house - party ; - and more than this they calculate on our influence 
 in society , and the possible chance there might be in the dim future of 
 our lending some of they money should press occasion require it . in 
 the scant thankfulness and suppress contempt their adulatory offering 
 excite , Sibyl and I be completely at one . she look upon her array 
 of glitter valuable with the utmost weariness and indifference , and 
 flatter my self - love by assure I that the only thing she care at 
 all for be the riviére of sapphire and diamond I have give she as a 
 betrothal - pledge , together with an engagement - ring of the same lustrous 
 gem . yet I notice she also have a great liking for Lucio 's present , 
 which be a truly magnificent masterpiece of the jeweller 's art . it be 
 a girdle in the form of a serpent , the body entirely compose of the 
 fine emerald , and the head of ruby and diamond . flexible as a 
 reed , when Sibyl put it on , it appear to spring and coil round her 
 waist like a living thing , and breathe with her breathing . I do not 
 much care for it myself as an ornament for a young bride , - it seem to 
 I quite unsuitable , - but as everyone else admire it and envy the 
 possessor of such superb jewel , I say nothing of my own distaste . 
 Diana Chesney have show a certain amount of delicate sentiment and 
 refinement in her offering , - it be a very exquisite marble statue of 
 Psyche , mount on a pedestal of solid silver and ebony . Sibyl thank 
 she , smile coldly . 

 " you have give I an emblem of the Soul , " - she say ; " no doubt you 
 remember I have no soul of my own ! " 

 and her airy laugh have chill poor Diana ' to the marrow , ' as the 
 warm - hearted little american herself , with tear , assure I . 

 at this period I see very little of Rimânez . I be much occupy with my 
 lawyer on the question of ' settlement . ' Messrs Bentham and Ellis 
 rather object to the arrangement by which I give the half of my 
 fortune to my intended wife unconditionally ; but I would brook no 
 interference , and the deed be draw up , sign , seal and witness . 
 the Earl of Elton could not sufficiently praise my ' unexampled 
 generosity ' - my ' noble character ; ' - and walk about , eulogise I 
 everywhere , till he almost turn himself into a public advertisement of 
 the virtue of his future son - in - law . he seem to have take a new 
 lease of life , - he flirt with Diana Chesney openly , - and of his 
 paralysed spouse with the fix stare and deathly grin , he never speak , 
 and , I imagine , never think . Sibyl herself be always in the hand of 
 dressmaker and milliner , - and we only see each other every day for a 
 few minute ' hurried chat . on these occasion she be always 
 charming , - even affectionate ; and yet , - though I be full of passionate 
 admiration and love for she , I feel that she be mine merely as a slave 
 might be mine ; that she give I her lip to kiss as if she consider I 
 have a right to kiss they because I have buy they , and for no other 
 reason , - that her pretty caress be study , and her whole behaviour 
 the result of careful forethought and not natural impulsiveness . I try 
 to shake off this impression , but it still remain persistently , and 
 cloud the sweetness of my brief courtship . 

 meanwhile , slowly and almost imperceptibly , my ' boom ' book drop out 
 of notice . Morgeson present a heavy bill of publishing cost which I 
 pay without a murmur ; now and then an allusion to my ' literary 
 triumph ' crop up in one or other of the newspaper , but otherwise no 
 one speak of my ' famous ' work , and few read it . I enjoy the same sort 
 of cliquey reputation and public failure attend a certain novel 
 entitle ' Marius the Epicurean . ' the journalist with whom I have come in 
 contact begin to drift away like flotsam and jetsam ; I think they see I 
 be not likely to give many more ' review ' dinner or supper , and 
 that my marriage with the Earl of Elton 's daughter would lift I into an 
 atmosphere where Grub - street could not breathe comfortably or stretch 
 its leg at ease . the heap of gold on which I sit as on a throne , 
 divide I gradually from even the back court and low passage 
 lead to the Temple of Fame , - and almost unconsciously to myself I 
 retreat step by step , shade my eye as it be from the sun , and 
 see the glitter turret in the distance , with a woman 's slight 
 figure enter the lofty portico , turn back her laurelled head to 
 smile sorrowfully and with divinest pity upon I , ere pass in to 
 salute the god . yet , if ask about it , everyone on the press would 
 have say that I have have a great success . I - only i - realize the 
 bitterness and truth of my failure . I have not touch the heart of the 
 public ; - I have not succeed in so wake my reader out of the torpor 
 of their dull and commonplace every - day life , that they should turn 
 towards I with outstretched hand , exclaim - " More , - more of these 
 thought which comfort and inspire we ! - which make we hear God 's voice 
 proclaim ' all be well ! ' above the storm of life ! " I have not do 
 it , - I could not do it . and the bad part of my feeling on this point 
 be the idea that possibly I might have do it have I remain poor ! the 
 strong and healthy pulse in the composition of a man , - the 
 necessity for hard work , - have be kill in I . I know I need not work ; 
 that the society in which I now move think it ridiculous if I do 
 work ; that I be expect to spend money and ' enjoy ' myself in the 
 idiotic fashion of what the ' upper ten ' term enjoyment . my acquaintance 
 be not slow in suggest plan for the dissipation of my surplus 
 cash , - why do I not build for myself a marble palace on the 
 Riviera ? - or a yacht to completely outshine the Prince of Wales 's 
 ' Britannia ' ? why do I not start a theatre ? or find a newspaper ? not 
 one of my social adviser once propose my do any private personal 
 good with my fortune . when some terrible case of distress be publish , 
 and subscription be raise to relieve the object or object of 
 suffering , I invariably give Ten Guineas , and allow myself to be 
 thank for my ' generous assistance . ' I might as well have give ten 
 penny , for the guineas be no more to I in comparison than the pence . 
 when fund be start to erect a statue to some great man who have , in 
 the usual way of the world , be a victim of misrepresentation till his 
 death , I produce my Ten Guineas again , when I could easily have 
 defray the whole cost of the memorial , with honour to myself , and be 
 none the poor . with all my wealth I do nothing noteworthy ; I 
 shower no unexpected luck in the way of the patient , struggle 
 worker in the hard school of literature and art ; I give no ' largesse ' 
 among the poor ; - and when a thin , eager - eyed curate , with a strong 
 earnest face call upon I one day , to represent , with much nervous 
 diffidence , the hideous suffering of some of the sick and starve in 
 his district down by the dock , and suggest that I might possibly care 
 to alleviate a few of these direful sorrow as a satisfaction to myself , 
 as well as for the sake of human brotherhood , I be ashamed to say I let 
 he go with a sovereign , for which he heap coal of fire on my head by 
 his simple ' God bless you , and thank you . ' I could see he be himself in 
 the grip of poverty , - I could have make he and his poor district 
 gloriously happy by a few stroke of my pen on a cheque for an amount I 
 should never have miss , - and yet - I give he nothing but that one 
 piece of gold , and so allow he to depart . he invite I , with earnest 
 good - will , to go and see his starve flock , - " for , believe I Mr 
 Tempest , " say he - " I should be sorry if you think , as some of the 
 wealthy be unhappily apt to do , that I seek money simply to apply it to 
 my own personal us . if you would visit the district yourself , and 
 distribute whatever you please with your own hand , it would be 
 infinitely more gratifying to I , and would have a far well effect on 
 the mind of the people . for , sir , the poor will not always be patient 
 under the cruel burden they have to bear . " 

 I smile indulgently , and assure he , not without a touch of satire in 
 my tone , that I be convince all clergyman be honest and 
 unselfish , - and then I send my servant to bow he out with all possible 
 politeness . and that very day I remember , I drink at my luncheon Chateau 
 Yquem at twenty - five shilling a bottle . 

 I enter into these apparently trifle detail because they all help to 
 make up the sum and substance of the deadly consequence to follow , - and 
 also because I wish to emphasize the fact that in my action I only 
 imitate the example of my compeer . Most rich man to - day follow the 
 same course as I do , - and active personal good to the community be 
 work by very few of they . no great deed of generosity illumine our 
 annal . Royalty itself lead no fashion in this , - the royal gift of 
 game and cast - off clothing send to our hospital be too slight and 
 conventional to carry weight . the ' entertainment for the poor ' get up 
 by some of the aristocrat at the East end , be nothing , and less than 
 nothing . they be weak sop to our tame ' lion couchant ' offer in 
 doubtful fear and trembling . for our lion be wakeful and somewhat 
 restive , - there be no knowing what may happen if the original ferocity 
 of the beast be rouse . a few of our over - rich man might considerably 
 ease the load of cruel poverty in many quarter of the metropolis if 
 they unite themselves with a noble unselfishness in the strong and 
 determined effort to do so , and eschew red - tapeism and wordy argument . 
 but they remain inert ; - spend solely on their own personal 
 gratification and amusement , - and meanwhile there be dark sign of 
 trouble brood . the poor , as the lean and anxious curate say , will 
 not always be patient ! 

 I must not here forget to mention , that through some secret management 
 of Rimânez , my name , much to my own surprise , appear on the list of 
 competitor for the Derby . how , at so late an hour , this have be 
 effect , I know no more than where my horse ' phosphor ' come from . it 
 be a superb animal , but Rimânez , whose gift to I it be , warn I to 
 be careful as to the character of the person admit into the stable 
 to view it , and to allow no one but the horse 's own two attendant to 
 linger near it long on any pretext . speculation be very rife as to what 
 ' phosphor 's ' capability really be ; the groom never show he off 
 to advantage during exercise . I be amazed when Lucio tell I his man 
 Amiel would be the jockey . 

 " Good heaven ! - not possible ! " I exclaim . " can he ride ? " 

 " like the very devil ! " - respond my friend with a smile : " he will ride 
 ' phosphor ' to the winning - post . " 

 I be very doubtful in my own mind of this ; a horse of the Prime 
 Minister 's be to run , and all the betting be on that side . few have 
 see ' phosphor , ' and those few , though keen admirer of the animal 's 
 appearance , have little opportunity of judge its actual quality , 
 thank to the careful management of its two attendant , who be 
 dark - face , reticent - look man , somewhat after Amiel 's character and 
 complexion . I myself be quite indifferent as to the result of the 
 contest . I do not really care whether ' phosphor ' lose or win the race . 
 I could afford to lose ; and it would be little to I if I win , save a 
 momentary pass triumph . there be nothing last , intellectual or 
 honourable in the victory , - there be nothing last , intellectual or 
 honourable in anything connect with racing . however , because it be 
 ' fashionable ' to be interested in this particular mode of waste time 
 and money , I follow the general ' lead , ' for the sake of ' be 
 talk about , ' and nothing more . meanwhile , Lucio , say little to I 
 concern it , be busy plan the betrothal - fête at Willowsmere , and 
 design all sort of ' surprise ' entertainment for the guest . eight 
 hundred invitation be send out ; and society soon begin to chatter 
 volubly and excitedly on the probable magnificence of the forthcoming 
 festival . Eager acceptance pour in ; only a few of those ask be 
 hinder from attend by illness , family death or previous 
 engagement , and among these latter , to my regret , be Mavis Clare . she 
 be go to the sea - coast to stay with some old friend , and in a 
 prettily - word letter explain this , and express she thank for my 
 invitation , though she find herself unable to accept it . how curious it 
 be that when I read she little note of refusal I should experience such 
 a keen sense of disappointment ! she be nothing to I , - nothing but a 
 ' literary ' woman who , by strange chance , happen to be sweet than 
 most woman un literary ; and yet I feel that the fête at Willowsmere 
 would lose something in brightness lack her presence . I have want to 
 introduce she to Sibyl , as I know I should thus give a special pleasure 
 to my betrothed , - however , it be not to be , and I be conscious of an 
 inexplicable personal vexation . in strict accordance with the promise 
 make , I let Rimânez have his own way entirely with regard to all the 
 arrangement for what be to be the ne plus ultra of everything ever 
 design for the distraction , amusement and wonderment of listless and 
 fastidious ' swagger ' people , and I neither interfere , nor ask any 
 question , content to rely on my friend 's taste , imagination and 
 ingenuity . I only understand that all the plan be be carry out 
 by foreign artist and caterer , - and that no english firm would be 
 employ . I do venture once to inquire the reason of this , and get one 
 of Lucio 's own enigmatical reply : - 

 " nothing English be good enough for the English , " - he say - " thing have 
 to be import from France to please the people whom the French 
 themselves angrily designate as ' perfide Albion . ' you must not have a 
 ' Bill of Fare ' ; you must have a ' Menu ' ; and all your dish must bear 
 french title , otherwise they will not be in good form . you must have 
 French ' comedienne ' and ' danseuse ' to please the british taste , and 
 your silken drapery must be weave on French loom . lately too , it have 
 be deem necessary to import parisian morality as well as parisian 
 fashion . it do not suit stalwart Great Britain at all , you 
 know , - stalwart Great Britain , ape the manner of Paris , look like a 
 jolly open - faced , sturdy - limbe Giant , with a doll 's bonnet stick on his 
 leonine head . but the doll 's bonnet be just now la mode . some day I 
 believe the Giant will discover it look ridiculous , and cast it off 
 with a burst of genuine laughter at his own temporary folly . and without 
 it , he will resume his original dignity ; - the dignity that well become 
 a privileged conqueror who have the sea for his standing - army . " 

 " evidently you like England ! " I say smile . 

 he laugh . 

 " not in the very least ! I do not like England any more than any other 
 country on the globe . I do not like the globe itself ; and England come 
 in for a share of my aversion as one of the spot on the trumpery ball . 
 if I could have my way , I should like to throne myself on a convenient 
 star for the purpose and kick out at Earth as she whirl by in space , 
 hop by that act of just violence to do away with she for ever ! " 

 " but why ? " I ask , amuse - " why do you hate the Earth ? what have the 
 poor little planet do to merit your abhorrence ? " 

 he look at I very strangely . 

 " shall I tell you ? you will never believe I ! " 

 " no matter for that ! " I answer smile - " say on ! " 

 " what have the poor little planet do ? " he repeat slowly - " the poor 
 little planet have do - nothing . but it be what the god have do with 
 this same poor little planet , that awaken my anger and scorn . they have 
 make it a live sphere of wonder , - endow it with beauty borrow 
 from the fair corner of high Heaven , - deck it with flower and 
 foliage , - teach it music , - the music of bird and torrent and roll 
 wave and fall rain , - rock it gently in clear ether , among such 
 light as blind the eye of mortal , - guide it out of chaos , through 
 cloud of thunder and barbëd shaft of lightning , to circle peacefully 
 in its appoint orbit , light on the one hand by the vivid splendour of 
 the sun , and on the other by the sleepy radiance of the moon ; - and more 
 than all this , they have invest it with a Divine Soul in man ! oh , you 
 may disbelieve as you will , - but notwithstanding the pigmy peep earth 
 take at the vast and eternal ocean of Science , the Soul be here , and 
 all the immortal force with it and around it ! Nay , the god - I speak in 
 the plural , after the fashion of the ancient Greeks - for to my thinking 
 there be many god emanate from the Supreme Deity , - the god , I say , 
 have so insist on this fact , that one of they have walk the earth in 
 human guise , solely for the sake of emphasize the truth of immortality 
 to these frail creature of seemingly perishable clay ! for this I hate 
 the planet ; - be there not , and be there not , other and far grander 
 world that a God should have choose to dwell on than this one ! " 

 for a moment I be silent , out of sheer surprise . 

 " you amaze I ! " I say at last - " you allude to Christ , I suppose ; but 
 everybody be convince by this time that he be a mere man like the rest 
 of we ; there be nothing divine about he . what a contradiction you be ! 
 why , I remember you indignantly deny the accusation of be a 
 Christian . " 

 " of course , - and I deny it still " - he answer quickly - " I have not a 
 fat living in the church that I should tell a lie on such a subject . I 
 be not a Christian ; nor be anyone live a Christian . to quote a very 
 old saying ' there never be a christian save one , and he be crucify . ' 
 but though I be not a Christian I never say I doubt the existence of 
 Christ . that knowledge be force upon I , - with considerable pressure 
 too ! " 

 " by a reliable authority ? " I inquire with a slight sneer . 

 he make no immediate reply . his flash eye look , as it be , 
 through I and beyond I at something far away . the curious pallor that 
 at time give his face the set look of an impenetrable mask , come upon 
 he then , and he smile , - an awful smile . so might a man smile out of 
 deadly bravado , when tell of some dim and dreadful torture await he . 

 " you touch I on a sore point , " - he say at last , slowly , and in a harsh 
 tone - " my conviction respect certain religious phase of man 's 
 development and progress , be found on the arduous study of some very 
 unpleasant truth to which humanity generally shut its eye , bury 
 its head in the desert - sand of its own delusion . these truth I will 
 not enter upon now . some other time I will initiate you into a few of my 
 mystery . " 

 the tortured smile pass from his face , leave it intellectually 
 composed and calm as usual , - and I hastily change the subject , for I 
 have make up my mind by this time that my brilliant friend have , like many 
 exceptionally gifted person , a ' craze ' on one topic , and that topic a 
 particularly difficult one to discuss as it touch on the superhuman 
 and therefore   to my thinking   the impossible . my own temperament , which 
 have , in the day of my poverty , fluctuate between spiritual strive 
 and material gain , have , with my sudden access to fortune , rapidly 
 harden into the character of a man of the world worldly , for whom all 
 speculation as to the unseen force work in and around we , be the 
 mere folly , not worth a moment 's waste of thought . I should have 
 laugh to scorn anyone who have then presume to talk to I about the 
 law of Eternal Justice , which with individual as well as nation , 
 work , not for a pass ' phase , ' but for all time towards good , and not 
 evil , - for no matter how much a man may strive to blind himself to the 
 fact , he have a portion of the Divine within he , which if he wilfully 
 corrupt by his own wickedness , he must be force to cleanse again and 
 yet again , in the fierce flame of such remorse and such despair as be 
 rightly term the quenchless fire of Hell ! 




 XXII 


 on the afternoon of the twenty - first of May , I go down , accompany by 
 Lucio , to Willowsmere , to be in readiness for the reception of the 
 social swarm who be to flock thither the next day . Amiel go with 
 we , - but I leave my own man , Morris , behind , to take charge of my room 
 in the Grand , and to forward late telegram and special message . the 
 weather be calm , warm and bright , - and a young moon show her thin 
 crescent in the sky as we get out at the country station and step 
 into the open carriage await we . the station - official greet we 
 with servile humility , eye Lucio especially with an almost gap air 
 of wonderment ; the fact of his lavish expenditure in arrange with the 
 railway company a service of special train for the use of the morrow 's 
 guest , have no doubt excite they to a speechless extent of admiration 
 as well as astonishment . when we approach Willowsmere , and enter the 
 beautiful drive , border with oak and beech , which lead up to the house , 
 I utter an exclamation of delight at the festal decoration display , 
 for the whole avenue be span with arch of flag and flower , 
 garland of blossom be even swing from tree to tree , and interlace 
 many of the low branch . the gable porch at the entrance of the 
 house be drape with crimson silk and festoon with white rose , - and 
 as we alight , the door be fling open by a smart page in brilliant 
 scarlet and gold . 

 " I think , " say Lucio to I as we enter - " you will find everything as 
 complete as this world 's resource will allow . the retinue of servant 
 here be what be vulgarly call ' on the job ' ; their payment be agree 
 upon , and they know their duty thoroughly , - they will give you no 
 trouble . " 

 I could scarcely find word to express my unbounded satisfaction , or to 
 thank he for the admirable taste with which the beautiful house have 
 be adorn . I wander about in an ecstasy of admiration , triumphing 
 in such a visible and gorgeous display of what great wealth could really 
 do . the ball - room have be transform into an elegant bijou theatre , 
 the stage be conceal by a curtain of thick gold - colour silk on 
 which the oft - quote line of Shakespeare be embroider in raise 
 letter , - 

  " all the world 's a stage , 
  and all the man and woman merely player . " 

 turn out of this into the drawing - room , I find it decorate entirely 
 round with bank of rose , red and white , the flower form a huge 
 pyramid at one end of the apartment , behind which , as Lucio inform I , 
 unseen musician would discourse sweet harmony . 

 " I have arrange for a few ' tableaux vivant ' in the theatre to fill up 
 a gap of time ; " - he say carelessly - " fashionable folk now - a - day get 
 so soon tired of one amusement that it be necessary to provide several 
 in order to distract the brain that can not think , or discover any mean 
 of entertainment in themselves . as a matter of fact , people can not even 
 converse long together because they have nothing to say . oh , do not 
 bother to go out in the ground on a tour of inspection just now , - leave 
 a few surprise for yourself as well as for your company to - morrow . come 
 and have dinner ! " 

 he put his arm through mine and we enter the dining - room . here the 
 table be lay out with costly fruit , flower and delicacy of every 
 description , - four man - servant in scarlet and gold stand silently in 
 wait , with Amiel , in black as usual , behind his master 's chair . we 
 enjoy a sumptuous repast serve to perfection , and when it be 
 finish , we stroll out in the ground to smoke and talk . 

 " you seem to do everything by magic , Lucio ; " - I say , look at he 
 wonderingly - " all these lavish decoration , - these servant - " 

 " money , my dear fellow , - nothing but money " - he interrupt with a 
 laugh - " Money , the devil 's pass - key ! you can have the retinue of a king 
 without any of a king 's responsibility , if you only choose to pay for 
 it . it be merely a question of cost . " 

 " and taste ! " I remind he . 

 " true , - and taste . some rich man there be who have less taste than a 
 costermonger . I know one who have the egregious vulgarity to call the 
 attention of his guest to the value of his good and chattel . he 
 point out for my admiration one day , an antique and hideous china 
 plate , the only one of that kind in the world , and tell I it be worth 
 a thousand guineas . ' break it , ' - I say coolly - ' you will then have the 
 satisfaction of know you have destroy a thousand guineas ' worth of 
 undesirable ugliness . ' you should have see his face ! he show I no 
 more curio ! " 

 I laugh , and we walk slowly up and down for a few minute in 
 silence . presently I become aware that my companion be look at I 
 intently , and I turn my head quickly to meet his eye . he smile . 

 " I be just then think , " he say , " what you would have do with your 
 life if you have not inherit this fortune , and if , - if I have not come 
 your way ? " 

 " I should have starve , no doubt , " - I respond - " die like a rat in a 
 hole , - of want and wretchedness . " 

 " I rather doubt that ; " he say meditatively - " it be just possible you 
 might have become a great writer . " 

 " why do you say that now ? " I ask . 

 " because I have be read your book . there be fine idea in 
 it , - idea that might , have they be the result of sincere conviction , 
 have reach the public in time , because they be sane and healthy . the 
 public will never put up for long with corrupt ' fad ' and artificial 
 ' craze . ' now you write of God , - yet accord to your own statement , 
 you do not believe in God even when you write the word that imply his 
 existence , - and that be long before I meet you . therefore the book be 
 not the result of sincere conviction , and that be the key - note of your 
 failure to reach the large audience you desire . each reader can see you 
 do not believe what you write , - the trumpet of last fame never sound 
 triumph for an author of that calibre . " 

 " do not   let we talk about it for Heaven 's sake ! " I say irritably - " I 
 know my work lack something , - and that something may be what you say or 
 it may not , - I do not want to think about it . let it perish , as it 
 assuredly will ; perhaps in the future I may do well . " 

 he be silent , - and finish his cigar , throw the end away in the grass 
 where it burn like a dull red coal . 

 " I must turn in , " he then observe , - " I have a few more direction to 
 give to the servant for to - morrow . I shall go to my room as soon as I 
 have do , - so I will say good - night . " 

 " but surely you be take too much personal trouble , " - I say - " can not   I 
 help in any way ? " 

 " no , you can not , " - he answer smile . " when I undertake to do anything 
 I like to do it in my own fashion , or not at all . sleep well , and rise 
 early . " 

 he nod , and saunter slowly away over the dewy grass . I watch his 
 dark tall figure recede till he have enter the house ; then , light 
 a fresh cigar , I wander on alone through the ground , note here and 
 there flowery arbour and dainty silk pavilion erect in picturesque 
 nook and corner for the morrow . I look up at the sky ; it be clear 
 and bright , - there would be no rain . presently I open the wicket - gate 
 that lead into the outer by - road , and walk on slowly , almost 
 unconsciously , I find myself in a few minute opposite ' Lily Cottage . ' 
 approach the gate I look in , - the pretty old house be dark , silent 
 and desert . I know Mavis Clare be away , - and it be not strange that 
 the aspect of her home - nest emphasize the fact of her absence . a 
 cluster of climb rose hang from the wall , look as if they be 
 listen for the first sound of her return footstep ; across the 
 green breadth of the lawn where I have see she play with her dog , a 
 tall sheaf of St John 's lily stand up white against the sky , their 
 pure heart open to the star - light and the breeze . the scent of 
 honey - suckle and sweet - briar fill the air with delicate 
 suggestion , - and as I lean over the low fence , gaze vaguely at the 
 long shadow of the tree on the grass , a nightingale begin to sing . the 
 sweet yet dolorous warble of the ' little brown lover of the moon , ' 
 palpitate on the silence in silver - toned drop of melody ; and I 
 listen , till my eye smart with a sudden moisture as of tear . 
 strangely enough , I never think of my betrothed bride Sibyl then , as 
 surely , by all the precedent of passion , I should have do at such a 
 moment of dreamful ecstasy . it be another woman 's face that float 
 before my memory ; - a face not beautiful , - but merely sweet , - and make 
 radiant by the light of two tender , wistful , wonderfully innocent 
 eye , - a face like that of some new Daphne with the mystic laurel 
 spring from her brow . the nightingale sing on and on , - the tall 
 lily sway in the faint wind as though nod wise approval of the 
 bird 's wild music , - and , gather one briar - rise from the hedge , I 
 turn away with a curious heaviness at my heart , - a trouble I could not 
 analyse or account for . I explain my feeling partly to myself as one 
 of regret that I have ever take up my pen to assault , with sneer and 
 flippant jest , the gentle and brilliantly endow owner of this little 
 home where peace and pure content dwelt happily in student - like 
 seclusion ; - but this be not all . there be something else in my 
 mind , - something inexplicable and sad , - which then I have no skill to 
 define . I know now what it be , - but the knowledge come too late ! 

 return to my own domain , I see through the tree a vivid red light 
 in one of the upper window of Willowsmere . it twinkle like a lurid 
 star , and I guide my step by its brilliancy as I make my way across 
 the wind garden - path and terrace back to the house . enter the 
 hall , the page in scarlet and gold meet I , and with a respectful 
 obeisance , escort I to my room where Amiel be in wait . 

 " have the prince retire ? " I ask he . 

 " yes , sir . " 

 " he have a red lamp in his window have he not ? " 

 Amiel look deferentially meditative . yet I fancy I see he smile . 

 " I think - - yes , - I believe he have , sir . " 

 I ask no more question , but allow he to perform his duty as 
 valet in silence . 

 " good - night sir ! " he say at last , his ferret eye fasten upon I with 
 an expressionless look . 

 " good - night ! " I respond indifferently . 

 he leave the room with his usual cat - like stealthy tread , and when he have 
 go , I , - move by a sudden fresh impulse of hatred for he , - spring to 
 the door and lock it . then I listen , with an odd nervous 
 breathlessness . there be not a sound . for fully quarter of an hour I 
 remain with my attention more or less strained , expectant of I know 
 not what ; but the quiet of the house be absolutely undisturbed . with a 
 sigh of relief I fling myself on the luxurious bed , - a couch fit for a 
 king , drape with the rich satin elaborately embroider , - and 
 fall soundly asleep I dream that I be poor again . poor , - but 
 unspeakably happy , - and hard at work in the old lodging , write down 
 thought which I know , by some divine intuition and beyond all doubt , 
 would bring I the whole world 's honour . again I hear the sound of the 
 violin play by my unseen neighbour next door , and this time they be 
 triumphal chord and cadence of joy , without one throb of sorrow . and 
 while I write on in an ecstasy of inspiration , oblivious of poverty and 
 pain , I hear , echo through my vision , the round warble of the 
 nightingale , and see , in the far distance , an angel float towards I 
 on pinion of light , with the face of Mavis Clare . 




 XXIII 


 the morning break clear , with all the pure tint of a fine opal 
 radiating in the cloudless sky . never have I beheld such a fair scene as 
 the wood and garden of Willowsmere when I look upon they that day 
 illumine by the unclouded sunlight of a spring half - melt into 
 summer . my heart swell with pride as I survey the beautiful domain I 
 now own , - and think how happy a home it would make when Sibyl , 
 matchless in her loveliness , share with I its charm and luxury . 

 " yes , " - I say half - aloud - " say what philosopher will , the possession 
 of money do insure satisfaction and power . it be all very well to 
 talk about fame , but what be fame worth , if , like Carlyle , one be 
 too poor to enjoy it ! besides , literature no long hold its former 
 high prestige , - there be too many in the field , - too many 
 newspaper - scribbler , all believe they be genius , - too many 
 ill - educate lady - paragraphist and ' new ' woman , who think they be as 
 gift as Georges Sand or Mavis Clare . with Sibyl and Willowsmere , I 
 ought to be able to resign the idea of fame - literary fame - with a good 
 grace . " 

 I know I reason falsely with myself , - I know that my hankering for a 
 place among the truly great of the world , be as strong as ever , - I know 
 I crave for the intellectual distinction , force , and pride which make 
 the Thinker a terror and a power in the land , and which so sever a great 
 poet or great romancist from the commoner throng that even king be 
 glad to do he or her honour , - but I would not allow my thought to 
 dwell on this rapidly vanish point of unattainable desire . I settle 
 my mind to enjoy the luscious flavour of the immediate present , as a bee 
 settle in the cup of honey - flower , - and , leave my bedroom , I go 
 downstairs to breakfast with Lucio in the good and gay of humour . 

 " not a cloud on the day ! " he say , meet I with a smile , as I enter 
 the bright morning - room , whose window open on the lawn - " the fête 
 will be a brilliant success , Geoffrey . " 

 " thank to you ! " I answer - " personally I be quite in the dark as to 
 your plan , - but I believe you can do nothing that be not well do . " 

 " you honour I ! " he say with a light laugh - " you credit I then with 
 well quality than the creator ! for what he do , in the opinion of 
 the present generation , be exceedingly ill do ! man have take to 
 grumble at he instead of praise he , - and few have any patience 
 with or like for his law . " 

 I laugh . " well , you must admit those law be very arbitrary ! " 

 " they be . I entirely acknowledge the fact ! " 

 we sit down to table , and be wait upon by admirably - train servant 
 who apparently have no idea of anything else but attendance on our need . 
 there be no trace of bustle or excitement in the household , - no sign 
 whatever to denote that a great entertainment be about to take place 
 that day . it be not until the close of our meal that I ask Lucio what 
 time the musician would arrive . he glance at his watch . 

 " about noon I should say , " - he reply - " perhaps before . but whatever 
 their hour , they will all be in their place at the proper moment , 
 depend upon it . the people I employ - both musician and ' artiste ' - know 
 their business thoroughly , and be aware that I stand no nonsense . " a 
 rather sinister smile play round his mouth as he regard I . " none of 
 your guest can arrive here till one o'clock , - as that be about the 
 time the special train will bring the first batch of they from 
 London , - and the first ' déjeuner ' will be serve in the garden at two . 
 if you want to amuse yourself there be a Maypole be put up on the 
 large lawn , - you would well go and look at it . " 

 " A Maypole ! " I exclaim - " now that be a good idea ! " 

 " it use to be a good idea , " - he answer - " when english lad and lass 
 have youth , innocence , health and fun in their composition , a dance round 
 the Maypole hand in hand , do they good and do nobody harm . but now 
 there be no lad and lass , - enervate old man and woman in their 
 teen walk the world wearily , speculate on the us of life , - probe 
 vice , and sneer down sentiment , and such innocent diversion as the 
 Maypole no long appeal to our jade youth . so we have to get 
 ' professional ' to execute the May - revel , - of course the dancing be 
 well do by properly train leg ; but it mean nothing , and be 
 nothing , except a pretty spectacle . " 

 " and be the dancer here ? " I ask , rise and go towards the window 
 in some curiosity . 

 " no , not yet . but the May - pole be ; - fully decorate . it face the wood 
 at the back of the house , - go and see if you like it . " 

 I follow his suggestion , and go in the direction indicate , I soon 
 perceive the gaily - deck object which use to be the welcome signal of 
 many a village holiday in Shakespeare 's old - world England . the pole be 
 already set up and fix in a deep socket in the ground , and a dozen or 
 more man be at work , unbind its numerous trail of blossom and 
 garland of green , tie with long streamer of vari - colour ribbon . it 
 have a picturesque effect in the centre of the wide lawn border with 
 grand old tree , - and approach one of the man , I say something to 
 he by way of approval and admiration . he glance at I furtively and 
 unsmilingly , but say nothing , - and I conclude from his dark and 
 foreign cast of feature , that he do not understand the English 
 language . I note , with some wonder and slight vexation that all the 
 workman be of this same alien and sinister type of countenance , very 
 much after the unattractive model of Amiel and the two groom who have 
 my racer ' phosphor ' in charge . but I remember what Lucio have tell 
 I , - namely , that all the design for the fête be carry out by 
 foreign expert and artist , - and after some puzzled consideration , I 
 let the matter pass from my mind . 

 the morning hour fly swiftly by , and I have little time to examine all 
 the festal preparation with which the garden abound , - so that I be 
 almost as ignorant of what be in store for the amusement of my guest 
 as the guest themselves . I have the curiosity to wait about and watch 
 for the coming of the musician and dancer , but I might as well have 
 spar myself this waste of time and trouble , for I never see they 
 arrive at all . at one o'clock , both Lucio and I be ready to receive 
 our company , - and at about twenty minute past the hour , the first 
 instalment of ' swagger society ' be empty into the ground . Sibyl and 
 her father be among these , - and I eagerly advance to meet and greet 
 my bride - elect as she alight from the carriage that have bring she 
 from the station . she look supremely beautiful that day , and be , as 
 she deserve to be , the cynosure of all eye . I kiss she little gloved 
 hand with a deep reverence than I would have kiss the hand of a 
 queen . 

 " welcome back to your old home , my Sibyl ! " I say to she in a low voice 
 tenderly , at which word she pause , look up at the red gable of the 
 house with such wistful affection as fill her eye with something like 
 tear . she leave her hand in mine , and allow I to lead she towards the 
 silken - drape , flower - deck porch , where Lucio wait , smile , - and as 
 she advance , two tiny page in pure white and silver glide suddenly 
 out of some unseen hiding - place , and empty two basket of pink and 
 white rose - leaf at her foot , thus strew a fragrant pathway for she 
 into the house . they vanish as completely and swiftly as they have 
 appear , - some of the guest utter murmur of admiration , while 
 Sibyl gaze about she , blush with surprise and pleasure . 

 " how charming of you , Geoffrey ! " she say , " what a poet you be to 
 devise so pretty a greeting ! " 

 " I wish I deserve your praise ! " I answer , smile at she - " but the 
 poet in question be Prince Rimânez , - he be the master and ruler of 
 to - day 's revel . " 

 again the rich colour flush her cheek , and she give Lucio her hand . 
 he bow over it in courtly fashion , - but do not kiss it as he have 
 kiss the hand of Mavis Clare . we pass into the house , through the 
 drawing - room , and out again into the garden , Lord Elton be loud in 
 his praise of the artistic manner in which his former dwelling have be 
 improve and embellish . soon the lawn be sprinkle with gaily attire 
 group of people , - and my duty as host begin in hard earnest . I have to 
 be greet , complimented , flattered , and congratulate on my approach 
 marriage by score of hypocrite who nearly shake my hand off in their 
 enthusiasm for my wealth . have I become suddenly poor , I think grimly , 
 not one of they would have lend I a sovereign ! the guest keep on 
 arrive in shoal , and when there be about three or four hundred 
 assemble , a burst of exquisite music sound , and a procession of page 
 in scarlet and gold , march two by two appear , carry tray full 
 of the rare flower tie up in bouquet , which they offer to 
 all the lady present . exclamation of delight arise on every 
 side , - exclamation which be for the most part high - pitch and 
 noisy , - for the ' swagger set ' have long cease to cultivate softness of 
 voice or refinement of accent , - and once or twice the detestable slang 
 word , ' rip ' escape from the lip of a few dash dame , repute to 
 be ' leader ' of style . Repose of manner , dignity and elegance of 
 deportment , however , be no long to be discover among the present 
 ' race ' duchess and gambling countess of the blue blue blood of 
 England , so one do not expect these grace of distinction from they . 
 the louder they can talk , and the more slang they can adopt from the 
 language of their groom and stable - boy , the more be they judge to be 
 ' in the swim ' and ' up to date . ' I speak , of course , of the modern scion 
 of aristocracy . there be a few truly ' great lady ' left , whose maxim 
 be still ' noblesse oblige , ' - but they be quite in the minority and by 
 the young generation be vote either ' old cat ' or ' bore . ' many of 
 the ' cultured ' mob that now swarm over my ground have come out of the 
 sheer vulgar curiosity to see what ' the man with five million ' could 
 do in the way of entertaining , - other be anxious to get news , if 
 possible , of the chance of ' phosphor ' win the Derby , concern 
 which I be discreetly silent . but the bulk of the crowd wander 
 aimlessly about , star impertinently or enviously at each other , and 
 scarcely look at the natural loveliness of the garden or the 
 woodland scenery around they . the brainlessness of modern society be 
 never so flagrantly manifest as at a garden - party , where the restless 
 trousere and petticoate biped move vaguely to and fro , scarcely 
 stop to talk civilly or intelligently to one another for five 
 minute , most of they hover dubiously and awkwardly between the 
 refreshment - pavilion and the band - stand . in my domain they be deprive 
 of this latter harbour of refuge , for no musician could be see , though 
 music be hear , - beautiful wild music which come first from one part of 
 the ground and then from another , and to which few listen with any 
 attention . all be , however , happily unanimous in their enthusiastic 
 appreciation of the excellence of the food provide for they in the 
 luxurious luncheon tent of which there be twenty in number . man eat 
 as if they have never eat in their life before , and drink the choice 
 and exquisite wine with equal greed and gusto . one never entirely 
 realise the extent to which human gourmandism can go till one know a 
 few peer , bishop and cabinet - minister , and watch those dignitary 
 feed ad libitum . soon the company be so complete that there be no 
 long any need for I to perform the fatiguing duty of ' receive ' ; and 
 I therefore take Sibyl in to luncheon , determine to devote myself to 
 she for the rest of the day . she be in one of she bright and most 
 captivate mood , - her laughter ring out as sweetly joyous as that of 
 some happy child , - she be even kind to Diana Chesney , who be also one 
 of my guest , and who be plainly enjoy herself with all the verve 
 peculiar to pretty american woman , who consider flirtation as much of a 
 game as tennis . the scene be now one of great brilliancy , the light 
 costume of the woman contrast well with the scarlet and gold 
 livery of the seemingly innumerable servant that be now everywhere 
 in active attendance . and , constantly through the flutter festive 
 crowd , from tent to tent , from table to table , and group to group , Lucio 
 move , - his tall stately figure and handsome face always conspicuous 
 wherever he stand , his rich voice thrill the air whenever he speak . 
 his influence be irresistible , and gradually dominate the whole 
 assemblage , - he rouse the dull , inspire the witty , encourage the 
 timid , and bring all the conflict element of rival position , 
 character and opinion into one uniform whole , which be unconsciously 
 lead by his will as easily as a multitude be lead by a convincing orator . 
 I do not know it then , but I know now , that metaphorically speak , he 
 have his foot on the neck of that ' society ' mob , as though it be one 
 prostrate man ; - that the sycophant , liar and hypocrite whose utmost 
 idea of good be wealth and luxurious living , bent to his secret power as 
 reed bend to the wind , - and that he do with they all whatsoever he 
 choose , - as he do to this very day ! God ! - if the grinning , guzzle 
 sensual fool have only know what horror be about they at the 
 feast ! - what ghastly minister to pleasurable appetite wait obediently 
 upon they ! - what pallid terror lurk behind the gorgeous show of 
 vanity and pride ! but the veil be mercifully down , - and only to I have 
 it since be lift ! 

 Luncheon over , the singing of mirthful voice , tune to a kind of 
 village roundelay , attract the company , now feed to repletion , towards 
 the lawn at the back of the house , and cry of delight be raise as 
 the Maypole come into view , I myself join in the universal applause , 
 for I have not expect to see anything half so picturesque and pretty . 
 the pole be surround by a double ring of small child , - child so 
 beautiful in face and dainty in form , that they might very well have 
 be take for little fairy from some enchant woodland . the boy 
 be clothe as tiny forester , in doublet of green , with pink cap on 
 their curly lock , - the girl be in white , with their hair flow 
 loosely over their shoulder , and wreath of May - blossom crown their 
 brow . as soon as the guest appear on the scene , these exquisite 
 little creature commence their dance , each one take a trail of 
 blossom or a ribbon pendant from the May - pole , and weave it with the 
 other into no end of beautiful and fantastic design . I look on , as 
 amazed and fascinate as anyone present , at the wonderful lightness and 
 ease with which these child trip and run ; - their tiny twinkling 
 foot seem scarcely to touch the turf , - their face be so 
 lovely , - their eye so bright , that it be a positive enchantment to 
 watch they . each figure they execute be more intricate and effective 
 than the last , and the plaudit of the spectator grow more and more 
 enthusiastic , till presently come the finale , in which all the little 
 green forester climb up the pole and clung there , pelt the 
 white - rob maiden below with cowslip - ball , knot of rose , bunch of 
 violet , posy of buttercup , daisy and clover , which the 
 girl - child in their turn laughingly throw among the admire guest . 
 the air grow thick with flower , and heavy with perfume , and resound 
 with song and laughter ; - and Sibyl , stand at my side , clap she 
 hand in an ecstasy . 

 " oh , it be lovely - lovely ! " she cry - " be this the prince 's idea ? " then 
 as I answer in the affirmative , she add , " where , I wonder , do he 
 find such exquisitely pretty little child ! " 

 as she speak , Lucio himself advance a step or two in front of the other 
 spectator and make a slight peremptory sign . the fairy - like forester 
 and maiden , with extraordinary activity , all spring away from the 
 May - pole , pull down the garland with they , and wind the flower 
 and ribbon about themselves so that they look as if they be all 
 tie together in one inextricable knot , - this do , they start off at 
 a rapid run , present the appearance of a roll ball of blossom , 
 merry pipe - music accompany their footstep , till they have entirely 
 disappear among the tree . 

 " oh do call they back again ! " entreat Sibyl , lay her hand coaxingly 
 on Lucio 's arm , - " I should so like to speak to two or three of the 
 prettiest ! " 

 he look down at she with an enigmatical smile . 

 " you would do they too much honour , Lady Sibyl , " he reply - " they be 
 not accustomed to such condescension from great lady and would not 
 appreciate it . they be pay professional , and , like many of their 
 class , only become insolent when praise . " 

 at that moment Diana Chesney come run across the lawn , breathless . 

 " I can not   see they anywhere ! " she declare pantingly - " the dear little 
 darling ! I run after they as fast as I could ; I want to kiss one of 
 those perfectly scrumptious boy , but they be go ! - not a trace of they 
 leave ! it be just as if they have sink into the ground ! " 

 again Lucio smile . 

 " they have their order , - " he say curtly - " and they know their place . " 

 just then , the sun be obscure by a pass black cloud , and a peal of 
 thunder rumble over - head . Looks be turn to the sky , but it be 
 quite bright and placid save for that one float shadow of storm . 

 " only summer thunder , " - say one of the guest - " there will be no rain . " 

 and the crowd that have be press together to watch the ' maypole 
 dance ' begin to break up in group , and speculate as to what diversion 
 might next be provide for they . I , watch my opportunity , draw Sibyl 
 away . 

 " come down by the river ; " - I whisper - " I must have you to myself for a 
 few minute . " she yield to my suggestion , and we walk away from the 
 mob of our acquaintance , and enter a grove of tree lead to the 
 bank of that part of the Avon which flow through my ground . here we 
 find ourselves quite alone , and put my arm round my betrothed , I 
 kiss she tenderly . 

 " tell I , " I say with a half - smile - " do you know how to love yet ? " 

 she look up with a passionate darkness in her eye that startle I . 

 " yes , - I know ! " be her unexpected answer . 

 " you do ! " and I stop to gaze intently into her fair face - " and how 
 do you learn ? " 

 she flush red , - then grow pale , - and clung to I with a nervous , 
 almost feverish force . 

 " very strangely ! " she reply - " and - quite suddenly ! the lesson be 
 easy , I find ; - too easy ! Geoffrey , " - she pause , and fix her eye 
 full on mine - " I will tell you how I learn it , ... but not now , ... 
 some other day . " here she break off , and begin to laugh rather forcedly . 
 " I will tell you ... when we be marry . " she glance anxiously about 
 she , - then , with a sudden abandonment of her usual reserve and pride , 
 throw herself into my arm and kiss my lip with such ardour as make 
 my sens reel . 

 " Sibyl - Sibyl ! " I murmur , hold she close to my heart - - " oh my 
 darling , - you love I ! - at last you love I ! " 

 " hush ! - hush ! " she say breathlessly - " you must forget that kiss , - - it 
 be too bold of I - it be wrong - I do not mean it , ... I , ... I be 
 think of something else . Geoffrey ! " - and her small hand clench on 
 mine with a sort of eager fierceness - " I wish I have never learn to 
 love ; I be happy before I know ! " 

 a frown knit her brow . 

 " now " - she go on in the same breathless hurry way - " I want love ! 
 I be starve , thirst for it ! I want to be drown in it , lose in it , 
 kill by it ! nothing else will content I ! " 

 I fold she still close in my arm . 

 " do I not say you would change , Sibyl ? " I whisper - " your coldness and 
 insensibility to love be unnatural and could not last , - my darling , I 
 always know that ! " 

 " you always know ! " she echo a little disdainfully - " ah , but you do not 
 know even now what have chance to I . nor shall I tell you - yet . oh 
 Geoffrey ! - " here she draw herself out of my embrace , and stoop , 
 gather some bluebell in the grass - " see these little flower grow 
 so purely and peacefully in the shade by the Avon ! - they remind I of 
 what I be , here in this very place , long ago . I be quite as happy , and 
 I think as innocent as these blossom ; I have no thought of evil in my 
 nature , - and the only love I dream of be the love of the fairy prince 
 for the fairy princess , - as harmless an idea as the love of the flower 
 themselves . yes ! - I be then all I should like to be now , - all that I be 
 not ! " 

 " you be everything that be beautiful and sweet ! " - I tell she , 
 admiringly , as I watch the play of retrospective and tender expression 
 on her perfect face . 

 " so you judge , - be a man who be perfectly satisfied with his own 
 choice of a wife ! " she say with a flash of her old cynicism - " but I 
 know myself well than you know I . you call I beautiful and 
 sweet , - but you can not call I good ! I be not good . why , the very love 
 that now consume I be - - " 

 " what ? " I ask she quickly , seize her hand with the blue - bell in 
 they , and gaze searchingly into her eye - " I know before you speak , 
 that it be the passion and tenderness of a true woman ! " 

 she be silent for a moment . then she smile , with a bewitching languor . 

 " if you know , then I need not tell you " - she say - " so , do not let we 
 stay here any long talk nonsense ; - ' society ' will shake its head 
 over we and accuse we of ' bad form , ' and some lady - paragraphist will 
 write to the paper , and , say - ' Mr Tempest 's conduct as a host leave much 
 to be desire , as he and his bride - elect be ' spoon " all the day . ' " 

 " there be no lady - paragraphist here , " - I say laugh , and encircle 
 her dainty waist with one arm as I walk . 

 " oh , be there not , though ! " she exclaim , laugh also , " why , you 
 do not   suppose you can give any sort of big entertainment without they do 
 you ? they permeate society . Old Lady Maravale , for example , who be 
 rather reduce in circumstance , write a guinea 's worth of scandal a 
 week for one of the paper . and she be here , - I see she simply gorge 
 herself with chicken salad and truffle an hour ago ! " here pausing , and 
 rest against my arm , she peer through the tree . " there be the 
 chimney of Lily Cottage where the famous Mavis Clare live , " she say . 

 " yes , I know , " - I reply readily - " Rimânez and I have visit she . she 
 be away just now , or she would have be here to - day . " 

 " do you like she ? " Sibyl query . 

 " very much . she be charming . " 

 " and ... the prince ... do he like she ? " 

 " well , upon my word , " I answer with a smile - " I think he like she 
 more than he do most woman ! he show the most extraordinary deference 
 towards she , and seem almost abash in her presence . be you cold , 
 Sibyl ? " I add hastily , for she shiver suddenly and her face grow 
 pale - " you have well come away from the river , - it be damp under these 
 tree . " 

 " yes , - let we go back to the garden and the sunshine ; " - she answer 
 dreamily - " so your eccentric friend , - the woman - hater , - find something 
 to admire in Mavis Clare ! she must be a very happy creature I 
 think , - perfectly free , famous , and believe in all good thing of life 
 and humanity , if one may judge from her book . " 

 " well , take altogether , life be not   so very bad ! " I observe playfully . 

 she make no reply , - and we return to the lawn where afternoon tea be 
 now be serve to the guest , who be seat in brilliant scatter 
 group under the tree or within the silken pavilion , while the 
 sweetest music , - and the strange , if people have only have ear to hear 
 it , - both vocal and instrumental , be be perform by those invisible 
 player and singer whose secret whereabouts be unknown to all , save 
 Lucio . 




 XXIV 


 just as the sun begin to sink , several little page come out of the 
 house , and with low salutation , distribute among the guest daintily 
 embossed and paint programme of the ' Tableaux Vivants , ' prepare for 
 their diversion in the extemporize bijou theatre . number of people 
 rise at once from their chair on the lawn , eager for this new 
 spectacle , and begin to scramble along and hustle one another in that 
 effective style of ' high - breeding ' so frequently exhibit at her 
 Majesty 's Drawing - Rooms . I , with Sibyl , hastily precede the impatient , 
 push crowd , for I wish to find a good seat for my beautiful 
 betroth before the room become full to over - flow . there prove 
 however , to be plenty of accommodation for everybody , - what space there 
 be seem capable of limitless expansion , and all the spectator be 
 comfortably place without difficulty . soon we be all study our 
 programme with considerable interest , for the title of the ' Tableaux ' 
 be somewhat original and mystifying . they be eight in number , and 
 be respectively head - ' Society , ' - ' Bravery : ancient and Modern , ' - ' A 
 Lost Angel , ' - ' the Autocrat , ' - ' a Corner of Hell , ' - ' seed of 
 Corruption , ' - ' his late purchase , ' - and ' Faith and Materialism . ' it 
 be in the theatre that everyone become at last conscious of the weirdly 
 beautiful character of the music that have be surge round they all 
 day . seat under one roof in more or less enforce silence and 
 attention , the vague and frivolous throng grow hush and passive , - the 
 ' society ' smirk pass off certain face that be as train to grin as 
 their tongue be train to lie , - the dreadful giggle of the unwedded 
 man - hunter be no long hear , - and soon the most exaggerated 
 fashion - plate of a woman forget to rustle her gown . the passionate 
 vibration of a violoncello , superbly play to a double harp 
 accompaniment , throb on the stillness with a beseech depth of 
 sound , - and people listen , I see , almost breathlessly , entrance , as 
 it be , against their will , and star as though they be 
 hypnotize , in front of they at the gold curtain with its familiar 
 motto - 

  " all the world 's a stage 
  and all the man and woman merely player . " 

 before we have time to applaud the violoncello solo however , the music 
 change , - and the mirthful voice of violin and flute ring out in a 
 waltz of the giddiest and sweetest tune . at the same instant a silvery 
 bell tinkle , and the curtain part noiselessly in twain , disclose 
 the first tableau - " Society . " an exquisite female figure , array in 
 evening - dress of the rich and most extravagant design , stand before 
 we , her hair crown with diamond , and her bosom blaze with the same 
 lustrous gem . her head be slightly raise , - her lip be part in a 
 languid smile , - in one hand she hold up - lift a glass of foaming 
 champagne , - her gold - slippere foot trod on an hour - glass . behind she , 
 catch convulsively at the fold of her train , crouch another woman 
 in rag , pinch and wretche , with starvation depict in her face , - a 
 dead child lie near . and , overshadow this group , be two 
 supernatural shape , - one in scarlet , the other in black , - vast and 
 almost beyond the stature of humanity , - the scarlet figure represent 
 Anarchy , and its blood - red finger be advanced to clutch the diamond 
 crown from ' Society 's ' brow , - the sable - rob form be death , and even 
 as we look , it slowly raise its steely dart in act to strike ! the 
 effect be weird and wonderful , - and the grim lesson the picture 
 convey , be startling enough to make a very visible impression . no 
 one speak , - no one applaud , - but people move restlessly and fidgette 
 on their seat , - and there be an audible sigh of relief as the curtain 
 close . open again , it display the second tableau - ' Bravery - Ancient 
 and Modern . ' this be in two scene ; - the first one depict a nobleman 
 of Elizabeth 's time , with rapi draw , his foot on the prostrate body 
 of a coarse ruffian who have evidently , from the grouping , insult a 
 woman whose slight figure be discern shrink timidly away from the 
 contest . this be ' Ancient Bravery , ' - and it change rapidly to ' modern , ' 
 show we an enervated , narrow - shoulder , pallid dandy in opera - coat 
 and hat , smoke a cigarette and languidly appeal to a bulky 
 policeman to protect he from another young noodle of his own class , 
 similarly attire , who be represent as sneak round a corner in 
 abject terror . we all recognise the force of the application , and be 
 in a much well humour with this picture satire than we have be at 
 the lesson of ' Society . ' next follow ' a Lost Angel , ' in which be 
 show a great hall in the palace of a king , where there be number of 
 brilliantly attired people , all group in various attitude , and 
 evidently completely absorb in their own concern , so much so as to 
 be entirely unconscious of the fact that in their very midst , stand a 
 wondrous Angel , clothe in dazzle white , with a halo round her fair hair , 
 and a glory , as of the sunset , on her half droop wing . her eye be 
 wistful , - her face be pensive and expectant ; she seem to say , " will 
 the world ever know that I be here ? " somehow , - as the curtain slowly 
 close again , amid loud applause , for the picture be extraordinarily 
 beautiful , I think of Mavis Clare , and sigh . Sibyl look up at I . 

 " why do you sigh ? " she say - " it be a lovely fancy , - but the symbol be 
 waste in the present audience , - no one with education believe in 
 angel now - a - day . " 

 " true ! " I assent ; yet there be a heaviness at my heart , for her word 
 remind I of what I would rather have forget , - namely her own 
 admit lack of all religious faith . ' the Autocrat , ' be the next 
 tableau , and represent an Emperor enthrone . at his footstool kneel a 
 piteous crowd of the starving and oppress , hold up their lean hand 
 to he , clasp in anguished petition , but he look away from they as 
 though he see they not . his head be turn to listen to the 
 side - whisper of one who seem , by the courtly bend and flattering 
 smile , to be his adviser and confidant , - yet that very confidant hold 
 secrete behind his back , a draw dagger , ready to strike his sovereign 
 to the heart . " Russia ! " whisper one or two of the company , as the 
 scene be obscure ; but the scarcely - breathe suggestion quickly pass 
 into a murmur of amazement and awe as the curtain part again to 
 disclose " a Corner of Hell . " this tableau be indeed original , and quite 
 unlike what might have be imagine as the conventional treatment of 
 such a subject . what we see be a black and hollow cavern , glitter 
 alternately with the flashing of ice and fire , - huge icicle droop 
 from above , and pale flame leap stealthily into view from below , and 
 within the dark embrasure , the shadowy form of a man be seat , 
 count out gold , or what seem to be gold . yet as coin after coin 
 slip through his ghostly finger , each one be see to change to 
 fire , - and the lesson thus picture be easily read . the lost soul have 
 make its own torture , and be still at work intensify and increase 
 its own fiery agony . much as this scene be admire for its rembrandt 
 effect of light and shade , I , personally , be glad when it be curtain 
 from view ; there be something in the dreadful face of the doomed sinner 
 that remind I forcibly and unpleasantly of those ghastly three I have 
 see in my horrid vision on the night of Viscount Lynton 's suicide . 
 ' seed of Corruption ' be the next picture , and show we a young and 
 beautiful girl in her early teen , lie on a luxurious couch en 
 deshabille , with a novel in her hand , of which the title be plainly 
 see by all ; - a novel well - know to everyone present , and the work of a 
 much - praise living author . round she , on the floor , and cast carelessly 
 on a chair at her side , be other novel of the same ' sexual ' 
 type , - all their title turn towards we , and the name of their 
 author equally make manifest . 

 " what a daring idea ! " say a lady in the seat immediately behind I - " I 
 wonder if any of those author be present ! " 

 " if they be they will not   mind ! " reply the man next to she with a 
 smother laugh - " those sort of writer would merely take it as a 
 first - class advertisement ! " 

 Sibyl look at the tableau with a pale face and wistful eye . 

 " that be a true picture ! " she say under her breath - " Geoffrey , it be 
 painfully true ! " 

 I make no answer , - I think I know to what she allude ; but alas ! - I 
 do not know how deeply the ' seed of corruption ' have be sow in her 
 own nature , or what a harvest they would bring forth . the curtain 
 close , - to open again almost immediately on " his late purchase . " here 
 we be show the interior of a luxurious modern drawing - room , where 
 about eight or ten man be assemble , in fashionable evening - dress . 
 they have evidently just rise from a card - table , - and one of they , a 
 dissipate look brute , with a wicked smile of mingled satire and 
 triumph on his face be point to his ' purchase , ' - a beautiful woman . 
 she be clothe in glisten white like a bride , - but she be bind , as 
 prisoner be bind , to an upright column , on which the grin head of 
 a marble Silenus leer above she . her hand be tie tightly 
 together , - with chain of diamond ; her waist be bind , - with thick 
 rope of pearl ; - a wide collar of ruby encircle her throat ; - and 
 from bosom to foot she be net about and tie , - with string of gold 
 and gem . her head be fling back defiantly with an assumption of pride 
 and scorn , - her eye alone express shame , self - contempt , and despair 
 at her bondage . the man who own this white slave be represent , by 
 his attitude , as catalogue and appraise her ' point ' for the 
 approval and applause of his comrade , whose face variously and 
 powerfully express the differ emotion of lust , cruelty , envy , 
 callousness , derision , and selfishness , more admirably than the most 
 gifted painter could imagine . 

 " a capital type of most fashionable marriage ! " I hear some - one say . 

 " rather ! " another voice reply - " the orthodox ' happy couple ' to the 
 life ! " 

 I glance at Sibyl . she look pale , - but smile as she meet my 
 question eye . a sense of consolation creep warmly about my heart as 
 I remember that now , she have , as she tell I ' learn to love , ' - and 
 that therefore her marriage with I be no long a question of material 
 advantage alone . she be not my ' purchase , ' - she be my love , my saint , 
 my queen ! - or so I choose to think , in my foolishness and vanity ! 

 the last tableau of all be now to come , - " Faith and Materialism , " and 
 it prove to be the most startling of the series . the auditorium be 
 gradually darken , - and the dividing curtain disclose a ravishingly 
 beautiful scene by the sea - shore . a full moon cast its tranquil glory 
 over the smooth water , and , - rise on rainbow - wing from earth towards 
 the sky , one of the lovely creature ever dream of by poet or 
 painter , float angel - like upwards , her hand hold a cluster of 
 lily clasp to her breast , - her lustrous eye full of divine joy , 
 hope , and love . exquisite music be hear , - soft voice sing in the 
 distance a chorale of rejoice ; - heaven and earth , sea and air , - all 
 seem to support the aspire Spirit as she soar higher and high , 
 in ever - deepen rapture , when , - as we all watch that aerial flying 
 form with a sense of the keen delight and satisfaction , - a sudden 
 crash of thunder sound , - the scene grow dark , - and there be a distant 
 roaring of angry water . the light of the moon be eclipse , - the music 
 cease ; a faint lurid glow of red shone at first dimly , then more 
 vividly , - and ' materialism ' declare itself , - a human skeleton , bleach 
 white and grin ghastly mirth upon we all ! while we yet look , the 
 skeleton itself drop to piece , - and one long twining worm lift its 
 slimy length from the wreck of bone , another work its way through 
 the eye - hole of the skull . murmur of genuine horror be hear in the 
 auditorium , - people on all side rise from their seat - one man in 
 particular , a distinguished professor of science , push past I to get 
 out , mutter crossly - " this may be very amusing to some of you , but to 
 I , it be disgusting ! " 

 " like your own theory , my dear Professor ! " say a rich laugh voice , 
 as Lucio meet he on his way , and the bijou theatre be again flood 
 with cheerful light - " they be amusing to some , and disgusting to 
 other ! - - pardon I ! - I speak of course in jest ! but I design that 
 tableau specially in your honour ! " 

 " oh , you do , do you ? " growl the Professor - " well , I do not 
 appreciate it . " 

 " yet you should have do , for it be quite scientifically 
 correct , " - declare Lucio laugh still . " Faith , - with the wing , whom 
 you see joyously fly towards an impossible Heaven , be not 
 scientifically correct , - have you not tell we so ? - but the skeleton and 
 the worm be quite of your cult ! no materialist can deny the 
 correctness of that ' complexion to which we all must come at last . ' 
 positively , some of the lady look quite pale ! how droll it be , that 
 while everybody   to be fashionable , and in favour with the press   must 
 accept Materialism as the only creed , they should invariably become 
 affright , or let we say offended , at the natural end of the body , as 
 complete by material agency ! " 

 " well , it be not a pleasant subject , that last tableau , " - say Lord 
 Elton , as he come out of the theatre with Diana Chesney hang 
 confidingly on his arm - " you can not say it be festal ! " 

 " it be , - for the worm ! " reply Lucio gaily - " Come , Miss Chesney , - and 
 you Tempest , come along with Lady Sibyl , - let we go out in the ground 
 again , and see my will - o'-the - wisps lighting up . " 

 fresh curiosity be excite by this remark ; the people quickly throw off 
 the gruesome and tragic impression make by the strange ' tableaux ' just 
 witness , - and pour out of the house into the garden chatter and 
 laugh more noisily than ever . it be just dusk , - and as we reach 
 the open lawn we see an extraordinary number of small boy , clothe in 
 brown , run about with will - o'-the - wisp lantern . their movement 
 be swift and perfectly noiseless , - they leap , jump and twirl 
 like little gnome over flowerbed , under shrubbery , and along the 
 edge of path and terrace , many of they climb tree with the 
 rapidity and agility of monkey , and wherever they go they leave behind 
 they a trail of brilliant light . soon , by their effort , all the ground 
 be illuminate with a magnificence that could not have be equal 
 even by the historic fête at Versailles , - tall oak and cedar be 
 transform to pyramid of fire - blossom , - every branch be load with 
 coloured lamp in the shape of star , - rocket hiss up into the clear 
 space shower down bouquet , wreath and ribbon of flame , - line of 
 red and azure run glowingly along the grass - border , and amid the 
 enthusiastic applause of the assemble spectator , eight huge 
 fire - fountain of all colour spring up in various corner of the 
 garden , while an enormous golden balloon , dazzlingly luminous , ascend 
 slowly into the air and remain poised above we , send from its 
 glitter car hundred of gem - like bird and butterfly on fiery 
 wing , that circle round and round for a moment and then vanish . 
 while we be yet loudly clap the splendid effect of this 
 sky - spectacle , a troop of beautiful girl - dancer in white come run 
 across the grass , wave long silvery wand that be tip with 
 electric star , and to the sound of strange tinkle music , seemingly 
 play in the distance on glass bell , they commence a fantastic dance 
 of the wild yet most graceful character . every shade of opaline 
 colour fall upon their sway figure from some invisible agency as 
 they trip and whirl , - and each time they wave their wand , ribbon 
 and flag of fire be unroll and toss high in air where they 
 gyrate for a long time like move hieroglyph . the scene be now so 
 startling , so fairy - like and wonderful , that we be well - nigh strike 
 speechless with astonishment , - too fascinated and absorb even to 
 applaud , we have no conception how time go , or how rapidly the night 
 descend , - till all at once without the least warning , an appalling 
 crash of thunder burst immediately above our head , and a jagged fork of 
 lightning tear the luminous fire - balloon to shred . two or three woman 
 begin to scream , - whereupon Lucio advance from the throng of spectator 
 and stand in full view of all , hold up his hand . 

 " stage thunder , I assure you ! " he say playfully , in a clear somewhat 
 scornful voice - " it come and go at my bidding . quite a part of the 
 game , believe I ! - these sort of thing be only toy for child . 
 again - again , ye petty element ! " he cry , laugh , and lift his 
 handsome face and flash eye to the dark heavens - " Roar your good and 
 loud ! - roar , I say ! " 

 such a terrific boom and clatter answer he as baffle all 
 description , - it be as if a mountain of rock have fall into 
 ruin , - but have be assure that the deafening noise be ' stage 
 thunder ' merely , the spectator be no long alarm , and many of they 
 express their opinion that it be ' wonderfully well do . ' after this , 
 there gradually appear against the sky a broad blaze of red light like 
 the reflection of some great prairie fire , - it stream apparently 
 upward from the ground , bath we all where we stand , in its blood - like 
 glow . the white - rob dancing - girl waltz on and on , their arm 
 entwine , their lovely face irradiate by the lurid flame , while above 
 they now fly creature with black wing , bat and owl , and great 
 night - moth , that flap and flutter about for all the world as if 
 they be truly alive and not mere ' stage property . ' another flash of 
 lightning , - and one more booming thud of thunder , - - and lo ! - the 
 undisturbed and fragrant night be about we , clear , dewy and calm , - the 
 young moon smile pensively in a cloudless heaven , - all the 
 dancing - girl have vanish , - the crimson glow have change to a pure 
 silvery radiance , and an array of pretty page in eighteenth century 
 costume of pale pink and blue , stand before we with lighted flame 
 torch , make a long triumphal avenue , down which Lucio invite we to 
 pass . 

 " on , on fair lady and gallant gentleman ! " he cry - " this 
 extemporize path of light lead , - not to Heaven - no ! that be far too 
 dull an ending ! - but to supper ! on ! - follow your leader ! " 

 every eye be turn on his fine figure and striking countenance , as 
 with one hand he beckon the guest , - between the double line of lit 
 torch he stand , - a picture for a painter , with those dark eye of his 
 alit with such strange mirth as could not be define , and the sweet , 
 half - cruel , wonderfully attractive smile play upon his lip ; - and 
 with one accord the whole company troop pell - mell after he , shout 
 their applause and delight . who could resist he ! - not one in that 
 assemblage at least ; - there be few ' saint ' in society ! as I go with 
 the rest , I feel as though I be in some gorgeous dream , - my sens 
 be all in a whirl , - I be giddy with excitement and could not stop to 
 think , or to analyse the emotion by which I be govern . have I 
 possess the force or the will to pause and consider , I might possibly 
 have come to the conclusion that there be something altogether beyond 
 the ordinary power of man display in the successive wonder of this 
 brilliant ' gala , ' - but I be , like all the rest of society , bend merely 
 on the pleasure of the moment , regardless of how it be procure , what 
 it cost I , or how it affect other . how many I see and know to - day 
 among the worshipper of fashion and frivolity who be act precisely 
 as I act then ! indifferent to the welfare of everyone save themselves , 
 grudge every penny that be not spend on their own advantage or 
 amusement , and too callous to even listen to the sorrow or difficulty 
 or joy of other when these do not in some way , near or remote , touch 
 their own interest , they waste their time day after day in selfish 
 trifling , wilfully blind and unconscious to the fact that they be 
 build up their own fate in the future , - that future which will prove 
 all the more a terrible reality in proportion to the extent of our 
 presumption in dare to doubt its truth . 

 More than four hundred guest sit down to supper in the large 
 pavilion , - a supper serve in the most costly manner and furnish with 
 luxury that represent the utmost pitch of extravagance . I eat and 
 drank , with Sybil at my side , hardly know what I say or do in the 
 whirling excitement of the hour , - the opening of champagne - bottle , the 
 clink of glass , the clatter of plate , the loud hum of talk 
 intersperse with monkey - like squeal or goat - like whinny of laughter , 
 over - ride at interval by the blare of trumpet - music and drum , - all 
 these sound be as so much noise of rush water in my ear , - and I 
 often find myself grow abstract and in a manner confuse by the 
 din . I do not say much to Sibyl , - one can not very well whisper 
 sentimental nothing in the ear of one 's betroth when she be eat 
 ortolan and truffle . presently , amid all the hubbub , a deep bell 
 strike twelve time , and Lucio stand up at the end of one of the long 
 table , a full glass of foam champagne in his hand - 

 " lady and gentleman ! " 

 there be a sudden silence . 

 " lady and gentleman ! " he repeat , his brilliant eye flash 
 derisively , I think , over the whole well - feed company , " midnight have 
 strike and the good of friend must part ! but before we do so , let we 
 not forget that we have meet here to wish all happiness to our host , Mr 
 Geoffrey Tempest and his bride - elect , the Lady Sibyl Elton . " here there 
 be vociferous applause . " it be say " - continue Lucio , " by the maker 
 of dull maxim , that ' Fortune never come with both hand full ' - but in 
 this case the adage be prove false and put to shame , - for our friend 
 have not only secure the pleasure of wealth , but the treasure of love 
 and beauty combine . limitless cash be good , but limitless love be 
 well , and both these choice gift have be bestow on the betrothed 
 pair whom to - day we honour . I will ask you to give they a hearty round 
 of cheering , - and then it must be good - night indeed , though not 
 farewell , - for with the toast of the bride and bridegroom - elect , I shall 
 also drink to the time , - not far distant perhaps , - when I shall see some 
 of you , if not all of you again , and enjoy even more of your charming 
 company than I have do to - day ! " 

 he cease amid a perfect hurricane of applause , - and then everyone rise 
 and turn towards the table where I sit with Sibyl , and name our 
 name aloud , drink wine , the man join in hearty shout of " Hip , hip , 
 hip hurrah ! " yet , - as I bow repeatedly in response to the storm of 
 cheer , and while Sibyl smile and bend her graceful head to right and 
 leave , my heart sink suddenly with a sense of fear . be it my fancy - or 
 do I hear peal of wild laughter circle round the brilliant pavilion 
 and echo away , far away into distance ? I listen , glass in hand . 
 " Hip , hip , hip hurrah ! " shout my guest with gusto . " ha - ha - ! 
 ha - ha ! " seem shriek and yell in my ear from the outer air . 
 struggle against this delusion , I get up and return thank for 
 myself and my future bride in a few brief word which be receive with 
 fresh salvos of applause , - and then we all become aware that Lucio have 
 spring up again in his place , and be stand high above we all , with 
 one foot on the table and the other on the chair , confront we with a 
 fresh glass of wine in his hand , fill to the brim . what a face he have 
 at that moment ! - what a smile ! 

 " the parting cup , my friend ! " he exclaim - " to our next merry 
 meeting ! " 

 with plaudit and laughter the guest eagerly and noisily 
 respond , - and as they drank , the pavilion be flood by a deep 
 crimson illumination as of fire . every face look blood - red ! - every 
 jewel on every woman flash like a live flame ! - for one brief instant 
 only , - then it be go , and there follow a general stampede of the 
 company , - everybody hurrying as fast as they could into the carriage 
 that wait in long line to take they to the station , the last two 
 ' special ' train to London be at one a.m. and one thirty . I bid 
 Sibyl and her father a hurried good - night , - Diana Chesney go in the 
 same carriage with they , full of ecstatic thank and praise to I for 
 the splendour of the day which she describe in her own fashion as 
 " know how to do it , - " and then the depart crowd of vehicle begin 
 to thunder down the avenue . as they go an arch of light suddenly 
 span Willowsmere Court from end to end of its red gable , blaze 
 with all the colour of the rainbow , in the middle of which appear 
 letter of pale blue and gold , form what I have hitherto consider as 
 a funereal device , 

  " sic transit gloria mundi ! Vale ! " 

 but , after all , it be as fairly applicable to the ephemeral splendour 
 of a fête as it be to the more lasting marble solemnity of a sepulchre , 
 and I think little or nothing about it . so perfect be all the 
 arrangement , and so admirably be the servant train , that the 
 guest be not long in depart , - and the ground be soon not only 
 empty , but dark . not a vestige of the splendid illumination be leave 
 anywhere , - and I enter the house fatigue , and with a dull sense of 
 bewilderment and fear on I which I could not explain . I find Lucio 
 alone in the smoking - room at the further end of the oak - panel hall , a 
 small cosily curtain apartment with a deep bay window which open 
 directly on to the lawn . he be stand in this embrasure with his back 
 to I , but he turn swiftly round as he hear my step and confront 
 I with such a wild , white , tortured face that I recoil from he , 
 startle . 

 " Lucio , you be ill ! " I exclaim - " you have do too much to - day . " 

 " perhaps I have ! " he answer in a hoarse unsteady voice , and I see a 
 strong shudder convulse he as he speak , - then , gather himself 
 together as it be by an effort , he force a smile - " do not   be alarm , 
 my friend ! - it be nothing , - nothing but the twinge of an old deep - seat 
 malady , - a troublesome disease that be rare among man , and hopelessly 
 incurable . " 

 " what be it ? " I ask anxiously , for his death - like pallor alarm I . 
 he look at I fixedly , his eye dilate and darken , and his hand 
 fall with a heavy pressure on my shoulder . 

 " a very strange illness ! " he say , in the same jarring accent . 
 " remorse ! have you never hear of it , Geoffrey ? neither medicine nor 
 surgery be of any avail , - it be ' the worm that dieth not , and the flame 
 that can not be quench . ' Tut ! - let we not talk of it , - no one can cure 
 I , - no one will ! I be past hope ! " 

 " but remorse , - if you have it , and I can not possibly imagine why , for 
 you have surely nothing to regret , - be not a physical ailment ! " I say 
 wonderingly . 

 " and physical ailment be the only one worth trouble about , you 
 think ? " he query , still smile that strained and haggard smile - " the 
 body be our chief care , - we cosset it , and make much of it , feed it and 
 pamper it , and guard it from so much as a pin - prick of pain if we 
 can , - and thus we flatter ourselves that all be well , - all must be 
 well ! yet it be but a clay chrysali , bind to split and crumble with 
 the growth of the moth - soul within , - the moth that fly with blind 
 instinctiveness straight into the unknown , and be dazzle by excess of 
 light ! look out here , " - he go on with an abrupt and soft change of 
 tone - " look out at the dreamful shadowy beauty of your garden now ! the 
 flower be asleep , - the tree be surely glad to be disburden of all 
 the gaudy artificial lamp that lately hang upon their branch , - there 
 be the young moon pillow her chin on the edge of a little cloud and 
 sink to sleep in the west , - a moment ago there be a late nightingale 
 awake and singing . you can feel the breath of the rose from the trelli 
 yonder ! all this be Nature 's work , - and how much fair and sweet it 
 be now than when the light be ablaze and the blare of band - music 
 startle the small bird in their downy nest ! - yet ' society ' would not 
 appreciate this cool dusk , this happy solitude ; - ' society ' prefer a 
 false glare to all true radiance . and what be bad it try to make 
 true thing take a second place as adjunct to sham one , - and there 
 come in the mischief . " 

 " it be just like you to run down your own indefatigable labour in the 
 splendid success of the day , " - I say laugh - " you may call it a 
 ' false glare ' if you like , but it have be a most magnificent 
 spectacle , - and certainly in the way of entertainment it will never be 
 equal or excel . " 

 " it will make you more talk about than even your ' boom ' book could 
 do ! " say Lucio , eye I narrowly . 

 " not the least doubt of that ! " I reply - " society prefer food and 
 amusement to any literature , - even the great . by - the - by , where be 
 all the ' artiste , ' - the musician and dancer ? " 

 " Gone ! " 

 " Gone ! " I echo amazedly - " already ! good heavens ! have they have 
 supper ? " 

 " they have have everything they want , even to their pay , " say Lucio , a 
 trifle impatiently - " do I not tell you Geoffrey , that when I undertake 
 to do anything , I do it thoroughly or not at all ? " 

 I look at he , - he smile , but his eye be sombre and scornful . 

 " all right ! " I respond carelessly , not wish to offend he , - " have 
 it your own way ! but , upon my word , to I it be all like devil 's magic ! " 

 " what be ? " he ask imperturbably . 

 " Everything ! - the dancer , - the number of servant and page - why , there 
 must have be two or three hundred of they , - those wonderful 
 ' tableaux , ' - the illumination , - the supper , - everything I tell 
 you ! - and the most astonishing part of it now be , that all these people 
 should have clear out so soon ! " 

 " well , if you elect to call money devil 's magic , you be right , " - say 
 Lucio . 

 " but surely in some case , not even money could procure such perfection 
 of detail " - - I begin . 

 " money can procure anything ! " - he interrupt , a thrill of passion 
 vibrate in his rich voice , - " I tell you that long ago . it be a hook 
 for the devil himself . not that the devil could be suppose to care 
 about world 's cash personally , - but he generally conceive a liking for 
 the company of the man who possess it ; - possibly he know what that 
 man will do with it . I speak metaphorically of course , - but no metaphor 
 can exaggerate the power of money . trust no man or woman 's virtue till 
 you have try to purchase it with a round sum in hard cash ! money , my 
 excellent Geoffrey , have do everything for you , - remember that ! - you 
 have do nothing for yourself . " 

 " that be not a very kind speech , " - I say , somewhat vexedly . 

 " no ? and why ? because it be true ? I notice most people complain of 
 ' unkindness ' when they be tell a truth . it be true , and I see no 
 unkindness in it . you have   do nothing for yourself and you be not 
 expect to do anything - except , " and he laugh - " except just now to 
 get to bed , and dream of the enchanting Sibyl ! " 

 " I confess I be tired , " - I say , and an unconscious sigh escape 
 I - " and you ? " 

 his gaze rest broodingly on the outer landscape . 

 " I also be tired , " he respond slowly - " but I never get away from my 
 fatigue , for I be tired of myself . and I always rest badly . good - night ! " 

 " good - night ! " I answer , - and then pause , look at he . he return 
 my look with interest . 

 " well ? " he ask expressively . 

 I force a smile . 

 " well ! " I echo - " I do not know what I should say , - except - that I wish 
 I know you as you be . I feel that you be right in tell I once 
 that you be not what you seem . " 

 he still keep his eye fix upon I . 

 " as you have express the wish , " - he say slowly - " I promise you you 
  shall know I as I be some - day ! it may be well for you to know , - for 
 the sake of other who may seek to cultivate my company . " 

 I move away to leave the room . 

 " thank for all the trouble you have take to - day , " - I say in a light 
 tone - " though I shall never be able to express my full gratitude in 
 word . " 

 " if you want to thank anybody , thank God that you have live through 
 it ! " he reply . 

 " why ? " I ask , astonish . 

 " why ? because life hang on a thread , - a society crush be the very acme 
 of boredom and exhaustion , - and that we escape with our life from a 
 general guzzle and giggle be matter for thanksgiving , - that be all ! and 
 God get so few thank as a rule that you may surely spare he a brief 
 one for to - day 's satisfactory ending . " 

 I laugh , see no meaning in his word beyond the usual satire he 
 affect . I find Amiel , wait for I in my bedroom , but I dismiss 
 he abruptly , hat the look of his crafty and sullen face , and say 
 I need no attendance . thoroughly fatigue , I be soon in bed and 
 asleep , - and the terrific agency that have produce the splendour of 
 the brilliant festival at which I have figure as host , be not reveal 
 to I by so much as a warning dream ! 




 XXV 


 a few day after the entertainment at Willowsmere , and before the 
 society paper have do talk about the magnificence and luxury 
 display on that occasion , I wake up one morning , like the great poet 
 Byron , " to find myself famous . " not for any intellectual 
 achievement , - not for any unexpected deed of heroism , - not for any 
 resolved or noble attitude in society or politic , - no ! - I owe my fame 
 merely to a quadrupe ; - ' phosphor ' win the Derby . it be about a 
 neck - and - neck contest between my racer and that of the Prime Minister , 
 and for a second or so the result seem doubtful , - but , as the two 
 jockey near the goal , Amiel , whose thin wiry figure clothe in the 
 bright of bright scarlet silk , stick to his horse as though he be a 
 part of it , put ' phosphor ' to a pace he have never yet exhibit , 
 appear to skim along the ground at literally fly speed , the upshot 
 be that he score a triumphant victory , reach the win - post a 
 couple of yard or more ahead of his rival . acclamation rent the air at 
 the vigour display in the ' finish ' - and I become the hero of the 
 day , - the darling of the populace . I be somewhat amused at the 
 Premier 's discomfiture , - he take his beating rather badly . he do not 
 know I , nor I he , - I be not of his politic , and I do not care a jot 
 for his feeling one way or the other , but I be gratify , in a certain 
 satirical sense , to find myself suddenly acknowledge as a great man 
 than he , because I be the owner of the Derby - winner ! before I well know 
 where I be , I find myself be present to the Prince of Wales , who 
 shake hand with I and congratulate I ; - all the big aristocrat 
 in England be willing and eager to be introduce to I ; - and inwardly 
 I laugh at this exhibition of taste and culture on the part of ' the 
 gentleman of England that live at home at ease . ' they crowd round 
 ' phosphor , ' whose wild eye warn stranger against take liberty 
 with he , but who seem not a whit the bad for his exertion , and who 
 apparently be quite ready to run the race over again with equal 
 pleasure and success . Amiel 's dark sly face and cruel ferret eye be 
 evidently not attractive to the majority of the gentleman of the turf , 
 though his answer to all the query put to he , be admirably ready , 
 respectful and not without wit . but to I the whole sum and substance of 
 the occasion be the fact that I , Geoffrey Tempest , once struggle 
 author , now millionaire , be simply by virtue of my ownership of the 
 Derby - winner , ' famous ' at last ! - or what society consider famous , - that 
 fame that secure for a man the attention of ' the nobility and gentry , ' 
 to quote from tradesman 's advertisement , - and also obtain the 
 persistent adulation and shameless pursuit of all the demi - mondaine 
 who want jewel and horse and yacht present to they in exchange for 
 a few tainted kiss from their carmine lip . under the shower of 
 compliment I receive , I stand , apparently delight , - smile , affable 
 and courteous , - enter into the spirit of the occasion , and shake 
 hand with my Lord that , and Sir Something Nobody , and his serene 
 Highness the Grand Duke so - and - so of Beer - Land , and his other Serene 
 Lowness of Small - Principality , - but in my secret soul I scorn these 
 people with their social humbug and hypocrisy , - scorn they with such a 
 deadly scorn as almost amazed myself . when presently I walk off the 
 course with Lucio , who as usual seem to know and to be friend with 
 everybody , he speak in accent that be far more grave and gentle than 
 I have ever hear he use before . 

 " with all your egotism , Geoffrey , there be something forcible and noble 
 in your nature , - something which rise up in bold revolt against 
 falsehood and sham . why , in Heaven 's name do you not give it way ? " 

 I look at he amazed , and laugh . 

 " give it way ? what do you mean ? would you have I tell humbug that I 
 know they as such ? , - and liar that I discern their lie ? my dear 
 fellow , society would become too hot to hold I ! " 

 " it could not be hotter - or cold - than hell , if you believe in hell , 
 which you do not , " - he rejoin , in the same quiet voice - " but I do not 
 assume that you should say these thing straight out and bluntly , to 
 give offence . an affront candour be not nobleness , - it be merely 
 coarse . to act nobly be well than to speak . " 

 " and what would you have I do ? " I ask curiously . 

 he be silent for a moment , and seem to be earnestly , almost painfully 
 consider , - then he answer , - 

 " my advice will seem to you singular , Geoffrey , - but if you want it , 
 here it be . give , as I say , the noble , and what the world would call 
 the quixotic part of your nature full way , - do not sacrifice your high 
 sense of what be right and just for the sake of pander to anyone 's 
 power or influence , - and - say farewell to I ! I be no use to you , save 
 to humour your vary fancy , and introduce you to those great , - or 
 small , - personage you wish to know for your own convenience or 
 advantage , - believe I , it would be much well for you and much more 
 console at the inevitable hour of death , if you be to let all this 
 false and frivolous nonsense go , and I with it ! leave society to its 
 own fool 's whirligig of distracted folly , - put Royalty in its true 
 place , and show it that all its pomp , arrogance and glitter be 
 worthless , and itself a nothing , compare to the upright standing of a 
 brave soul in an honest man , - and , as Christ say to the rich 
 ruler - ' sell half that thou hast and give to the poor . ' " 

 I be silent for a minute or so out of sheer surprise , while he watch 
 I earnestly , his face pale and expectant . a curious shock of something 
 like compunction startle my conscience , and for a brief space I be 
 move to a vague regret , - regret that with all the enormous capability I 
 possess of do good to number of my fellow - creature with the vast 
 wealth I own , I have not attain to any high moral attitude than 
 that represent by the frivolous folk who make up what be call the 
 ' Upper Ten ' of society . I take the same egotistical pleasure in myself 
 and my own doing as any of they , - and I be to the full as foolishly 
 conventional , smooth - tongue and hypocritical as they . they act their 
 part and I act mine , - none of we be ever our real self for a 
 moment . in very truth , one of the reason why ' fashionable ' man and 
 woman can not bear to be alone be , that a solitude in which they be 
 compel to look face to face upon their secret self become 
 unbearable because of the burden they carry of conceal vice and 
 accuse shame . my emotion soon pass however , and slip my arm 
 through Lucio 's , I smile , as I answer - 

 " your advice , my dear fellow , would do credit to a salvationist 
 preacher , - but it be quite valueless to I , because impossible to 
 follow . to say farewell for ever to you , in the first place , would be to 
 make myself guilty of the black ingratitude , - in the second instance , 
 society , with all its ridiculous humbug , be nevertheless necessary for 
 the amusement of myself and my future wife , - Royalty moreover , be 
 accustomed to be flatter , and we shall not be hurt by join in the 
 general inane chorus ; - thirdly , if I do as the visionary Jew 
 suggest - - " 

 " what visionary Jew ? " he ask , his eye sparkle coldly . 

 " why , Christ of course ! " I rejoin lightly . 

 the shadow of a strange smile part his lip . 

 " it be the fashion to blaspheme ! " he say , - " a mark of brilliancy in 
 literature , and wit in society ! I forget ! pray go on , - if you do as 
 Christ suggest - - " 

 " yes , - if I give half my good to the poor , I should not be thank for 
 it , or consider anything but a fool for my pain . " 

 " you would wish to be thank ? " he say . 

 " naturally ! Most people like a little gratitude in return for benefit . " 

 " they do . and the Creator , who be always give , be suppose to like 
 gratitude also , " - he observe - " nevertheless he seldom get it ! " 

 " I do not talk of hyperphysical nothingness , " - I say with 
 impatience - " I be speak of the plain fact of this world and the 
 people who live in it . if one give largely , one expect to be 
 acknowledge as generous , - but if I be to divide my fortune , and hand 
 half of it to the poor , the matter would be chronicle in about six 
 line in one of the paper , and society would exclaim ' what a fool ! ' " 

 " then let we talk no more about it , " - say Lucio , his brow clearing , 
 and his eye gather again their wonte light of mockery and 
 mirth - " have win the Derby , you have really do all a 
 nineteenth - century civilization expect you to do , and for your reward , 
 you will be in universal demand everywhere . you may hope soon to dine at 
 Marlborough House , - and a little back - stair influence and political 
 jobbery will work you into the Cabinet if you care for it . do I not 
 tell you I would set you up as successfully as the bear who have reach 
 the bun on the top of the slippery pole , a spectacle for the envy of man 
 and the wonder of angel ? well , there you be ! - triumphant ! - a great 
 creature Geoffrey ! - in fact , you be the great product of the age , a 
 man with five million and owner of the Derby - winner ! what be the glory 
 of intellect compare to such a position as your ! man envy you , - and as 
 for angel , - if there be any , - you may be sure they do wonder ! a 
 man 's fame guarantee by a horse , be something indeed to make an angel 
 stare ! " 

 he laugh uproariously , and from that day he never speak again of his 
 singular proposition that I should ' part with he , ' and let the " nobler " 
 nature in I have its way . I be not to know then that he have stake a 
 chance upon my soul and lose it , - and that from henceforward he take a 
 determined course with I , implacably on to the appalling end . 

 my marriage take place on the appoint day in June with all the pomp 
 and extravagant show befit my position , and that of the woman I have 
 choose to we d. it be needless to describe the gorgeousness of the 
 ceremony in detail , - any fashionable ' lady paper ' describe the 
 wedding of an Earl 's daughter to a five - fold millionaire , will give an 
 idea , in hysterical rhapsody , of the general effect . it be an amazing 
 scene , - and one in which costly millinery completely vanquish all 
 consideration of solemnity or sacredness in the suppose ' divine ' 
 ordinance . the impressive command : " I require and charge ye both , as ye 
 will answer at the dreadful day of judgment , " - do not obtain half so 
 much awed attention as the exquisite knot of pearl and diamond which 
 fasten the bride 's silver - embroider train to her shoulder . ' all the 
 world and his wife ' be present , - that is , the social world , which 
 imagine no other world exist , though it be the least part of the 
 community . the Prince of Wales honour we by his presence : two great 
 dignitary of the church perform the marriage - rite , resplendent in 
 redundant fulness of white sleeve and surplice , and equally impose in 
 the fatness of their body and unctuous redness of their face ; and 
 Lucio be my ' good man . ' he be in high , almost wild spirit , - and , 
 during our drive to the church together , have entertain I all the way 
 with numerous droll story , mostly at the expense of the clergy . when 
 we reach the sacred edifice , he say laughingly as he alight - 

 " do you ever hear it report , Geoffrey , that the devil be unable to 
 enter a church , because of the cross upon it , or within it ? " 

 " I have hear some such nonsense , " - I reply , smile at the humour 
 express in his sparkle eye and eloquent feature . 

 " it be nonsense , - for the maker of the legend forget one thing ; " he 
 continue , drop his voice to a whisper as we pass under the 
 carve gothic portico - " the cross may be present , - - but - - so be the 
 clergyman ! and wherever a clergyman be , the devil may surely follow ! " 

 I almost laugh aloud at his manner of make this irreverent 
 observation , and the look with which he accompany it . the rich tone 
 of the organ creep softly on the flower - scented silence however , 
 quickly solemnize my mood , - and while I lean against the altar - rail 
 wait for my bride , I catch myself wonder for the hundredth time 
 or more , at my comrade 's singularly proud and kingly aspect , as with 
 fold arm and lift head , he contemplate the lily - deck altar and 
 the gleam crucifix upon it , his meditative eye bespeak a curious 
 mingling of reverence and contempt . 

 one incident I remember , as stand out particularly in all the glare 
 and glitter of the brilliant scene , and this occur at the signing of 
 our name in the register . when Sibyl , a vision of angelic loveliness in 
 all her bridal white , affix her signature to the entry , Lucio bend 
 towards she , - 

 " as ' good man ' I claim an old - fashioned privilege ! " he say , and kiss 
 she lightly on the cheek . she blush a vivid red , - then suddenly grow 
 ghastly pale , - and with a kind of choke cry , reel back in a dead 
 faint in the arm of one of her bridesmaid . it be some minute before 
 she be restore to consciousness , - but she make light both of my alarm 
 and the consternation of her friend , - and assure we that it be 
 nothing but the effect of the heat of the weather and the excitement of 
 the day , she take my arm and walk down the aisle smilingly , through 
 the brilliant rank of her star and envious ' society ' friend , all of 
 whom covet her good fortune , not because she have marry a worthy or 
 gifted man , - that would have be no special matter for 
 congratulation , - but simply because she have marry five million of 
 money ! I be the appendage to the million - nothing far . she hold 
 her head high and haughtily , though I feel her tremble as the thundering 
 strain of the ' Bridal March ' from Lohengrin pour sonorous triumph on 
 the air . she trod on rose all the way , - I remember that too , ... 
 afterwards ! her satin slipper crush the heart of a thousand innocent 
 thing that must surely have be more dear to God than she ; - the little 
 harmless soul of flower , whose task in life , sweetly fulfil , have 
 be to create beauty and fragrance by their mere existence , expire to 
 gratify the vanity of one woman to whom nothing be sacred . but I 
 anticipate , - I be yet in my fool 's dream , - and imagine that the dying 
 blossom be happy to perish thus beneath her tread ! 

 a grand reception be hold at Lord Elton 's house after the 
 ceremony , - and in the midst of the chattering , the eating and the 
 drinking , we , - my newly make wife and I , - depart amid the profuse 
 flattery and good wish of our ' friend ' who , prim with the very 
 fine champagne , make a very decent show of be sincere . the last 
 person to say farewell to we at the carriage - door be Lucio , - and the 
 sorrow I feel at part with he be more than I could express in word . 
 from the very hour of the dawning of my good fortune we have be almost 
 inseparable companion , - I owe my success in society , - everything , even 
 my bride herself , - to his management and tact , - and though I have now win 
 for my life 's partner the most beautiful of woman , I could not 
 contemplate even the temporary breaking of the association between myself 
 and my gifted and brilliant comrade , without a keen pang of personal pain 
 amid my nuptial joy . lean his arm on the carriage - window , he look 
 in upon we both , smile . 

 " my spirit will be with you both in all your journeying ! " he say - " and 
 when you return , I shall be one of the first to bid you welcome home . 
 your house - party be fix for September , I believe ? " 

 " yes , - and you will be the most eagerly desire guest of all invite ! " I 
 reply heartily , press his hand . 

 " Fie , for shame ! " he retort laughingly - " be not so disloyal of speech , 
 Geoffrey ! be you not go to entertain the Prince of Wales ? - and 
 shall anyone be more ' eagerly - desire ' than he ? no , - I must play a 
 humble third or even fourth on your list where Royalty be 
 concern , - my princedom be alas ! not that of Wales , - and the throne I 
 might claim   if I have anyone to help I , which I have not   be a long way 
 remove from that of England ! " 

 Sibyl say nothing , - but her eye rest on his handsome face and fine 
 figure with an odd wonder and wistfulness , and she be very pale . 

 " good - bye Lady Sibyl ! " he add gently - " all joy be with you ! to we who 
 be leave behind , your absence will seem long , - but to you , - ah ! - love 
 give wing to time , and what would be to ordinary folk a month of mere 
 dull living , will be for you nothing but a moment 's rapture ! love be 
 well than wealth , - you have find that out already I know ! - but I 
 think - and hope - that you be destine to make the knowledge more 
 certain and complete ! think of I sometimes ! Au revoir ! " 

 the horse start , - a handful of rice fling by the society idiot who be 
 always at wedding , rattle against the door and on the roof of the 
 brougham , and Lucio step back , wave his hand . to the last we see 
 he , - a tall stately figure on the step of Lord Elton 's 
 mansion , - surround by an ultra - fashionable throng , ... bridesmaid in 
 bright attire and picture - hat , - young girl all eager and 
 excited - look , each of they no doubt long fervently for the day to 
 come when they might severally manage to secure as rich a husband as 
 myself , ... match - make mother and wicked old dowager , exhibit 
 priceless lace on their capacious bosom , and ablaze with diamond , ... 
 man with white button - hole bouquet in their irreproachably fitting 
 frock - coat , - servant in gay livery , and the usual street - crowd of 
 idle sight - seer ; - all this cluster of face , costume and flower , be 
 pile against the grey background of the stone portico , - and in the 
 midst , the dark beauty of Lucio 's face and the luminance of his flashing 
 eye make he the conspicuous object and chief centre of attraction , ... 
 then , ... the carriage turn a sharp corner , - the face vanish , - and 
 Sibyl and I realise that from henceforward we be leave alone , - alone 
 to face the future and ourselves , - and to learn the lesson of love ... 
 or hate ... for evermore together ! 




 XXVI 


 I can not now trace the slow or swift flitting by of phantasmal event , 
 ... wild ghost of day or week that drift past , and bring I 
 gradually and finally to a time when I find myself wandering , numb and 
 stricken and sick at heart , by the shore of a lake in Switzerland , - a 
 small lake , densely blue , with apparently a thought in its depth such 
 as be reflect in a child 's earnest eye . I gaze down at the clear and 
 glisten water almost unseeingly , - the snow - peak mountain 
 surround it be too high for the lifting of my aching 
 sight , - loftiness , purity , and radiance be unbearable to my mind , 
 crush as it be beneath a weight of dismal wreckage and ruin . what a 
 fool be I ever to have believe that in this world there could be such 
 a thing as happiness ! misery star I in the face , - life - long 
 misery , - and no escape but death . misery ! - it be the word which like a 
 hellish groan , have be utter by the three dreadful phantom that have 
 once , in an evil vision , disturb my rest . what have I do , I demand 
 indignantly of myself , to deserve this wretchedness which no wealth 
 could cure ? - why be fate so unjust ? like all my kind , I be unable to 
 discern the small yet strong link of the chain I have myself work , 
 and which bind I to my own undoing , - I blame fate , or rather 
 God , - and talk of injustice , merely because I personally suffer , 
 never realize that what I consider unjust be but the equitable 
 measure forth of that Eternal Law which be carry out with as 
 mathematical an exactitude as the movement of the planet , 
 notwithstanding man 's pigmy effort to impede its fulfilment . the light 
 wind blow down from the snow peak above I ruffle the placidity of 
 the little lake by which I aimlessly stroll , - I watch the tiny 
 ripple break over its surface like the line of laughter on a human 
 face , and wonder morosely whether it be deep enough to drown in ! for 
 what be the use of live on , - know what I know ! know that she 
 whom I have love , and whom I love still in a way that be hateful to 
 myself , be a thing viler and more shameless in character than the 
 veri poor drab of the street who sell herself for current 
 coin , - that the lovely body and angel - face be but an attractive 
 disguise for the soul of a harpy , - a vulture of vice , ... my God ! - an 
 irrepressible cry escape I as my thought go on and on in the 
 never - end circle and problem of incurable , unspeakable despair , - and 
 I throw myself down on a shelving bank of grass that slop towards the 
 lake and cover my face in a paroxysm of tearless agony . 

 still inexorable thought work in my brain , and force I to consider 
 my position . be she , - be Sibyl - more to blame than I myself for all 
 the strange havoc wrought ? I have marry she of my own free will and 
 choice , - and she have tell I beforehand - " I be a contaminate creature , 
 train to perfection in the lax moral and prurient literature of my 
 day . " well , - and so it have prove ! my own blood burn with shame as I 
 reflect how ample and convincing be the proof ! - and , start up 
 from my recumbent posture I pace up and down again restlessly in a 
 fever of self - contempt and disgust . what could I do with a woman such as 
 she to whom I be now bind for life ? reform she ? she would laugh I to 
 scorn for the attempt . reform myself ? she would sneer at I for an 
 effeminate milksop . besides , be not I as willing to be degrade as she 
 be to degrade I ? - a very victim to my brute passion ? tortured and 
 madden by my feeling I roam about wildly , and start as if a 
 pistol - shot have be fire near I when the plash of oar sound on the 
 silence and the keel of a small boat grate on the shore , the boatman 
 within it respectfully beg I in mellifluous French to employ he 
 for an hour . I assent , and in a minute or two be out on the lake in 
 the middle of the red glow of sunset which turn the snow - summit to 
 point of flame , and the water to the hue of ruby wine . I think the man 
 who row I see that I be in no very pleasant humour , for he preserve 
 a discreet silence , - and I , pull my hat partly over my eye , lie back 
 in the stern , still busy with my wretched musing . only a month 
 marry ! - and yet , - a sickening satiety have take the place of the 
 so - call ' deathless ' lover 's passion . there be moment even , when my 
 wife 's matchless physical beauty appear hideous to I . I know she as 
 she be , - and no exterior charm could ever again cover for I the 
 revolting nature within . and what puzzle I from dawn to dusk be her 
 polished , specious hypocrisy , - her amazing aptitude for lie ! to look at 
 she , - to hear she speak , - one would have deem she a very saint of 
 purity , - a delicate creature whom a coarse word would startle and 
 offend , - a very incarnation of the sweetest and most gracious 
 womanhood , - all heart and feeling and sympathy . everyone think thus of 
 she , - and never be there a great error . heart she have none ; that fact 
 be bear in upon I two day after our marriage while we be in Paris , 
 for there a telegram reach we announce her mother 's death . the 
 paralyse Countess of Elton have , it appear , expire suddenly on our 
 wedding - day , or rather our wedding night , - but the Earl have deem it 
 good to wait forty - eight hour before interrupt our hymeneal 
 happiness with the melancholy tiding . he follow his telegram by a 
 brief letter to his daughter , in which the concluding line be 
 these - " as you be a bride and be travel abroad , I should advise 
 you by no means to go into mourning . under the circumstance it be 
 really not necessary . " 

 and Sibyl have readily accept his suggestion , keep generally however 
 to white and pale mauve colouring in her numerous and wonderful 
 toilette , in order not to outrage the propriety too openly in the 
 opinion of person know to she , whom she might possibly meet casually 
 in the foreign town we visit . no word of regret pass her lip , and 
 no tear be shed for her mother 's loss . she only say , 

 " what a good thing her suffering be over ! " 

 then , with a little sarcastic smile , she have add - 

 " I wonder when we shall receive the Elton - Chesney wedding card ! " 

 I do not reply , for I be pain and grieve at her lack of all gentle 
 feeling in the matter , and I be also , to a certain extent , 
 superstitiously affect by the fact of the death occur on our 
 marriage - day . however this be now a thing of the past ; a month have 
 elapse , - a month in which the tearing - down of illusion have go on 
 daily and hourly , - till I be leave to contemplate the uncurtained bare 
 prose of life and the knowledge that I have wed a beautiful feminine 
 animal with the soul of a shameless libertine . here I pause and ask 
 myself , - be not I also a libertine ? yes , - I freely admit it , - but the 
 libertinage of a man , while it may run to excess in hot youth , generally 
 resolve itself , under the influence of a great love , into a strong 
 desire for undefiled sweetness and modesty in the woman belove . if a 
 man have indulge in both folly and sin , the time come at last , when , if 
 he have any good leave in he at all , he turn back upon himself and 
 lash his own vice with the scorpion - whip of self - contempt till he 
 smart with the rage and pain of it , - and then , ache in every pulse 
 with his deserved chastisement , he kneel in spirit at the foot of some 
 pure , true - hearted woman whose white soul , like an angel , hover 
 compassionately above he , and there lay down his life , say " do what 
 you will with it , - it be your ! " and woe to she who play lightly with 
 such a gift , or work fresh injury upon it ! no man , even if he have in 
 his day , indulge in ' rapid ' living , should choose a ' rapid ' woman for 
 his wife , - he have far well put a loaded pistol to his head and make an 
 end of it ! 

 the sunset - glory begin to fade from the landscape as the little boat 
 glide on over the tranquil water , and a great shadow be on my mind , 
 like the shadow of that outer darkness which would soon be night . again 
 I ask myself - be there no happiness possible in all the world ? just 
 then the Angelus chime from a little chapel on the shore , and as it 
 rang , a memory stir in my brain move I well - nigh to tear . Mavis 
 Clare be happy ! - Mavis , with her frank fearless eye , sweet face and 
 bright nature , - Mavis , wear her crown of Fame as simply as a child 
 might wear a wreath of may - blossom , - she , with a merely moderate share 
 of fortune which even in its slight proportion be only due to her own 
 hard incessant work , - she be happy . and I , - with my million , - be 
 wretched ! how be it ? why be it ? what have I do ? I have live as my 
 compeer live , - I have follow the lead of all society , - I have feast 
 my friend and effectually ' snub ' my foe , - I have comport myself 
 exactly as other of my wealth comport themselves , - and I have marry a 
 woman whom most man , look upon once , would have be proud to win . 
 nevertheless there seem to be a curse upon I . what have I miss out 
 of life ? I know , - but be ashamed to own it , because I have previously 
 scorn what I call the dream - nothing of mere sentiment . and now I 
 have to acknowledge the paramount importance of those ' dream - nothing ' 
 out of which all true living must come . I have to realize that my 
 marriage be nothing but the mere mating of the male and female 
 animal , - a coarse bodily union , and no more ; - that all the fine and 
 deep emotion which make a holy thing of human wedlock , be 
 lack , - the mutual respect , the trust sympathy , - the lovely 
 confidence of mind with mind , - the subtle inner spiritual bond which no 
 science can analyse , and which be so much close and strong than the 
 material , and knit immortal soul together when body decay - these 
 thing have no existence , and never would exist between my wife and I . 
 thus , as far as I be concern , there be a strange blankness in the 
 world , - I be thrust back upon myself for comfort and find none . what 
 should I do with my life , I wonder drearily ! Win fame , - true 
 fame , - after all ? with Sibyl 's witch - eye mock my effort ? - never ! 
 if I have ever have any gift of creative thought within I , she would 
 have kill it ! 

 the hour be over , - the boatman row I in to land , and I pay and 
 dismiss he . the sun have completely sink , - there be dense purple 
 shadow darken over the mountain , and one or two small star faintly 
 discernible in the east . I walk slowly back to the villa where we be 
 stay , - a ' dépendance ' belong to the large hotel of the district , 
 which we have rent for the sake of privacy and independence , some of 
 the hotel - servant be portion off to attend upon we , in addition to 
 my own man Morris , and my wife 's maid . I find Sibyl in the garden , 
 recline in a basket - chair , her eye fix on the after - glow of the 
 sunset , and in her hand a book , - one of the loathliest of the prurient 
 novel that have be lately write by woman to degrade and shame their 
 sex . with a sudden impulse of rage upon I which I could not resist , I 
 snatch the volume from she and fling it into the lake below . she make 
 no movement of either surprise or offence , - she merely turn her eye 
 away from the glowing heaven , and look at I with a little smile . 

 " how violent you be to - day , Geoffrey ! " she say . 

 I gaze at she in sombre silence . from the light hat with its pale mauve 
 orchid that rest on her nut - brown hair , to the point of her daintily 
 embroider shoe , her dress be perfect , - and she be perfect . I 
 know that , - a matchless piece of womanhood ... outwardly ! my heart 
 beat , - there be a sense of suffocation in my throat , - I could have 
 kill she for the mingled loathing and longing which her beauty rouse 
 in I . 

 " I be sorry ! " I say hoarsely , avoid her gaze - " but I hate to see you 
 with such a book as that ! " 

 " you know its content ? " she query , with the same slight smile . 

 " I can guess . " 

 " such thing have to be write , they say nowadays , " - she go on - " and , 
 certainly , to judge from the commendation bestow on these sort of 
 book by the press , it be very evident that the wave of opinion be 
 set in the direction of let girl know all about marriage before 
 they enter upon it , in order that they may do so with their eye wide 
 open , - very wide open ! " she laugh , and her laughter hurt I like a 
 physical wound . " what an old - fashioned idea the bride of the poet and 
 sixty - year - ago romancist seem now ! " she continue - " imagine she ! - a 
 shrink tender creature , shy of beholder , timid of speech , ... 
 wear the emblematic veil , which in former day , you know , use to 
 cover the face entirely , as a symbol that the secret of marriage be 
 as yet hide from the maiden 's innocent and ignorant eye . now the veil 
 be wear fling back from the bride 's brow , and she star unabashe at 
 everybody , - oh yes , indeed we know quite well what we be do now when 
 we marry , thank to the ' new ' fiction ! " 

 " the new fiction be detestable , " - I say hotly - " both in style and 
 morality . even as a question of literature I wonder at your 
 condescending to read any of it . the woman whose dirty book I have just 
 throw away - and I feel no compunction for have do it , - be destitute 
 of grammar as well as decency . " 

 " oh , but the critic do not   notice that , " - she interrupt , with a 
 delicate mockery vibrate in her voice - " it be apparently not their 
 business to assist in preserve the purity of the English language . 
 what they fall into rapture over be the originality of the ' sexual ' 
 theme , though I should have think all such matter be as old as the 
 hill . I never read review as a rule , but I do happen to come across 
 one on the book you have just drown , - and in it , the reviewer state 
 he have cry over it ! " 

 she laugh again . 

 " Beast ! " I say emphatically - " he probably find in it some gloze - over 
 of his own vice . but you , Sibyl - why do you read such stuff ? - how can 
 you read it ? " 

 " Curiosity move I in the first place , " - she answer listlessly - " I 
 want to see what make a reviewer cry ! then when I begin to read , I 
 find that the story be all about the manner in which man amuse 
 themselves with the soil dove of the highway and bye - way , - and as I 
 be not very well instruct in that sort of thing , I think I might as 
 well learn ! you know these unpleasant morsel of information on 
 unsavoury subject be like the reputed suggestion of the devil , - if 
 you listen to one , you be bind to hear more . besides , literature be 
 suppose to reflect the time we live in , - and that kind of literature 
 be more prevalent than anything else , we be compel to accept and 
 study it as the mirror of the age . " 

 with an expression on her face that be half mirth and half scorn , she 
 rise from her seat , and look down into the lovely lake below she . 

 " the fish will eat that book , - " she observe - " I hope it will not 
 poison they ! if they could read and understand it , what singular idea 
 they would have of we human being ! " 

 " why do not   you read Mavis Clare 's book ? " I ask suddenly - " you tell I 
 you admire she . " 

 " so I do , - immensely ! " she answer , - " I admire she and wonder at she , 
 both together . how that woman can keep her child 's heart and child 's 
 faith in a world like this , be more than I can understand . it be always 
 a perfect marvel to I , - a sort of supernatural surprise . you ask I why 
 do not   I read her book , - I do read they , - I have   read they all over and 
 over again , - but she do not write many , and one have to wait for her 
 production long than for those of most author . when I want to feel 
 like an angel , I read Mavis Clare , - but I more often be inclined to feel 
 the other way , and then her book be merely so many worry to I . " 

 " Worries ? " I echo . 

 " yes . it be worry to find somebody believe in a God when you 
 can not   believe in he , - to have beautiful faith offer to you which 
  you can not   grasp , - and to know that there be a creature alive , a woman 
 like yourself in everything except mind , who be hold fast a happiness 
 which you can never attain , - no , not though you hold out pray hand 
 day and night and shout wild appeal to the dull heaven ! " 

 at that moment she look like a queen of tragedy , - her violet eye 
 ablaze , - her lip apart , - her breast heaving ; - - I approach she with a 
 strange nervous hesitation and touch her hand . she give it to I 
 passively , - I draw it through my arm , and for a minute or two we pace 
 silently up and down the gravel walk . the light from the monster hotel 
 which cater for we and our want , be begin to twinkle from 
 basement to roof , - and just above the châlet we rent , a triad of star 
 sparkle in the shape of a trefoil . 

 " Poor Geoffrey ! " she say presently , with a quick upward glance at 
 I , - " I be sorry for you ! with all my vagary of disposition I be not a 
 fool , and at anyrate I have learn how to analyse myself as well as 
 other . I read you as easily as I read a book , - I see what a strange 
 tumult your mind be in ! you love I - and you loathe I ! - and the 
 contrast of emotion make a wreck of you and your ideal . hush , - do not 
 speak ; I know , - I know ! but what would you have I be ? an angel ? I 
 can not realize such a being for more than a fleeting moment of 
 imagination . a saint ? they be all martyr . a good woman ? I never meet 
 one . innocent ? - ignorant ? I tell you before we marry that I be 
 neither ; there be nothing leave for I to discover as far as the 
 relation between man and woman be concern , - I have take the measure 
 of the inherent love of vice in both sex . there be not a pin to choose 
 between they , - man be no bad than woman , - woman no bad than man . I 
 have discover everything - except God ! - and I conclude no God could 
 ever have design such a crazy and mean business as human life . " 

 while she thus speak , I could have fall at her foot and implore she 
 to be silent . for she be , unknowingly , give utterance to some of the 
 many thought in which I myself have frequently indulge , - and yet , from 
 her lip they sound cruel , unnatural , and callous to a degree that 
 make I shrink from she in fear and agony . we have reach a little grove 
 of pine , - and here in the silence and shadow I take she in my arm and 
 star disconsolately upon the beauty of her face . 

 " Sibyl ! " I whisper - " Sibyl , what be wrong with we both ? how be it that 
 we do not seem to find the lovely side of love ? - why be it that even 
 in our kiss and embrace , some impalpable darkness come between we , 
 so that we anger or weary each other when we should be glad and 
 satisfied ? what be it ? can you tell ? for you know the darkness be 
 there ! " 

 a curious look come into her eye , - a far - away strained look of hungry 
 yearning , mingle , as I think , with compassion for I . 

 " yes , it be there ! " she answer slowly - " and it be of our own mutual 
 creation . I believe you have something nobler in your nature , Geoffrey , 
 than I have in mine , - an indefinable something that recoil from I and 
 my theory despite your wish and will . perhaps if you have give way to 
 that feel in time , you would never have marry I . you speak of the 
 lovely side of love , - to I there be no lovely side , - it be all 
 coarse and horrible ! you and I for instance , - cultured man and 
 woman , - we can not , in marriage , get a flight beyond the common emotion 
 of Hodge and his girl ! " she laugh violently , and shudder in my arm . 
 " what liar the poet be , Geoffrey ! they ought to be sentence to 
 life - long imprisonment for their perjury ! they help to mould the 
 credulous belief of a woman 's heart ; - in her early youth she read 
 their delicious assurance , and imago that love will be all they 
 teach , - a thing divine and last beyond earthly counting ; - then come 
 the coarse finger of prose on the butterfly - wing of poesy , and the 
 bitterness and hideousness of complete disillusion ! " 

 I hold she still in my arm with the fierce grasp of a man cling to a 
 spar ere he drown in mid - ocean . 

 " but I love you Sibyl ! - - my wife , I love you ! " I say , with a passion 
 that choke my utterance . 

 " you love I , - yes , I know , but how ? in a way that be abhorrent to 
 yourself ! " she reply - " it be not poetic love , - it be man 's love , and 
 man 's love be brute love . so it be , - so it will be , - so it must be . 
 moreover the brute - love soon tire , - and when it die out from satiety 
 there be nothing left . nothing , Geoffrey , - absolutely nothing but a 
 blank and civil form of intercourse , which I do not doubt we shall be 
 able to keep up for the admiration and comment of society ! " 

 she disengage herself from my embrace , and move towards the house . 

 " come ! " she add , turn she exquisite head back over her shoulder 
 with a feline caress grace that she alone possess , " you know there 
 be a famous lady in London who advertise her saleable charm to the 
 outside public by mean of her monogram work into the lace of all her 
 window - blind , think it no doubt good for trade ! I be not quite so 
 bad as that ! you have pay dearly for I I know ; - but remember I as yet 
 wear no jewel but your , and crave no gift beyond those you be 
 generous enough to bestow , - and my dutiful desire be to give you as much 
 full value as I can for your money . " 

 " Sibyl , you kill I ! " I cry , torture beyond endurance , " do you think 
 I so base - - " 

 I break off with almost a sob of despair . 

 " you can not help be base , " she say , steadily regard I , - " because 
 you be a man . I be base because I be a woman . if we believe in a God , 
 either of we , we might discover some different way of life and love - who 
 know ? - but neither you nor I have any remnant of faith in a be whose 
 existence all the scientist of the day be ever at work to disprove . we 
 be persistently teach that we be animal and nothing more , - let we 
 therefore not be ashamed of animalism . animalism and atheism be 
 approve by the scientist and applaud by the press , - and the clergy 
 be powerless to enforce the faith they preach . come Geoffrey , do not 
 stay moon like a stricken Parsifal under those pine , - throw away 
 that thing which trouble you , your conscience , - throw it away as you 
 have throw the book I be lately read , and consider this , - that most 
 man of your type take pride and rejoice in be the prey of a bad 
 woman ! - so you should really congratulate yourself on have one for a 
 wife ! - one who be so broad - minded too , that she will always let you have 
 your own way in everything you do , provide you let she have her ! it be 
 the way all marriage be arrange nowadays , - at any rate in our 
 set , - otherwise the tie would be impossible of endurance . come ! " 

 " we can not live together on such an understanding , Sibyl ! " I say 
 hoarsely , as I walk slowly by her side towards the villa . 

 " oh yes , we can ! " she aver , a little malign smile play round her 
 lip - " we can do as other do , - there be no necessity for we to stand 
 out from the rest like quixotic fool , and pose as model to other 
 married people , - we should only be detest for our pain . it be surely 
 well to be popular than virtuous , - virtue never pay ! see , there be 
 our interesting german waiter come to inform we that dinner be ready ; 
 please do not   look so utterly miserable , for we have not quarrel , and 
 it would be foolish to let the servant think we have . " 

 I make no answer . we enter the house , and din , - Sibyl keep up a 
 perfect fire of conversation , to which I reply in mere 
 monosyllable , - and after dinner we go as usual to sit in the 
 illuminate garden of the adjacent hotel , and hear the band . Sibyl be 
 know , and universally admire and flatter by many of the people 
 stay there , - - and , as she move about among her acquaintance , 
 chat first with one group and then with another , I sit in moody 
 silence , watch she with increase wonderment and horror . her beauty 
 seem to I like the beauty of the poison - flower , which , brilliant in 
 colour and perfect in shape , exhale death to those who pluck it from 
 its stem . and that night , when I hold she in my arm , and feel her heart 
 beat against my own in the darkness , an awful dread arise in I , - a 
 dread as to whether I might not at some time or other be tempt to 
 strangle she as she lie on my breast - - strangle she as one would 
 strangle a vampire that suck one 's blood and strength away ! 




 XXVII 


 we conclude our wedding - tour rather soon than we have at first 
 intend , and return to England and Willowsmere Court , about the 
 middle of August . I have a vague notion stir in I that give I a 
 sort of dim indefinable consolation , and it be this , - I mean to bring 
 my wife and Mavis Clare together , believe that the gentle influence of 
 the gracious and happy creature , who , like a contented bird in its nest , 
 dwelt serene in the little domain so near my own , might have a soften 
 and wholesome effect upon Sibyl 's pitiless love of analysis and scorn of 
 all noble ideal . the heat in Warwickshire be at this time 
 intense , - the rose be out in their full beauty , and the thick foliage 
 of the branching oak and elm in my ground afford grateful shade and 
 repose to the tired body , while the tranquil loveliness of the woodland 
 and meadow scenery , comfort and soothe the equally tired mind . after 
 all , there be no country in the world so fair as England , - none so 
 richly endow with verdant forest and fragrant flower , - none that can 
 boast of sweet nook for seclusion and romance . in Italy , that land so 
 over - praise by hysterical poseur who foolishly deem it admirable to 
 glorify any country save their own , the field be arid and brown , and 
 parch by the too fervent sun , - there be no shady lane such as 
 England can boast of in all her shire , - and the mania among Italians 
 for ruthlessly cut down their fine tree , have not only actually 
 injure the climate , but have so spoil the landscape that it be 
 difficult to believe at all in its once renowne , and still erroneously 
 report charm . such a bower of beauty as Lily Cottage be in that 
 sultry August , could never have be discover in all the length and 
 breadth of Italy . Mavis superintend the care of her garden 
 herself , - she have two gardener , who under her direction , keep the 
 grass and tree continually water , - and nothing could be imagine more 
 lovely than the picturesque old - fashioned house , cover with rose and 
 tuft of jessamine that seem to tie up the roof in festal knot and 
 garland , while around the building spread long reach of deep emerald 
 lawn , and bosky arbour of foliage where all the most musical song - bird 
 apparently find refuge and delight , and where at evening a perfect 
 colony of nightingale keep up a bubble fountain of delicious melody . 
 I remember well the afternoon , warm , languid and still , when I take 
 Sibyl to see the woman - author she have so long admire . the heat be so 
 great that in our own ground all the bird be silent , but when we 
 approach Lily Cottage the first thing we hear be the piping of a 
 thrush up somewhere among the rose , - a mellow liquid warble expressing 
 ' sweet content , ' and mingle with the subdued coo - cooing of the dove 
 ' reviewer ' who be comment on whatever pleased or displease they 
 in the distance . 

 " what a pretty place it be ! " say my wife , as she peep over the gate , 
 and through the odorous tangle of honeysuckle and jessamine - " I really 
 think it be pretty than Willowsmere . it have be wonderfully 
 improve . " 

 we be show in , - and Mavis , who have expect our visit do not keep we 
 wait long . an she enter , clothe in some gossamer white stuff that 
 clung softly about her pretty figure and be belt in by a simple 
 ribbon , an odd sickening pang go through my heart . the fair untroubled 
 face , - the joyous yet dreamy student eye , - the sensitive mouth , and 
 above all , the radiant look of happiness that make the whole expression 
 of her feature so bright and fascinating , teach I in one flash of 
 conviction all that a woman might be , and all that she too frequently be 
 not . and I have hat Mavis Clare ! - I have even take up my pen to deal 
 she a wanton blow through the medium of anonymous criticism , ... but 
 this be before I know she , - before I realize that there could be any 
 difference between she and the female scarecrow who so frequently pose 
 as ' novelist ' without be able to write correct English , and who talk 
 in public of their ' copy ' with the glibness gain from Grub Street and 
 the journalist ' cheap restaurant . yes - I have hat she , - - and 
 now - - now , almost I love she ! Sibyl , tall , queenly and beautiful , 
 gaze upon she with eye that express astonishment as well as 
 admiration . 

 " to think that you be the famous Mavis Clare ! " she say , smile , as 
 she hold out her hand - " I always hear and know that you do not look at 
 all literary , but I never quite realize that you could be exactly what 
 I see you be ! " 

 " to look literary do not always imply that you be literary ! " 
 return Mavis , laugh a little - " too often I be afraid you will find 
 that the woman who take pain to look literary be ignorant of 
 literature ! but how glad I be to see you , Lady Sibyl ! do you know I use 
 to watch you play about on the lawn at Willowsmere when I be quite 
 a little girl ? " 

 " and I use to watch you , " - respond Sibyl - " you use to make 
 daisy - chain and cowslip - ball in the field opposite on the other side 
 of the Avon . it be a great pleasure to I to know we be neighbour . you 
 must come and see I often at Willowsmere . " 

 Mavis do not answer immediately , - she busy herself in pour out tea 
 and dispense it to both of we . Sibyl , who be always on the alert for 
 glimpse of character , notice that she do not answer , and repeat she 
 word coaxingly . 

 " you will come , will you not ? as often as you like , - the oftener the 
 well . we must be friend , you know ! " 

 Mavis look up then , a frank sweet smile in her eye . 

 " do you really mean it ? " she ask . 

 " mean it ! " echo Sibyl - " why , of course I do ! " 

 " how can you doubt it ! " I exclaim . 

 " well , you must both forgive I for ask such a question " - say Mavis 
 still smile - " but you see you be now among what be call the 
 ' county magnate , ' and county magnate consider themselves infinitely 
 above all author ! " she laugh outright , and her blue eye twinkle 
 with fun . " I think many of they estimate writer of book as some sort 
 of strange outgrowth of humanity that be barely decent . it be 
 deliciously funny and always amuse I , - nevertheless , among my many 
 fault , the big one be , I fancy , pride , and a dreadfully obstinate 
 spirit of independence . now , to tell you the truth , I have be ask by 
 many so - call ' great ' people to their house , and when I have go , I 
 have generally be sorry for it afterwards . " 

 " why ? " I ask - " they honour themselves by invite you . " 

 " oh , I do not   think they take it in that way at all ! " she reply , 
 shake her fair head demurely - " they fancy they have perform a great 
 act of condescension , - whereas it be really I who condescend , for it be 
 very good of I , you know , to leave the society of the Pallas Athene in 
 my study for that of a flounced and frizzle lady of fashion ! " her 
 bright smile again irradiate her face and she go on - " once I be 
 ask to luncheon with a certain baron and baroness who invite a few 
 guest " to meet I , " so they say . I be not introduce to more than one 
 or two of these people , - the rest sit and star at I as if I be a 
 new kind of fish or fowl . then the baron show I his house , and tell 
 I the price of his picture and his china , - he be even good enough to 
 explain which be Dresden and which be Delft ware , though I believe , 
 benighted author as I be , I could have instruct he equally on these , 
 and other matter . however I manage to smile amicably through the whole 
 programme , and profess myself charm and delight in the usual 
 way ; - but they never ask I to visit they again , - and ,   unless indeed 
 they want I to be impressed with their furniture - catalogue   I can 
 never make out what I do to be ask at all , and what I have do never 
 to be ask any more ! " 

 " they must have be parvenus , " - say Sibyl indignantly - " no well - breed 
 people would have price their good to you , unless they happen to be 
 Jews . " 

 Mavis laugh - a merry little laugh like a peal of bell , - then she 
 continue - 

 " well , I will not say who they be , - I must keep something for my 
 ' literary reminiscence ' when I get old ! then all these people will be 
 name , and go down to posterity as Dante 's enemy go down to Dante 's 
 hell ! I have only tell you the incident just to show you why I ask you 
 if you mean it , when you invite I to visit you at Willowsmere . 
 because the baron and baroness I have speak of ' gush ' over I and my 
 poor book to such an extent that you would have fancy I be to be for 
 evermore one of their dear friend , - and they do not   mean it ! other 
 people I know embrace I effusively and invite I to their house , and 
  they do not   mean it ! and when I find out these sham , I like to make it 
 very clear on my own side that I do not seek to be embrace or invite , 
 and that if certain great folk deem it a ' favour ' to ask I to their 
 house , I do not so consider it , but rather think the ' favour ' be 
 entirely on my part if I accept the invitation . and I do not say this 
 for my own self at all , - self have nothing to do with it , - but I do say 
 it and strongly assert it for the sake of the dignity of literature as 
 an art and profession . if a few other author would maintain this 
 position , we might raise the standard of letter by degree to what it 
 be in the old day of Scott and Byron . I hope you do not think I too 
 proud ? " 

 " on the contrary , I think you be quite right " - say Sibyl 
 earnestly - " and I admire you for your courage and independence . some of 
 the aristocracy be , I know , such utter snob that often I feel ashamed 
 to belong to they . but as far as we be concern , I can only assure you 
 that if you will honour we by become our friend as well as neighbour , 
 you shall not regret it . do try and like I if you can ! " 

 she bent forward with a witching smile on her fair face . Mavis look at 
 she seriously and admiringly . 

 " how beautiful you be ! " she say frankly - " everybody tell you this of 
 course , - still , I can not help join in the general chorus . to I , a 
 lovely face be like a lovely flower , - I must admire it . beauty be quite 
 a divine thing , and though I be often tell that the plain people be 
 always the good people , I never can quite believe it . nature be surely 
 bind to give a beautiful face to a beautiful spirit . " 

 Sibyl , who have smile with pleasure at the first word of the open 
 compliment pay she by one of the most gifted of her own sex , now 
 flush deeply . 

 " not always , Miss Clare , " - she say , veil her brilliant eye beneath 
 the droop of her long lash - " one can imagine a fair fiend as easily as 
 a fair angel . " 

 " true ! " and Mavis look at her musingly , - then suddenly laugh in her 
 blithe bright way , she add - " quite true ! really I can not picture an 
 ugly fiend , - for the fiend be suppose to be immortal , and I be 
 convince that immortal ugliness have no part in the universe . downright 
 hideousness belong to humanity alone , - and an ugly face be such a blot 
 on creation that we can only console ourselves by the reflection that it 
 be fortunately perishable , and that in course of time the soul behind it 
 will be release from its ill - form husk , and will be allow to wear a 
 fairer aspect . yes , Lady Sibyl , I will come to Willowsmere ; I can not 
 refuse to look upon such loveliness as your as often as I may ! " 

 " you be a charming flatterer ! " say Sibyl , rise and put an arm 
 round she in that affectionate coax way of hers which seem so 
 sincere , and which so frequently mean nothing - " but I confess I prefer 
 to be flatter by a woman rather than by a man . man say the same thing 
 to all woman , - they have a very limited répertoire of compliment , - and 
 they will tell a fright she be beautiful , if it happen to serve their 
 immediate purpose . but woman themselves can so hardly be persuade to 
 admit that any good quality exist either inwardly or outwardly in one 
 another , that when they do say a kind or generous thing of their own sex 
 it be a wonder worth remembering . may I your study ? " 

 Mavis willingly assent , - and we all three go into the peaceful 
 sanctum where the marble Pallas preside , and where the dog Tricksy and 
 Emperor be both ensconce , - Emperor sit up on his haunch and 
 survey the prospect from the window , and Tricksy with a most absurd 
 air of importance , imitate the large animal 's attitude precisely , at 
 a little distance off . both creature be friendly to my wife and to 
 I , and while Sibyl be stroke the St Bernard 's massive head , Mavis 
 say suddenly , 

 " where be the friend who come with you here first , Prince Rimânez ? " 

 " he be in St Petersburg just now , " - I answer - " but we expect he in 
 two or three week to stay with we on a visit for some time . " 

 " he be surely a very singular man , " - say Mavis thoughtfully - " do you 
 remember how strangely my dog behave to he ? Emperor be quite 
 restless and troublesome for two or three hour after he have go . " 

 and in a few word , she tell Sibyl the incident of the St Bernard 's 
 attack upon Lucio . 

 " some people have a natural antipathy to dog , " - say Sibyl , as she 
 hear - " and the dog always find it out , and resent it . but I should not 
 have think Prince Rimânez have an antipathy to any creature 
 except - woman ! " 

 and she laugh , a trifle bitterly . 

 " except woman ! " echo Mavis surprisedly - " do he hate woman ? he must 
 be a very good actor then , - for to I he be wonderfully kind and 
 gentle . " 

 Sibyl look at she intently , and be silent for a minute . then she 
 say - 

 " perhaps it be because he know you be unlike the ordinary run of 
 woman and have nothing in common with their usual trumpery aim . of 
 course he be always courteous to our sex , - but I think it be easy to see 
 that his courtesy be often wear as a mere mask to cover a very different 
 feeling . " 

 " you have perceive that , then , Sibyl ? " I say with a slight smile . 

 " I should be blind if I have not perceive it " - she reply ; " I do not 
 however blame he for his pet aversion , - I think it make he all the 
 more attractive and interesting . " 

 " he be a great friend of your ? " inquire Mavis , look at I as she 
 put the question . 

 " the very great friend I have , " - I reply quickly - " I owe he more 
 than I can ever repay , - indeed I have to thank he even for introduce 
 I to my wife ! " 

 I say the word unthinkingly and playfully , but as I utter they , a 
 sudden shock affect my nerve , - a shock of painful memory . yes , it be 
 true ! - I owe to he , to Lucio , the misery , fear , degradation and shame 
 of have such a woman as Sibyl be , unite to I till death should we 
 part . I feel myself turn sick and giddy , - and I sit down in one of 
 the quaint oak chair that help to furnish Mavis Clare 's study , 
 allow the two woman to pass out of the open french window into the 
 sunlit garden together , the dog follow at their heel . I watch 
 they as they go , - my wife , tall and stately , attire in the new and 
 most fashionable mode , - Mavis , small and slight , with her soft white 
 gown and float waist - ribbon , - the one sensual , the other 
 spiritual , - the one base and vicious in desire , - the other pure - soule 
 and aspire to noblest end , - the one , a physically magnificent 
 animal , - the other merely sweet - faced and ideally fair like a sylph of 
 the woodland , - and look , I clench my hand as I think with 
 bitterness of spirit what a mistaken choice I have make . in the profound 
 egotism which have always be part of my nature I now actually allow 
 myself to believe that I might , have I choose , have wed Mavis 
 Clare , - never for one moment imagine that all my wealth would have 
 be useless to I in such a quest , and that I might as well have 
 propose to pluck a star from the sky as to win a woman who be able to 
 read my nature thoroughly , and who would never have come down to my 
 money - level from her intellectual throne , - no , not though I have be a 
 monarch of many nation . I star at the large tranquil feature of the 
 Pallas Athene , - and the blank eyeball of the marble goddess appear to 
 regard I in turn with impassive scorn . I glance round the room , 
 and at the wall adorn with the wise saying of poet and 
 philosopher , - saying that remind I of truth which I know , yet 
 never accept as practicable ; and presently my eye be attract to a 
 corner near the writing - desk which I have not notice before , where there 
 be a small dim lamp burn . above this lamp an ivory crucifix gleam 
 white against drapery of dark purple velvet , - below it , on a silver 
 bracket , be an hour - glass through which the sand be run in 
 glistening grain , and round the entire little shrine be write in 
 letter of gold " now be the acceptable time ! " - the word ' now ' be in 
 large character than the rest . ' now ' be evidently Mavis 's motto , - to 
 lose no moment , but to work , to pray , to love , to hope , to thank God and 
 be glad for life , all in the ' now ' - and neither to regret the past nor 
 forebode the future , but simply do the good that could be do , and 
 leave all else in child - like confidence to the Divine Will . I get up 
 restlessly , - the sight of the crucifix curiously annoy I ; - and I 
 follow the path my wife and Mavis have take through the garden . I 
 find they look in at the cage of the ' athenæum ' owl , - the 
 owl - in - chief being as usual puff out with his own importance , and 
 swell visibly with indignation and excess of feather . Sibyl turn as 
 she see I , - her face be bright and smile . 

 " Miss Clare have very strong opinion of her own , Geoffrey , " she 
 say - " she be not as much captivate by Prince Rimânez as most people 
 be , - in fact , she have just confide to I that she do not quite like 
 he . " 

 Mavis blush , but her eye meet mine with fearless candour . 

 " it be wrong to say what one think , I know , - " she murmur in somewhat 
 troubled accent - " and it be a dreadful fault of mine . please forgive I 
 Mr Tempest ! you tell I the prince be your great friend , - and I 
 assure you I be immensely impress by his appearance when I first see 
 he , ... but afterwards , ... after I have study he a little , the 
 conviction be bear in upon I that he be not altogether what he 
 seem . " 

 " that be exactly what he say of himself , " - I answer , laugh a 
 little - " he have a mystery I believe , - and he have promise to clear it up 
 for I some day . but I be sorry you do not   like he , Miss Clare , - for he 
 like you . " 

 " perhaps when I meet he again my idea may be different " - say Mavis 
 gently - " at present , ... well , - do not let we talk of it any 
 more , - indeed I feel I have be very rude to express any opinion at all 
 concern one for whom you and Lady Sibyl have so great a regard . but 
 somehow I seem impel , almost against my will , to say what I do 
 just now . " 

 her soft eye look pained and puzzle , and to relieve she and change 
 the subject , I ask if she be write anything new . 

 " oh yes , " - she reply - " it would never do for I to be idle . the public 
 be very kind to I , - and no soon have they read one thing of mine 
 than they clamour for another , so I be keep very busy . " 

 " and what of the critic ? " I ask , with a good deal of curiosity . 

 she laugh . 

 " I never pay the least attention to they , " she answer , " except when 
 they be hasty and misguide enough to write lie about I , - then I very 
 naturally take the liberty to contradict those lie , either through my 
 own statement or that of my lawyer . apart from refuse to allow the 
 public to be lead into a false notion of my work and aim , I have no 
 grudge whatever against the critic . they be generally very poor 
 hard - work man , and have a frightful struggle to live . I have often , 
 privately , do some of they a good turn without their knowledge . a 
 publisher of mine send I an MS . the other day by one of my deadly 
 enemy on the press , and state that my opinion would decide its 
 rejection or acceptance , - I read it through , and though it be not very 
 brilliant work , it be good enough , so I praise it as warmly as I 
 could , and urge its publication , with the stipulation that the author 
 should never be tell I have have the cast vote . it have just come out I 
 see , - and I be sure I hope it will succeed . " here she pause to gather a 
 few deep damask rose , which she hand to Sibyl . " yes , - critic be 
 very badly , even cruelly pay , " - she go on musingly - " it be not to be 
 expect that they should write eulogy of the successful author , while 
 they continue unsuccessful , - such work could not be anything but gall 
 and wormwood to they . I know the poor little wife of one of they , - and 
 settle her dressmaker 's bill for she because she be afraid to show it 
 to her husband . the very week afterwards he slash away at my last book 
 in the most approve style in the paper on which he be employ , and 
 get , I suppose , about a guinea for his trouble . of course he do not   know 
 about his little wife and her dunning dressmaker ; and he never will 
 know , because I have bind she over to secrecy . " 

 " but why do you do such thing ? " ask Sibyl astonish ; " I would have 
 let his wife get into the County Court for her bill , if I have be you ! " 

 " would you ? " and Mavis smile gravely - " well , I could not . you know who 
 it be that say ' bless they that curse you , and do good to they that 
 hate you ' ? besides , the poor little woman be frightened to death at her 
 own expenditure . it be pitiful , you know , to see the helpless agony of 
 people who will live beyond their income , - they suffer much more than 
 the beggar in the street who make frequently more than a pound a day by 
 merely whine and snivel . the critic be much more in evil case 
 than the beggar - few of they make even a pound a day , and of course 
 they regard as their natural enemy the author who make thirty to 
 fifty pound a week . I assure you I be very sorry for critic all 
 round , - they be the least - regard and worst - reward of all the 
 literary community . and I never bother myself at all about what they say 
 of I , except as I before observe , when in their haste they tell 
 lie , - then of course it become necessary for I to state the truth in 
 simple self - defence as well as by way of duty to my public . but as a 
 rule I hand over all my press - notice to Tricksy there , " - indicate the 
 minute Yorkshire terrier who follow closely at the edge of her white 
 gown , - " and he tear they to indistinguishable shred in about three 
 minute ! " 

 she laugh merrily , and Sibyl smile , watch she with the same wonder 
 and admiration that have be express in her look more or less since 
 the beginning of our interview with this light - hearted possessor of 
 literary fame . we be now walk towards the gate , preparatory to 
 take our departure . 

 " may I come and talk to you sometimes ? " my wife say suddenly , in she 
 prettiest and most plead voice - " it would be such a privilege ! " 

 " you can come whenever you like in the afternoon , " - reply Mavis 
 readily - " the morning belong to a goddess more dominant even than 
 Beauty ; - work ! " 

 " you never work at night ? " I ask . 

 " indeed no ! I never turn the ordinance of Nature upside down , as I be 
 sure I should get the bad of it if I make such an attempt . the night 
 be for sleep - and I use it thankfully for that bless purpose . " 

 " some author can only write at night though , " I say . 

 " then you may be sure they only produce blur picture and indistinct 
 characterization , " say Mavis - " some I know there be , who invite 
 inspiration through gin or opium , as well as through the midnight 
 influence , but I do not believe in such method . morning , and a freshly 
 rest brain be require for literary labour , - that be , if one want 
 to write a book that will last for more than one ' season . ' " 

 she accompany we to the gate and stand under the porch , her big dog 
 beside she , and the rose wave high over her head . 

 " at any rate work agree with you , " - say Sibyl fix upon she a long , 
 intent , almost envious gaze - " you look perfectly happy . " 

 " I be perfectly happy , " - she answer , smile - " I have nothing in all 
 the world to wish for , except that I may die as peacefully as I have 
 live . " 

 " may that day be far distant ! " I say earnestly . 

 she raise her soft meditative eye to mine . 

 " thank you ! " she respond gently - " but I do not mind when it come , so 
 long as it find I ready . " 

 she wave her hand to we as we leave she and turn the corner of the 
 lane , - and for some minute we walk on slowly in absolute silence . 
 then at last Sibyl speak - 

 " I quite understand the hatred there be in some quarter for Mavis 
 Clare , " - she say - " I be afraid I begin to hate she myself ! " 

 I stop and star at she , astonish and confound . 

 " you begin to hate she - - you ? - and why ? " 

 " be you so blind that you can not perceive why ? " she retort , the 
 little malign smile I know so well play round her lip - " because she 
 be happy ! because she have no scandal in her life , and because she dare 
 to be content ! one long to make her miserable ! but how to do it ? she 
 believe in a God , - she think all he ordain be right and good . with 
 such a firm faith as that , she would be happy in a garret earning but a 
 few penny a day . I see now perfectly how she have win her public , - it be 
 by the absolute conviction she have herself of the theory of life she 
 try to instil . what can be do against she ? nothing ! but I understand 
 why the critic would like to ' quash ' her , - if I be a critic , fond of 
 whiskey - and - soda , and music - hall woman , I should like to quash she 
 myself for be so different to the rest of her sex ! " 

 " what an incomprehensible woman you be , Sibyl ! " I exclaim with real 
 irritation , - " you admire Miss Clare 's book , - you have always admire 
 they , - you have ask she to become your friend , - and almost in the same 
 breath you aver you would like to ' quash ' she or to make her miserable ! 
 I confess I can not understand you ! " 

 " of course you can not ! " she respond tranquilly , her eye rest upon 
 I with a curious expression , as we pause for an instant under the deep 
 shade of a chestnut tree before enter our own ground - " I never 
 suppose you could , and unlike the ordinary femme incomprise , I have 
 never blame you for your want of comprehension . it have take I some 
 time to understand myself , and even now I be not quite sure that I have 
 gauge the depth or shallowness of my own nature correctly . but on 
 this matter of Mavis Clare , can you not imagine that badness may hate 
 goodness ? that the confirm drunkard may hate the sober citizen ? that 
 the outcast may hate the innocent maiden ? and that it be possible that 
 I , - read life as I do , and find it loathsome in many of its 
 aspect , - distrust man and woman utterly , - and be destitute of any 
 faith in God , - may hate , - yes hate , " - and she clench her hand on a 
 tuft of droop leaf and scatter the green fragment at her 
 foot - " a woman who find life beautiful , and God existent , - who take no 
 part in our social sham and slander , - and who in place of my 
 self - torture spirit of analysis , have secure an enviable fame and the 
 honour of thousand , ally to a serene content ? why it would be 
 something worth live for , to make such a woman wretched for once in 
 her life ! - but , as she be constitute , it be impossible to do it . " 

 she turn from I and walk slowly onward , - I follow in a pained 
 silence . 

 " if you do not mean to be her friend , you should tell she so , " - I say 
 presently - " you hear what she say about pretended protestation of 
 regard ? " 

 " I hear , " - she reply morosely - " she be a clever woman , Geoffrey , and 
 you may trust she to find I out without any explanation ! " 

 as she say this , I raise my eye and look full at she , - her 
 exceed beauty be become almost an agony to my sight , and in a 
 sudden fool 's paroxysm of despair I exclaim - 

 " o Sibyl , Sibyl ! why be you make as you be ! " 

 " ah , why indeed ! " she rejoin , with a faint mocking smile - " and why , 
 be make as I be , be I bear an Earl 's daughter ? if I have be a drab 
 of the street , I should have be in my proper place , - and novel would 
 have be write about I , and play , - and I might have become such a 
 heroine as should cause all good man to weep for joy because of my 
 generosity in encourage their vice ! but as an Earl 's daughter , 
 respectably married to a millionaire , be a mistake of nature . yet nature 
 do make mistake sometimes Geoffrey , and when she do they be 
 generally irremediable ! " 

 we have now reach our own ground , and I walk , in miserable mood , 
 beside she across the lawn towards the house . 

 " Sibyl , " - I say at last - " I have hop you and Mavis Clare might be 
 friend . " 

 she laugh . 

 " so we shall be friend I daresay , - for a little while " - she 
 reply - " but the dove do not willingly consort with the raven , and 
 Mavis Clare 's way of life and studious habit would be to I 
 insufferably dull . besides , as I say before , she , as a clever woman and 
 a thinker , be too clear - sighted not to find I out in the course of 
 time . but I will play humbug as long as I can . if I perform the part of 
 ' county lady ' or ' patron , ' of course she will not   stand I for a moment . I 
 shall have to assume a much more difficult r"le , - that of an honest 
 woman ! " 

 again she laugh , - a cruel little laugh that chill my blood , and 
 pace slowly into the house through the open window of the 
 drawing - room . and I , leave alone in the garden among the nodding rose 
 and wave tree , feel that the beautiful domain of Willowsmere have 
 suddenly grow hideous and bereft of all its former charm , and be 
 nothing but a haunted house of desolation , - haunt by an all - dominant 
 and ever victorious Spirit of Evil . 




 XXVIII 


 one of the strange thing in all the strange course of our human life 
 be the suddenness of certain unlooke - for event , which , in a day or 
 even an hour , may work utter devastation where there have be more or 
 less peace , and hopeless ruin where there have be comparative safety . 
 like the shock of an earthquake , the clamorous incident thunder in on 
 the regular routine of ordinary life , crumble down our hope , break 
 our heart , and scatter our pleasure into the dust and ash of 
 despair . and this kind of destructive trouble generally happen in the 
 midst of apparent prosperity , without the least warning , and with all 
 the abrupt fierceness of a desert - storm . it be constantly make manifest 
 to we in the unexpected and almost instantaneous downfall of certain 
 member of society who have hold their head proudly above their 
 compeer and have presume to pose as example of light and lead to 
 the whole community ; we see it in the capricious fortune of king and 
 statesman , who be in favour one day and disgrace the next , and vast 
 change be work with such inexplicable quickness that it be scarcely 
 wonderful to hear of certain religious sect who , when everything be 
 prosper more than usually well with they , make haste to put on 
 garment of sackcloth , and cast ash on their head , pray aloud 
 " prepare we , o Lord , for the evil day which be at hand ! " the 
 moderation of the Stoics , who consider it impious either to rejoice or 
 grieve , and strove to maintain an equable middle course between the 
 oppose element of sorrow and joy , without allow themselves to be 
 lead away by over - much delight or over - much melancholy , be surely a wise 
 habit of temperament . I , who live miserably as far as my inner and 
 well consciousness be concern , be yet outwardly satisfied with the 
 material thing of life and the luxury surround I , - and I begin to 
 take comfort in these thing , and with they endeavour to quell and 
 ignore my more subtle grief , succeed so far in that I become more 
 and more of a thorough materialist every day , love bodily ease , 
 appetizing food , costly wine , and personal indulgence to a degree that 
 rob I gradually of even the desire for mental effort . I teach 
 myself moreover , almost insensibly , to accept and tolerate what I know 
 of the wanton side of my wife 's character , - true , I respect she less 
 than the Turk respect the creature of his harem , - but like the Turk , I 
 take a certain savage satisfaction in be the possessor of her beauty , 
 and with this feeling , and the brute passion it engender , I be fain 
 to be content . so that for a short time at least , the drowsy 
 satisfaction of a well - feed , well - mat animal be mine , - I imagine that 
 nothing short of a stupendous financial catastrophe to the country 
 itself could exhaust my stock of cash , - and that therefore there be no 
 necessity for I to exert myself in any particular branch of usefulness , 
 but simply to ' eat drink and be merry ' as Solomon advise . intellectual 
 activity be paralyse in I , - to take up my pen and write , and make 
 another and high bid for fame , be an idea that now never enter my 
 mind ; I spend my day in order about my servant , and practise the 
 petty pleasure of tyranny on gardener and groom , and in generally 
 give myself air of importance , mingle with an assumption of 
 toleration and benevolence , for the benefit of all those in my employ . I 
 know the proper thing to do , well enough ! - I have not study the way of 
 the over - wealthy for nothing , - I be aware that the rich man never feel 
 so thoroughly virtuous as when he have inquire after the health of his 
 coachman 's wife , and have send she a couple of pound for the outfit of 
 her new - bear baby . the much prate - of ' kindness of heart ' and 
 ' generosity ' possess by millionaire , generally amount to this kind 
 of thing , - and when , if idly stroll about my parkland , I happen to 
 meet the small child of my lodge - keeper , and then and there bestow 
 sixpence upon it , I almost feel as if I deserve a throne in Heaven at 
 the right hand of the Almighty , so great be my appreciation of my own 
 good - nature . Sibyl , however , never affect this sort of county - magnate 
 beneficence . she do nothing at all among our poor neighbour ; - the 
 clergyman of the district unfortunately happen to let slip one day a 
 few word to the effect that " there be no great want of anything among 
 his parishioner , owe to the continual kindness and attention of Miss 
 Clare , " - and Sibyl never from that moment proffer any assistance . now 
 and then she take her graceful person into Lily Cottage and sit with its 
 happy and studious occupant for an hour , - and occasionally the fair 
 author herself come and din with we , or have ' afternoon tea ' under the 
 branch elm on the lawn , - but even I , intense egotist as I be , could 
 see that Mavis be scarcely herself on these occasion . she be always 
 charming and bright of course , - indeed the only time in which I be 
 able to partially forget myself and the absurdly increase importance 
 of my personality in my own esteem , be when she , with her sweet voice 
 and animate manner , bring her wide knowledge of book , man , and 
 thing , to bear on the conversation , thus raise it to a high level 
 than be ever reach by my wife or I . yet I now and then notice a 
 certain vague constraint about she , - and her frank eye have frequently a 
 pained and question look of trouble when they rest for any length 
 of time on the enchanting beauty of Sibyl 's face and form . I , however , 
 pay little heed to these trifling matter , my whole care be to lose 
 myself more and more utterly in the enjoyment of purely physical ease 
 and comfort , without trouble myself as to what such self - absorption 
 might lead in the future . to be completely without a conscience , without 
 a heart and without sentiment be , I perceive , the good way to keep 
 one 's appetite , and preserve one 's health ; - to go about worry over 
 the trouble of other people , or put one 's self out to do any good in 
 the world , would involve such an expenditure of time and trouble as must 
 inevitably spoil one 's digestion , - and I see that no millionaire or even 
 moderately rich man care to run the risk of injure his digestion for 
 the sake of perform a kindness to a poor fellow - creature . profiting 
 by the example present to I everywhere in society , I take care of 
  my digestion , and be particular about the way in which my meal be 
 cook and serve , - particular too , as to the fashion in which my wife 
 dress for those meal , - for it suit my supreme humour to see her 
 beauty bedeck as suitably and richly as possible , that I might have 
 the satisfaction of consider she ' point ' with the same epicurean 
 fastidiousness as I consider a dish of truffle or specially prepare 
 game . I never think of the stern and absolute law - " unto whom much be 
 give , even from he should much be require ; " - I be scarcely aware of 
 it in fact , - the New Testament be of all book in the world the most 
 unfamiliar to I . and while I wilfully deafen myself to the voice of 
 conscience , - that voice which ever and anon urge I in vain to a nobler 
 existence , - the cloud be gather , ready to burst above I with that 
 terrific suddenness such as always seem to we who refuse to study the 
 cause of our calamity , as astonishing and startling as death itself . 
 for we be always more or less startled at death notwithstanding that it 
 be the commonest occurrence know . 

 towards the middle of September my ' royal and distinguish ' house - party 
 arrive and stay at Willowsmere Court for a week . of course it be 
 understand that whenever the Prince of Wales honour any private 
 residence with a visit , he select , if not all , at any rate the great 
 part of those person who be to be invite to meet he . he do so in 
 the present instance , and I be place in the odd position of have to 
 entertain certain people whom I have never meet before , and who , with the 
 questionable taste frequently exhibit among the ' upper ten , ' look 
 upon I merely as " the man with the million , " the caterer for their 
 provision , and no more , - direct their chief attention to Sibyl , who 
 be by virtue of her birth and association one of their ' set , ' and 
 push I , their host , more or less into the background . however the 
 glory of entertain Royalty more than suffice for my poor pride at 
 that time , and with less self - respect than an honest cur , I be content 
 to be snub and harass and worry a hundred time a day by one or 
 the other of the ' great ' personage who wander at will all over my 
 house and ground , and accept my lavish hospitality . many people 
 imagine that it must be an ' honour ' to entertain a select party of 
 aristocrat , but I , on the contrary , consider that it be not only a 
 degradation to one 's manly and more independent instinct , but also a 
 bore . these highly - breed , highly - connect individual , be for the most 
 part unintelligent , and devoid of resource in their own mind , - they 
 be not gifted as conversationalist or wit , - one gain no intellectual 
 advantage from their society , - they be simply dull folk , with an 
 exaggerated sense of their own importance , who expect wherever they go , 
 to be amuse without trouble to themselves . out of all the visitor at 
 Willowsmere the only one whom it be really a pleasure to serve be the 
 Prince of Wales himself , - and amid the many personal irritation I have 
 to suffer from other , I find it a positive relief to render he any 
 attention , however slight , because his manner be always mark by that 
 tact and courtesy which be the good attribute of a true gentleman 
 whether he be prince or peasant . in his own affable way , he go one 
 afternoon to see Mavis Clare , and come back in high good - humour , talk 
 for some time of nothing but the author of ' difference , ' and of the 
 success she have achieve in literature . I have ask Mavis to join our 
 party before the Prince come , as I feel pretty sure he would not have 
 erase her name from the list of guest submit to he , - but she would 
 not accept , and beg I very earnestly not to press the point . 

 " I like the Prince , " - she have say - " Most people like he who know 
 he , - but I do not always like those who surround he , - pardon I for my 
 frankness ! the Prince of Wales be a social magnet , - he draw a number of 
 person after he who by dint of wealth , if not intelligence , can 
 contrive to ' push ' into his set . now I be not an advocate of 
 ' push ' - moreover I do not care to be see with ' everybody ' ; - this be my 
 sinful pride you will say , or as our american cousin would put it , my 
 ' cussedness . ' but I assure you , Mr Tempest , the good possession I have , 
 and one which I value a great deal more even than my literary success , 
 be my absolute independence , and I would not have it think , even 
 erroneously , that I be anxious to mix with the crowd of sycophant and 
 time - server who be only too ready to take advantage of the Prince 's 
 good - nature . " 

 and , act upon her determination , she have remain more than ever 
 seclude in her cottage - nest of foliage and flower during the progress 
 of the week 's festivity , - the result be , as I have state , that the 
 Prince ' drop in ' upon she quite casually one day , accompany by his 
 equerry , and probably for all I know , have the pleasure of see the 
 dove ' reviewer ' fed , and squabble over their meal . 

 much as we have desire and expect the presence of Rimânez at our 
 gathering , he do not appear . he telegraph his regret from Paris , and 
 follow the telegram by a characteristic letter , which run thus : - 

  my dear Tempest . 

  you be very kind to wish to include I , your old friend , in the 
  party you have invite to meet his Royal Highness , and I only hope 
  you will not think I churlish for refuse to come . I be sick to 
  death of Royalties , - I have know so many of they in the course of 
  my existence that I begin to find their society monotonous . their 
  position be all so exactly alike too , - and moreover have always 
  be alike from the day of Solomon in all his glory , down to the 
  present blessed era of Victoria , Queen and Empress . one thirst for 
  a change ; at least I do . the only monarch that ever fascinate my 
  imagination particularly be Richard Coeur de Lion ; there be 
  something original and strike about that man , and I presume he 
  would have be well worth talk to . and Charlemagne be 
  doubtless , as the slangy young man of the day would observe , ' not 
  half bad . ' but for the rest , - un fico ! much talk be there make 
  about her Majesty Elizabeth , who be a shrew and a vixen and 
  blood - thirsty withal , - the chief glory of her reign be Shakespeare , 
  and he make king and queen the dancing puppet of his thought . in 
  this , though in nothing else , I resemble he . you will have enough 
  to do in the entertainment of your distinguished guest , for I 
  suppose there be no amusement they have not try , and find more or 
  less unsatisfactory , and I be sorry I can suggest nothing 
  particularly new for you to do . her Grace the Duchess of Rapidryder 
  be very fond of be toss in a strong table - cloth between four 
  able - bodied gentleman of good birth and discretion , before go to 
  bed o ' night , - she can not very well appear on a music - hall stage 
  you know , owe to her exalt rank , - and this be a child - like , 
  pretty and harmless method of manage to show her leg , which she 
  rightly consider , be too shapely to be hide . Lady Bouncer , whose 
  name I see in your list , always like to cheat at card , - I would 
  aid and abet she in her aim if I be you , as if she can only clear 
  her dressmaker 's bill by her winning at Willowsmere , she will bear 
  it in mind , and be a useful social friend to you . the honourable 
  Miss Fitz - Gander who have a great reputation for virtue , be anxious , 
  for press and particular reason , to marry Lord Noodles , - if you 
  can move on matter between they into a definite engagement of 
  marriage before her lady - mother return from her duty - visit in 
  Scotland , you will be do she a good turn , and save society a 
  scandal . to amuse the man I suggest plenty of shooting , gambling , 
  and unlimited smoking . to entertain the Prince , do little , - for he 
  be clever enough to entertain himself privately with the folly and 
  humbug of those he see around he , without actually share in the 
  petty comedy . he be a keen observer , - and must derive infinite 
  gratification from his constant study of man and manner , which be 
  sufficiently deep and search to fit he for the occupation of 
  even the throne of England . I say ' even , ' for at present , till 
  Time 's great hour - glass turn , it be the grand throne in the 
  world . the Prince read , understand , and secretly laugh to scorn 
  the table - cloth vagary of the Duchess of Rapidryder , the humour 
  of my Lady Bouncer and the nervous prudery of the Honourable Miss 
  Fitz - Gander . and there be nothing he will appreciate so much in his 
  reception as a lack of toadyism , a sincere demeanour , an 
  unostentatious hospitality , a simplicity of speech , and a total 
  absence of affectation . remember this , and take my advice for what 
  it be worth . of all the Royalties at present flourish on this 
  paltry planet , I have the great respect for the Prince of Wales , 
  and it be by reason of this very respect that I do not intend , on 
  this occasion at any rate , to thrust myself upon his notice . I shall 
  arrive at Willowsmere when your ' royal ' festivity be over . my 
  homage to your fair spouse , the Lady Sibyl , and believe I , 

  your as long as you desire it 
  Lucio Rimânez . 

 I laugh over this letter and show it to my wife , who do not laugh . 
 she read it through with a closeness of attention that somewhat 
 surprise I , and when she lay it down there be a strange look of pain 
 in her eye . 

 " how he despise we all ! " she say slowly - " what scorn underlie his 
 word ! do you not recognise it ? " 

 " he be always a cynic , - " I reply indifferently - " I never expect he 
 to be anything else . " 

 " he seem to know some of the way of the woman who be come here - " 
 she go on in the same musing accent ; " it be as if he read their 
 thought , and perceive their intention at a distance . " 

 her brow knit frowningly , and she seem for some time absorb in 
 gloomy meditation . but I do not pursue the subject , - I be too intent 
 on my own fussy preparation for the Prince 's arrival to care about 
 anything else . 

 and , as I have say , Royalty , in the person of one of the most genial of 
 man , come and go through the whole programme devise for his 
 entertainment , and then depart again with his usual courteous 
 acknowledgment for the hospitality offer and accept , - leave we , 
 as he generally leave everybody , charm with his good - humour and 
 condescension , provide his temper have not be ruffle . when , with his 
 exit from the scene , the whole party break up , leave my wife and I to 
 our own two self once more , there come a strange silence and 
 desolation over the house that be like the stealthy sense of some 
 approach calamity . Sibyl seem to feel it as much as I do , - and 
 though we say nothing to each other concern our mutual sensation , I 
 could see that she be under the same cloud of depression as myself . she 
 go oftener to Lily Cottage , and always from these visit to the 
 fair - haired student among the rose , come back , I hopefully fancy in 
 soft mood , - her very voice be gentle , - her eye more thoughtful and 
 tender . one evening she say - 

 " I have be think , Geoffrey , that perhaps there be some good in life 
 after all , if I could only find it out and live it . but you be the 
 last person to help I in such a matter . " 

 I be sit in an arm - chair near the open window , smoking , and I 
 turn my eye upon she with some astonishment and a touch of 
 indignation . 

 " what do you mean , Sibyl ? " I ask - " surely you know that I have the 
 great desire to see you always in your good aspect , - many of your 
 idea have be most repugnant to I .... " 

 " stop there ! " she say quickly , her eye flash as she speak - " my 
 idea have be repugnant to you , you say ? what have you do , you as 
 my husband , to change those idea ? have you not the same base passion 
 as I ? - and do you not give way to they as basely ? what have I see in 
 you from day to day that I should take you as an example ? you be 
 master here , and you rule with all the arrogance wealth can give , - you 
 eat , drink and sleep , - you entertain your acquaintance simply that you 
 may astonish they by the excess of luxury in which you indulge , - you 
 read and smoke , shoot and ride , and there an end , - you be an ordinary , 
 not an exceptional man . do you trouble to ask what be wrong with 
  I ? - do you try , with the patience of a great love , to set before I 
 nobler aim than those I have consciously or unconsciously imbibe ? - do 
 you try to lead I , an erring , passionate , misguided woman , into what I 
 dream of as the light , - the light of faith and hope which alone give 
 peace ? " 

 and suddenly , bury her head in the pillow of the couch on which she 
 lean , she break into a fit of smothered weeping . 

 I draw my cigar from my mouth and star at she helplessly . it be about 
 an hour after dinner , and a warm soft autumnal evening , - I have eat and 
 drunk well , and I be drowsy and heavy - brain . 

 " dear I ! " I murmur - " you seem very unreasonable , Sibyl ! I suppose you 
 be hysterical .... " 

 she spring up from the couch , - her tear dry on her cheek as though 
 by sheer heat of the crimson glow that flush they , and she laugh 
 wildly . 

 " yes , that be it ! " she exclaim - " Hysteria ! - nothing else ! it be 
 accountable for everything that move a woman 's nature . a woman have no 
 right to have any emotion that can not be cure by smell - salt ! 
 Heart - ache ? - pooh ! - cut her stay - lace ! despair and a sense of sin and 
 misery ? - nonsense ! - bathe her temple with vinegar ! an uneasy 
 conscience ? - ah ! - for an uneasy conscience there be nothing well than 
 sal volatile ! woman be a toy , - a breakable fool 's toy ; - and when she 
  be break , throw she aside and have do with she , - do not   try to piece 
 together the fragile rubbish ! " 

 she cease abruptly , pant for breath , - and before I could collect my 
 thought or find any word wherewith to reply , a tall shadow suddenly 
 darken the embrasure of the window , and a familiar voice enquire - 

 " May I , with the privilege of friendship , enter unannounced ? " 

 I start up . 

 " Rimânez ! " I cry , seize he by the hand . 

 " Nay , Geoffrey , my homage be due here first , " - he reply , shake off 
 my grasp , and advance to Sibyl , who stand perfectly still where she 
 have rise up in her strange passion - " Lady Sibyl , be I welcome ? " 

 " can you ask it ! " she say , with an enchanting smile , and in a voice 
 from which all harshness and excitement have flee ; " More than welcome ! " 
 here she give he both her hand which he respectfully kiss . " you 
 can not imagine how much I have long to see you again ! " 

 " I must apologise for my sudden appearance , Geoffrey , " - he then 
 observe , turn to I - " but as I walk here from the station and come 
 up your fine avenue of tree , I be so strike with the loveliness of 
 this place and the exquisite peace of its surrounding , that , know my 
 way through the ground , I think I would just look about and see if 
 you be anywhere within sight before I present myself at the 
 conventional door of entrance . and I be not disappointed , - I find you , 
 as I expect , enjoy each other 's society ! - the happy and most 
 fortunate couple existent , - people whom , out of all the world I should 
 be dispose to envy , if I envy worldly happiness at all , which I do 
 not ! " 

 I glance at he quickly ; - he meet my gaze with a perfectly unembarrassed 
 air , and I conclude that he have not overhear Sibyl 's sudden 
 melodramatic outburst . 

 " have you din ? " I ask , with my hand on the bell . 

 " thank , yes . the town of Leamington provide I with quite a sumptuous 
 repast of bread and cheese and ale . I be tired of luxury you 
 know , - that be why I find plain fare delicious . you be look 
 wonderfully well , Geoffrey ! - shall I offend you if I say you be 
 grow - yes - positively stout ? - with the stoutness befit a true 
 county gentleman , who mean to be as gouty in the future as his 
 respectable ancestor ? " 

 I smile , but not altogether with pleasure ; it be never agreeable to be 
 call ' stout ' in the presence of a beautiful woman to whom one have only 
 be wed a matter of three month . 

 " you have not put on any extra flesh ; - " I say , by way of feeble 
 retort . 

 " no " - he admit , as he dispose his slim elegant figure in an 
 arm - chair near my own - " the necessary quantity of flesh be a bore to I 
 always , - extra flesh would be a positive infliction . I should like , as 
 the irreverent though reverend Sidney Smith say , on a hot day , ' to sit 
 in my bone , ' or rather , to become a spirit of fine essence like 
 Shakespeare 's Ariel , if such thing be possible and permissible . how 
 admirably married life agree with you , Lady Sibyl ! " 

 his fine eye rest upon she with apparent admiration , - she flush 
 under his gaze I see , and seem confused . 

 " when do you arrive in England ? " she inquire . 

 " yesterday , " - he answer , - " I run over Channel from Honfleur in my 
 yacht , - you do not know I have a yacht , do you Tempest ? - oh , you must 
 come for a trip in she some day . she be a quick vessel , and the weather 
 be fair . " 

 " be Amiel with you ? " I ask . 

 " no . I leave he on board the yacht . I can , as the common people say , 
 ' valet myself ' for a day or two . " 

 " a day or two ? " echo Sibyl - " but you surely will not leave we so soon ? 
 you promise to make a long visit here . " 

 " do I ? " and he regard she steadily , with the same languorous 
 admiration in his eye - " but , my dear Lady Sibyl , time alter our idea , 
 and I be not sure whether you and your excellent husband be of the same 
 opinion as you be when you start on your wedding - tour . you may not 
 want I now ! " 

 he say this with a significance to which I pay no heed whatever . 

 " not want you ! " I exclaim - " I shall always want you Lucio , - you be 
 the good friend I ever have , and the only one I care to keep . believe 
 I ! - there be my hand upon it ! " 

 he look at I curiously for a minute , - then turn his head towards my 
 wife . 

 " and what do Lady Sibyl say ? " he ask in a gentle , almost caress 
 tone . 

 " Lady Sibyl say , " she answer with a smile , and the colour come and 
 go in her cheek - " that she will be proud and glad if you will 
 consider Willowsmere your home as long as you have leisure to make it 
 so , - and that she hop , - though you be repute to be a hater of 
 woman , - " here she raise her beautiful eye and fix they full upon 
 he - " you will relent a little in favour of your present châtelaine ! " 

 with these word , and a playful salutation , she pass out of the room 
 into the garden , and stand on the lawn at a little distance from we , her 
 white robe shimmer in the mellow autumnal twilight , - and Lucio , 
 spring up from his seat , look after she , clap his hand down 
 heavily on my shoulder . 

 " by Heaven ! " he say softly , " a perfect woman ! I should be a churl to 
 withstand she , - or you , my good Geoffrey , " - and he regard I 
 earnestly - " I have lead a very devil of a life since I see you 
 last , - it be time I reform , - upon my soul it be ! the peaceful 
 contemplation of virtuous marriage will do I good ! - send for my luggage 
 to the station , Geoffrey , and make the good of I , - I have   come to 
 stay ! " 




 XXIX 


 a tranquil time now ensue ; a time which , though I know it not , be just 
 that singular pause so frequently observe in nature before a storm , and 
 in human life before a crush calamity . I put aside all troublesome 
 and harass thought , and become oblivious of everything save my own 
 personal satisfaction in the renewal of the comradeship between myself 
 and Lucio . we walk together , ride together , and pass most of our 
 day in each other 's company , - nevertheless though I give my friend much 
 of my close confidence I never speak to he of the moral obliquity 
 and perversion I have discover in Sibyl 's character , - not out of any 
 consideration for Sibyl , but simply because I know by instinct what his 
 reply would be . he would have no sympathy with my feeling . his keen 
 sense of sarcasm would over - rule his friendship , and he would retort 
 upon I with the question - what business have I , be imperfect myself , 
 to expect perfection in my wife ? like many other of my sex I have the 
 notion that I , as man , could do all I please , when I please and how I 
 please ; I could sink to a level low than that of the beast if I 
 choose , - but all the same I have the right to demand from my wife the most 
 flawless purity to mate with my defilement . I be aware how Lucio would 
 treat this form of arrogant egoism , - and with what mocking laughter he 
 would receive any expression of idea from I on the subject of morality 
 in woman . so I be careful to let no hint of my actual position escape 
 I , - and I comport myself on all occasion to Sibyl with special 
 tenderness and consideration , though she , I think , appear rather to 
 resent my play the part of lover - husband too openly . she be herself , 
 in Lucio 's presence , strangely erratic of humour , by turn brilliant and 
 mournful , - sometimes merry and anon depress : yet never have she 
 display a more captivating grace and charm of manner . how foolish and 
 blind I be all the while ! - how dead to any perception of the formation 
 and sequence of event ! absorb in gross material pleasure , I ignore 
 all the hide force that make the history of an individual life no 
 less than of a whole nation , and look upon each day that dawn almost 
 as if it have be my own creation and possession , to waste as I think 
 fit , - never consider that day be but so many white leaflet from 
 God 's chronicle of human life , whereon we place our mark , good or bad , 
 for the just and exact summing - up of our thought and deed here after . 
 have any one dare to say this truth to I then , I should have bid he 
 go and preach nonsense to child , - but now , - when I recall those 
 white leaf of day that be unroll before I fresh and blank with 
 every sunrise , and with which I do nothing save scrawl my own Ego in a 
 foul smudge across each one , I tremble , and inwardly pray that I may 
 never be force to send back my self - write record ! yet of what use be 
 it to pray against eternal Law ? it be eternal Law that we shall 
 ourselves count up our own misdeed at the final reckoning , - hence it be 
 no wonder that many be find who prefer not to believe in a future 
 after death . rightly do such esteem it well to die utterly , than be 
 force to live again and look back upon the wilful evil they have do ! 

 October ripen slowly and almost imperceptibly towards its end , and the 
 tree put on their gorgeous autumnal tint of burn crimson and gold . 
 the weather remain fine and warm , and what the French Canadians 
 poetically term the ' Summer of all Saints ' give we bright day and 
 cloudless moonlit evening . the air be so mild that we be always 
 able to take our coffee after dinner on the terrace overlook the lawn 
 in front of the drawing - room , - and it be on one of these balmy night 
 that I be the interested spectator of a strange scene between Lucio and 
 Mavis Clare , - a scene I should have think impossible of occurrence have 
 I not myself witness it . Mavis have din at Willowsmere ; she very 
 rarely so honour we ; and there be a few other guest besides . we have 
 linger over the coffee long than usual , for Mavis have give an extra 
 charm to the conversation by her eloquent vivacity and bright humour , 
 and all present be anxious to hear , see and know as much of the 
 brilliant novelist as possible . but when a full golden moon rise in 
 mellow splendour over the tree - top , my wife suggest a stroll in the 
 ground , and everyone agree to the proposal with delight , we 
 start , - more or less together , - some in couple , some in group of 
 three or four . after a little desultory ramble however , the party get 
 separate in the rose - garden and adjacent shrubbery , and I find 
 myself alone . I turn back to the house to get my cigar - case which I 
 have leave on a table in the library , and pass out again in another 
 direction I stroll slowly across the grass , smoke as I go , towards 
 the river , the silver gleam of which could clearly be discern through 
 the fast - thin foliage overhang its bank . I have almost reach 
 the path that follow the course of the wind water , when I be 
 bring to a standstill by the sound of voice - one , a man 's , low and 
 persuasive , - the other a woman 's , tender , grave and somewhat tremulous . 
 neither voice could be mistake ; I recognize Lucio 's rich penetrate 
 tone , and the sweet vibrante accent of Mavis Clare . out of sheer 
 surprise I pause , - have Lucio fall in love , I wonder , 
 half - smile ? - be I about to discover that the suppose ' woman - hater ' 
 have be tame and catch at last ? by Mavis too ! - little Mavis , who be 
 not beautiful accord to accepted standard , but who have something 
 more than beauty to enravish a proud and unbelieving soul , - here , as my 
 thought run on , I be conscious of a foolish sense of jealousy , - why 
 should he choose Mavis , I think , out of all woman in the world ? could 
 he not leave she in peace with her dream , her book and her 
 flower ? - safe under the pure , wise , impassive gaze of Pallas Athene , 
 whose cool brow be never fevere by a touch of passion ? something 
 more than curiosity now impel I to listen , and I cautiously advance 
 a step or two towards the shadow of a broad elm where I could see 
 without be see . yes , there be Rimânez , - stand erect with fold 
 arm , his dark , sad , inscrutable eye fix on Mavis , who stand opposite 
 to he a few pace off , look at he in her turn with an expression of 
 mingle fascination and fear . 

 " I have ask you Mavis Clare , " - say Lucio slowly - " to let I serve 
 you . you have genius - a rare quality in a woman , - and I would advance 
 your fortune . I should not be what I be if I do not try to persuade 
 you to let I help on your career . you be not rich , - I could show you 
 how to become so . you have a great fame - that I grant ; but you have many 
 enemy and slanderer who be for ever try to pull you down from the 
 throne you have win . I could bring these to your foot , and make they 
 your slave . with your intellectual power , your personal grace and gift 
 of temperament , I could , if you would let I guide you , give you such 
 far - reach influence as no woman have possess in this century . I be 
 no boaster , - I can do what I say and more ; and I ask nothing from you in 
 return except that you should follow my advice implicitly . my advice , 
 let I tell you be not difficult to follow ; most people find it easy ! " 

 his expression of face , I think , be very singular as he speak , - it 
 be so haggard , dreary and woe - begone that one might have imagine he 
 be make some proposal that be particularly repugnant to he , instead 
 of offer to perform the benevolent action of help a hard - work 
 literary woman to achieve great wealth and distinction . I wait 
 expectantly for Mavis to reply . 

 " you be very good , Prince Rimânez , " she say , after a little pause - " to 
 take any thought for I at all . I can not imagine why you should do so ; 
 for I be really nothing to you . I have of course hear from Mr Tempest 
 of your great wealth and influence , and I have no doubt you mean kindly . 
 but I have never owe anything to any one , - no one have ever help 
 I , - I have help myself , and still prefer to do so . and really I have 
 nothing to wish for , - except - when the time come - a happy death . it be 
 true I be not rich , - but then I do not want to be rich . I would not be 
 the possessor of wealth for all the world ! to be surround with 
 sycophant and flatterer , - never to be able to distinguish false 
 friend from true , - to be love for what you have and not for what you 
  be ! - oh no , it would be misery to I . and I have never crave for 
 power , - except perhaps the power to win love . and that I have , - many 
 people love my book , and through my book love I , - I feel their love , 
 though I may never see or know they personally . but I be so conscious of 
 their sympathy that I love they in return without the necessity of 
 personal acquaintance . they have heart which respond to my 
 heart , - that be all the power I care about . " 

 " you forget your numerous enemy ! " say Lucio , still morosely regard 
 she . 

 " no , I do not forget they , " - she return , - " but - I forgive they ! they 
 can do I no harm . as long as I do not lower myself , no one else can 
 lower I . if my own conscience be clear , no reproach can wound . my 
 life be open to all , - people can see how I live , and what I do . I try to 
 do well , - but if there be those who think I do ill , I be sorry , - and if 
 my fault can be amend I shall be glad to amend they . one must have 
 enemy in this world , - that be , if one make any sort of 
 position , - people without enemy be generally nonentity . all who 
 succeed in win some little place of independence must expect the 
 grudging enmity of hundred who can not find even the small foothold , 
 and be therefore failure in the battle of life , - I pity these 
 sincerely , and when they say or write cruel thing of I , I know it be 
 only spleen and disappointment that move both their tongue and pen , 
 and freely pardon they . they can not hurt or hinder I , - in fact , no one 
 can hurt or hinder I but myself . " 

 I hear the tree rustle slightly , - a branch crack , - and peer 
 through the leaf , I see that Lucio have advance a step close to where 
 Mavis stand . a faint smile be on his face , soften it wonderfully and 
 give an almost supernatural light to his beautiful dark feature . 

 " fair philosopher , you be almost a feminine Marcus Aurelius in your 
 estimate of man and thing ! " - he say ; " but - you be still a woman - and 
 there be one thing lack to your life of sublime and calm 
 contentment - a thing at whose touch philosophy fail , and wisdom wither 
 at its root . love , Mavis Clare ! - lover 's love , - devoted love , blindly 
 passionate , - this have not be yours as yet to win ! no heart beat 
 against your own , - no tender arm caress you , - you be alone . man be 
 for the most part afraid of you , - be brute fool themselves , they 
 like their woman to be brute fool also , - and they grudge you your keen 
 intellect , - your serene independence . yet which be good ? - the adoration 
 of a brute fool , or the loneliness pertain to a spirit aloft on some 
 snowy mountain - peak , with no companion but the star ? think of it ! - the 
 year will pass , and you must need grow old , - and with the year will 
 come that solitary neglect which make age bitter . now , you will 
 doubtless wonder at my word - yet believe I I speak the truth when I 
 say that I can give you love , - not my love , for I love none , - but I 
 can bring to your foot the proud man in any country of the world as 
 suitor for your hand . you shall have your choice of they , and your own 
 time for choosing , - and whomsoever you love , he you shall we d , ... 
 why - what be wrong with you that you shrink from I thus ? " 

 for she have retreat , and be gaze at he in a kind of horror . 

 " you terrify I ! " she falter , - and as the moonlight fall upon 
 she I could see that she be very pale - " such promise be 
 incredible - impossible ! you speak as if you be more than human ! I do 
 not understand you , Prince Rimânez , - you be different to anyone I ever 
 meet , and ... and ... something in I strong than myself warn I 
 against you . what be you ? - why do you talk to I so strangely ? Pardon 
 I if I seem ungrateful ... , oh , let we go in - it be get quite late 
 I be sure , and I be cold ... " 

 she tremble violently , and catch at the branch of a tree to steady 
 herself , - Rimânez stand immovably still , regard she with a fixed and 
 almost mournful gaze . 

 " you say my life be lonely , " - she go on reluctantly and with a note of 
 pathos in her sweet voice - " and you suggest love and marriage as the 
 only joy that can make a woman happy . you may be right . I do not 
 presume to assert that you be wrong . I have many married 
 woman - friend - but I would not change my lot with any one of they . I 
 have dream of love , - but because I have not realize my dream I be not 
 the less content . if it be God 's will that I should be alone all my 
 day , I shall not murmur , for my solitude be not actual loneliness . 
 work be a good comrade , - then I have book , and flower and bird - I be 
 never really lonely . and that I shall fully realize my dream of love one 
 day I be sure , - if not here , then hereafter . I can wait ! " 

 as she speak , she look up to the placid heaven where one or two star 
 twinkle through the arching bough , - her face express angelic 
 confidence and perfect peace , - and Rimânez advance a step or two , 
 fully confront she with a strange light of exultation in his eye . 

 " true , - you can wait , Mavis Clare ! " he say in deep clear tone from 
 which all sadness have flee - " you can afford to wait ! tell I , - think for 
 a moment ! - can you remember I ? be there a time on which you can look 
 back , and look , see my face , not here but elsewhere ? think ! do you 
 ever see I long ago - in a far sphere of beauty and light , when you be 
 an Angel , Mavis , - and I be - not what I be now ! how you tremble ! you 
 need not fear I , - I would not harm you for a thousand world ! I talk 
 wildly at time I know ; - I think of thing that be past , - long long 
 past , - and I be fill with regret that burn my soul with fiercer heat 
 than fire ! and so neither world 's wealth , world 's power , nor world 's 
 love will tempt you , Mavis ! - and you , - a woman ! you be a live miracle 
 then , - as miraculous as the drop of undefiled dew which reflect in its 
 tiny circumference all the colour of the sky , and sink into the earth 
 sweetly , carry moisture and refreshment where it fall . I can do 
 nothing for you - you will not have my aid - you reject my service ? then 
 as I may not help you , you must help I ! " - and drop before she , he 
 reverently take her hand and kiss it - " I ask a very little thing of 
 you , - pray for I ! I know you be accustomed to pray , so it will be no 
 trouble to you , - you believe God hear you , - and when I look at you , 
  I believe it too . only a pure woman can make faith possible to man . 
 pray for I then , as one who have fall from his high and well 
 self , - who strive , but who may not attain , - who labour under heavy 
 punishment , - who would fain reach Heaven , but who by the cursëd will of 
 man , and man alone , be keep in Hell ! pray for I , Mavis Clare ! promise 
 it ! - and so shall you lift I a step nearer the glory I have lose ! " 

 I listen , petrify with amazement . could this be Lucio ? - the mocking , 
 careless , cynical scoffer I know , as I think , so well ? - be it really 
 he who kneel thus like a repentant sinner , abase his proud head before 
 a woman ? I see Mavis release her hand from his , the while she stand 
 look down upon he in alarm and bewilderment . presently she speak in 
 sweet yet tremulous accent - 

 " since you desire it so earnestly , I promise , " - she say - " I will pray 
 that the strange and bitter sorrow which seem to consume you may be 
 remove from your life - - " 

 " Sorrow ! " he echo , interrupt she and spring to his foot with an 
 impassione gesture - " Woman , - genius , - angel , whatever you be , do not 
 speak of one sorrow for I ! I have a thousand thousand sorrow ! - aye a 
 million million , that be as little flame about my heart , and as deeply 
 seat as the centre of the universe ! the foul and filthy crime of 
 man , - the base deceit and cruelty of woman , - the ruthless , murderous 
 ingratitude of child , - the scorn of good , the martyrdom of intellect , 
 the selfishness , the avarice , the sensuality of human life , the hideous 
 blasphemy and sin of the creature to the Creator - these be my endless 
 sorrow ! - these keep I wretched and in chain , when I would fain be 
 free . these create hell around I , and endless torture , - these bind and 
 crush I and pervert my being till I become what I dare not name to 
 myself , or to other . and yet , ... as the eternal God be my witness , ... 
 I do not think I be as bad as the bad man live ! I may tempt - but I 
 do not pursue , - I take the lead in many life , yet I make the way I go 
 so plain that those who follow I do so by their own choice and free 
 will more than by my persuasion ! " he pause , - then continue in a soft 
 tone - " you look afraid of I , - but be assure you never have less cause 
 for terror . you have truth and purity - I honour both . you will have none 
 of my advice or assistance in the making of your life 's 
 history , - to - night therefore we part , to meet no more on earth . never 
 again , Mavis Clare ! - no , not through all your quiet day of sweet and 
 content existence will I cross your path , - before Heaven I swear it ! " 

 " but why ? " ask Mavis gently , approach he now as she speak , with a 
 soft grace of movement , and lay her hand on his arm - " why do you 
 speak with such a passion of self - reproach ? what dark cloud be on your 
 mind ? surely you have a noble nature , - and I feel that I have wrong 
 you in my thought , ... you must forgive I - I have mistrust you - " 

 " you do well to mistrust I ! " he answer , and with these word he 
 catch both her hand and hold they in his own , look at her full in 
 the face with eye that flash like jewel , " your instinct teach you 
 rightly . would there be many more like you to doubt I and repel I ! 
 one word , - if , when I be go , you ever think of I , think that I be 
 more to be pity than the veri paralyse and starve wretch that 
 ever crawl on earth , - for he , perchance , have hope - and I have none . 
 and when you pray for I - for I hold you to this promise , - pray for one 
 who dare not pray for himself ! you know the word , ' lead we not into 
 temptation but deliver we from evil ' ? to - night you have be lead into 
 temptation , though you know it not , but you have deliver yourself from 
 evil as only a true soul can . and now farewell ! in life I shall see you 
 no more : - in death , - well ! I have attend many death - bed in response 
 to the invitation of the moribund , - but I shall not be present at 
 your ! perhaps , when your parting spirit be on the verge between 
 darkness and light , you may know who I be , and be ! - and you may thank 
 God with your last breath that we part to - night - as we do 
 now - forever ! " 

 he loosen his grasp of she , - she fall back from he pale and 
 terrify , - for there be something now in the dark beauty of his face 
 that be unnatural and appalling . a sombre shadow cloud his 
 brow , - his eye have gleam in they as of fire , - and a smile be on his 
 lip , half tender , half cruel . his strange expression move even I to a 
 sense of fear , and I shiver with sudden cold , though the air be warm 
 and balmy . slowly retreat , Mavis move away , look round at he now 
 and then as she go , in wistful wonder and alarm , - till in a minute or 
 two her slight figure in its shimmering silken white robe , have vanish 
 among the tree . I linger , hesitate and uncertain what to do , - then 
 finally determine to get back to the house if possible without be 
 notice , I make one step , when Lucio 's voice , scarcely raise , address 
 I - 

 " well , eavesdropper ! why do you not come out of the shadow of that 
 elm - tree and see the play to a well advantage ? " 

 surprised and confused , I advance , mumble some unintelligible excuse . 

 " you see a pretty bit of act here , " he go on , strike a match and 
 light a cigar the while he regard I coolly , his eye twinkle 
 with their usual mockery - " you know my theory , that all man and all 
 woman be purchaseable for gold ? well , I want to try Mavis Clare . she 
 reject all my advantageous offer , as you must have hear , and I could 
 only make matter smooth by ask she to pray for I . that I do this 
 very melodramatically I hope you will admit ? a woman of that dreamy 
 idealistic temperament always like to imagine that there be a man who 
 be grateful for her prayer ! " 

 " you seem very much in earnest about it ! " I say , vex with myself 
 that he have catch I spy . 

 " why , of course ! " he respond , thrust his arm familiarly through 
 mine - " I have an audience ! two fastidious critic of dramatic art hear 
 I rant my ranting , - I have to do my good ! " 

 " two critic ? " I repeat perplexedly . 

 " yes . you on one side , - Lady Sibyl on the other . Lady Sibyl rise , after 
 the custom of fashionable beauty at the opera , before the last scene , 
 in order to get home in good time for supper ! " 

 he laugh wildly and discordantly , and I feel desperately 
 uncomfortable . 

 " you must be mistake Lucio - " I say - " that I listen I admit , - and 
 it be wrong of I to do so , - but my wife would never condescend ... " 

 " ah , then it must have be a sylph of the wood that glide out of the 
 shadow with a silken train behind she and diamond in her hair ! " he 
 retort gaily - " Tut Geoffrey ! - do not   look so crestfallen . I have do 
 with Mavis Clare , and she with I . I have not be make love to 
 she , - I have simply , just to amuse myself , test her character , - and I 
 find it strong than I think . the combat be over . she will never go 
 my way , - nor , I fear , shall I ever go her ! " 

 " upon my word , Lucio , " I say with some irritation - " your disposition 
 seem to grow more and more erratic and singular every day ! " 

 " do it not ! " he answer with a droll affectation of interested 
 surprise in himself - " I be a curious creature altogether ! wealth be mine 
 and I care not a jot for it , - power be mine and I loathe its 
 responsibility ; - in fact I would rather be anything but what I be ! look 
 at the light of your ' home , sweet home ' Geoffrey ! " this he say as we 
 emerge from among the tree on to the moonlit lawn , from whence could 
 be see the shining of the electric lamp in the drawing - room - " Lady 
 Sibyl be there , - an enchanting and perfect woman , who live but to 
 welcome you to her embrace arm ! fortunate man ! - who would not envy 
 you ! love ! - who would , who could exist without it - save I ! who , in 
 Europe at least , would forego the delight of kissing , -   which the 
 japanese by - the - by consider a disgusting habit , - without embrace , - and 
 all those other endearment which be suppose to dignify the progress 
 of true love ! one never tire of these thing , - there be no satiety ! I 
 wish I could love somebody ! " 

 " so you can , if you like , " - I say , with a little uneasy laugh . 

 " I can not . it be not in I . you hear I tell Mavis Clare as much . I 
 have it in my power to make other people fall in love , somewhat after 
 the dexterous fashion practise by match - make mother , - but for 
 myself , love on this planet be too low a thing - too brief in duration . 
 last night , in a dream , - I have strange dream at time , - I see one whom 
 possibly I could love , - but she be a Spirit , with eye more lustrous 
 than the morning , and a form as transparent as flame ; - she could sing 
 sweetly , and I watch she soar upward , and listen to her song . it 
 be a wild song , and to many mortal ear meaningless , - it be something 
 like this ... " and his rich baritone peal lusciously forth in 
 melodious tune - 

  into the Light , 
  into the heart of the fire ! 
  to the innermost core of the deathless flame 
  I ascend , - I aspire ! 
  under I roll the whirling Earth 
  with the noise of a myriad wheel that run 
  ever round and about the sun , - 
  over I circle the splendid heaven 
  Strewn with the star of morn and even , 
  and I a queen 
  of the air serene , 
  float with my flag - like wing unfurl , 
  alone - alone - ' twixt God and the world ! 

 here he break off with a laugh . " she be a strange Spirit , " - he 
 say - " because she could see nothing but herself " twixt God and the 
 world . ' she be evidently quite unaware of the numerous exist 
 barrier put up by mankind between themselves and their maker . I wonder 
 what unenlightened sphere she come from ! " 

 I look at he in mingle wonder and impatience . 

 " you talk wildly , " - I say - " and you sing wildly . of thing that mean 
 nothing , and be nothing . " 

 he smile , lift his eye to the moon , now shin her full and 
 bright . 

 " true ! " he reply - " thing which have meaning and be valuable , have 
 all to do with money or appetite , Geoffrey ! there be no wide outlook 
 evidently ! but we be speak of love , and I hold that love should be 
 eternal as hate . here you have the substance of my religious creed if I 
 have any , - that there be two spiritual force rule the universe - love 
 and hate , - and that their incessant quarrel create the general 
 confusion of life . both contend one against the other , - and only at 
 Judgment - Day will it be prove which be the strong . I be on the side 
 of Hate myself , - for at present Hate have score all the victory worth 
 winning , while Love have be so often martyr that there be only the 
 poor ghost of it leave on earth . " 

 at that moment my wife 's figure appear at the drawing - room window , and 
 Lucio throw away his half - smoke cigar . 

 " your guardian - angel beckon ! " he say , look at I an odd expression 
 of something like pity mingle with disdain , - " let we go in . " 




 XXX 


 the very next night but one after Lucio 's strange interview with Mavis 
 Clare , the thunderbolt destine to wreck my life and humiliate I to the 
 dust , fall with appal suddenness . no warning give ! - it come at a 
 moment when I have dare to deem myself happy . all that day , - the last 
 day I be ever to know of pride or self - gratulation , - I have enjoy life 
 to the full ; it be a day too in which Sibyl have seem transform to a 
 sweeter , gentle woman than I have hitherto know she , - when all her 
 attraction of beauty and manner be apparently put forth to captivate 
 and enthrall I as though she be yet to be woo and win . or , - do she 
 mean to bewitch and subjugate Lucio ? of this I never think , - never 
 dream : - I only see in my wife an enchantress of the most voluptuous 
 and delicate loveliness , - a woman whose very garment seem to cling to 
 she tenderly as though proud of clothing so exquisite a form , - a 
 creature whose every glance be brilliant , whose every smile be a 
 ravishment , - and whose voice , attune to the soft and most caressing 
 tone appear in its every utterance to assure I of a deep and more 
 last love than I have yet enjoy . the hour fly by on golden 
 wing , - we all three , - Sibyl , myself and Lucio , - have attain , as I 
 imagine , to a perfect unity of friendship and mutual understanding , - we 
 have pass that last day together in the outlying wood of Willowsmere , 
 under a gorgeous canopy of autumn leaf , through which the sun shed 
 mellow beam of rose and gold , - we have have an al fresco luncheon in 
 the open air , - Lucio have sing for we wild old ballad and love - madrigal 
 till the very foliage have seem to tremble with joy at the sound of 
 such entrancing melody , - and not a cloud have mar the perfect peace 
 and pleasure of the time . Mavis Clare be not with we , - and I be glad . 
 somehow I feel that of late she have be more or less a discordant 
 element whenever she have join our party . I admire she , - in a sort of 
 fraternal half - patronizing way I even love she , - nevertheless I be 
 conscious that her way be not as our way , - her thought not as our 
 thought . I place the fault on she of course ; I conclude that it be 
 because she have what I elect to call ' literary egoism , ' instead of by 
 its rightful name , the spirit of honourable independence . I never 
 consider the inflated quality of my own egoism , - the poor pride of a 
 ' cash and county ' position , which be the pettiest sort of vain - glory 
 anyone can indulge in , - and after turn the matter over in my mind , I 
 decide that Mavis be a very charming young woman with great literary 
 gift , and an amazing pride , which make it totally impossible for she to 
 associate with many ' great ' people , so - call , - as she would never 
 descend to the necessary level of flunkeyish servility which they 
 expect , and which I certainly demand . I should almost have be 
 incline to relegate she to ' Grub Street , ' have not a faint sense of 
 justice as well as shame hold I back from do she that indignity even 
 in my thought . however I be too much impressed with my own vast 
 resource of unlimited wealth , to realize the fact that anyone who , like 
 Mavis , earn independence by intellectual work and worth alone , be 
 entitle to feel a far great pride than those who by mere chance of 
 birth or heritage become the possessor of million . then again , Mavis 
 Clare 's literary position be , though I like she personally , always a 
 kind of reproach to I when I think of my own abortive effort to win 
 the laurel of fame . so that on the whole I be glad she do not spend 
 that day with we in the wood ; - of course , if I have pay any attention 
 to the " trifle which make up the sum of life " I should have remember 
 that Lucio have tell she he would " meet she no more on earth , " - but I 
 judge this to be a mere trifle of hasty and melodramatic speech , 
 without any intentional meaning . 

 so my last twenty - four hour of happiness pass away in halcyon 
 serenity , - I feel a sense of deepen pleasure in existence , and I 
 begin to believe that the future have bright thing in store for I 
 than I have lately venture to expect . Sibyl 's new phase of gentleness 
 and tenderness towards I , combine with her rare beauty , seem to 
 augur that the misunderstanding between we would be of short duration , 
 and that her nature , too early render harsh and cynical by a ' society ' 
 education would soften in time to that beautiful womanliness which be , 
 after all , woman 's good charm . thus I think , in blissful and content 
 reverie , recline under the branch autumnal foliage , with my fair 
 wife beside I , and listen to the rich tone of my friend Lucio 's 
 magnificent voice peal forth sonorous , wild melody , as the sunset 
 deepen in the sky and the twilight shadow fall . then come the 
 night - the night which drop only for a few hour over the quiet 
 landscape , but for ever over I ! 

 we have din late , and , pleasantly fatigue with our day in the open 
 air , have retire early . I have latterly grow a heavy sleeper , and I 
 suppose I must have slumber some hour , when I be awaken suddenly 
 as though by an imperative touch from some unseen hand . I start up in 
 my bed , - the night - lamp be burn dimly , and by its glimmer I see that 
 Sibyl be no long at my side . my heart give one bind against my rib 
 and then almost stand still - a sense of something unexpected and 
 calamitous chill my blood . I push aside the embroider silken 
 hanging of the bed and peer into the room , - it be empty . then I rise 
 hastily , put on my clothe and go to the door , - it be carefully shut , 
 but not lock as it have be when we retire for the night . I open it 
 without the least noise , and look out into the long passage , - no one 
 there ! immediately opposite the bedroom door there be a winding oak 
 staircase lead down to a broad corridor , which in former time have 
 be use as a music - room or picture - gallery , - an ancient organ , still 
 sweet of tone , occupy one end of it with dull golden pipe tower up 
 to the carved and embossed ceiling , - the other end be light by a large 
 oriel window like that of a church , fill with rare old stain glass , 
 represent in various niche the life of the saint , the centre 
 subject be the martyrdom of St Stephen . advance with soft caution 
 to the balustrade overlook this gallery , I gaze down into it , and 
 for a moment could see nothing on the polished floor but the criss - cross 
 pattern make by the moonlight fall through the great window , - but 
 presently , as I watch breathlessly , wonder where Sibyl could have 
 go to at this time of night , I see a dark tall Shadow waver across the 
 moonlit network of line , and I hear the smother sound of voice . 
 with my pulse beat furiously , and a sensation of suffocation in my 
 throat , - full of strange thought and suspicion which I dare not 
 define , I creep slowly and stealthily down the stair , till as my foot 
 touch the last step I see - what nearly strike I to the ground with a 
 shock of agony - and I have to draw back and bite my lip hard to repress 
 the cry that nearly escape they . there , - there before I in the full 
 moonlight , with the colour of the red and blue robe of the paint 
 saint on the window glow blood - like and azure about she , knelt my 
 wife , - array in a diaphanous garment of filmy white which betray 
 rather than conceal the outline of her form , - her wealth of hair 
 fall about she in wild disorder , - her hand clasp in 
 supplication , - her pale face upturned ; and above she tower the dark 
 impose figure of Lucio ! I star at the twain with dry burning 
 eye , - what do this portend ? be she - my wife - false ? be he - my 
 friend - a traitor ? 

 " Patience - - patience ! - - " I mutter to myself - " this be a piece of 
 act doubtless - - such as chance the other night with Mavis 
 Clare ! - - patience ! - - let we hear this - - this comedy ! " and , draw 
 myself close up against the wall , I lean there , scarcely draw 
 breath , wait for her voice , - for his ; - when they speak I should 
 know , - - yes , I should know all ! and I fasten my look on they as 
 they stand there , - vaguely wonder even in my tense anguish , at the 
 fearful light on Lucio 's face , - a light which could scarcely be the 
 reflection of the moon , as he back the window , - and at the scorn of 
 his frown brow . what terrific humour sway he ? - why do he , even 
 to my stupefied thought appear more than human ? - why do his very beauty 
 seem hideous at that moment , and his aspect fiendish ? hush - hush ! she 
 speak , - my wife , - I hear she every word - hear all and endure all , 
 without fall dead at her foot in the extremity of my dishonour and 
 despair ! 

 " I love you ! " she wail - " Lucio , I love you , and my love be kill I ! 
 be merciful ! - have pity on my passion ! - love I for one hour , one little 
 hour ! - it be not much to ask , and afterwards , - do with I what you 
 will , - torture I , brand I an outcast in the public sight , curse I 
 before Heaven - I care nothing - I be yours body and soul - I love you ! " 

 her accent vibrate with mad idolatrous pleading , - I listen 
 infuriate , but dumb . " hush , - hush ! " I tell myself " this be a 
 comedy - not yet play out ! " and I wait , with every nerve strain , 
 for Lucio 's reply . it come , accompany by a laugh , low and sarcastic . 

 " you flatter I ! " he say - " I regret I be unable to return the 
 compliment ! " 

 my heart give a throb of relief and fierce joy , - almost I could have 
 join in his ironical laughter . she - Sibyl - drag herself near to 
 he . 

 " Lucio - Lucio ! " she murmur - " have you a heart ? can you reject I when 
 I pray to you thus ? - when I offer you all myself , - all that I be , or 
 ever hope to be ? be I so repugnant to you ? many man would give their 
 life if I would say to they what I say to you , - but they be nothing to 
 I - you alone be my world , - the breath of my existence ! - ah , Lucio , can 
 you not believe , will you not realize how deeply I love you ! " 

 he turn towards she with a sudden fierce movement that startle 
 I , - and the cloud of scorn upon his brow grow dark . 

 " I know you love I ! " he say , and from where I stand I see the cold 
 derisive smile flash from his lip to his eye in lightning - like 
 mockery - " I have always know it ! your vampire soul leap to mine at 
 the first glance I ever give you , - you be a false foul thing from the 
 first , and you recognize your master ! yes - your Master ! " for she have 
 utter a faint cry as if in fear , - and he , stoop , snatch her two 
 hand and grasp they hard in his own - " listen to the truth of yourself 
 for once from one who be not afraid to speak it ! - you love I , - and 
 truly your body and soul be mine to claim , if I so choose ! you marry 
 with a lie upon your lip ; you swear fidelity to your husband before 
 God , with infidelity already in your thought , and by your own act make 
 the mystical blessing a blasphemy and a curse ! wonder not then that the 
 curse have fall ! I know it all ! - the kiss I give you on your 
 wedding - day put fire in your blood and seal you mine ! - why , you would 
 have flee to I that very night , have I demand it , - have I love you as 
 you love I , - that be , if you choose to call the disease of vanity and 
 desire that riot in your vein , by such a name as love ! but now hear 
  I ! " and as he hold she two wrist he look down upon she with such 
 black wrath depict in his face as seem to create a darkness round 
 he where he stand , - " I hate you ! yes - I hate you , and all such woman as 
 you ! for you corrupt the world , - you turn good to evil , - you deepen 
 folly into crime , - with the seduction of your nude limb and lie eye , 
 you make fool , coward and beast of man ! when you die , your body 
 generate foulness , - thing of the mould and slime be form out of the 
 flesh that be once fair for man 's delight , - you be no use in life - you 
 become poison in death , - I hate you all ! I read your soul - it be an open 
 book to I - and it be brand with a name give to those who be 
 publicly vile , but which should , of strict right and justice , be equally 
 bestow on woman of your position and type , who occupy pride and place 
 in this world 's standing , and who have not the excuse of poverty for 
 sell themselves to the devil ! " 

 he cease abruptly and with passion , make a movement as though to 
 fle she from he , - but she cling to his arm , - clung with all the 
 pertinacity of the loathly insect he have take from the bosom of the 
 dead egyptian woman and make a toy of to amuse his leisure ! and I , 
 look on and listen , honour he for his plain speaking , for his 
 courage in tell this shameless creature what she be in the opinion 
 of an honest man , without gloze over her outrageous conduct for the 
 sake of civility or social observance . my friend , - my more than friend ! 
 he be true , - he be loyal - he have neither desire nor intent to betray 
 or dishonour I . my heart swell with gratitude to he , and also with a 
 curious sense of feeble self - pity , - compassionate myself intensely , I 
 could have sob aloud in nervous fury and pain , have not my desire to 
 hear more , repress my personal excitement and emotion . I watch my 
 wife wonderingly - what have become of her pride that she still kneel 
 before the man who have taunt she with such word as should have be 
 beyond all endurance ? 

 " Lucio ! ... Lucio ! " she whisper , and her whisper sound through the 
 long gallery like the hiss of a snake - " say what you will - say all you 
 will of I , - you can say nothing that be not true . I be vile - I own it . 
 but be it of much avail to be virtuous ? what pleasure come from 
 goodness ? - what gratification from self - denial ? there be no God to care ! 
 a few year , and we all die , and be forget even by those who love 
 we , - why should we lose such joy as we may have for the mere asking ? 
 surely it be not difficult to love even I for an hour ? - be I not fair 
 to look upon ? - and be all this beauty of my face and form worthless in 
 your sight , and you no more than man ? murder I as you may with all the 
 cruelty of cruel word , I care nothing ! - I love you - love you ! " - and in 
 a perfect passion of self - abandonment she spring to her foot , toss 
 back her rich hair over her shoulder , and stand erect , a very bacchante 
 of wild loveliness - " look at I ! you shall not , - you dare not spurn such 
 a love as mine ! " 

 dead silence follow her outburst , - and I star in fascinated awe at 
 Lucio as he turn more fully round and confront she . the expression 
 of his countenance strike I then as quite unearthly , - his beautiful 
 broad brow be knit in a darkling line of menace , - his eye 
 literally blaze with scorn , and yet he laugh , - a low laugh , resonant 
 with satire . 

 " shall not ! - dare not ! " he echo disdainfully - " woman 's word , - woman 's 
 rant ! - the shriek of the outraged feminine animal who fail to 
 attract , as she think , her choose mate . such a love as your ! - what be 
 it ? degradation to whosoever shall accept it , - shame to whosoever shall 
 rely upon it ! you make a boast of your beauty ; your mirror show you a 
 pleasing image , - but your mirror lie ! - as admirably as you do ! you see 
 within it not the reflection of yourself , for that would cause you to 
 recoil in horror , ... you merely look upon your fleshly covering , a 
 garment of tissue , shrinkable , perishable , and only fit to mingle with 
 the dust from which it spring . your beauty ! I see none of it , - I see 
 you ! and to I you be hideous , and will remain hideous for ever . I hate 
 you ! - I hate you with the bitterness of an immeasurable and unforgiving 
 hatred , - for you have do I a wrong , - you have work an injury upon 
 I , - you have add another burden to the load of punishment I carry ! " 

 she make a forward movement with outstretched arm , - he repulse she by 
 a fierce gesture . 

 " stand back ! " he say - " be afraid of I , as of an unknown terror ! O 
 pitiless Heaven ! - to think of it ! - but a night ago I be lift a step 
 nearer to my lost delight ! - and now this woman drag I back , and 
 down ! - and yet again I hear the barring of the gate of Paradise ! O 
 infinite torture ! o wicked soul of man and woman ! - be there no touch of 
 grace or thought of God leave in you ! - and will ye make my sorrow 
 eternal ! " 

 he stand , lift his face to the light where it stream through the 
 oriel window , and the moonbeam colour themselves faintly roseate as 
 they filter through the paint garment of St Stephen , show a 
 great and terrible anguish in his eye . I hear he with amazement and 
 awe , - I could not imagine what he mean by his strange word , - and it 
 be evident by her expression , that my reckless and abandon wife be 
 equally mystified . 

 " Lucio , " - she murmur - " Lucio , ... what be it ... what have I do ? - I 
 who would not wound you for the world ? - I who but seek your love , Lucio , 
 to repay it in full with such fond passion and tenderness as you have 
 never know ! for this and this only , I marry Geoffrey , - I choose your 
 friend as husband because he be your friend ! "   o perfidious woman ! 
 " and because I see his foolish egotism - his pride in himself and his 
 rich , - his blind confidence in I and in you ; - I know that I could , 
 after a time , follow the fashion of many another woman in my set and 
 choose my lover , - ah , my lover ! - I have choose he already , - I have 
 choose you , Lucio ! - yes , though you hate I you can not hinder I from 
 love you , - I shall love you till I die ! " 

 he turn his gaze upon she steadily , - the gloom deepen on his brow . 

 " and after you die ? " he say - " will you love I then ? " 

 there be a stern derision in his tone which appear to vaguely terrify 
 she . 

 " after death ! ... " she stammer . 

 " yes , - after death ! " he repeat sombrely - " there be an after ; - as 
 your mother know ! " a faint exclamation escape she , - she fix her eye 
 upon he affrightedly . " fair lady , " he go on - " your mother be , like 
 yourself , a voluptuary . she , like you , make up her mind to ' follow the 
 fashion ' as you put it , as soon as her husband 's ' blind ' or willing 
 confidence be gain . she choose , not one lover but many . you know she 
 end . in the written but miscomprehende law of Nature , a diseased body 
 be the natural expression of a diseased mind , - her face in her last day 
 be the reflex of her soul . you shudder ? - the thought of her 
 hideousness be repellent to your self - conscious beauty ? yet the evil 
 that be in she be also in you , - it fester in your blood slowly but 
 surely , and as you have no faith in God to cure the disease , it will 
 have its way - even at the final moment when death clutch at your 
 throat and stop your breathing . the smile upon your frozen lip then 
 will not be the smile of a saint , believe I , but of a sinner ! death be 
 never deceive , though life may be . and afterwards ... I ask again , will 
 you love I , do you think ? ... when you know who I be ? " 

 I be myself startled at his manner of put this strange question ; - I 
 see she lift her hand beseechingly towards he , and she seem to 
 tremble . 

 " when I know who you be ! " she repeat wonderingly - " do I not know ? you 
 be Lucio , - Lucio Rimânez - my love , - my love ! - whose voice be my 
 music , - whose beauty I adore , - whose look be my heaven " ... 

 " and Hell ! " he interpose , with a low laugh - " come here ! " 

 she go towards he eagerly , yet falteringly . he point to the 
 ground , - I see the rare blue diamond he always wear on his right hand , 
 flash like a flame in the moonray . 

 " since you love I so well , " - he say - " Kneel down and worship I ! " 

 she drop on her knee - and clasp her hand , - I strove to move , - to 
 speak , - but some resistless force hold I dumb and motionless ; - the 
 light from the stain glass window fall upon her face , and show its 
 fairness illumine by a smile of perfect rapture . 

 " with every pulse of my being I worship you ! " she murmur 
 passionately - " my king ! - my god ! the cruel thing you say but deepen my 
 love for you , - you can kill , but you can never change I ! for one kiss 
 of your lip I would die , - for one embrace from you I would give my 
 soul ! ... " 

 " have you one to give ? " he ask derisively - " be it not already dispose 
 of ? you should make sure of that first ! stay where you be and let I 
 look at you ! so ! - a woman , wear a husband 's name , hold a 
 husband 's honour , clothe in the very garment purchase with a 
 husband 's money , and newly rise from a husband 's side , steal forth 
 thus in the night , seek to disgrace he and pollute herself by the 
 vulgar unchastity ! and this be all that the culture and training of 
 nineteenth - century civilization can do for you ? myself , I prefer the 
 barbaric fashion of old time , when rough savage fight for their woman 
 as they fight for their cattle , treat they as cattle , and keep they 
 in their place , never dream of endow they with such strong virtue 
 as truth and honour ! if woman be pure and true , then the lose 
 happiness of the world might return to it , - but the majority of they be 
 like you , liar , ever pretend to be what they be not . I may do what 
 I choose with you , you say ? torture you , kill you , brand you with the 
 name of outcast in the public sight , and curse you before Heaven - if I 
 will only love you ! - all this be melodramatic speech , and I never care 
 for melodrama at any time . I shall neither kill you , brand you , curse 
 you , nor love you ; - I shall simply - call your husband ! " 

 I stir from my hiding - place , - then stop . she spring to her foot in 
 an insensate passion of anger and shame . 

 " you dare not ! " she pant - " you dare not so ... disgrace I ! " 

 " Disgrace you ! " he echo scornfully - " that remark come rather late , 
 see you have disgrace yourself ! " 

 but she be now fairly roused . all the savagery and obstinacy of her 
 nature be awaken , and she stand like some beautiful wild animal at 
 bay , tremble from head to foot with the violence of her emotion . 

 " you repulse I , - you scorn I ! " she mutter in hurried fierce accent 
 that scarcely rise above an angry whisper - " you make a mockery of my 
 heart 's anguish and despair , but you shall suffer for it ! I be your 
 match , - nay your equal ! you shall not spurn I a second time ! you ask , 
 will I love you when I know who you be , - it be your pleasure to deal in 
 mystery , but I have no mystery - I be a woman who love you with all 
 the passion of a life , - and I will murder myself and you , rather than 
 live to know that I have pray you for your love in vain . do you think 
 I come unprepared ? - no ! " and she suddenly draw from her bosom a short 
 steel dagger with a jewel hilt , a curio I recognize as one of the 
 gift to she on her marriage ; " love I , I say ! - or I will stab myself 
 dead here at your foot , and cry out to Geoffrey that you have murder 
 I ! " 

 she raise the weapon aloft , - I almost spring forward - but I draw back 
 again quickly as I see Lucio seize the hand that hold the dagger and 
 drag it firmly down , - while , wrest the weapon from her clutch he 
 snap it asunder and fling the piece on the floor . 

 " your place be the stage , Madam ! " he say - " you should have be the 
 chief female mime at some ' high - class ' theatre ! you would have adorn 
 the board , draw the mob , have as many lover , stagey and private as you 
 please , be invite to act at Windsor , obtain a payment - jewel from 
 the Queen , and write your name in her autograph album . that should 
 undoubtedly have be your ' great ' career - you be bear for it - make 
 for it ! you would have be as brute - souled as you be now , - but that 
 would not have matter , - mime be exempt from chastity ! " 

 in the action of break the dagger , and in the intense bitterness of 
 his speech he have thrust she back a few pace from he , and she stand 
 breathless and white with rage , eye he in mingled passion and 
 terror . for a moment she be silent , - then advance slowly with the 
 feline suppleness of movement which have give she a reputation for grace 
 exceed that of any woman in England , she say in deliberately 
 measure accent - 

 " Lucio Rimânez , I have bear your insult as I would bear my death at 
 your hand , because I love you . you loathe I , you say - you repulse 
 I , - I love you still ! you can not cast I off - I be yours ! you shall 
 love I , or I will die , - one of the two . take time for thought , - I leave 
 you to - night , - I give you all to - morrow to consider , - love I , - give I 
 yourself , - be my lover , - and I will play the comedy of social life as 
 well as any other woman , - so well that my husband shall never know . but 
 refuse I again as you have refuse I now , and I will make away with 
 myself . I be not ' act , ' - I be speak calmly and with conviction ; I 
 mean what I say ! " 

 " do you ? " query Lucio coldly - " let I congratulate you ! few woman 
 attain to such coherence ! " 

 " I will put an end to this life of mine ; " she go on , pay no sort of 
 heed to his word - " I can not endure existence without your love , Lucio ! " 
 and a dreary pathos vibrate in her voice - " I hunger for the kiss of 
 your lip , - the clasp of your arm ! do you know - do you ever think of 
 your own power ? - the cruel , terrible power of your eye , your speech , 
 your smile , - the beauty which make you more like an angel than a 
 man , - and have you no pity ? do you think that ever a man be bear like 
 you ? " he look at she as she say this , and a faint smile rest on his 
 lip - " when you speak , I hear music - when you sing , it seem to I that 
 I understand what the melody of a poet 's heaven must be ; - surely , 
 surely you know that your very look be a snare to the warm weak soul 
 of a woman ! Lucio ! - " and embolden by his silence , she steal near to 
 he - " meet I to - morrow in the lane near the cottage of Mavis Clare .... " 

 he start as if he have be sting - but not a word escape he . 

 " I hear all you say to she the other night ; " she continue , advance 
 yet a step close to his side - " I follow you , - and I listen . I be 
 well - nigh mad with jealousy - I think - I fear - you love she , - but I 
 be wrong . I never do thank God for anything , - but I thank God that 
 night that I be wrong ! she be not make for you - I be ! meet I outside 
 her house , where the great white rose - tree be in bloom - gather one , - one 
 of those little autumnal rose and give it to I - I shall understand it 
 as a signal - a signal that I may come to you to - morrow night and not be 
 curse or repulse , but love , - love ! - ah Lucio ! promise I ! - one 
 little rose ! - the symbol of an hour 's love ! - then let I die ; I shall 
 have have all I ask of life ! " 

 with a sudden swift movement , she fling herself upon his breast , and 
 circle her arm about his neck , lift her face to his . the moonbeam 
 show I her eye alit with rapture , her lip tremble with passion , 
 her bosom heaving , ... the blood surge up to my brain , and a red mist 
 swam before my sight , ... would Lucio yield ? not he ! - he loosen she 
 desperate hand from about his throat , and force she back , hold she 
 at arm 's length . 

 " Woman , false and accurséd ! " he say in tone that be sonorous and 
 terrific - " you know not what you seek ! all that you ask of life shall be 
 your in death ! - this be the law , - therefore beware what demand you 
 make lest they be too fully grant ! a rise from the cottage of Mavis 
 Clare ? - a rise from the garden of Eden ! - they be one and the same to 
 I ! not for my gathering or your ! love and joy ? for the unfaithful 
 there be no love , - for the impure there be no joy . add no more to the 
 measure of my hatred and vengeance ! - go while there be yet time , - go and 
 front the destiny you have make for yourself - for nothing can alter it ! 
 and as for I , whom you love , - before whom you have kneel in idolatrous 
 worship - " and a low fierce laugh escape he - " why , - restrain your 
 feverish desire , fair fiend ! - have patience ! - we shall meet ere long ! " 

 I could not bear the scene another moment , and spring from my 
 hiding - place , I drag my wife away from he and fling myself between 
 they . 

 " let I defend you , Lucio , from the pertinacity of this wanton ! " I 
 cry with a wild burst of laughter - " an hour ago I think she be my 
 wife , - I find she nothing but a purchase chattel , who seek a change of 
 master ! " 




 XXXI 


 for one instant we all three stand face each other , - I breathless and 
 mad with fury , - Lucio calm and disdainful , - my wife stagger back from 
 I , half - swoon with fear . in an access of black rage , I rush upon 
 she and seize she in my arm . 

 " I have hear you ! " I say - " I have see you ! I have watch you kneel 
 before my true friend , my loyal comrade there , and try your good to make 
 he as vile as yourself ! I be that poor fool , your husband , - that blind 
 egoist whose confidence you seek to win - and to betray ! I be the 
 unhappy wretch whose surplus of world 's cash have buy for he in 
 marriage a shameless courtezan ! you dare to talk of love ? you profane 
 its very name ! good God ! - what be such woman as you make of ? you throw 
 yourself into our arm , - you demand our care - you exact our 
 respect - you tempt our sens - you win our heart , - and then you make 
 fool of we all ! Fools , and bad than fool , - you make we man without 
 feeling , conscience , faith , or pity ! if we become criminal , what 
 wonder ! if we do thing that shame our sex , be it not because you set we 
 the example ? God - God ! I , who love you , - yes , love you in spite of all 
 that my marriage with you teach I , - I , who would have die to save you 
 from a shadow of suspicion , - I be the one out of all the world you 
 choose to murder by your treachery ! " 

 I loosen my grasp of she , - she recover her self - possession by an 
 effort , and look at I straightly with cold unfeele eye . 

 " what do you marry I for ? " she demand - " for my sake or your own ? " 

 I be silent , - too choke with wrath and pain to speak . all I could do 
 be to hold out my hand to Lucio , who grasp it with a cordial and 
 sympathetic pressure . yet ... I fancy he smile ! 

 " be it because you desire to make I happy out of pure love for I ? " 
 pursue Sibyl - " or because you wish to add dignity to your own 
 position by wed the daughter of an Earl ? your motif be not 
 unselfish , - you choose I simply because I be the ' beauty ' of the day 
 whom London man star at and talk of , - and because it give you a 
 certain ' prestige ' to have I for your wife , in the same way as it give 
 you a footing with Royalty to be the owner of the Derby - winner . I tell 
 you honestly what I be before our marriage , - it make no effect upon 
 your vanity and egoism . I never love you , - I could not love you , and I 
 tell you so . you have hear , so you say , all that have pass between I 
 and Lucio , - therefore you know why I marry you . I state it boldly to 
 your face , - it be that I might have your intimate friend for my lover . 
 that you should pretend to be scandalize at this be absurd ; it be a 
 common position of thing in France , and be become equally common in 
 England . morality have always be declare unnecessary for man , - it be 
 become equally unnecessary for woman ! " 

 I star at she , amazed at the glibness of her speech , and the cool 
 convincing manner in which she speak , after her recent access of passion 
 and excitement . 

 " you have only to read the ' new ' fiction , " - she go on , a mocking smile 
 light up her pale face , " and indeed all ' new ' literature generally , 
 to be assure that your idea of domestic virtue be quite out of date . 
 both man and woman be , accord to certain accept writer of the 
 day , at equal liberty to love when they will , and where they may . 
 polygamous purity be the ' new ' creed ! such love , in fact , so we be 
 teach , constitute the only ' sacred ' union . if you want to alter this 
 ' movement , ' and return to the old - fashioned type of the modest maiden 
 and the immaculate matron , you must sentence all the ' new ' writer of 
 profitable pruriency to penal servitude for life , and institute a 
 Government censorship of the modern press . as matter stand , your 
 attitude of the outraged husband be not only ridiculous , - it be 
 unfashionable . I assure you I do not feel the slight prick of 
 conscience in say I love Lucio , - any woman might be proud of love 
 he ; - he , however , will not , or can not love I , - we have have a ' scene , ' 
 and you have complete the dramatic effect by witness it , - there be 
 no more to be say or do in the affair . I do not suppose you can 
 divorce I , - but if you can , you may - I shall make no defence . " 

 she turn , as if to go ; - I still star dumbly at she , find no word 
 to cope with her effrontery , - when Lucio 's voice , attune to a grave and 
 soothe suavity , interpose , - 

 " this be a very painful and distressing state of thing , " - he say , and 
 the strange half - cynical , half contemptuous smile still rest on his 
 lip - " but I must positively protest against the idea of divorce , not 
 only for her ladyship 's sake , but my own . I be entirely innocent in the 
 matter ! " 

 " innocent ! " I exclaim , grasp he again by the hand ; " you be 
 nobility itself , Lucio ! - as loyal a friend as ever man have ! I thank you 
 for your courage , - for the plain and honest manner in which you have 
 speak . I hear all you say ! nothing be too strong , - nothing could be 
 too strong to awaken this misguided woman to a sense of her outrageous 
 conduct , - her unfaithfulness - - " 

 " pardon I ! " he interrupt delicately - " the Lady Sibyl can scarcely be 
 call unfaithful , Geoffrey . she suffer , - - from - - let we call it , a 
 little exaltation of nerve ! in thought she may be guilty of infidelity , 
 but society do not know that , - and in act she be pure , - pure as the 
 newly - drive snow , - and as the newly - drive snow , will society , itself 
 immaculate , regard she ! " 

 his eye glitter , - I meet his chill derisive glance . 

 " you think as I do , Lucio ! " I say hoarsely - " you feel with I , that a 
 wife 's unchaste thought be as vile as her unchaste act . there be no 
 excuse , - no palliative for such cruel and abominable ingratitude . 
 why , " - and my voice rise unconsciously as I turn fiercely again 
 towards Sibyl - " do I not free you and your family from the heavy 
 pressure of poverty and debt ? have I grudge you anything ? be you not 
 load with jewel ? - have you not great luxury and liberty than a 
 queen ? and do you not owe I at least some duty ? " 

 " I owe you nothing ! " she respond boldly - " I give you what you pay 
 for , - my beauty and my social position . it be a fair bargain ! " 

 " a dear and bitter one ! " I cry . 

 " maybe so . but such as it be , you strike it , - not I. you can end it 
 when you please , - the law ... " 

 " the law will give you no freedom in such a case , " - interpose Lucio 
 with a kind of satirical urbanity - " a judicial separation on the ground 
 of incompatibility of temper might be possible certainly - but would not 
 that be a pity ? her ladyship be unfortunate in her taste , - that be 
 all ! - she select I as her cavaliere servente , and I refuse the 
 situation , - hence there be nothing for it but to forget this unpleasant 
 incident , and try to live on a well understanding for the future - - " 

 " do you think " - say my wife , advance with her proud head uplifted in 
 scorn , the while she point at I - " do you think I will live with he 
 after what he have see and hear to - night ? what do you take I for ? " 

 " for a very charming woman of hasty impulse and unwise 
 reasoning , " - reply Lucio , with an air of sarcastic gallantry - " Lady 
 Sibyl , you be illogical , - most of your sex be . you can do no good by 
 prolong this scene , - a most unpleasant and try one to we poor man . 
 you know how we hate ' scene ' ! let I beg of you to retire ! your duty be 
 to your husband ; pray heaven he may forget this midnight delirium of 
 your , and set it down to some strange illness rather than to any evil 
 intention . " 

 for all answer she come towards he , stretch out her arm in wild 
 appeal . 

 " Lucio ! " she cry - " Lucio , my love ! good - night ! - good - bye ! " 

 I spring between he and her advance form . 

 " before my very face ! " I exclaim - " o infamous woman ! have you no 
 shame ? " 

 " none ! " she say , with a wild smile - " I glory in my love for such a king 
 of worth and beauty ! look at he ! - and then look at yourself in the 
 near mirror that reflect so poor and mean a picture of a man ! how , 
 even in your egoism , could you deem it possible for a woman to love 
  you when he be near ! stand out of the light ! - you interpose a 
 shadow between my god and I ! " 

 as she utter these mad word , her aspect be so strange and unearthly , 
 that out of sheer stupefied wonder , I mechanically do as she bid I , 
 and stand aside . she regard I fixedly . 

 " I may as well say good - bye to you also , " - she observe - " for I shall 
 never live with you again . " 

 " nor I with you ! " I say fiercely . 

 " nor I with you - nor I with you ! " she repeat like a child say a 
 lesson - " of course not ! - if I do not live with you , you can not live with 
 I ! " she laugh discordantly ; then turn her beseech gaze once more 
 upon Lucio - " good - bye ! " she say . 

 he look at she with a curious fixity , but return no word in answer . 
 his eye flash coldly in the moonlight like sharp steel , and he 
 smile . she regard he with such passionate intentness that it seem 
 as though she seek to draw his very soul into herself by the magnetism 
 of her glance , - but he stand unmove , a very statue of fine disdain and 
 intellectual self - repression . my scarcely control fury break out 
 again at the sight of her dumb yearning , and I give vent to a shout of 
 scornful laughter . 

 " by heaven , a veritable new Venus and reluctant Adonis ! " I cry 
 deliriously - " a poet should be here to immortalize so touch a scene ! 
 go - go ! " - and I motion she away with a furious gesture - " Go , if you do 
 not want I to murder you ! go , with the proud consciousness that you 
 have work all the mischief and ruin that be most dear to the heart of 
 a woman , - you have spoil a life and dishonour a name , - you can do no 
 more , - your feminine triumph be complete ! go ! - would to God I might 
 never see your face again ! - would to God I have be spar the misery of 
 have marry you ! " 

 she pay no attention whatever to my word , but keep her eye fix on 
 Lucio . retreat slowly , she seem to feel rather than see her way to 
 the wind stair , and there , turn , she begin to ascend . half way up 
 she pause - look back and fully confront we once more , - with a wild 
 wicked rapture on her face she kiss her hand to Lucio , smile like a 
 spectral woman in a dream , - then she go onward and upward step by 
 step , till the last white fold of her robe have vanish , - and we 
 two , - my friend and I , - be alone . face one another we stand , 
 silently , - I meet his sombre eye and think I read an infinite 
 compassion in they ! - then , - while I yet look upon he , something 
 seem to clutch my throat and stop my breathing , - his dark and 
 beautiful countenance appear to I to grow suddenly lurid as with 
 fire , - a coronal of flame seem to tremble above his brow , - the 
 moonlight glisten blood - red ! - a noise be in my ear of mingle 
 thunder and music as though the silent organ at the end of the gallery 
 be play by hand invisible ; - struggle against these delusive 
 sensation , I involuntarily stretch out my hand ... 

 " Lucio ! ... " I gasp - " Lucio ... my friend ! I think , ... I be , ... 
 die ! my heart be break ! " 

 as I speak , a great blackness close over I , - and I fall senseless . 




 XXXII 


 Oh , the blessedness of absolute unconsciousness ! it be enough to make 
 one wish that death be indeed annihilation ! utter oblivion , - complete 
 destruction , - surely this would be a great mercy to the err soul of 
 man than the terrible God's - gift of immortality , - the dazzle impress 
 of that divine ' image ' of the Creator in which we be all make , and 
 which we can never obliterate from our being . I , who have realize to 
 the full the unalterable truth of eternal life , - eternal regeneration 
 for each individual spirit in each individual human creature , - look upon 
 the endless future through which I be compel to take my part with 
 something more like horror than gratitude . for I have waste my time and 
 throw away priceless opportunity , - and though repentance may retrieve 
 these , the work of retrieval be long and bitter . it be easy to lose a 
 glory than to win it ; and if I could have die the death that 
 positivist hope for at the very moment when I learn the full measure 
 of my heart 's desolation , surely it would have be well ! but my 
 temporary swoon be only too brief , - and when I recover I find myself 
 in Lucio 's own apartment , one of the large and most sumptuously 
 furnish of all the guest - chamber at Willowsmere , - the window be 
 wide open , and the floor be flood with moonlight . as I shudder 
 coldly back to life and consciousness , I hear a tinkle sound of tune , 
 and open my eye wearily I see Lucio himself seat in the full 
 radiance of the moon with a mandoline on his knee from which he be 
 softly strike delicate impromptu melody . I be amazed at 
 this , - astound that while I personally be overwhelm with a weight 
 of woe , he should still be capable of amuse himself . it be a common 
 idea with we all that when we ourselves be put out , no one else should 
 dare to be merry , - in fact we expect Nature itself to wear a miserable 
 face if our own beloved Ego be disturb by any trouble , - such be the 
 extent of our ridiculous self - consciousness . I move in my chair and 
 half rise from it , - when Lucio , still thrum the string of his 
 instrument piano pianissimo , say - 

 " keep still , Geoffrey ! you will be all right in a few minute . do not   worry 
 yourself . " 

 " Worry myself ! " I echo bitterly - " why not say do not   kill yourself ! " 

 " because I see no necessity to offer you that advice at present - " he 
 respond coolly - " and if there be necessity , I doubt if I should give 
 it , - because I consider it well to kill one 's self than worry one 's 
 self . however opinion differ . I want you to take this matter lightly . " 

 " lightly ! - take my own dishonour and disgrace lightly ! " I exclaim , 
 almost leap from my chair - " you ask too much ! " 

 " my good fellow , I ask no more than be ask and expect of a hundred 
 ' society ' husband to - day . consider ! - your wife have be lead away from 
 her soberer judgment and reasoning by an exalted and hysterical passion 
 for I on account of my look , - not for myself at all - because she 
 really do not know I , - she only see I as I appear to be . the love 
 of handsome exterior personality be a common delusion of the fair 
 sex - and pass in time like other woman 's disease . no actual dishonour 
 or disgrace attache to she or to you , - nothing have be see , hear , or 
 do , in public . this be so , I can not   understand what you be make 
 a fuss about . the great object of social life , you know , be to hide all 
 savage passion and domestic difference from the gaze of the vulgar 
 crowd . you can be as bad as you like in private - only God see - and 
 that do not matter ! " 

 his eye have a mocking lustre in they , - twang his mandoline , he sing 
 under his breath , 

  " if she be not fair for I 
  what care I how fair she be ! " 

 " that be the true spirit , Geoffrey , " - he go on - " it sound flippant to 
 you no doubt in your present tragic frame of mind , - but it be the only 
 way to treat woman , in marriage or out of it . before the world and 
 society , your wife be like Cæsar 's , above suspicion . only you and I 
  we will leave God out   have be the witness of her attack of 
 hysteria ... " 

 " Hysteria , you call it ! she love you ! " I say hotly - " and she have 
 always love you . she confess it , - and you admit that you always 
 know it ! " 

 " I always know she be hysterical - yes - if that be what you mean ; " - he 
 answer - " the majority of woman have no real feeling , no serious 
 emotion - except one - vanity . they do not know what a great love 
 mean , - their chief desire be for conqu , - and fail in this , they 
 run up the gamut of baffled passion to the pitch of frenetic hysteria , 
 which with some become chronic . Lady Sibyl suffer in this way . now 
 listen to I . I will go off to Paris or Moscow or Berlin at once , - after 
 what have happen , of course I can not stay here , - and I give you my word 
 I will not intrude myself into your domestic circle again . in a few day 
 you will tide over this rupture , and learn the wisdom of support the 
 difference that occur in matrimony , with composure - - " 

 " impossible ! I will not part with you ! " I say vehemently - " nor will I 
 live with she ! well the companionship of a true friend than that of a 
 false wife ! " 

 he raise his eyebrow with a puzzled half humorous expression - then 
 shrug his shoulder , as one who give up a difficult argument . 
 rise , he put aside his mandoline and come over to I , his tall 
 impose figure cast a gigantic shadow in the brilliant moonbeam . 

 " upon my word , you put I in a very awkward position Geoffrey , - what be 
 to be do ? you can get a judicial separation if you like , but I think 
 it would be an unwise course of procedure after barely four month of 
 marriage . the world would be set talk at once . really it be well to 
 do anything than give the gossip a chance for float scandal . look 
 here - do not   decide anything hastily , - come up to town with I for a day , 
 and leave your wife alone to meditate upon her foolishness and its 
 possible consequence , - then you will be well able to judge as to your 
 future movement . go to your room , and sleep till morning . " 

 " Sleep ! " I repeat with a shudder - " in that room where she - - " I break 
 off with a cry and look at he imploringly - " be I go mad , I wonder ! 
 my brain seem on fire ! if I could forget ! ... if I could forget ! 
 Lucio - if you , my loyal friend , have be false to I I should have 
 die , - your truth , your honour have save I ! " 

 he smile - an odd , cynical little smile . 

 " Tut - - I make no boast of virtue " - he rejoin - " if the lady 's beauty 
 have be any temptation to I I might have yield to her charm , - in so 
 do I should have be no more than man , as she herself suggest . but 
 perhaps I be more than man ! - at anyrate bodily beauty in woman make 
 no sort of effect on I , unless it be accompany by beauty of 
 soul , - then it do make an effect , and a very extraordinary one . it 
 provoke I to try how deep the beauty go - whether it be impervious or 
 vulnerable . as I find it , so I leave it ! " 

 I star wearily at the moonlight pattern on the floor . 

 " what be I to do ? " I ask - " what would you advise ? " 

 " come up to town with I , " - he reply - " you can leave a note for your 
 wife , explain your absence , - and at one of the club we will talk 
 over the matter quietly , and decide how good to avoid a social scandal . 
 meanwhile , go to bed . if you will not   go back to your own room , sleep in 
 the spare one next to mine . " 

 I rise mechanically and prepare to obey he . he watch I furtively . 

 " will you take a composing draught if I mix it for you ? " he say - " it be 
 harmless , and will give you a few hour ' sleep . " 

 " I would take poison from your hand ! " I answer recklessly - " why do not 
 you mix that for I ? - and then , ... then I should sleep indeed , - and 
 forget this horrible night ! " 

 " no , - unfortunately you would not forget ! " he say , go to his 
 dressing - case and take out a small white powder which he dissolve 
 gradually in a glass of water - " that be the bad of what people call 
 dying . I must instruct you in a little science by - and - by , to distract 
 your thought . the scientific part of death , - the business that go on 
 behind the scene you know - will interest you very much - it be highly 
 instructive , particularly that section of it which I be entitle to call 
 the regeneration of atom . the brain - cell be atom , and within these , 
 be other atom call memory , curiously vital and marvellously 
 prolific ! drink this , " - and he hand I the mixture he have 
 prepare - " for temporary purpose it be much well than death - because 
 it do numb and paralyse the conscious atom for a little while , 
 whereas death only liberate they to a large and more obstinate 
 vitality . " 

 I be too self - absorb to heed or understand his word , but I drank 
 what he give I submissively and return the glass , - he still watch 
 I closely for about a minute . then he open the door of the apartment 
 which adjoin his own . 

 " throw yourself on that bed and close your eye , " - he continue in 
 somewhat peremptory accent - " till morning break I give you a 
 respite , - " and he smile strangely - " both from dream and memory ! 
 plunge into Oblivion , my friend ! - brief as it be and as it must ever be , 
 it be sweet ! - even to a millionaire ! " 

 the ironical tone of his voice vex I , - I look at he half 
 reproachfully , and see his proud beautiful face , pale as marble , 
 clear - cut as a cameo , soften as I meet his eye , - I feel he be sorry for 
 I despite his love of satire , - and grasp his hand I press it 
 fervently without offer any other reply . then , go into the next 
 room as he bid I , I lie down , and fall asleep almost instantly , I 
 remember no more . 




 XXXIII 


 with the morning come full consciousness ; I realize bitterly all that 
 have happen , but I be no long incline to bemoan my fate . my sens 
 be stricken , as it seem , too numb and rigid for any further outbreak 
 of passion . a hard callousness take the place of outraged feeling ; and 
 though despair be in my heart , my mind be make up to one stern 
 resolve , - I would look upon Sibyl no more . never again should that fair 
 face , the deceitful mask of a false nature , tempt my sight and move I 
 to pity or forgiveness , - that I determine . leave the room in which I 
 have pass the night , I go to my study and write the follow 
 letter ; - 

  Sibyl . 

  after the degrading and disgraceful scene of last night you must be 
  aware that any further intercourse between we be impossible . Prince 
  Rimânez and I be leave for London ; we shall not return . you can 
  continue to reside at Willowsmere , - the house be your , - and the 
  half of my fortune unconditionally settle upon you on our 
  marriage - day will enable you to keep up the fashion of your ' set , ' 
  and live with that luxury and extravagance you deem necessary to an 
  ' aristocratic ' position . I have decide to travel , - and I intend to 
  make such arrangement as may prevent , if possible , our ever meeting 
  again , - though I shall of course do my good for my own sake , to 
  avoid any scandal . to reproach you for your conduct would be 
  useless ; you be lose to all sense of shame . you have abase 
  yourself in the humiliation of a guilty passion before a man who 
  despise you , - who , in his own loyal and noble nature , hat you for 
  your infidelity and hypocrisy , - and I can find no pardon for the 
  wrong you have thus do to I , and the injury you have bring upon 
  my name . I leave you to the judgment of your own conscience , - if you 
  have one , - which be doubtful . such woman as you , be seldom troubled 
  with remorse . it be not likely you will ever see I or the man to 
  whom you have offer your undesired love again , - make of your life 
  what you can or will , I be indifferent to your movement , and for my 
  own part , shall endeavour as much as may be , to forget that you 
  exist . 

  your husband , 
  Geoffrey Tempest . 

 this letter , fold and seal , I send to my wife in her own apartment 
 by her maid , - the girl come back and say she have deliver it , but that 
 there be no answer . her ladyship have a severe headache and mean to 
 keep her room that morning . I express just as much civil regret as a 
 confidential maid would naturally expect from the newly - wed husband 
 of her mistress , - and then , give instruction to my man Morris to pack 
 my portmanteau , I partook of a hurried breakfast with Lucio in more or 
 less silence and constraint , for the servant be in attendance , and I 
 do not wish they to suspect that anything be wrong . for their benefit , 
 I give out that my friend and I be call suddenly to town on urgent 
 business , - that we might be absent a couple of day , perhaps 
 long , - and that any special message or telegram could be send on to I 
 at Arthur 's Club . I be thankful when we at last get away , - when the 
 tall , picturesque red gable of Willowsmere vanish from my sight , - and 
 when finally , seat in a railway smoking - carriage reserve for our two 
 self , we be able to watch the mile of distance gradually extend 
 between we and the beautiful autumnal wood of poet - haunt 
 Warwickshire . for a long time we keep silence , turn over and 
 pretend to read the morning 's paper , - till presently fling down 
 the dull and wearisome ' time ' sheet , I sigh heavily , and lean 
 back , close my eye . 

 " I be truly very much distressed about all this ; " say Lucio then , with 
 extreme gentleness and suavity - " it seem to I that I be the adverse 
 element in the affair . if Lady Sibyl have never see I , - - " 

 " why , then I should never have see she ! " I respond bitterly - " it 
 be through you I meet she first . " 

 " true ! " and he eye I thoughtfully - " I be very unfortunately 
 place ! - it be almost as if I be to blame , though no - one could be more 
 innocent or well - intentione than myself ! " he smile , - then go on very 
 gravely - " I really should avoid scandalous gossip if I be you , - I do 
 not speak of my own involuntary share in the disaster , - what people say 
 of I be quite immaterial ; but for the lady 's sake - - " 

 " for my own sake I shall try to avoid it ; " I say brusquely , whereat his 
 eye glitter strangely - " it be myself I have to consider most of all . 
 I shall , as I hint to you this morning , travel for a few year . " 

 " yes , - go on a tiger - hunt expedition in India , " - he suggest - " or 
 kill elephant in Africa . it be what a great many man do when their 
 wife forget themselves . several well - know husband be abroad just 
 now ! " 

 again the brilliant enigmatical smile flash over his face , - but I 
 could not smile in answer . I star moodily out of the window at the 
 bare autumnal field , past which the train fly , - bare of 
 harvest , - strip of foliage - like my own miserable life . 

 " come and winter with I in Egypt , " - he continue - " come in my yacht 
 ' the flame , ' - we will take she to Alexandria , - and then do the Nile in a 
 dahabeah , and forget that such frivolous doll as woman exist except to 
 be play with by we ' superior ' creature and throw aside . " 

 " Egypt - - the Nile ! " I murmur , - somehow the idea please 
 I - " yes , - - why not ? " 

 " why not indeed ! " he echo - " the proposal be agreeable to you I be 
 sure . come and see the land of the old god , - the land where my princess 
 use to live and torture the soul of man ! - perhaps we may discover the 
 remain of her last victim , - - who know ! " 

 I avoid his gaze ; - the recollection of the horrible wing thing he 
 persist in imagine to be the transmigrate soul of an evil woman , 
 be repugnant to I . almost I feel as if there be some subtle 
 connection between that hateful creature and my wife Sibyl . I be glad 
 when the train reach London , and we , take a hansom , be plunge 
 into the very vortex of human life . the perpetual noise of traffic , 
 the motley crowd of people , the shouting of news - boy and 
 omnibus - conductor , - all this hubbub be grateful to my ear , and for a 
 time at least , distract my thought . we lunch at the Savoy , and 
 amuse ourselves with note the town noodle of fashion , - the inane 
 young man in the stock of the stiff high collar , and wear the 
 manacle of equally stiff and exaggerated cuff , a veritable prisoner in 
 the dock of silly custom , - the frivolous fool of a woman , paint and 
 powder , with false hair and dye eyebrow , try to look as much like 
 a pay courtezan as possible , - the elderly matron , skip forward on 
 high heel , and attempt by the assumption of juvenile air and grace 
 to cover up and conceal the obtrusive fact of a too obvious paunch and 
 overlap bosom , - the would - be dandy and ' beau ' of seventy , strangely 
 possess by youthful desire , and manifest the same by goat - like 
 capering at the heel of young married woman ; - these and such - like 
 contemptible unit of a contemptible social swarm , pass before we like 
 puppet at a country fair , and arouse we in turn to laughter or 
 disdain . while we yet linger over our wine , a man come in alone , and 
 sit down at the table next to our ; - he have with he a book , which , 
 after give his order for luncheon , he at once open at a marked 
 place and begin to read with absorbed attention , - I recognise the 
 cover of the volume and know it to be Mavis Clare 's " difference . " a 
 haze float before my sight , - a sensation of rise tear be in my 
 throat , - I see the fair face , earnest eye , and sweet smile of 
 Mavis , - that woman - wearer of the laurel - crown , - that keeper of the 
 lily of purity and peace . alas , those lily ! - they be for I 

  " des fleur étrange , 3 
  Avec leur airs de sceptre d'ange ; 
  De thyrse lumineux pour doigts de séraphins , - 
  Leurs parfum sont trop fort , tout ensemble , et trop fins ! " 

 I shade my eye with one hand , - yet under that shade I feel that Lucio 
 watch I closely . presently he speak softly , just as if he have read my 
 thought . 

 " consider the effect a perfectly innocent woman have on the mind of 
 even an evil man , it be strange , be not   it that there be so few of they ! " 

 I do not answer . 

 " in the present day , " he go on - " there be a number of female 
 clamouring like unnatural hen in a barn - yard about their ' right ' and 
 ' wrong . ' their great right , their high privilege , be to guide and 
 guard the soul of man . this , they for the most part , throw away as 
 worthless . aristocratic woman , royal woman even , hand over the care of 
 their child to hire attendant and inferior , and then be surprised 
 and injure if those child turn out to be either fool or 
 blackguard . if I be controller of the State , I would make it a law 
 that every mother should be bind to nurse and guard her child 
 herself as nature intend , unless prevent by ill - health , in which 
 case she would have to get a couple of doctor 's certificate to certify 
 the fact . otherwise , any woman refuse to comply with the law should be 
 sentence to imprisonment with hard labour . this would bring they to 
 their sens . the idleness , wickedness , extravagance and selfishness of 
 woman , make man the boor and egotist they be . " 

 I look up . 

 " the devil be in the whole business ; " - I say bitterly - " if woman be 
 good , man would have nothing to do with they . look round you at what be 
 call ' society ' ! how many man there be who deliberately choose taint 
 woman for their wife , and leave the innocent uncared for ! take Mavis 
 Clare - - " 

 " oh , you be think of Mavis Clare , be you ? " he rejoin , with a 
 quick glance at I - " but she would be a difficult prize for any man to 
 win . she do not seek to be marry , - and she be not uncared for , since 
 the whole world care for she . " 

 " that be a sort of impersonal love ; " - I answer - " it do not give she 
 the protection such a woman need , and ought to obtain . " 

 " do you want to become her lover ? " he ask with a slight smile - " I be 
 afraid you have   no chance ! " 

 " I ! her lover ! good God ! " I exclaim , the blood rush hotly to my 
 face at the mere suggestion - " what a profane idea ! " 

 " you be right , - it be profane ; " - he agree , still smile - " it be as 
 though I should propose your steal the sacramental cup from a church , 
 with just this difference , - you might succeed in run off with the 
 cup because it be only the church 's property , but you would never 
 succeed in win Mavis Clare , inasmuch as she belong to God . you know 
 what Milton say : 

  ' so dear to Heaven be saintly chastity 
  that when a soul be find sincerely so , 
  a thousand liveried angel lacquey she , 
  drive far off each thing of sin and guilt , 
  and in clear dream and solemn vision 
  tell she of thing which no gross ear can hear , 
  till oft converse with heavenly habitant 
  begin to cast a beam on th'outward shape 
  the unpolluted temple of the mind , 
  and turn it by degree to the soul 's essence 
  till all be make immortal ! ' 

 he quote the line softly and with an exquisite gravity . 

 " that be what you see in Mavis Clare , " - he continue - " that ' beam on the 
 outward shape ' which ' turn it by degree to the soul 's essence , ' - and 
 which make she beautiful , without what be call beauty by lustful 
 man . " 

 I move impatiently , and look out from the window near which we be 
 seat , at the yellow width of the flow Thames below . 

 " Beauty , accord to man 's ordinary standard , " pursue Lucio , " mean 
 simply good flesh , - nothing more . flesh , arrange prettily and roundly 
 on the always ugly skeleton beneath , - flesh , daintily coloured and soft 
 to the touch , without scar or blemish . plenty of it too , dispose in the 
 proper place . it be the most perishable sort of commodity , - an illness 
 spoil it , - a try climate ruin it , - age wrinkle it , - death destroy 
 it , - but it be all the majority of man look for in their bargain with 
 the fair sex . the most utter roué of sixty that ever trot jauntily 
 down Piccadilly pretend to be thirty , expect like Shylock his 
 ' pound ' or several pound of youthful flesh . the desire be neither 
 refined nor intellectual , but there it be , - and it be solely on this 
 account that the ' lady ' of the music - hall become the tainted member 
 and future mother of the aristocracy . " 

 " it do not need the lady of the music - hall to taint the already 
 taint ! " I say . 

 " true ! " and he look at I with kindly commiseration - " let we put the 
 whole mischief down to the ' new ' fiction ! " 

 we rise then , have finish luncheon , and leave the Savoy we go on 
 to Arthur 's . here we sit down in a quiet corner and begin to talk of our 
 future plan . it take I very little time to make up my mind , - all 
 quarter of the world be the same to I , and I be really indifferent 
 as to where I go . yet there be always something suggestive and 
 fascinating about the idea of a first visit to Egypt , and I willingly 
 agree to accompany Lucio thither , and remain the winter . 

 " we will avoid society " - he say - " the well - breed , well - educate 
 ' swagger ' people who throw champagne - bottle at the Sphinx , and think a 
 donkey - race ' rip fun ' shall not have the honour of our company . 
 Cairo be full of such dancing doll , so we will not stay there . Old Nile 
 have many attraction ; and lazy luxury on a dahabeah will soothe your 
 overwrought nerve . I suggest our leave England within a week . " 

 I consent , - and while he go over to a table and write some letter 
 in preparation for our journey , I look through the day 's paper . there 
 be nothing to read in they , - for though all the world 's news palpitate 
 into Great Britain on obediently throb electric wire , each editor 
 of each little pennyworth , be jealous of every other editor of every 
 other pennyworth , only admit into his column exactly what suit his 
 politic or personally please his taste , and the interest of the 
 public at large be scarcely consider . poor , bamboozled , patient 
 public ! - no wonder it be begin to think that a halfpenny spend on a 
 newspaper which be only purchase to be throw away , enough and more 
 than enough . I be still glance up and down the tedious column of the 
 Americanized Pall Mall Gazette , and Lucio be still write , when a 
 page - boy enter with a telegram . 

 " Mr Tempest ? " 

 " yes . " and I snatch the yellow - cover missive and tear it open , - and 
 read the few word it contain almost uncomprehendingly . they run 
 thus - 

  " return at once . something alarming have happen . Afraid to act 
  without you . Mavis Clare . " 

 a curious chill come over I , - the telegram fall from my hand on the 
 table . Lucio take it up and glance at it . then , regard I 
 stedfastly , he say - 

 " of course you must go . you can catch the four - forty train if you take a 
 hansom . " 

 " and you ? " I mutter . my throat be dry and I could scarcely speak . 

 " I will stay at the Grand , and wait for news . do not   delay a moment , - Miss 
 Clare would not have take it upon herself to send this message , unless 
 there have be serious cause . " 

 " what do you think - what do you suppose - - " I begin . 

 he stop I by a slight imperative gesture . 

 " I think nothing - I suppose nothing . I only urge you to start 
 immediately . come ! " 

 and almost before I realize it , he have take I with he out into the 
 hall of the club , where he help I on with my coat , give I my hat , 
 and send for a cab to take I to the railway station . we scarcely 
 exchange farewell , - stupefy with the suddenness of the unexpected 
 summon back to the home I have leave in the morning , as I think , for 
 ever , I hardly know what I be do or where I be go , till I find 
 myself alone in the train , return to Warwickshire as fast as steam 
 would bear I , with the gloom of the deepening dusk around I , and such 
 a fear and horror at my heart as I dare not think of or define . what 
 be the ' something alarming ' that have happen ? how be it that Mavis 
 Clare have telegraph to I ? these , and endless other question 
 torment my brain , - and I be afraid to suggest answer to any of they . 
 when I arrive at the familiar station , there be no one wait to 
 receive I , so I hire a fly , and be drive up to my own house just as 
 the short evening deepen into night . a low autumnal wind be sigh 
 restlessly among the tree like a wandering soul in torment ; not a star 
 shone in the black depth of the sky . directly the carriage stop , a 
 slim figure in white come out under the porch to meet I , - it be Mavis , 
 her angel 's face grave and pale with emotion . 

 " it be you at last ! " she say in a trembling voice - - " thank God you 
 have come ! " 


   3   Edmond Rostand . ' La Princesse Lointaine . ' 




 XXXIV 


 I grasp her hand hard . 

 " what be it ? " - I begin ; - then , look round I see that the hall be 
 full of panic - stricken servant , some of whom come forward , confusedly 
 murmur together about be ' afraid , ' and ' not know what to do . ' I 
 motion they back by a gesture and turn again to Mavis Clare . 

 " tell I , - quick - what be wrong ? " 

 " we fear something have happen to Lady Sibyl , " - she reply at 
 once - " her room be lock , and we can not make her hear . she maid get 
 alarm , and run over to my house to ask I what be good to be do , - I 
 come at once , and knock and call , but could get no response . you 
 know the window be too high to reach from the ground , - there be no 
 ladder on the premise long enough for the purpose , - and no one can 
 climb up that side of the building . I beg some of the servant to 
 break open the door by force , - but they would not , - they be all 
 afraid ; and I do not like to act on my own responsibility , so I 
 telegraph for you - - " 

 I spring away from she before she have finish speak and hurry 
 upstairs at once , - outside the door of the ante - room which lead into my 
 wife 's luxurious ' suite ' of apartment , I pause breathless . 

 " Sibyl ! " I cry . 

 there be not a sound . Mavis have follow I , and stand by my side , 
 tremble a little . two or three of the servant have also creep up the 
 stair , and be cling to the banister , listen nervously . 

 " Sibyl ! " I call again . still absolute silence . I turn round upon the 
 waiting and anxious domestic with an assumption of calmness . 

 " Lady Sibyl be probably not in her room at all ; " - I say ; " she may have 
 go out unobserved . this door of the ante - chamber have a 
 spring - lock , - it can easily get fast shut by the mere accident . bring 
 a strong hammer , - or a crowbar , - anything that will break it open , - if 
 you have have sense you would have obey Miss Clare , and do this a 
 couple of hour ago . " 

 and I wait with enforce composure , while my instruction be carry 
 out as rapidly as possible . two of the man - servant appear with the 
 necessary tool , and very soon the house resound with clamour , - blow 
 after blow be deal upon the solid oaken door for some time without 
 success , - the spring lock would not yield , - neither would the strong 
 hinge give way . presently however , after ten minute ' hard labour , one 
 of the finely carve panel be smash in , - then another , - and , 
 spring over the débris I rush through the ante - room into the 
 boudoir , - then pause , listen , and call again , " Sibyl ! " no one 
 follow I , - some indefinable instinct , some nameless dread , hold the 
 servant back , and Mavis Clare as well . I be alone , ... and in complete 
 darkness . grope about , with my heart beat furiously , I seek for 
 the ivory button in the wall which would , at pressure , flood the room 
 with electric light , but somehow I could not find it . my hand come in 
 contact with various familiar thing which I recognise by touch , - rare 
 bit of china , bronze , vas , picture , - costly trifle that be 
 heap up as I know , in this particular apartment with a lavish luxury 
 and disregard of cost befit a wanton eastern empress of old 
 time , - cautiously feel my way along , I start with terror to see , as 
 I think , a tall figure outline itself suddenly against the 
 darkness , - white , spectral and luminous , - a figure that , as I star at 
 it aghast , raise a pallid hand and point I forward with a menacing 
 air of scorn ! in my daze horror at this apparition , or delusion , I 
 stumble over the heavy trail fold of a velvet portiére , and know 
 by this that I have pass from the boudoir into the adjoining bedroom . 
 again I stop , - call " Sibyl ! " but my voice have scarcely strength 
 enough to raise itself above a whisper . Giddy and confuse as I be , I 
 remember that the electric light in this room be fix at the side of 
 the toilet - table , and I step hurriedly in that direction , when all at 
 once in the thick gloom I touch something clammy and cold like dead 
 flesh , and brush against a garment that exhale faint perfume , and 
 rustle at my touch with a silken sound . this alarm I more thoroughly 
 than the spectre I fancy I have just see , - I draw back shudderingly 
 against the wall , - and in so do , my finger involuntarily close on 
 the polished ivory stud which , like a fairy talisman in modern 
 civilization , emit radiance at the owner 's will . I press it 
 nervously , - the light blaze forth through the rose - tint shell which 
 shade its dazzle clearness , and show I where I stand , ... within 
 an arm 's length of a strange , stiff white creature that sit star at 
 itself in the silver - frame mirror with wide - open , fixed and glassy 
 eye ! 

 " Sibyl ! " I gasp - " my wife ... ! ... " but the word die chokingly in my 
 throat . be it indeed my wife ? - this frozen statue of a woman , watch 
 her own impassive image thus intently ? I look upon she 
 wonderingly , - doubtingly , - as if she be some strange ; - it take I 
 time to recognize her feature , and the bronze - gold darkness of her long 
 hair which fall loosely about she in a lavish wealth of ripple wave , 
 ... her left hand hang limply over the arm of the chair in which , like 
 some carven ivory goddess , she sit enthrone , - and tremblingly , slowly , 
 reluctantly , I advance and take that hand . cold as ice it lie in my 
 palm much as though it be a waxen model of itself ; - it glitter with 
 jewel , - and I study every ring upon it with a curious , dull 
 pertinacity , like one who seek a clue to identity . that large turquoise 
 in a diamond setting be a marriage - gift from a duchess , - that opal she 
 father give she , - the lustrous circle of sapphire and brilliant 
 surmount her wedding - ring be my gift , - that ruby I seem to 
 know , - - well , well ! what a mass of sparkling value waste on such 
 fragile clay ! I peer into her face , - then at the reflection of that 
 face in the mirror , - and again I grow perplexed , - be it , could it be 
 Sibyl after all ? Sibyl be beautiful , - this dead thing have a devilish 
 smile on its blue , part lip , and frenzied horror in its eye ! 
 suddenly something tense in my brain seem to snap and give 
 way , - drop the chill finger I hold , I cry aloud - 

 " Mavis ! Mavis Clare ! " 

 in a moment she be with I , - in a glance she comprehend all . fall 
 on her knee by the dead woman she break into a passion of weeping . 

 " oh , poor girl ! " she cry - " oh , poor , unhappy , misguided girl ! " 

 I star at her gloomily . it seem to I very strange that she should 
 weep for sorrow not her own . there be a fire in my brain , - a confused 
 trouble in my thought , - I look at my dead wife with her fix gaze 
 and evil smile , sit rigidly upright , and rob in the mocking sheen 
 of her rose - silk peignoir , shower with old lace , after the costly 
 of Paris fashion , - then at the living , tender - soule , earnest creature , 
 fame for her genius throughout the world , who kneel on the ground , 
 sob over the stiffening hand on which so many rare gem glisten 
 derisively , - and an impulse rise in I strong than myself , move I 
 to wild and clamorous speech . 

 " get up , Mavis ! " I cry - " do not kneel there ! go , - go out of this 
 room , - out of my sight ! you do not know what she be - this woman whom I 
 marry , - I deem she an angel , but she be a fiend , - yes , Mavis , a 
 fiend ! look at she , star at her own image in the glass , - you can not 
 call she beautiful - now ! she smile , you see , - just as she smile last 
 night when , ... ah , you know nothing of last night ! I tell you , go ! " and 
 I stamp my foot almost furiously , - " this air be contaminate , - it 
 will poison you ! the perfume of Paris and the effluvia of death 
 intermingle be sufficient to breed a pestilence ! go quickly , - inform 
 the household their mistress be dead , - have the blind draw down , - show 
 all the exterior sign of decent and fashionable woe ! " - and I begin 
 laugh deliriously - " tell the servant they may count upon expensive 
 mourning , - for all that money can do shall be do in homage to King 
 death ! let everyone in the place eat and drink as much as they can or 
 will , - and sleep , or chatter as such menial love to do , of hearse , 
 graf and sudden disaster ; - but let I be leave alone , - alone with 
  she ; - we have much to say to one another ! " 

 White and tremble , Mavis rise up and stand gaze at I in fear and 
 pity . 

 " alone ? ... " she falter - " you be not fit to be alone ! " 

 " no , I be not fit to be , but I must be , " - I rejoin quickly and 
 harshly - " this woman and I love - after the manner of brute , and be 
 wed or rather mat in a similar manner , though an archbishop bless 
 the pairing , and call upon Heaven to witness its sanctity ! yet we 
 part ill friend , - and dead though she be , I choose to pass the night 
 with she , - I shall learn much knowledge from her silence ! to - morrow the 
 grave and the servant of the grave may claim she , but to - night she be 
 mine ! " 

 the girl 's sweet eye brim over with tear . 

 " oh you be too distracted to know what you be say , " she 
 murmur - " you do not even try to discover how she die ! " 

 " that be easy enough to guess , " - I answer quickly , and I take up a 
 small dark - colour bottle label ' poison ' which I have already 
 perceive on the toilet - table - " this be uncorked and empty . what it 
 contain I do not know , - but there must be an inquest of 
 course , - people must be allow to make money for themselves out of her 
 ladyship 's rash act ! and see there , - " here I point to some loose 
 sheet of note - paper cover with writing , and partially conceal by a 
 filmy lace handkerchief which have evidently be hastily throw across 
 they , and a pen and inkstand close by - " there be some admirable reading 
 prepared for I doubtless ! - the last message from the beloved dead be 
 sacred , Mavis Clare ; surely you , a writer of tender romance , can 
 realize this ! - and realize it , you will do as I ask you , - leave I ! " 

 she look at I in deep compassion , and slowly turn to go . 

 " God help you ! " she say sobbingly - " God console you ! " 

 at this , some demon in I break loose , and spring to her side I 
 catch her hand in mine . 

 " do not dare to talk of God ! " I say in passionate accent ; " not in this 
 room , - not in that presence ! why should you call curse down upon I ? 
 the help of God mean punishment , - the consolation of God be terrible ! 
 for strength must acknowledge itself weak before he will help it , - and a 
 heart must be break before he will console it ! but what do I say ! - I 
 believe in no God - ! I believe in an unknown Force that encompass I 
 and hunt I down to the grave , but nothing more . she think as I 
 do , - and with reason , - for what have God do for she ? she be make evil 
 from the first , - a bear snare of Satan .... " 

 something catch my breath here , - I stop , unable to utter another 
 word . Mavis star at I affright , and I star back again . 

 " what be it ? " she whisper alarmedly . I struggle to speak , - finally , 
 with difficulty I answer she - 

 " nothing ! " 

 and I motion she away with a gesture of entreaty . the expression of my 
 face must have startle or intimidate she I fancy , for she retreat 
 hastily and I watch she disappear as if she be the phantom of a 
 dream , - then , as she pass out through the boudoir , I draw close the 
 velvet portiére behind she and lock the intermediate door . this do I 
 go slowly back to the side of my dead wife . 

 " now Sibyl , " - I say aloud - " we be alone , you and i - alone with our own 
 reflect image , - you dead , and I live ! you have no terror for I in 
 your present condition , - your beauty have go . your smile , your eye , 
 your touch can not stir I to a throb of the passion you crave , yet 
 weary of ! what have you to say to I ? - I have hear that the dead can 
 speak at time , - and you owe I reparation , - reparation for the wrong 
 you do I , - the lie on which you base our marriage , - the guilt you 
 cherish in your heart ! shall I read your petition for forgiveness 
 here ? " 

 and I gather up the write sheet of note - paper in one hand , feel 
 they rather than see they , for my eye be fix on the pallid 
 corpse in its rose - silk ' negligée ' and jewel , that gaze at itself so 
 pertinaciously in the shin mirror . I draw a chair close to it , and 
 sit down , observe likewise the reflection of my own haggard face in 
 the glass beside that of the self - murder woman . turn presently , I 
 begin to scrutinize my immovable companion more closely - and perceive 
 that she be very lightly clothe , - under the silk peignoir there be 
 only a flow white garment of soft fine material lavishly embroider , 
 through which the statuesque contour of her rigid limb could be 
 distinctly see . stoop , I feel her heart , - I know it be pulseless ; 
 yet I half imagine I should feel its beat . as I withdraw my hand , 
 something scaly and glistening catch my eye , and look I perceive 
 Lucio 's marriage - gift circle her waist , - the flexible emerald snake 
 with its diamond crest and ruby eye . it fascinate I , - - coil round 
 that dead body it seem alive and sentient , - if it have lift its 
 glitter head and hiss at I I should scarcely have be surprised . 
 I sit back for a moment in my chair , almost as rigid as the corpse 
 beside I , - I star again , as the corpse star always , into the mirror 
 which picture we both , we ' twain in one , ' as the sentimentalist aver 
 of wed folk , though in truth it often happen that there be no two 
 creature in the world more widely separate than husband and wife . I 
 hear stealthy movement and suppress whispering in the passage 
 outside , and guess that some of the servant be there watch and 
 waiting , - but I care nothing for that . I be absorb in the ghastly 
 night interview I have plan for myself , and I so enter into the 
 spirit of the thing , that I turn on all the electric lamp in the 
 room , besides light two tall cluster of shade candle on either 
 side of the toilet - table . when all the surrounding be thus render 
 as brilliant as possible , so that the corpse look more livid and 
 ghastly by comparison , I seat myself once more , and prepare to read 
 the last message of the dead . 

 " now Sibyl , " - I mutter , lean forward a little , and note with a 
 morbid interest that the jaw of the corpse have relax a little within 
 the last few minute , and that the smile on the face be therefore more 
 hideous - " Confess your sin ! - for I be here to listen . such dumb , 
 impressive eloquence as yours deserve attention ! " 

 a gust of wind flee round the house with a wail cry , - the window 
 shake , and the candle flicker . I wait till every sound have die 
 away , and then - with a glance at my dead wife , under the sudden 
 impression that she have hear what I say , and know what I be do , I 
 begin to read . 




 XXXV 


 thus run the ' last document , ' commence abruptly and without prefix ; - 

  " I have make up my mind to die . not out of passion or 
  petulance , - but from deliberate choice , and as I think , necessity . 
  my brain be tired of problem , - my body be tired of life ; it be good 
  to make an end . the idea of death , - which mean annihilation , - be 
  very sweet to I . I be glad to feel that by my own will and act I 
  can silence this uneasy throbbing of my heart , this turmoil and heat 
  of my blood , - this torture aching of my nerve . young as I be , I 
  have no delight now in existence , - I see nothing but my love 's 
  luminous eye , his god - like feature , his enthral smile , - and 
  these be lose to I . for a brief while he have be my world , life 
  and time , - he have go , - and without he there be no universe . how 
  could I endure the slow , wretched passing of hour , day , week , 
  month and year alone ? - though it be well to be alone than in the 
  dull companionship of the self - satisfy , complacent and arrogant 
  fool who be my husband . he have leave I for ever , so he say in a 
  letter the maid bring to I an hour ago . it be quite what I 
  expect of he , - what man of his type could find pardon for a blow 
  to his own amour propre ! if he have study my nature , enter into 
  my emotion , or striven in the least to guide and sustain I , - if he 
  have show I any sign of a great , true love such as one sometimes 
  dream of and seldom find , - I think I should be sorry for he 
  now , - I should even ask his forgiveness for have marry he . but 
  he have treat I precisely as he might treat a pay mistress , - that 
  be , he have feed I , clothe I , and provide I with money and jewel 
  in return for make I the toy of his passion , - but he have not 
  give I one touch of sympathy , - one proof of self - denial or humane 
  forbearance . therefore , I owe he nothing . and now he , and my love 
  who will not be my lover , have go away together ; I be free to do 
  as I will with this small pulse within I call life , which be 
  after all , only a thread , easily break . there be no one to say I 
  nay , or to hold my hand back from give myself the final quietus . 
  it be well I have no friend ; it be good for I that I have probe 
  the hypocrisy and social sham of the world , and that I have master 
  the follow hard truth of life , - that there be no love without 
  lust , - no friendship without self - interest , - no religion without 
  avarice , - and no so - call virtue without its accompany strong 
  vice . who , know these thing , would care to take part in they ! on 
  the verge of the grave I look back along the short vista of my 
  year , and I see myself a child in this very place , this woode 
  Willowsmere ; I can note how that life begin to which I be about to 
  put an end . pamper , pet and spoilt , tell that I must ' look 
  pretty ' and take pleasure in my clothe , I be even at the age of 
  ten , capable of a certain amount of coquetry . old roué , smelling 
  of wine and tobacco , be eager to take I on their knee and pinch 
  my soft flesh ; - they would press my innocent lip with their 
  wither one , - wither and contaminate by the kiss of 
  cocotte and ' soil dove ' of the town ! - I have often wonder 
  how it be these man can dare to touch a young child 's mouth , know 
  in themselves what beast they be ! I see my nurse , - a train liar 
  and time - server , give herself more air than a queen , and 
  forbid I to speak to this child or that child , because they 
  be ' beneath ' I ; - then come my governess , full of a prurient 
  prudery , as bad a woman in moral as ever live , yet ' highly 
  recommend ' and with excellent reference , and wear an 
  assumption of the strict virtue , like many equally hypocritical 
  clergyman 's wife I have know . I soon find she out , - for even as a 
  child I be painfully observant , - and the story she and my 
  mother 's french maid use to tell , in lower voice now and then 
  break by coarse laughter , be sufficient to enlighten I as to her 
  true character . yet , beyond have a supreme contempt for the woman 
  who practise religious austerity outwardly , and be at heart a 
  rake , I give small consideration to the difficult problem such a 
  nature suggest . I live , - how strange it seem that I should be 
  write now of myself , as past and do with ! - yes , I live in a 
  dreamy , more or less idyllic state of mind , think without be 
  conscious of thought , full of fancy concern the flower , tree 
  and bird , - wish for thing of which I know nothing , - imagine 
  myself a queen at time , and again , a peasant . I be an omnivorous 
  reader , - and I be specially fond of poetry . I use to pore over the 
  mystic verse of Shelley , and judge he then as a sort of 
  demi - god ; - and never , even when I know all about his life , could I 
  realize he as a man with a thin , shriek falsetto voice and 
  ' loose ' notion concern woman . but I be quite sure it be good 
  for his fame that he be drown in early youth with so many 
  melancholy and dramatic surrounding , - it save he , I consider , 
  from a possibly vicious and repulsive old age . I adore Keats till I 
  know he have waste his passion on a Fanny Brawn , - and then the 
  glamour of he vanish . I can offer no reason for this , - I merely 
  set down the fact . I make a hero of Lord Byron , - in fact he have 
  always form for I the only heroical type of poet . strong in 
  himself and pitiless in his love for woman , he treat they for the 
  most part as they merit , consider the singular and unworthy 
  specimen of the sex it be his misfortune to encounter . I use to 
  wonder , when read these man 's amorous line , whether love would 
  ever come my way , and what beatific state of emotion I should then 
  enjoy . then come the rough awakening from all my dream , - childhood 
  melt into womanhood , - and at sixteen I be take up to town with 
  my parent to " know something of the way and manner of society , " 
  before finally ' come out . ' oh , those way and manner ! I learn 
  they to perfection ! astonish at first , then bewilder , and 
  allow no time to form any judgment on what I see , I be hurry 
  through a general vague ' impression ' of thing such as I have never 
  imagine or dream of . while I be yet lose in wonderment , and keep 
  constantly in companionship with young girl of my own rank and age , 
  who nevertheless seem much more advanced in knowledge of the world 
  than I , my father suddenly inform I that Willowsmere be lose to 
  we , - that he could not afford to keep it up , - and that we should 
  return there no more . ah , what tear I shed ! - what a fury of grief 
  consume I ! - I do not then comprehend the difficult entanglement 
  of either wealth or poverty ; - all I could realize be that the door 
  of my dear old home be close upon I for ever . after that , I 
  think I grow cold and hard in disposition ; I have never love my 
  mother very dearly , - in fact I have see very little of she , as she 
  be always away visit , if not entertain visitor , and she 
  seldom have I with she , - so that when she be suddenly strike down 
  by a first shock of paralysis , it affect I but little . she have 
  her doctor and nurse , - I have my governess still with I ; and my 
  mother 's sister , Aunt Charlotte , come to keep house for we , - so I 
  begin to analyse society for myself , without give any expression 
  of my opinion on what I observe . I be not yet ' out , ' but I go 
  everywhere where girl of my age be invite , and perceive thing 
  without show that I have any faculty of perception . I cultivate a 
  passionless and cold exterior , - a listless , uninterested and frigid 
  demeanor , - for I discover that this be accept by many people as 
  dullness or stupidity , and that by assume such a character , 
  certain otherwise crafty person would talk more readily before I , 
  and betray themselves and their vice unawares . thus my ' social 
  education ' begin in grim earnest ; - woman of title and renown would 
  ask I to their ' quiet tea , ' because I be what they be please 
  to call a ' harmless girl - ' ' rather pretty , but dull , ' - and allow I 
  to assist they in entertain the lover who call upon they 
  while their husband be out . I remember that on one occasion , a 
  great lady famous for two thing , her diamond and her intimacy with 
  the Queen , kiss she ' cavaliere servente , ' a note sporting earl , 
  with considerable abandon in my presence . he mutter something 
  about I , - I hear it ; - but his amorous mistress merely answer in 
  a whisper - " oh , it be only Sibyl Elton , - she understand nothing . " 
  afterwards however , when he have go , she turn to I with a grin 
  and remark - " you see I kiss Bertie , do not   you ? I often do ; he be 
  quite like my brother ! " I make no reply , - I only smile vaguely ; and 
  the next day she send I a valuable diamond ring , which I at once 
  return to she with a prim little note , state that I be much 
  oblige , but that my father consider I too young as yet to wear 
  diamond . why do I think of these trifle now I wonder ! - now when I 
  be about to take my leave of life and all its lie ! ... there be a 
  little bird sing outside my bedroom window , - such a pretty 
  creature ! I suppose it be happy ? - it should be , as it be not 
  human ... the tear be in my eye as I listen to its sweet 
  warbling , and think that it will be live and sing still to - day 
  at sunset when I be dead ! 

          

  that last sentence be mere sentiment , for I be not sorry to die . if 
  I feel the least regret about it I should not carry out my 
  intention . I must resume my narrative , - for it be an analysis I be 
  try to make of myself , to find out if I can whether there be no 
  excuse to be find for my particular disposition , - whether it be 
  not after all , the education and training I have have that have make 
  I what I be , or whether indeed I be bear evil from the first . the 
  circumstance that surround I , do not , at any rate , tend to 
  soften or improve my character . I have just pass my seventeenth 
  birthday , when one morning my father call I into his library and 
  tell I the true position of his affair . I learn that he be 
  crippled on all side with debt , - that he live on advance make to 
  he by Jew usurer , - and that these advance be trust to he 
  solely on the speculation that I , his only daughter , would make a 
  sufficiently rich marriage to enable he to repay all loan with 
  heavy interest . he go on to say that he hop I would act 
  sensibly , - and that when any man show indication of become 
  suitor for my hand , I would , before encourage they , inform he , 
  in order that he might make strict enquiry as to their actual 
  extent of fortune . I then understand , for the first time , that I be 
  for sale . I listen in silence till he have finish , - then I ask 
  he - ' Love , I suppose , be not to be consider in the matter ? ' he 
  laugh , and assure I it be much easy to love a rich man than a 
  poor one , as I would find out after a little experience . he add , 
  with some hesitation , that to help make both end meet , as the 
  expense of town life be considerable , he have arrange to take a 
  young american lady under his charge , a Miss Diana Chesney , who 
  wish to be introduce into english society , and who would pay two 
  thousand guineas a year to he for that privilege , and for Aunt 
  Charlotte 's service as chaper"ne . I do not remember now what I say 
  to he when I hear this , - I know that my long suppress feeling 
  break out in a storm of fury , and that for the moment he be 
  completely take aback by the force of my indignation . an american 
  boarder in our house ! - it seem to I as outrageous and 
  undignifie as the conduct of a person I once hear of , who , 
  favour by the Queen 's patronage with ' free ' apartment in 
  Kensington Palace , take from time to time on the sly , an american or 
  Colonial ' pay - guest , ' who adopt forthwith the address of her 
  Majesty 's birthplace as her own , thus lower the whole prestige of 
  that historic habitation . my wrath however be useless ; - the bargain 
  be arrange , - my father , regardless of his proud lineage and the 
  social dignity of his position , have degrade himself , in my opinion , 
  to the level of a sort of superior lodging - house keeper , - and from 
  that time I lose all my former respect for he . of course it can be 
  argue that I be wrong , - that I ought to have honour he for 
  turn his name to monetary account by loan it out as a 
  protective shield and panoply for an american woman without 
  anything but the dollar of a vulgar ' railway - king ' to back she up 
  in society , - but I could not see it in that light . I retreat into 
  myself more than ever , - and become more than pleasantly know for my 
  coldness , reserve and hauteur . Miss Chesney come , and strove hard to 
  be my friend , - but she soon find that impossible . she be a 
  good - hearted creature I believe , - but she be badly breed and badly 
  train as all her compatriot be , more or less , despite their 
  smattering of an european education ; I dislike she from the first , 
  and have spar no pain to show it . yet I know she will be Countess 
  of Elton as soon as it be decently possible , - say , after the year 's 
  ceremonious mourning for my mother have expire , and perhaps three 
  month ' hypocritical wearing of black for I , - my father believe 
  himself to be still young and passably good - look , and he be quite 
  incapable of resist the fortune she will bring he . when she take 
  up her fix abode in our house and Aunt Charlotte become she pay 
  chaper"ne , I seldom go out to any social gathering , for I could 
  not endure the idea of be see in her companionship . I keep to my 
  own room a great deal , and thus seclude , read many book . all the 
  fashionable fiction of the day pass through my hand , much to my 
  gradual enlightenment , if not to my edification . one day , - a day 
  that be stamp on my memory as a kind of turning - point in my 
  life , - I read a novel by a woman which I do not at first entirely 
  understand , - but on go over some of its passage a second time , 
  all at once its horrible lasciviousness flash upon I , and fill 
  I with such genuine disgust that I fling it on the ground in a fit 
  of loathing and contempt . yet I have see it praise in all the 
  lead journal of the day ; its obscenity be hint at as 
  ' daring , ' - its vulgarity be quote as ' brilliant wit , ' - in fact 
  so many laudatory column be write about it in the press that I 
  resolve to read it again . encourage by the ' literary censor ' of 
  the time , I do so , and little by little the insidious abomination 
  of it filter into my mind and stay there . I begin to think 
  about it , - and by - and - by find pleasure in think about it . I 
  send for other book by the same tainted hand , and my appetite for 
  that kind of prurient romance grow keener . at this particular 
  juncture as chance or fate would have it , an acquaintance of mine , 
  the daughter of a Marchioness , a girl with large black eye , and 
  those full protrude lip which remind one unconsciously of a 
  swine 's snout , bring I two or three odd volume of the poem of 
  Swinburne . always devoted to poetry , and consider it to be the 
  high of the art , and up to that period have be ignorant of 
  this writer 's work , I turn over the book with eagerness , 
  expect to enjoy the usual sublime emotion which it be the 
  privilege and glory of the poet to inspire in mortal less divinely 
  endow than himself , and who turn to he 

  " for help to climb 
  beyond the high peak of time . " 

  now I should like , if I could do so , to explain clearly the effect 
  of this satyr - songster upon my mind , - for I believe there be many 
  woman to whom his work have be deadly than the deadly 
  poison , and far more soul - corrupting than any book of Zola 's or the 
  most pernicious of modern french writer . at first I read the poem 
  quickly , with a certain pleasure in the musical swing and jangle of 
  rhythm , and without pay much attention to the subject - matter of 
  the verse , - but presently , as though a lurid blaze of lightning have 
  strip a fair tree of its adorn leaf , my sens suddenly 
  perceive the cruelty and sensuality conceal under the ornate 
  language and persuasive rhyme , - and for a moment I pause in my 
  reading , and close my eye , shudder and sick at heart . be human 
  nature as base and abandon as this man declare it to be ? be 
  there no God but Lust ? be man and woman low and more depraved in 
  their passion and appetite than the very beast ? I muse and 
  dream , - I pore over the ' Laus Veneris ' - ' Faustine ' and 
  ' Anactoria , ' till I feel myself be drag down to the level of 
  the mind that conceive such outrage to decency , - I drink in the 
  poet 's own fiendish contempt of God , and I read over and over again 
  his verse ' before a Crucifix ' till I know they by heart ; - till they 
  ring in my brain as persistently as any nursery jingle , and drive my 
  thought into as haughty a scorn of Christ and his teaching , as any 
  unbelieve Jew . it be nothing to I now , - now , when without hope , 
  or faith or love , I be about to take the final plunge into eternal 
  darkness and silence , - but for the sake of those who have the 
  comfort of a religion I ask , why , in a so - call christian country , 
  be such a hideous blasphemy as ' before a Crucifix ' allow to 
  circulate among the people without so much as one reproof from those 
  who elect themselves judge of literature ? I have see many noble 
  writer condemn unheard , - many have be accuse of blasphemy , 
  whose work tend quite the other way , - but these line be permit 
  to work their cruel mischief unchecked , and the writer of they be 
  glorify as though he be a benefactor to mankind . I quote they 
  here , from bitter memory , that I may not be deem as exaggerate 
  their nature - 

  " so when our soul look back to thee , 
  they sicken , see against thy side , 
  too foul to speak of or to see , 
  the leprous likeness of a bride , 
  whose kissing lip through his lip grow 
  leave their God rotten to the bone . 

  when we would see thee man , and know 
  what heart thou had'st towards man indeed , 
  Lo , thy blood - blacken altar ; lo , 
  the lip of priest that pray and feed , 
  while their own hell 's worm curl and lick 
  the poison of the crucifix . 

  Thou bad'st the child come to thee , - 
  what child now but curse come , 
  what manhood in that God can be 
  who see their worship and be dumb ? - 
  no soul that live , love , wrought , and die 
  be this , their Carrion Crucified ! 

  Nay , if their God and thou be one 
  if thou and this thing be the same , 
  Thou should'st not look upon the sun , 
  the sun grow haggard at thy name ! 
  come down , be do with , cease , give o'er , 
  hide thyself , strive not , be no more ! " 

  from the time of read this , I use to think of Christ as ' carrion 
  crucify ' ; - if I ever think at all . I find out that no one have 
  ever reproach Swinburne for this term , - that it do not interfere 
  with his chance for the Laureateship , - and that not even a priest 
  of the church have be bold - spoken or zealous enough in his Master 's 
  cause to publicly resent the shameless outrage . so I conclude that 
  Swinburne must , after all , be right in his opinion , and I follow 
  the lazy and unthinking course of social movement , spend my day 
  with such literature as store my brain with a complete knowledge of 
  thing evil and pernicious . whatever soul I have in I be kill ; 
  the freshness of my mind be go , - Swinburne , among other , have 
  help I to live mentally , if not physically , through such a phase 
  of vice as have poison my thought for ever . I understand there be 
  some vague law in existence about place an interdiction on certain 
  book consider injurious to public moral , - if there be such a 
  rule , it have be curiously lax concern the author of 
  ' Anactoria ' - who , by virtue of be a poet , pass unquestione 
  into many a home , carry impure suggestion into mind that be 
  once cleanly and simple . as for I , after I have study his verse to 
  my heart 's content , nothing remain sacred , - I judge man as beast 
  and woman as little well , - I have no belief in honour , virtue or 
  truth , - and I be absolutely indifferent to all thing save one , and 
  that be my resolve to have my own way as far as love be concern . 
  I might be force to marry without love for purely 
  money - consideration , - but all the same , love I would have , or what 
  I call love ; - not an ' ideal ' passion by any mean , but precisely 
  what Mr Swinburne and a few of the most - praise novelist of the day 
  have teach I to consider as love . I begin to wonder when and how I 
  should meet my lover , - such thought as I have at this time indeed 
  would have make moralist stare and uplift their hand in 
  horror , - but to the exterior world I be the very pink and pattern 
  of maidenly decorum , reserve and pride . man desire , but fear I ; 
  for I never give they any encouragement , see as yet none among 
  they whom I deem worthy of such love as I could give . the majority 
  resemble carefully train baboon , - respectably clothe and 
  artistically shaven , - but nevertheless all with the spasmodic grin , 
  the leer eye and the uncouth gesture of the hairy woodland 
  monster . when I be just eighteen I ' come out ' in earnest - that be , 
  I be present at Court with all the foolish and farcical pomp 
  practise on such occasion . I be tell before go that it be a 
  great and necessary thing to be ' present , ' - that it be a 
  guarantee of position , and above all of reputation , - the Queen 
  receive none whose conduct be not rigidly correct and virtuous . 
  what humbug it all be ! - I laugh then , and I can smile now to 
  think of it , - why , the very woman who present I have two 
  illegitimate son , unknown to her lawful husband , and she be not 
  the only playful sinner in the Court comedy ! some woman be there 
  that day whom since even I would not receive - so openly infamous 
  be their life and character , yet they make their demure curtsey 
  before the Throne at state time , and assume to be the very 
  pattern of virtue and austerity . now and then , it chance in the 
  case of an exceedingly beautiful woman , of whom all the other be 
  jealous , that for her little slip she be select as an ' example ' 
  and exclude from Court , while her plainer sister , though sin 
  seventy time seven against all the law of decency and morality , 
  be still receive , - but otherwise , there be very little real care 
  exercise as to the character and prestige of the woman whom the 
  Queen receive . if any one of they be refuse , it be certain she 
  add to her social enormity , the great crime of be beautiful , 
  otherwise there would be no one to whisper away her reputation ! I 
  be what be call a ' success ' on my presentation day . that is , I 
  be star at , and openly flatter by certain member of my sex who 
  be too old and ugly to be jealous , and treat with insolent 
  contempt by those who be young enough to be my rival . there be a 
  great crush to get into the Throne - Room ; and some of the lady use 
  rather strong language . one duchess , just in front of I , say to 
  her companion - ' do as I do , - kick out ! bruise their shin for 
  they - as hard as you can , - we shall get on fast then ! ' this choice 
  remark be accompany by the grin of a fishwife and the stare of a 
  drab . yet it be a ' great ' lady who speak , - not a transatlantic 
  importation , but a woman of distinguished lineage and connection . 
  her observation however be only one out of many similar speech 
  which I hear on all side of I during the ' distinguished ' 
  mélée , - a thoroughly ill - mannered ' crush , ' which strike I as 
  supremely vulgar and totally unfit the dignity of our 
  Sovereign 's court . when I curtsy before the throne at last , and 
  see the majesty of the Empire represent by a kindly face old 
  lady , look very tired and bore , whose hand be as cold as ice 
  when I kiss it , I be conscious of an intense feeling of pity for 
  she in her high estate . who would be a Monarch , to be doom to the 
  perpetual receiving of a company of fool ! I get through my duty 
  quickly , and return home more or less weary out and disgust 
  with the whole ceremony , - and next day I find that my ' deb - t ' have 
  give I the position of a ' lead beauty ' ; or in other word that 
  I be now formally put up for sale . that be really what be mean by 
  be ' present ' and ' come out , ' - these be the fancy term of 
  one 's parental auctioneer . my life be now pass in dressing , 
  have my photograph take , give ' sitting ' to aspire 
  fashionable painter , and be ' inspect ' by man with a view to 
  matrimony . it be distinctly understand in society that I be not to 
  be sell under a certain figure per annum , - and the price be too 
  high for most would - be purchaser . how sick I grow of my constant 
  exhibition in the marriage - market ! what contempt and hatred be 
  foster in I for the mean and pitiable hypocrisy of my set ! I 
  be not long in discover that money be the chief - motive power of 
  all social success , - that the proud and high personage in 
  the world could be easily gather together under the roof of any 
  vulgar plebeian who happen to have enough cash to feed and 
  entertain they . as an example of this , I remember a woman , ugly , 
  passée and squint - eye , who during her father 's life be only 
  allow about half - a - crown a week as pocket - money up to her fortieth 
  year , - and who , when that father die , leave she in possession of 
  half his fortune ,   the other half go to illegitimate child of 
  whom she have never hear , he have always pose as a pattern of 
  immaculate virtue   suddenly blossom out as a ' leader ' of fashion , 
  and succeed , through cautious scheming and ungrudge toadyism , in 
  assemble some of the high people in the land under her roof . 
  ugly and passée though she be , and verge towards fifty , with 
  neither grace , wit , nor intelligence , through the power of her cash 
  alone she invite Royal duke and ' title ' generally to her dinner 
  and dance , - and it be to their shame that they actually accept 
  her invitation . such voluntary degradation on the part of really 
  well - connect people I have never be able to understand , - it be 
  not as if they be actually in want of food or amusement , for they 
  have a surfeit of both every season , - and it seem to I that they 
  ought to show a well example than to flock in crowd to the 
  entertainment of a mere uninteresting and ugly nobody just because 
  she happen to have money . I never enter her house myself though 
  she have the audacity to invite I , - I learn moreover , that she have 
  promise a friend of mine a hundred guineas if she could persuade I 
  to make one appearance in her room . for my renown as a ' beauty ' 
  combine with my pride and exclusiveness , would have give she 
  party a prestige great than even Royalty could bestow , - she 
  know that and I know that , - and know it , never condescend to 
  so much as notice she by a bow . but though I take a certain 
  satisfaction in thus revenge myself on the atrocious vulgarity of 
  parvenus and social interloper , I grow intensely weary of the 
  monotony and emptiness of what fashionable folk call ' amusement , ' 
  and presently fall ill of a nervous fever , I be send down to 
  the seaside for a few week ' change of air with a young cousin of 
  mine , a girl I rather like because she be so different to myself . 
  her name be Eva Maitland - she be but sixteen and extremely 
  delicate - poor little soul ! she die two month before my marriage . 
  she and I , and a maid to attend we , go down to Cromer , - and one 
  day , sit on the cliff together , she ask I timidly if I know 
  an author name Mavis Clare ? I tell she no , - whereupon she hand I 
  a book call ' the Wings of Psyche . ' 

  " do read it ! " she say earnestly - " it will make you feel so happy ! " 

  I laugh . the idea of a modern author write anything to make one 
  feel happy , seem to I quite ludicrous , the aim of most of they 
  be to awaken a disgust of life , and a hatred of one 's 
  fellow - creature . however , to please Eva , I read the ' Wings of 
  Psyche , ' - and if it do not make I actually happy , it move I to a 
  great wonder and deep reverence for the woman - writer of such a book . 
  I find out all about she , - that she be young , good - look , of a 
  noble character and unblemished reputation , and that her only 
  enemy be the press - critic . this last point be so much in her 
  favour with I that I at once buy everything she have ever 
  write , and her work become , as it be , my haven of rest . her 
  theory of life be strange , poetic , ideal and beautiful ; - though I 
  have not be able to accept they or work they out in my own case , I 
  have always feel soothe and comfort for a while in the very act 
  of wish they be true . and the woman be like her 
  book , - strange , poetic , ideal and beautiful , - how odd it be to 
  think that she be within ten minute walk of I now ! - I could send 
  for she if I like , and tell she all , - but she would prevent I 
  carry out my resolve . she would cling to I woman - like and kiss 
  I , and hold my hand and say ' no , Sibyl , no ! you be not 
  yourself , - you must come to I and rest ! ' an odd fancy have seize 
  I , ... I will open my window and call she very gently , - she might 
  be in the garden come here to see I , - and if she hear and 
  answer , who know ! - why , perhaps my idea may change , and fate 
  itself may take a different course ! 

          

  well , I have call she . I have send her name ' Mavis ! ' softly out on 
  the sunshine and still air three time , and only a little brown 
  namesake of her , a thrush , swing on a branch of fir , answer I 
  with his low autumnal piping . mavi ! she will not come , - to - day God 
  will not make she his messenger . she can not guess - she do not know 
  this tragedy of my heart , great and more poignant than all the 
  tragedy of fiction . if she do know I as I be , I wonder what she 
  would think of I ! 

          

  let I go back to the time when love come to I , - love , ardent , 
  passionate , and eternal ! ah , what wild joy thrill through I ! what 
  mad ecstasy fire my blood ! - what delirious dream possess my 
  brain ! - I see Lucio , - and it seem as if the splendid eye of some 
  great angel have flash a glory in my soul ! with he come his 
  friend , the foil to his beauty , - the arrogant , self - satisfy fool 
  of a millionaire , Geoffrey Tempest , - he who buy I , and who by 
  virtue of his purchase , be entitle by law to call himself my 
  husband ... " 

 here I pause in my reading and look up . the dead woman 's eye 
 appear now to regard I as steadily as herself in the opposite 
 mirror , - the head be a little more drop forward on the breast , and 
 the whole face very nearly resembled that of the late Countess of Elton 
 when the last shock of paralysis have render her hideous disfigurement 
 complete . 

 " to think I love that ! " I say aloud , point at the corpse 's 
 ghastly reflection - " Fool that I be indeed ! - as great a fool as all man 
 be who barter their life for the possession of a woman 's mere body ! 
 why if there be any life after death , - if such a creature have a soul 
 that at all resemble this poison clay , the very devil might turn 
 away aghast from such a loathly comrade ! " 

 the candle flicker and the dead face seem to smile , - a clock 
 chime in the adjoining room , but I do not count the hour , - I merely 
 arrange the manuscript page I hold more methodically , and read on with 
 renew attention . 




 xxxvi 


  " from the moment I see Lucio Rimânez " - go on Sibyl 's ' die 
  speech ' - " I abandon myself to love and the desire of love . I have 
  hear of he before from my father who have   as I learn to my 
  shame   be indebted to he for monetary assistance . on the very 
  night we meet , my father tell I quite plainly that now be my chance 
  to get ' settle ' in life . ' Marry Rimânez or Tempest , whichever you 
  can most easily catch , ' he say - ' the prince be fabulously 
  wealthy - but he keep up a mystery about himself and no one know 
  where he actually come from , - besides which he dislike woman ; - now 
  Tempest have five million and seem an easy - go fool , - I should 
  say you have well go for Tempest . ' I make no answer and give no 
  promise either way . I soon find out however that Lucio do not 
  intend to marry , - and I conclude that he prefer to be the lover 
  of many woman , instead of the husband of one . I do not love he any 
  the less for this , - I only resolve that I would at least be one of 
  those who be happy enough to share his passion . I marry the man 
  Tempest , feel that like many woman I know , I should when safely 
  wed , have great liberty of action , - I be aware that most 
  modern man prefer an amour with a married woman to any other kind of 
  liaison , - and I think Lucio would have readily yield to the 
  plan I have pre - conceived . but I be mistaken , - and out of this 
  mistake come all my perplexity , pain and bewilderment I can not 
  understand why my love , - belove beyond all word or 
  thought , - should scorn I and repulse I with such bitter loathing ! 
  it be such a common thing now - a - day for a married woman to have she 
  own lover , apart from her husband de convenance ! the writer of 
  book advise it , - I have see the custom not only excuse but 
  advocate over and over again in long and scientific article that 
  be openly publish in lead magazine . why then should I be 
  blame or my desire consider criminal ? as long as no public 
  scandal be make , what harm be do ? I can not see it , - it be not as 
  if there be a God to care , - the scientist say there be no God ! 

          

  I be very startled just now . I think I hear Lucio 's voice 
  call I . I have walk through the room look everywhere , and 
  I open my door to listen , but there be no one . I be alone . I have 
  tell the servant not to disturb I till I ring ; ... I shall never 
  ring ! now I come to think of it , it be singular that I have never 
  know who Lucio really be . a prince , he say - and that I can well 
  believe , - though truly prince now - a - day be so plebeian and common 
  in look and bear that he seem too great to belong to so shabby a 
  fraternity . from what kingdom do he come ? - to what nation do he 
  belong ? these be question which he never answer save equivocally . 

          

  I pause here , and look at myself in the mirror . how beautiful I be ! 
  I note with admiration the deep and dewy lustre of my eye and their 
  dark silky fringe , - I see the delicate colouring of my cheek and 
  lip , - the dear rounded chin with its pretty dimple , - the pure line 
  of my slim throat and snowy neck , - the glistening wealth of my long 
  hair . all this be give to I for the attraction and luring of man , 
  but my love , whom I love with all this living , breathing , exquisite 
  be of mine , can see no beauty in I , and reject I with such 
  scorn as pierce my very soul . I have kneel to he , - I have pray 
  to he , - I have worship he , - in vain ! hence it come that I must 
  die . only one thing he say that have the sound of hope , though the 
  utterance be fierce , and his look be cruel , - ' Patience ! ' he 
  whisper - ' we shall meet ere long ! ' what do he mean ? - what 
  possible meeting can there be now , when death must close the gate of 
  life , and even love would come too late ! 

          

  I have unlock my jewel - case and take from it the deadly thing 
  secrete there , - a poison that be entrust to I by one of the 
  physician who lately attend my mother . ' keep this under lock and 
  key , ' he say , ' and be sure that it be use only for external 
  purpose . there be sufficient in this flask to kill ten man , if 
  swallow by mistake . ' I look at it wonderingly . it be 
  colourless , - and there be not enough to fill a teaspoon , ... yet ... 
  it will bring down upon I an eternal darkness , and close up for 
  ever the marvellous scene of the universe ! so little ! - to do so 
  much ! I have fasten Lucio 's wedding - gift round my waist , - the 
  beautiful snake of jewel that cling to I as though it be 
  charge with an embrace from he , - ah ! would I could cheat myself 
  into so pleasing a fancy ! ... I be tremble , but not with cold or 
  fear , - it be simply an excitation of the nerve , - - an instinctive 
  recoil of flesh and blood at the near prospect of death .... how 
  brilliantly the sun shin through my window ! - its callous golden 
  stare have watch so many torture creature die without so much as 
  a cloud to dim its radiance by way of the suggestion of pity ! if 
  there be a God I fancy he would be like the sun , - glorious , 
  changeless , unapproachable , beautiful , but pitiless ! 

          

  out of all the various type of human being I think I hate the 
  class call poet most . I use to love they and believe in they ; 
  but I know they now to be mere weaver of lie , - builder of cloud 
  castle in which no throb life can breathe , no weary heart find 
  rest . love be their chief motive , - they either idealize or degrade 
  it , - and of the love we woman long for most , they have no 
  conception . they can only sing of brute passion or ethical 
  impossibility , - of the mutual great sympathy , the ungrudge 
  patient tenderness that should make love lovely , they have no sweet 
  thing to say . between their strained æstheticism and unbridle 
  sensualism , my spirit have be stretch on the rack and break on 
  the wheel , ... I should think many a wretched woman wreck among 
  love 's disillusion must curse they as I do ! 

          

  I be ready now , I think . there be nothing more to say . I offer no 
  excuse for myself . I be as I be make , - a proud and rebellious 
  woman , self - willed and sensual , see no fault in free love , and no 
  crime in conjugal infidelity , - and if I be vicious , I can honestly 
  declare that my vice have be encourage and foster in I by 
  most of the literary teacher of my time . I marry , as most woman 
  of my set marry , merely for money , - I love , as most woman of my set 
  love , for mere bodily attraction , - I die , as most woman of my set 
  will die , either naturally or self - slain , in utter atheism , 
  rejoice that there be no God and no Hereafter ! 

          

  I have the poison in my hand a moment ago , ready to take , when I 
  suddenly feel someone approach I stealthily from behind , and 
  glance up quickly at the mirror I see ... my mother ! her face , 
  hideous and ghastly as it have be in her last illness , be 
  reflect in the glass , peer over my shoulder ! I spring up and 
  confront she , - - she be go ! and now I be shiver with cold , 
  and I feel a chill dampness on my forehead , - mechanically I have 
  soak a handkerchief with perfume from one of the silver bottle on 
  the dress table , and have pass it across my temple to help I 
  recover from this sick swoon sensation . to recover ! - how 
  foolish of I , see I be about to die . I do not believe in 
  ghost , - yet I could have swear my mother be actually present just 
  now , - of course it be an optical delusion of my own feverish brain . 
  the strong scent on my handkerchief remind I of Paris - I can see 
  the shop where I buy this particular perfume , and the 
  well - dress doll of a man who serve I , with his little waxed 
  moustache , and his indefinable french manner of convey a 
  speechless personal compliment while make out a bill .... laugh 
  at this recollection , I see my face radiate in the glass , - my eye 
  flash into vivid lustre , and the dimple near my lip come and go , 
  give my expression an enchanting sweetness . yet in a few hour 
  this loveliness will be destroy , - and in a few day , the worm 
  will twine where the smile be now ! 

          

  an idea have come upon I that perhaps I ought to say a prayer . it 
  would be hypocritical , - but conventional . to die fashionably , one 
  ought to concede a few word to the church . and yet ... to kneel 
  down with clasped hand and tell an inactive , unsympathetic , 
  selfish , pay community call the church , that I be go to kill 
  myself for the sake of love and love 's despair , and that therefore I 
  humbly implore its forgiveness for the act seem absurd , - as absurd 
  as to tell the same thing to a non - existent deity . I suppose the 
  scientist do not think what a strange predicament their advanced 
  theory put the human mind in at the hour of death . they forget 
  that on the brink of the grave , thought come that will not be 
  gainsaid , and that can not be appease by a learn thesis .... 
  however I will not pray , - it would seem to myself cowardly that I 
  who have never say my prayer since I be a child , should run over 
  they now in a foolish babbling attempt to satisfy the power 
  invisible , - I could not , out of sheer association , appeal to Mr 
  Swinburne 's ' crucified carrion ' ! besides I do not believe in the 
  power invisible at all , - I feel that once outside this life , ' the 
  rest ' as Hamlet say ' be silence . ' 

          

  I have be star dreamily and in a sort of stupefaction at the 
  little poison - flask in my hand . it be quite empty now . I have 
  swallow every drop of the liquid it contain , - I take it quickly 
  and determinately as one take nauseous medicine , without allow 
  myself another moment of time for thought or hesitation . it taste 
  acrid and burn on my tongue , - but at present I be not conscious 
  of any strange or painful result . I shall watch my face in the 
  mirror and trace the oncoming of death , - this will be at any rate a 
  new sensation not without interest ! 

          

  my mother be here , - here with I in this room ! she be move about 
  restlessly , make wild gesture with her hand and try to speak . 
  she look as she do when she be die , - only more alive , more 
  sentient . I have follow she up and down , but be unable to touch 
  she , - she elude my grasp . I have call she ' Mother ! mother ! ' but 
  no sound issue from her white lip . her face be so appalling that I 
  be seize with a convulsion of terror a moment ago and fall on my 
  knee before her implore she to leave I , - and then she pause in 
  her glide to and fro and - smile ! what a hideous smile it be ! I 
  think I lose consciousness , ... for I find myself lie on the 
  ground . a sharp and terrible pain run through I make I spring 
  to my foot , ... and I bite my lip till they bleed , lest I should 
  scream aloud with the agony I suffer and so alarm the house . when 
  the paroxysm pass I see my mother stand quite near to I , 
  dumbly watch I with a strange expression of wonder and remorse . 
  I totter past she and back to this chair where I now sit , - - I be 
  calm now , and I be able to realize that she be only the phantom of 
  my own brain - that I fancy she be here while know she be 
  dead . 

          

  torture indescribable have make of I a writhing , moaning , helpless 
  creature for the past few minute . truly that drug be deadly ; - the 
  pain be horrible ... horrible ! ... it have leave I quiver in every 
  limb and palpitating in every nerve . look at my face in the glass 
  I see that it have already alter . it be draw and livid , - all the 
  fresh rose - tint of my lip have go , - my eye protrude unnaturally , 
  ... there be dull blue mark at the corner of my mouth and in the 
  hollow of my temple , and I observe a curious quick pulsation in 
  the vein of my throat . be my torment what it will , now there be no 
  remedy , - and I be resolve to sit here and study my own feature to 
  the end . ' the reaper whose name be Death ' must surely be near , ready 
  to gather my long hair in his skeleton hand like a sheaf of ripe 
  corn , ... my poor beautiful hair ! - how I have love its glistening 
  ripple , and brush it , and twin it round my finger , ... and how 
  soon it will lie like a dank weed in the mould ! 

          

  a devouring fire be in my brain and body , - I be burn with heat 
  and parch with thirst , - I have drunk deep draught of cold water , 
  but this have not relieve I . the sun glare in upon I like an open 
  furnace , - I have try to rise and close the blind against it , but 
  find I have no force to stand upright . the strong radiance blind 
  I : - the silver toilet box on my table glitter like so many point 
  of sword . it be by a powerful effort of will that I be able to 
  continue write , - my head be swim round , - and there be a 
  choke sensation in my throat . 

          

  a moment since I think I be die . tear asunder as it be by the 
  most torture pang , I could have scream for help , - and would 
  have do so , have voice be leave I . but I can not speak above a 
  whisper , - I mutter my own name to myself ' Sibyl ! Sibyl ! ' and can 
  scarcely hear it . my mother stand beside I , - apparently 
  wait ; - a little while ago I think I hear she say ' come , Sibyl ! 
  come to your choose lover ! ' now I be conscious of a great silence 
  everywhere , - a numbness have fall upon I , and a delicious respite 
  from pain , - but I see my face in the glass and know it be the face 
  of the dead . it will soon be all over , - a few more uneasy 
  breathing , - and I shall be at rest . I be glad , - for the world and I 
  be never good friend ; - I be sure that if we could know , before we 
  be bear , what life really be , we should never take the trouble to 
  live ! 

          

  a horrible fear have suddenly beset I . what if death be not what 
  the scientist deem it , - suppose it be another form of life ? can 
  it be that I be lose reason and courage together ? ... or what be 
  this terrible misgiving that be take possession of I ? ... I begin 
  to falter ... a strange sense of horror be creep over I ... I 
  have no more physical pain , but something bad than pain oppresse 
  I ... a feeling that I can not define . I be die ... die ! - I 
  repeat this to myself for comfort , ... in a little while I shall be 
  deaf and blind and unconscious , ... why then be the silence around 
  I now break through by sound ? I listen , - and I hear distinctly the 
  clamour of wild voice mingle with a sullen jar and roll as of 
  distant thunder ! ... my mother stand close to I , ... she be 
  stretch out her hand to touch mine ! 

          

  oh God ! ... let I write - write - while I can ! let I yet hold fast 
  the thread which fasten I to earth , - give I time - time before I 
  drift out , lose in yonder blackness and flame ! let I write for 
  other the awful Truth , as I see it , - there be no death ! 
  none - none ! - I can not die . I be pass out of my body , - I be 
  be wrench away from it inch by inch in inexplicable mystic 
  torture , - but I be not die , - I be be carry forward into a new 
  life , vague and vast ! ... I see a new world full of dark form , half 
  shape yet shapeless ! - they float towards I , beckon I on . I be 
  actively conscious - I hear , I think , I know ! death be a mere human 
  dream , - a comfort fancy ; it have no real existence , - there be 
  nothing in the Universe but life ! o hideous misery ! - I can not die ! 
  in my mortal body I can scarcely breathe , - the pen I try to hold 
  write of itself rather than through my shake hand , - but these 
  pang be the throe of birth - not death ! ... I hold back , - with all 
  the force of my soul I strive not to plunge into that black abyss I 
  see before I - but - my mother drag I with she , - I can not shake 
  she off ! I hear her voice now ; - she speak distinctly , and laugh as 
  though she weep ; ' come Sibyl ! soul of the child I bore , come and 
  meet your lover ! come and see upon WHOM you fix your faith ! soul 
  of the woman I train , return to that from whence you come ! ' still 
  I hold back , - nude and tremble I stare into a dark void - and now 
  there be wing about I , - wing of fiery scarlet ! - they fill the 
  space , - they enfold I , - they propel I , - they rush past and whirl 
  around I , sting I as with fly arrow and shower of hail ! 

          

  let I write on , - write on , with this dead fleshly hand , ... one 
  moment more time , dread God ! ... one moment more to write the 
  truth , - the terrible truth of Death whose dark secret , Life , be 
  unknown to man ! I live ! - a new , strong , impetuous vitality possess 
  I , though my mortal body be nearly dead . faint gasp and weak 
  shuddering affect it still , - and I , outside it and no long of it , 
  propel its perish hand to write these final word - I live ! to 
  my despair and horror , - to my remorse and agony , I live ! - oh the 
  unspeakable misery of this new life ! and bad of all , - God whom I 
  doubt , God whom I be teach to deny , this wrong , blasphemed , 
  and outrage God EXISTS ! and I could have find he have I 
  choose , - this knowledge be force upon I as I be tear from 
  hence , - it be shout at I by a thousand wail voice ! ... too 
  late ! - too late ! - the scarlet wing beat I downward , - these strange 
  half - shapeless form close round and drive I onward ... to a 
  further darkness , ... amid wind and fire ! 

          

  serve I , dead hand , once more ere I depart , ... my tortured spirit 
  must seize and compel you to write down this thing unnameable , that 
  earthly eye may read , and earthly soul take timely warning ! ... I 
  know at last whom I have love ! - whom I have choose , whom I have 
  worship ! ... oh God , have mercy ! ... I know who claim my worship 
  now , and drag I into yonder roll world of flame ! ... his name 
  be ........ " 

 here the manuscript end , - incomplete and break off abruptly , - and 
 there be a blot on the last sentence as though the pen have be 
 violently wrench from the die finger and hastily fling down . 

 the clock in the west room again chime the hour . I rise stiffly from my 
 chair , trembling , - my self - possession be give way , and I begin to 
 feel at last unnerved . I look askance at my dead wife , - she , who with 
 a superhuman die effort have declare herself to be yet alive , - who , in 
 some imaginable strange way have seemingly write after death , in a 
 frantic desire to make some appalling declaration which nevertheless 
 remain undeclared . the rigid figure of the corpse have now real terror 
 for I , - I dare not touch it , - I scarcely dare look at it , ... in some 
 dim inscrutable fashion I feel as if ' scarlet wing " environ it , 
 beat I down , yet press I on , - I too , in my turn ! with the 
 manuscript gather close in my hand , I bent nervously forward to blow 
 out the wax light on the toilet table , ... I see on the floor the 
 handkerchief odorous with the french perfume the dead woman have write 
 of , - I pick it up and place it near she where she sit , grin 
 hideously at her own mirror ghastliness . the flash of the jewel 
 serpent round her waist catch my eye anew as I do this , and I star 
 for a moment at its green glitter , dumbly fascinated , - then , move 
 stealthily , with the cold sweat pour down my back and every pulse in 
 I render feeble by sheer horror , I turn to leave the room . as I 
 reach the portiére and lift it , some instinct make I look back at 
 the dread picture of the lead ' society " beauty sit stark and 
 livid pale before her own stark and livid - pale image in the glass , - what 
 a " fashion - plate " she would make now , I think , for a frivolous and 
 hypocritical " lady ' paper ! " 

 " you say you be not dead , Sibyl ! " I mutter aloud - " not dead , but 
 living ! then , if you be alive , where be you , Sibyl ? - - where be you ? " 

 the heavy silence seem fraught with fearful meaning , - the light of the 
 electric lamp on the corpse and on the shimmering silk garment wrap 
 round it appear unearthly , - and the perfume in the room have a 
 grave - like earthy smell . a panic seize I , and drag frantically at 
 the portiére till all its velvet fold be draw thickly together , I 
 make haste to shut out from my sight the horrible figure of the woman 
 whose bodily fairness I have love in the customary way of sensual 
 man , - and leave she without so much as a pardoning or pity kiss of 
 farewell on the cold brow . for , ... after all I have myself to think of , 
 ... and she be dead ! 




 XXXVII 


 I pass over all the detail of polite ' shock , " affect sorrow , and 
 feign sympathy of society at my wife 's sudden death . no one be really 
 grieve about it , - man raise their eyebrow , shrug their shoulder , 
 light extra cigarette and dismiss the subject as too unpleasant and 
 depressing to dwell upon , - woman be glad of the removal of a too 
 beautiful and too much admired rival , and the majority of fashionable 
 folk delight in have something " thrill " to talk about in the 
 tragic circumstance of her end . as a rule , people be seldom or never 
 unselfish enough to be honestly sorry for the evanishment of some 
 leading or brilliant figure from their midst , - the vacancy leave room 
 for the pushing in of small fry . be sure that if you be unhappily 
 celebrate for either beauty , wit , intellect , or all three together , 
 half society wish you dead already , and the other half try to make 
 you as wretched as possible while you be alive . to be miss at all 
 when you die , some one must love you very deeply and unselfishly ; and 
 deep unselfish love be rare to find among mortal than a pearl in a 
 dust - bin . 

 thank to my abundance of cash , everything concern Sibyl 's suicide 
 be admirably manage . in consideration of her social position as an 
 Earl 's daughter , two doctor certify   on my pay they very handsome 
 fee   that hers be a ' death by misadventure , ' - namely , through take 
 an accidental overdose of a powerful sleeping draught . it be the good 
 report to make , - and the most respectable . it give the penny press an 
 opportunity of moralize on the danger that lurk in sleep 
 draught generally , - and Tom , Dick , and Harry all write letter to their 
 favorite periodical   sign their name in full   give their 
 opinion as to the nature of sleep draught , so that for a week at 
 least the ordinary dullness of the newspaper be quite enliven by 
 ungrammatical gratis ' copy . ' the conventionality of law , decency and 
 order be throughout scrupulously observe and comply 
 with , - everybody be pay   which be the chief thing , and everybody 
 be , I believe , satisfied with what they manage to make out of the 
 death - payment . the funeral give joy to the soul of all undertaker , - it 
 be so expensive and impressive . the florist 's trade gain something of 
 an impetus by the innumerable order receive for wreath and cross 
 make of the costly flower . when the coffin be carry to the grave , 
 it could not be see for the load of blossom that cover it . and amid 
 all the card and ' love token ' and ' farewell dearest ' and 
 ' not - lose - but - go - before ' - that ticket the white mass of lily , 
 gardenia and rose which be suppose to symbolize the innocence and 
 sweetness of the poisoned corpse they be send to adorn , there be not 
 one honest regret , - not one unfeigned expression of true sorrow . Lord 
 Elton make a sufficiently striking figure of dignified parental woe , but 
 on the whole I think he be not sorry for his daughter 's death , since 
 the only oppose obstacle to his marriage with Diana Chesney be now 
 remove . I fancy Diana herself be sorry , so far as such a frivolous 
 little American could be sorry for anything , - perhaps , however it would 
 be more correct to say that she be frightened . Sibyl 's sudden end 
 startle and trouble she , - but I be not sure that it grieve she . there 
 be such a difference between unselfish grief , and the mere sense of 
 nervous personal shock ! Miss Charlotte Fitzroy take the news of her 
 niece 's death with that admirable fortitude which frequently 
 characterize religious spinster of a certain age . she put by she 
 knitting , - say ' God 's will be do ! ' and send for her favorite 
 clergyman . he come , stay with she some hour drink strong 
 tea , - and the next morning at church administer to her communion . 
 this do , Miss Fitzroy go on the blameless and even tenor of her way , 
 wear the same virtuously distressed expression as usual , and show 
 no further sign of feeling . I , as the afflict millionaire - husband , be 
 no doubt the most interesting figure on the scene ; I be , I know very 
 well get up , thank to my tailor , and to the affectionate care of the 
 chief undertaker who hand I my black glove on the day of the funeral 
 with servile solicitude , but in my heart I feel myself to be a far 
 well actor than Henry Irving , and if only for my admirable mimicry of 
 heart - break , more fully worthy of the accolade . Lucio do not attend the 
 obsequie , - he write I a brief note of sympathy from town , and hint 
 that he be sure I could understand his reason for not be present . I 
 do understand , of course , - and appreciate his respect , as I think , 
 for I and my feeling , - yet strange and incongruous as it may seem , I 
 never long so much for his company as I do then ! however , - we have a 
 glorious burial of my fair and false lady , - prance horse draw 
 coroneted carriage in a long defile down the pretty Warwickshire lane 
 to the grey old church , picturesque and peaceful , where the clergyman 
 and his assistant in newly - wash surplice , meet the flower - laden 
 coffin , and with the usual conventional mumbling , consign it to the 
 dust . there be even press - reporter present , who not only describe 
 the scene as it do not happen , but who also send fancy sketch , to 
 their respective journal , of the church as it do not exist . I 
 mention this simply to show how thoroughly all " proper form " be 
 carry out and concede to . after the ceremony all we " mourner " go 
 back to Willowsmere to luncheon , and I well remember that Lord Elton 
 tell I a new and risqué joke over a glass of port before the meal be 
 finish . the undertaker have a sort of festive banquet in the servant ' 
 hall , - and take everything into due consideration , my wife 's death 
 give a great deal of pleasure to many people , and put useful money into 
 several ready pocket . she have leave no blank in society that could not 
 be easily fill up , - she be merely one butterfly out of thousand , 
 more daintily colour perhaps and more restless in flight , - but never 
 judge as more than up to the butterfly standard . I say no one give she 
 an honest regret , but I be wrong . Mavis Clare be genuinely , almost 
 passionately grieve . she send no flower for the coffin , but she come 
 to the funeral by herself , and stand a little apart wait silently 
 till the grave be cover in , - and then , just as the " fashionable " 
 train of mourner be leave the churchyard , she advance and place a 
 white cross of her own garden - lily upon the newly - turn brown mould . 
 I notice her action , and determine that before I leave Willowsmere for 
 the East with Lucio   for my journey have only be postpone a week or 
 two on account of Sibyl 's death   she should know all . 

 the day come when I carry out this resolve . it be a rainy and chill 
 afternoon , and I find Mavis in her study , sit beside a bright log 
 fire with her small terri in her lap and her faithful St Bernard 
 stretch at her foot . she be absorb in a book , - and over she watch 
 the marble Pallas inflexible and austere . as I enter she rise , and 
 put down the volume and her pet dog together , she advance to meet 
 I with an intense sympathy in her clear eye , and a wordless pity in 
 the tremulous line of her sweet mouth . it be charming to see how sorry 
 she feel for I , - and it be odd that I could not feel sorry for myself . 
 after a few word of embarrassed greeting I sit down and watch she 
 silently , while she arrange the log in the fire to make they burn 
 brighter , and for the moment avoid my gaze . 

 " I suppose you know , " - I begin with harsh abruptness - " that the 
 sleep - draught story be a polite fiction ? you know that my wife 
 poison herself intentionally ? " 

 Mavis look at I with a troubled and compassionate expression . 

 " I fear it be so - " ... she begin nervously . 

 " oh there be nothing either to fear or to hope " - I say with some 
 violence - " she do it . and can you guess why she do it ? because she 
 be mad with her own wickedness and sensuality , - because she love with 
 a guilty love , my friend Lucio Rimânez . " 

 Mavis give a little cry as of pain , and sit down white and trembling . 

 " you can read quickly , I be sure , " - I go on . " part of the profession 
 of literature be the ability to skim book and manuscript rapidly , and 
 grasp the whole gist of they in a few minute ; - read this - " and I 
 hand she the roll - up page of Sibyl 's die declaration - " let I 
 stay here , while you learn from that what sort of a woman she be , and 
 judge whether , despite her beauty , she be worth a regret ! " 

 " pardon I , - " say Mavis gently - " I would rather not read what be not 
 mean for my eye . " 

 " but it be mean for your eye , " - I retort impatiently - " it be mean 
 for everybody 's eye apparently , - it be address to nobody in 
 particular . there be a mention of you in it . I beg - nay I command you to 
 read it ! - I want your opinion on it , - your advice ; you may possibly 
 suggest , after perusal , the proper sort of epitaph I ought to inscribe 
 on the monument I be go to build to her sacred and dear memory ! " 

 I cover my face with one hand to hide the bitter smile which I know 
 betray my thought , and push the manuscript towards she . very 
 reluctantly she take it , - and slowly unroll it , begin to read . for 
 several minute there be a silence , break only by the crackling of the 
 log on the fire , and the regular breathing of the dog who now both lie 
 stretch comfortably in front of the wood blaze . I look covertly at 
 the woman whose fame I have envy , - at the slight figure , the coronal of 
 soft hair , - the delicate , droop sensitive face , - the small white 
 classic hand that hold the write sheet of paper so firmly , yet so 
 tenderly , - the very hand of the greek marble psyche ; - and I think what 
 short - sighted asse some literary man be who suppose they can succeed 
 in shut out woman like Mavis Clare from win everything that fame 
 or fortune can offer . such a head as her , albeit cover with lock 
 fair and caressable , be not mean , in its fine shape and compactness , 
 for submission to inferior intelligence whether masculine or 
 feminine , - that determine little chin which the firelight delicately 
 outline , be a visible declaration of the strength of will and the 
 indomitably high ambition of its owner , - and yet , ... the soft 
 eye , - the tender mouth , - do not these suggest the sweetest love , the 
 pure passion that ever find place in a woman 's heart ? I lose myself 
 in dreamy musing , - I think of many thing that have little to do with 
 either my own past or present . I realize that now and then at rare 
 interval God make a woman of genius with a thinker 's brain and an 
 angel 's soul , - and that such an one be bind to be a destiny to all 
 mortal less divinely endow , and a glory to the world in which she 
 dwell . so consider , I study Mavis Clare 's face and form , - I see 
 her eye fill with tear as she read on ; - why should she weep , I 
 wonder , over that ' last document ' which have leave I unmoved and 
 callous ? I be startle almost as if from sleep when her voice , 
 thrilling with pain , disturb the stillness , - she spring up , gaze at 
 I as if she see some horrible vision . 

 " oh , be you so blind , " she cry , " as not to see what this mean ? can 
 you not understand ? do you not know your bad enemy ? " 

 " my bad enemy ? " I echo amazed - " you surprise I , Mavis , - what have 
 I , or my enemy or friend to do with my wife 's last confession ? she 
 rave , - between poison and passion , she could not tell , as you see by 
 her final word , whether she be dead or alive , - and her write at all 
 under such stress of circumstance be a phenomenal effort , - but it have 
 nothing to do with I personally . " 

 " for God 's sake do not be so hard - hearted ! " - say Mavis 
 passionately - " to I these last word of Sibyl 's , - poor , torture , 
 miserable girl ! - be beyond all expression horrible and appalling . do 
 you mean to tell I you have no belief in a future life ? " 

 " none . " I answer with conviction . 

 " then this be nothing to you ? - this solemn assurance of hers that she 
 be not dead , but live again , - live too , in indescribable 
 misery ! - you do not believe it ? " 

 " do anyone believe the raving of the dying ! " I answer - " she be , as 
 I have say , suffer the torment of poison and passion , - and in those 
 torment write as one torment .... " 

 " be it impossible to convince you of the truth ? " ask Mavis 
 solemnly , - " be you so diseased in your spiritual perception as not to 
  know , beyond a doubt , that this world be but the shadow of the other 
 Worlds await we ? I assure you , as I live , you will have that terrible 
 knowledge force upon you some day ! I be aware of your theory , - your 
 wife have the same belief or rather non - belief as yourself , - yet she 
 have be convince at last ! I shall not attempt to argue with you . if 
 this last letter of the unhappy girl you wed can not open your eye to 
 the eternal fact you choose to ignore , nothing will ever help you . you 
 be in the power of your enemy ! " 

 " of whom be you speak , Mavis ? " I ask astonish , observe that 
 she stand like one suddenly appal in a dream , her eye fix musingly 
 on vacancy , and her lip tremble apart . 

 " your Enemy - your Enemy ! " she repeat with energy - " it seem to I as 
 if his Shadow stand near you now ! listen to this voice from the 
 dead - Sibyl 's voice ! - - what do she say ? - - ' oh God , have mercy ! - - I 
 know who claim my worship now and drag I into yonder roll world of 
 flame ... his name be - ' " ... 

 " well ! " I interrupt eagerly - - " she break off there ; his name be - - " 

 " Lucio Rimânez ! " say Mavis in a thrilling tone - " I do not know from 
 whence he come , - but I take God to witness my belief that he be a worker 
 of evil , - a fiend in beautiful human shape , - a destroyer and a 
 corrupter ! the curse of he fall on Sibyl the moment she meet he , - the 
 same curse rest on you ! leave he if you be wise , - take your chance of 
 escape while it remain to you , - and never let he see your face 
 again ! " 

 she speak with a kind of breathless haste as though impel by a force 
 not her own , - I star at her amazed , and in a manner irritated . 

 " such a course of action would be impossible to I , Mavis , " - I say 
 somewhat coldly - " the Prince Rimânez be my good friend - no man ever have 
 a well ; - and his loyalty to I have be put to a severe test under 
 which most man would have fail . I have not tell you all . " 

 and I relate in a few word the scene I have witness between my wife 
 and Lucio in the music - gallery at Willowsmere . she listen , - but with 
 an evident effort , - and push back her cluster hair from her brow 
 she sigh heavily . 

 " I be sorry , - but it do not alter my conviction ! " - she say - " I look 
 upon your good friend as your bad foe . and I feel you do not realize 
 the awful calamity of your wife 's death in its true aspect . will you 
 forgive I if I ask you to leave I now ? - - Lady Sibyl 's letter have 
 affect I terribly - I feel I can not speak about it any more .... I wish 
 I have not read it .... " 

 she break off with a little half - suppress sob , - I see she be 
 unnerved , and take the manuscript from her hand , I say 
 half - banteringly - 

 " you can not then suggest an epitaph for my wife 's monument ? " 

 she turn upon I with a grand gesture of reproach . 

 " yes I can ! " - she reply in a low indignant voice - " inscribe it 
 as - ' from a pitiless hand to a broken heart ! ' that will suit the dead 
 girl , - and you , the live man ! " 

 her rustle gown sweep across my foot , - she pass I and be go . 
 stupefy by her sudden anger , and equally sudden departure , I stand 
 inert , - the St Bernard rise from the hearth - rug and glower at I 
 suspiciously , evidently wish I to take my leave , - Pallas Athene 
 star , as usual , through I and beyond I in a boundless scorn , - all 
 the various object in this quiet study seem silently to eject I as 
 an undesired occupant . I look round it once longingly as a tired 
 outcast may look on a peaceful garden and wish in vain to enter . 

 " how like her sex she be after all ! " I say half aloud - " she blame I 
 for be pitiless , - and forget that Sibyl be the sinner , - not I ! no 
 matter how guilty a woman may be , she generally manage to secure a 
 certain amount of sympathy , - a man be always leave out in the cold . " 

 a shudder sense of loneliness oppress I as my eye wander round 
 the restful room . the odour of lily be in the air , exhale , so I 
 fancy , from the delicate and dainty personality of Mavis herself . 

 " if I have only know she first , - and love she ! " I murmur , as I turn 
 away at last and leave the house . 

 but then I remember I have hat she before I ever meet she , - and not 
 only have I hat she , but I have vilify and misrepresent her work 
 with a scurrilous pen under the shield of anonymity , and out of sheer 
 malice , - thus give she in the public sight , the great proof of her 
 own genius a gifted woman can ever win , - man 's envy ! 




 xxxviii 


 two week later I stand on the deck of Lucio 's yacht ' the flame , ' - a 
 vessel whose complete magnificence fill I , as well as all other 
 beholder , with bewildered wonderment and admiration . she be a miracle 
 of speed , her motive power be electricity ; and the electric engine 
 with which she be fit be so complex and remarkable as to baffle 
 all would - be inquirer into the secret of their mechanism and potency . a 
 large crowd of spectator gather to see she as she lie off 
 Southampton , attract by the beauty of her shape and appearance , - some 
 bold spirit even come out in tug and row - boat , hop to be allow 
 to make a visit of inspection on board , but the sailor , 
 powerfully - build man of a foreign and somewhat unpleasing type , soon 
 intimate that the company of such inquisitive person be undesirable 
 and unwelcome . with white sail spread , and a crimson flag fly from 
 her mast , she weigh anchor at sunset on the afternoon of the day her 
 owner and I join she , and move through the water with delicious 
 noiselessness and incredible rapidity , soon leave far behind her the 
 English shore , look like a white line in the mist , or the pale vision 
 of a land that might once have be . I have do a few quixotic thing 
 before depart from my native country , - for example , I have make a free 
 gift of his former home Willowsmere , to Lord Elton , take a sort of 
 sullen pleasure in think that he , the spendthrift nobleman , owe the 
 restoration of his property to I , - to I who have never be either a 
 successful linen - draper or furniture - man , but simply an author , one of 
 ' those sort of people ' whom my lord and my lady imagine they can 
 ' patronize ' and neglect again at pleasure without danger to themselves . 
 the arrogant fool invariably forget what last vengeance can be take 
 for an unmerited slight by the owner of a brilliant pen ! I be glad too , 
 in a way , to realize that the daughter of the american railway - king 
 would be bring to the grand old house to air her ' countess - ship , ' and 
 look at her prettily pert little physiognomy in the very mirror where 
 Sibyl have watch herself die . I do not know why this idea please I , 
 for I bear no grudge against Diana Chesney , - she be vulgar but 
 harmless , and would probably make a much more popular châtelaine at 
 Willowsmere Court than my wife have ever be . among other thing , I 
 dismiss my man Morris , and make he miserable , - with the gift of a 
 thousand pound , to marry and start a business on . he be miserable 
 because he could not make up his mind what business to adopt , his 
 anxiety be to choose the calling that would ' pay ' good , - and also , 
 because though he ' have his eye ' upon several young woman , he could not 
 tell which among they would be likely to be least extravagant , and the 
 most serviceable as a cook and housekeeper . the love of money and the 
 pain of take care of it , embitter his day as it embitter the day 
 of most man , and my unexpected munificence towards he burden he with 
 such a weight of trouble as rob he of natural sleep and appetite . I 
 care nothing for his perplexity however , and give he no advice , good 
 or bad . my other servant I dismiss , each with a considerable gift of 
 money , not that I particularly wish to benefit they , but simply 
 because I desire they to speak well of I . and in this world it be 
 very evident that the only way to get a good opinion be to pay for it ! I 
 give order to a famous italian sculptor for Sibyl 's monument , English 
 sculptor have no conception of sculpture , - it be to be of exquisite 
 design , work in pure white marble , the chief adornment be the 
 centre - figure of an angel ready for flight , with the face of Sibyl 
 faithfully copy from her picture . because , however devilish a woman 
 may be in her life - time , one be bind by all the law of social 
 hypocrisy to make an angel of she as soon as she be dead ! just before I 
 leave London I hear that my old college - friend ' boffle , ' John 
 Carrington , have meet with a sudden end . busy at the ' retorting ' of his 
 gold , he have be choke by the mercurial fume and have die in hideous 
 torment . at one time this news would have deeply affect I , but now , I 
 be scarcely sorry . I have hear nothing of he since I have come into my 
 fortune , - he have never even write to congratulate I . always full of 
 my own self - importance , I judge this as great neglect on his part , and 
 now that he be dead I feel no more than any of we feel now - a - day at 
 the loss of friend . and that be very little , - we have really no time to 
 be sorry , - so many people be always die ! - and we be in such a 
 desperate hurry to rush on to death ourselves ! nothing seem to touch 
 I that do not closely concern my own personal interest , - and I have no 
 affection leave , unless I may call the vague tenderness I have for Mavis 
 Clare an affection . yet , to be honest , this very emotion be after all 
 nothing but a desire to be console , pity and love by she , - to be 
 able to turn upon the world and say " this woman whom you have lift on 
 your shield of honour and crown with laurel , - she love I - she be 
 not your , but mine ! " purely interested and purely selfish be the 
 longing , - and it deserve no other name than selfishness . 

 my feeling for Rimânez too begin at this time to undergo a curious 
 change . the fascination I have for he , the power he exercise over I 
 remain as great as ever , but I find myself often absorb in a close 
 study of he , strangely against my own will . sometimes his every look 
 seem fraught with meaning , - his every gesture suggestive of an almost 
 terrific authority . he be always to I the most attractive of 
 being , - nevertheless there be an uneasy sensation of doubt and fear 
 grow up in my mind regard he , - a painful anxiety to know more 
 about he than he have ever tell I , - and on rare occasion I experience 
 a sudden shock of inexplicable repulsion against he which like a 
 tremendous wave throw I back with violence upon myself and leave I 
 half - stun with a dread of I know not what . alone with he , as it 
 be , on the wide sea , cut off for a time from all other intercourse 
 than that which we share together , these sensation be very strong 
 upon I . I begin to note many thing which I have be too blind or too 
 absorb in my own pursuit to observe before ; the offensive presence of 
 Amiel , who act as chief steward on board the yacht , fill I now not 
 only with dislike , but nervous apprehension , - the dark and more or less 
 repulsive visage of the crew haunt I in my dream ; - and one day , 
 lean over the vessel 's edge and gaze blankly down into the 
 fathomless water below , I fall to thinking of strange sorcery of the 
 East , and story of magician who by the exercise of unlawful science 
 do so make victim of man and delude they that their will be 
 entirely pervert and no long their own . I do not know why this 
 pass thought should have suddenly overwhelm I with deep 
 depression , - but when I look up , to I the sky have grow dark , and the 
 face of one of the sailor who be near I polish the brass 
 hand - rail , seem singularly threatening and sinister . I move to go to 
 the other side of the deck , when a hand be gently lay on my shoulder 
 from behind , and turn , I meet the sad and splendid eye of Lucio . 

 " be you grow weary of the voyage Geoffrey ? " he ask - " Weary of 
 those two suggestion of eternity - the interminable sky , the 
 interminable sea ? I be afraid you be ! - man easily get fatigue with 
 his own littleness and powerlessness when he be set afloat on a plank 
 between air and ocean . yet we be travel as swiftly as electricity 
 will bear we , - and , as work in this vessel , it be carry we at a far 
 great speed than you perhaps realize or imagine . " 

 I make no immediate answer , but take his arm stroll slowly up and 
 down . I feel he be look at I , but I avoid meet his gaze . 

 " you have be think of your wife ? " he query softly and , as I 
 think , sympathetically - " I have shun , - for reason you know 
 of , - all allusion to the tragic end of so beautiful a creature . beauty 
 be , alas ! - so often subject to hysteria ! yet - if you have any faith , you 
 would believe she be an angel now ! " 

 I stop short at this , and look straight at he . there be a fine 
 smile on his delicate mouth . 

 " an angel ! " I repeat slowly - " or a devil ? which would you say she 
 be ? - you , who sometimes declare that you believe in Heaven , - and Hell ? " 

 he be silent , but the dreamy smile remain still on his lip . 

 " come , speak ! " I say roughly - " you can be frank with I , you 
 know , - angel or devil - which ? " 

 " my dear Geoffrey ! " he remonstrate gently and with gravity - " a woman be 
 always an angel , - both here and hereafter ! " 

 I laugh bitterly . " if that be part of your faith I be sorry for you ! " 

 " I have not speak of my faith , " - he rejoin in colder accent , lift 
 his brilliant eye to the darken heaven - " I be not a Salvationist , 
 that I should bray forth a creed to the sound of trump and drum . " 

 " all the same , you have a creed ; " - I persist - " and I fancy it must 
 be a strange one ! if you remember , you promise to explain it to I - - " 

 " be you ready to receive such an explanation ? " he ask in a somewhat 
 ironical tone - " no , my dear friend ! - permit I to say you be not 
 ready - not yet ! my belief be too positive to be bring even into 
 contact with your contradiction , - too frightfully real to submit to 
 your doubt for a moment . you would at once begin to revert to the puny , 
 use - up old argument of Voltaire , Schopenhauer and Huxley , - little 
 atomic theory like grain of dust in the whirlwind of my knowledge ! I 
 can tell you I believe in God as a very actual and positive being , - and 
 that be presumably the first of the Church article . " 

 " you believe in God ! " I echo his word , star at he stupidly . he 
 seem in earnest . in fact he have always seem in earnest on the 
 subject of deity . vaguely I think of a woman in society whom I 
 slightly know , - an ugly woman , unattractive and mean - minded , who pass 
 her time in entertain semi - royalties and push herself amongst 
 they , - she have say to I one day -   4   " I hate people who believe in 
 God , do not   you ? the idea of a God make I sick ! " 

 " you believe in God ! " I repeat again dubiously . 

 " look ! " he say , raise his hand towards the sky - " there a few drift 
 cloud cover million of world , impenetrable , mysterious , yet 
  actual ; - down there - " and he point to the sea , " lurk a thousand 
 thing of which , though the ocean be a part of earth , human being have 
 not yet learn the nature . between these upper and low space of the 
 Incomprehensible yet Absolute , you , a finite atom of limited 
 capability stand , uncertain how long the frail thread of your life 
 shall last , yet arrogantly balance the question with your own poor 
 brain , as to whether you , - you in your utter littleness and 
 incompetency shall condescend to accept a God or not ! I confess , that of 
 all astonishing thing in the Universe , this particular attitude of 
 modern mankind be the most astonishing to I ! " 

 " your own attitude be ? - - " 

 " the reluctant acceptance of such terrific knowledge as be force upon 
 I , - " he reply with a dark smile - " I do not say I have be an apt or 
 a willing pupil , - I have have to suffer in learn what I know ! " 

 " do you believe in hell ? " I ask he suddenly - " and in Satan , the 
 Arch - enemy of mankind ? " 

 he be silent for so long that I be surprised , the more so as he grow 
 pale to the lip , and a curious , almost deathlike rigidity of feature 
 give his expression something of the ghastly and terrible . after a pause 
 he turn his eye upon I , - an intense burning misery be reflect in 
 they , though he smile . 

 " most assuredly I believe in hell ! how can I do otherwise if I believe 
 in heaven ? if there be an up there must be a Down ; if there be Light , 
 there must also be Darkness ! and , ... concern the Arch - Enemy of 
 mankind , - if half the story report of he be true , he must be the 
 most piteous and pitiable figure in the Universe ! what would be the 
 sorrow of a thousand million world , compare to the sorrow of Satan ! " 

 " sorrow ! " I echo - " he be suppose to rejoice in the working of evil ! " 

 " neither angel nor devil can do that , " - he say slowly - " to rejoice in 
 the working of evil be a temporary mania which affect man only . for 
 actual joy to come out of evil , Chaos must come again , and God must 
 extinguish himself . " he star across the dark sea , - the sun have sink , 
 and one faint star twinkle through the cloud . " and so I again say - the 
 sorrow of Satan ! sorrow immeasurable as eternity itself , - imagine 
 they ! to be shut out of Heaven ! - to hear all through the unende æon , 
 the far - off voice of angel whom once he know and love ! - to be a 
 wanderer among desert of darkness , and to pine for the light celestial 
 that be formerly as air and food to his being , - and to know that Man 's 
 folly , Man 's utter selfishness , Man 's cruelty , keep he thus exile , an 
 outcast from pardon and peace ! Man 's nobleness may lift the Lost Spirit 
 almost within reach of his lose joy , - but Man 's vileness drag he down 
 again , - easy be the torture of Sisyphus compare with the torture of 
 Satan ! no wonder that he loathe Mankind ! - small blame to he if he 
 seek to destroy the puny tribe eternally , - little marvel that he 
 grudge they their share of immortality ! think of it as a legend 
 merely , " - and he turn upon I with a movement that be almost 
 fierce - " Christ redeem Man , - and by his teaching , show how it be 
 possible for Man to redeem the Devil ! " 

 " I do not understand you - " I say feebly , awe by the strange pain and 
 passion of his tone . 

 " do you not ? yet my meaning be scarcely obscure ! if man be true to 
 their immortal instinct and to the God that make they , - if they be 
 generous , honest , fearless , faithful , reverent , unselfish , ... if woman 
 be pure , brave , tender and loving , - can you not imagine that in the 
 strong force and fairness of such a world , ' Lucifer , son of the Morning ' 
 would be move to love instead of hate ? - that the closed door of 
 Paradise would be unbarred - and that he , lift towards his Creator on 
 the prayer of pure life , would wear again his Angel 's crown ? can you 
 not realize this , even by way of a legendary story ? " 

 " why yes , as a legendary story the idea be beautiful , " - I admit - " and 
 to I , as I tell you once before , quite new . still , as man be never 
 likely to be honest or woman pure , I be afraid the poor devil stand a 
 bad chance of ever get redeem ! " 

 " I fear so too ! " and he eye I with a curious derision - " I very much 
 fear so ! and his chance be so slight , I rather respect he for be 
 the Arch - Enemy of such a worthless race ! " he pause a moment , then 
 add - " I wonder how we have manage to get on such an absurd subject of 
 conversation ? it be dull and uninteresting as all ' spiritual ' theme 
 invariably be . my object in bring you out on this voyage be not to 
 indulge in psychological argument , but to make you forget your trouble 
 as much as possible , and enjoy the present while it last . " 

 there be a vibration of compassionate kindness in his voice which at 
 once move I to an acute sense of self - pity , the bad enervator of 
 moral force that exist . I sigh heavily . 

 " truly I have suffer " - I say - " More than most man ! " 

 " More even than most millionaire deserve to suffer ! " declare Lucio , 
 with that inevitable touch of sarcasm which distinguish some of his 
 friendly remark - " money be suppose to make amend to a man for 
 everything , - and even the wealthy wife of a certain Irish ' patriot ' have 
 not find it incompatible with affection to hold her moneybag close to 
 herself while her husband have be declare a bankrupt . how she have 
 ' idolize ' he , let other say ! now , consider your cash - abundance , 
 it must be own the fate have treat you somewhat unkindly ! " 

 the smile that be half - cruel and half - sweet radiate in his eye as he 
 speak , - and again a singular revulsion of feeling against he move I 
 to dislike and fear . and yet , - how fascinating be his company ! I could 
 not but admit that the voyage with he to Alexandria on board ' the 
 Flame ' be one of positive enchantment and luxury all the way . there be 
 nothing in a material sense leave to wish for , - all that could appeal to 
 the intelligence or the imagination have be think of on board this 
 wonderful yacht which speed like a fairy ship over the sea . some of the 
 sailor be skilled musician , and on tranquil night or at sunset , 
 would bring string instrument and discourse to our ear the most 
 dulcet and ravish melody . Lucio himself too would often sing , - his 
 luscious voice resounding , as it seem , over all the visible sea and 
 sky , with such passion as might have draw an angel down to listen . 
 gradually my mind become impregnate with these snatch of mournful , 
 fierce , or weird minor tune , - and I begin to suffer in silence from an 
 inexplicable depression and foreboding sense of misery , as well as from 
 another terrible feeling to which I could scarcely give a name , - a 
 dreadful uncertainty of myself , as of one lose in a wilderness and 
 about to die . I endure these fit of mental agony alone , - and in such 
 dreary burn moment , believe I be go mad . I grow more and more 
 sullen and taciturn , and when we at last arrive at Alexandria I be not 
 move to any particular pleasure . the place be new to I , but I be not 
 conscious of novelty , - everything seem flat , dull , and totally 
 uninteresting . a heavy almost lethargic stupor chain my wit , and when 
 we leave the yacht in harbour and go on to Cairo , I be not sensible of 
 any personal enjoyment in the journey , or interest in what I see . I be 
 only partially rouse when we take possession of a luxurious dahabeah , 
 which , with a retinue of attendant , have be specially charter for 
 we , and commence our lotus - like voyage up the Nile . the reed - edge , 
 sluggish yellow river fascinate I , - I use to spend long hour 
 recline at full length in a deck - chair , gaze at the flat shore , the 
 blow sand - heap , the broken column and mutilate temple of the dead 
 kingdom of the past . one evening , thus musing , while the great golden 
 moon climb languidly up into the sky to stare at the wreck of earthly 
 age I say - 

 " if one could only see these ancient city as they once exist , what 
 strange revelation might be make ! our modern marvel of civilization 
 and progress might seem small trifle after all , - for I believe in our 
 day we be only re - discover what the people of old time know . " 

 Lucio draw his cigar from his mouth and look at it meditatively . then 
 he glance up at I with a half - smile - 

 " would you like to see a city resuscitate ? " he inquire - " here , in this 
 very spot , some six thousand year ago , a king reign , with a woman not 
 his queen but his favourite ,   quite a lawful arrangement in those day 
 who be as famous for her beauty and virtue , as this river be for its 
 fructifying tide . here civilization have progress enormously , - with the 
 one exception that it have not outgrow faith . Modern France and England 
 have beat the ancient in their scorn of God and creed , their contempt 
 for divine thing , their unnameable lasciviousness and blasphemy . this 
 city " - - and he wave his hand towards a dreary stretch of shore where a 
 cluster of tall reed wave above the monster fragment of a fall 
 column , - " be govern by the strong pure faith of its people more than 
 anything , - and the ruler of social thing in it be a woman . the king 's 
 favourite be something like Mavis Clare in that she possess 
 genius , - she have also the quality of justice , intelligence , love , 
 truth and a most noble unselfishness , - she make this place happy . it be 
 a paradise on earth while she live , - when she die , its glory end . so 
 much can a woman do if she choose , - so much do she not do , in her 
 usual cow - like way of living ! " 

 " how do you know all this you tell I of ? " I ask he . 

 " by study of past record " - he reply - " I read what modern man declare 
 they have no time to read . you be right in the idea that all ' new ' 
 thing be only old thing re - invent or re - discover , - if you have 
 go a step far and say that some of man 's present life be only 
 the continuation of their past , you would not have be wrong . now , if 
 you like , I can by my science , show you the city that stand here long 
 ago , - the ' City Beautiful ' as its name be , translate from the ancient 
 tongue . " 

 I rouse myself from my lounging attitude and look at he amazedly . he 
 meet my gaze unmove . 

 " you can show it to I ! " I exclaim - " how can you do such an impossible 
 thing ? " 

 " permit I to hypnotize you , " - he answer smile , - " my system of 
 hypnotism be , very fortunately , not yet discover by meddlesome 
 inquirer into occult matter , - but it never fail of its effect , - and I 
 promise you , you shall , under my influence , see not only the place , but 
 the people . " 

 my curiosity be strongly excited , and I become more eager to try the 
 suggest experiment than I care to openly show . I laugh however , 
 with affected indifference . 

 " I be perfectly willing ! " I say - " all the same , I do not   think you can 
 hypnotize I , - I have much too strong a will of my own - - " at which 
 remark I see a smile , dark and saturnine , hover on his lip - " but you 
 can make the attempt . " 

 he rise at once , and sign to one of our egyptian servant . 

 " stop the dahabeah , Azimah , " he say - " we will rest here for the night . " 

 Azimah , a superb - look Eastern in picturesque white garment , put his 
 hand to his head in submission and retire to give the order . in 
 another few moment the dahabeah have stop . a great silence be around 
 we , - the moonlight fall like yellow wine on the deck , - in the far 
 distance across the stretch of dark sand , a solitary column tower so 
 clear - cut against the sky that it be almost possible to discern upon it 
 the outline of a monstrous face . Lucio stand still , confront 
 I , - say nothing , but look I steadily through and through , with 
 those wonderful mystic , melancholy eye that seem to penetrate and 
 burn my very flesh . I be attract as a bird might be by the basilisk 
 eye of a snake , - yet I try to smile and say something indifferent . my 
 effort be useless , - personal consciousness be slip from I 
 fast , - the sky , the water and the moon whirl round each other in a 
 giddy chase for precedence ; - I could not move , for my limb seem 
 fasten to my chair with weight of iron , and I be for a few minute 
 absolutely powerless . then suddenly my vision clear   as I think   - my 
 sens grow vigorous and alert , ... I hear the sound of solemn marching 
 music , and there , - there in the full radiance of the moon , with a 
 thousand light gleam forth from high cupola , shine the ' City 
 Beautiful ' ! 


   4   say in the author 's hearing by one of the ' lady leader ' of 
  ' smart ' society . 




 XXXIX 


 a vision of majestic building , vast , stately and gigantic ! - - of 
 street crowd with man and woman in white and coloured garment 
 adorn with jewel , - of flower that grow on the roof of palace and 
 swing from terrace to terrace in loop and garland of fantastic 
 bloom , - of tree , broad - branched and fully leaf , - of marble 
 embankment overlook the river , - of lotus - lily grow thickly 
 below , by the water 's edge , - of music that echo in silver and brazen 
 twanging from the shelter of shady garden and cover 
 balcony , - every beautiful detail rise before I more distinctly than 
 an ivory carving mount on an ebony shield . just opposite where I stand 
 or seem to stand , on the deck of a vessel in the busy harbour , a wide 
 avenue extend , open up into huge square embellish with strange 
 figure of granite god and animal , - I see the sparkle spray of many 
 fountain in the moonlight , and hear the low persistent hum of the 
 restless human multitude that throng the place as thickly as bee 
 cluster in a hive . to the left of the scene I could discern a huge 
 bronze gate guard by sphinx ; there be a garden beyond it , and from 
 that depth of shade a girl 's voice , sing a strange wild melody , come 
 float towards I on the breeze . meanwhile the march music I have 
 first of all catch the echo of , sound near and nearer , - and 
 presently I perceive a great crowd approach with light torch and 
 garland of flower . soon I see a band of priest in brilliant robe 
 that literally blaze with sun - like gem , - they be move towards the 
 river , and with they come young boy and little child , while on 
 either side , maidens white - veil and rise - wreathe , pace demurely , 
 swing silver censer to and fro . after the priestly procession walk 
 a regal figure between rank of slave and attendant , - I know it for 
 the king of this ' City Beautiful , ' and be almost move to join in the 
 thunder acclamation which greet his progress . and that snowy 
 palanquin , carry by lily - crown girl , that follow his train , - who 
 occupy it ? ... what gem of his land be thus tenderly enshrine ? I be 
 consume by an extraordinary longing to know this , - I watch the white 
 burden come near to my point of vantage , - I see the priest arrange 
 themselves in a semi - circle on the river - embankment , the King in their 
 midst , and the surge shouting multitude around , - then come the brazen 
 clangour of many bell , intermix with the rolling of drum and the 
 shrill sound of reed - pipe lightly blow upon , - and , amid the blaze 
 of the flare torch , the White Palanquin be set down upon the 
 ground . a woman , clothe in some silvery glistening tissue , step forth 
 from it like a sylph from the foam of the sea , but - - she be veil , - I 
 could not discern so much as the outline of her feature , - and the keen 
 disappointment of this be a positive torture to I . if I could but see 
 she , I think , I should know something I have never hitherto guess ! 
 " Lift , oh lift the shroud veil , Spirit of the City Beautiful ! " I 
 inwardly pray - " for I feel I shall read in your eye the secret of 
 happiness ! " 

 but the veil be not withdraw , ... the music make barbaric clamour in 
 my ear , ... the blaze of strong light and colour blind I , ... and I 
 feel myself reel into a dark chaos , where as I imagine , I chase the 
 moon , as she fly before I on silver wing , - then ... the sound of a 
 rich baritone troll out a light song from a familiar modern opera 
 bouffe confuse and startle I , - - and in another second I find 
 myself star wildly at Lucio , who , lie easily back in his 
 deck - chair , be carol joyously to the silent night and the blank 
 expanse of sandy shore , in front of which our dahabeah rest 
 motionless . with a cry I fling myself upon he . 

 " where be she ? " I exclaim - " who be she ? " 

 he look at I without reply , and smile quizzically , release 
 himself from my sudden grasp . I draw back shuddering and bewilder . 

 " I see it all ! " I murmur - " the city - the priest , - the people - the 
 King ! - - all but her face ! why be that hide from I ! " 

 and actual tear rise to my eye involuntarily , - Lucio survey I with 
 evident amusement . 

 " what a ' find ' you would be to a first - class ' spiritual ' impostor 
 play his trick in cultured and easily - gull London society ! " he 
 observe - " you seem most powerfully impress by a pass vision ! " 

 " do you mean to tell I , " I say earnestly " that what I see just now be 
 the mere thought of your brain convey to mine ? " 

 " precisely ! " he respond - " I know what the ' City Beautiful ' be like , 
 and I be able to draw it for you on the canvas of my memory and present 
 it as a complete picture to your inward sight . for you have an inward 
 sight , - though like most people , you live unconscious of that neglect 
 faculty . " 

 " but - who be she ? " I repeat obstinately . 

 " ' she ' be , I presume , the King 's favourite . if she keep her face hide 
 from you as you complain , I be sorry ! - but I assure you it be not my 
 fault ! get to bed , Geoffrey , - you look daze . you take vision 
 badly , - yet they be well than reality , believe I ! " 

 somehow I could not answer he . I leave he abruptly and go below to 
 try and sleep , but my thought be all cruelly confuse , and I begin to 
 be more than ever overwhelm with a sense of deepen terror , - a 
 feeling that I be be command , control and , as it be , drive 
 along by a force that have in it something unearthly . it be a most 
 distressing sensation , - it make I shrink at time , from the look of 
 Lucio 's eye , - now and then indeed I almost cower before he , so 
 increasingly great be the indefinable dread I have of his presence . it 
 be not so much the strange vision of the ' City Beautiful ' that have 
 inspire this in I , - for after all , that be only a trick of hypnotism , 
 as he have say , and as I be content to argue it with myself , - but it 
 be his whole manner that suddenly begin to impress I as it have never 
 impress I before . if any change be slowly take place in my 
 sentiment towards he , so surely it seem be he change equally 
 towards I . his imperious way be more imperial , - his sarcasm more 
 sarcastic , - his contempt for mankind more openly display and more 
 frequently pronounce . yet I admire he as much as ever , - I delight 
 in his conversation , whether it be witty , philosophical or cynical , - I 
 could not imagine myself without his company . nevertheless the gloom on 
 my mind deepen , - our Nile trip become infinitely wearisome to I , so 
 much so , that almost before we have get half - way on our journey up the 
 river , I long to turn back again and wish the voyage at an end . an 
 incident that occur at Luxor be more than sufficient to strengthen 
 this desire . we have stay there for several day explore the district 
 and visit the ruin of Thebes and Karnac , where they be busy 
 excavate tomb . one afternoon they bring to light a red granite 
 sarcophagus intact , - in it be a richly paint coffin which be open 
 in our presence , and be find to contain the elaborately adorned mummy 
 of a woman . Lucio prove himself an apt reader of hieroglyph , and he 
 translate in brief , and with glib accuracy the history of the corpse as 
 it be picture inside the sepulchral shell . 

 " a dancer at the court of Queen Amenartes ; " he announce for the benefit 
 of several interested spectator who with myself , stand round the 
 sarcophagus - " who because of her many sin , and secret guilt which make 
 her life unbearable , and her day full of corruption , die of poison 
 administer by her own hand , accord to the King 's command , and in 
 presence of the executioner of law . such be the lady 's 
 story , - condense ; - there be a good many other detail of course . she 
 appear to have be only in her twentieth year . well ! " and he smile as 
 he look round upon his little audience , - " we may congratulate 
 ourselves on have progress since the day of these over - strict 
 ancient Egyptians ! the sin of dancer be not , with we , take au grand 
 serieux ! shall we see what she be like ? " 

 no objection be raise by the authority concern in the 
 discovery , - and I , who have never witness the unrolling of a mummy 
 before , watch the process with great interest and curiosity . as one by 
 one of the scented wrapping be remove , a long tress of nut - brown 
 hair become visible , - then , those who be engage in the task , use 
 more extreme and delicate precaution , Lucio himself assist they to 
 uncover the face . as this be do , a kind of sick horror steal over 
 I , - brown and stiff as parchment though the feature be , their 
 contour be recognisable , - and when the whole countenance be expose to 
 view I could almost have shriek aloud the name of ' Sibyl ! ' for it 
 be like she ! - dreadfully like ! - and as the faint , half - aromatic 
 half - putrid odour of the unrolled cerement creep towards I on the 
 air , I reel back giddily and cover my eye . irresistibly I be 
 remind of the subtle french perfume exhale from Sibyl 's garment when 
 I find she dead , - that , and this sickly effluvia be similar ! a man 
 standing near I see I swerve as though about to fall , and catch I on 
 his arm . 

 " the sun be too strong for you I fear ? " he say kindly - " this climate 
 do not suit everybody . " 

 I force a smile and murmur something about a pass touch of 
 vertigo , - then , recover myself I gaze fearfully at Lucio , who be 
 study the mummy attentively with a curious smile . presently stoop 
 over the coffin he take out of it a piece of finely wrought gold in the 
 shape of a medallion . 

 " this , I imagine must be the fair dancer 's portrait , " - he say , hold 
 it up to the view of all the eager and exclaim spectator - " quite a 
 treasure - trove ! an admirable piece of ancient workmanship , besides 
 be the picture of a very lovely woman . do you not think so , 
 Geoffrey ? " 

 he hand I the medallion , - and I examine it with deadly and 
 fascinated interest , - the face be exquisitely beautiful , - but assuredly 
 it be the face of Sibyl ! 

 I never remember how I live through the rest of that day . at night , as 
 soon as I have an opportunity of speak to Rimânez alone , I ask he ... 

 " do you see , - - do you not recognize ? ... " 

 " that the dead egyptian dancer resemble your late wife ? " he quietly 
 continue - " yes , - I notice it at once . but that should not affect you . 
 history repeat itself , - why should not lovely woman repeat themselves ? 
 Beauty always have its double somewhere , either in the past or future . " 

 I say no more , - but next morning I be very ill , - so ill that I could 
 not rise from my bed , and pass the hour in restless moaning and 
 irritable pain that be not so much physical as mental . there be a 
 physician resident at the hotel at Luxor , and Lucio , always show 
 himself particularly considerate for my personal comfort , send for he 
 at once . he feel my pulse , shake his head , and after much dubious 
 pondering , advise my leave Egypt immediately . I hear his mandate 
 give with a joy I could scarcely conceal . the yearning I have to get 
 quickly away from this ' land of the old god ' be intense and 
 feverish , - I loathe the vast and awful desert silence , where the 
 Sphinx frown contempt on the puny littleness of mankind , - where the 
 open tomb and coffin expose once more to the light of day , face 
 that be the very semblance of those we ourselves have know and love 
 in our time , - and where paint history tell we of just such thing as 
 our modern newspaper chronicle , albeit in different form . Rimânez be 
 ready and willing to carry out the doctor 's order , - and arrange our 
 return to Cairo and from thence to Alexandria , with such expedition as 
 leave I nothing to desire , and fill I with gratitude for his apparent 
 sympathy . in as short a time as abundance of cash could make possible , 
 we have rejoin ' the flame , ' and be en route , as I think , for 
 France or England . we have not absolutely settle our destination , have 
 some idea of coast along the Riviera , - but my old confidence in 
 Rimânez be now almost restore , I leave this to he for decision , 
 sufficiently satisfied in myself that I have not be destine to leave 
 my bone in terror - haunt Egypt . and it be not till I have be about a 
 week or ten day on board , and have make good progress in the recovery of 
 my health , that the beginning of the end of this never - to - be - forget 
 voyage be foreshadow to I in such terrific fashion as nearly plunge 
 I into the darkness of death , - or rather let I now say ,   have 
 learn my bitter lesson thoroughly   into the fell brilliancy of that 
 life beyond the tomb which we refuse to recognise or realize till we be 
 whirl into its glorious or awful vortex ! 

 one evening , after a bright day of swift and enjoyable sailing over a 
 smooth and sunlit sea , I retire to rest in my cabin , feel almost 
 happy . my mind be perfectly tranquil , - my trust in my friend Lucio be 
 again re - establish , - and I may add , so be my old arrogant and 
 confident trust in myself . my access to fortune have not , so far , bring 
 I either much joy or distinction , - but it be not too late for I yet 
 to pluck the golden apple of Hesperides . the various trouble I have 
 endure , though of such recent occurrence , begin to assume a blurred 
 indistinctness in my mind , as of thing long past and do with , - I 
 consider the strength of my financial position again with 
 satisfaction , to the extent of contemplate a second marriage - and that 
 marriage with - Mavis Clare ! no other woman should be my wife , I mentally 
 swore , - she , and she only should be mine ! I foresaw no difficulty in 
 the way , - and full of pleasant dream and self - delusion I settle 
 myself in my berth , and drop easily off to sleep . about midnight I 
 awake , vaguely terrified , to see the cabin full of a strong red light 
 and fierce glare . my first daze impression be that the yacht be on 
 fire , - the next instant I become paralysed and dumb with horror . Sibyl 
 stand before I ! ... Sibyl , a wild , strange , tortured writhing figure , 
 half nude , wave beckon arm , and make desperate gesture , - her 
 face be as I have see it last in death , livid and hideous , ... her 
 eye blaze mingled menace , despair , and warn upon I ! round she a 
 live wreath of flame coil upwards like a twisted snake , ... her lip 
 move as though she strove to speak , but no sound come from they , - - and 
 while I yet look at she , she vanish ! I must have lose consciousness 
 then , - for when I awake it be broad day . but this ghastly visitation 
 be only the first of many such , - and at last , every night I see she 
 thus , sheet in flame , till I grow well - nigh mad with fear and misery . 
 my torment be indescribable , - yet I say nothing to Lucio , who watch 
 I , as I imagine , narrowly , - I take sleeping - draught in the hope to 
 procure unbroken rest , but in vain , - always I wake at one particular 
 moment , and always I have to face this fiery phantom of my dead wife , 
 with despair in her eye and an unuttered warning on her lip . this be 
 not all . one day in the full sunlight of a quiet afternoon , I enter 
 the saloon of the yacht alone , and start back amazed to see my old 
 friend John Carrington seat at the table , pen in hand , cast up 
 account . he bend over his paper closely , - his face be furrow and 
 very pale , - but so life - like be he , so seemingly substantial that I 
 call he by name , whereat he look up , - smile drearily , and be 
 go ! tremble in every limb I realize that here be another spectral 
 terror add to the burden of my day ; and sit down , I try to 
 rally my scatter force and reason out what be good to be do . there 
 be no doubt I be very ill ; - these phantom be the warning of 
 brain - disease . I must endeavour , I think , to keep myself well under 
 control till I get to England , - there I determine to consult the good 
 physician , and put myself under their care till I be thoroughly 
 restore . 

 " meanwhile " - I mutter to myself - " I will say nothing , ... not even to 
 Lucio . he would only smile , ... and I should hate he ! ... " 

 I break off , wonder at this . for be it possible I should ever hate 
 he ? surely not ! 

 that night by way of a change , I sleep in a hammock on deck , hop to 
 dispel midnight illusion by rest in the open air . but my suffering 
 be only intensify . I wake as usual , ... to see , not only Sibyl , but 
 also to my deadly fear , the Three Phantoms that have appear to I in my 
 room in London on the evening of Viscount Lynton 's suicide . there they 
 be , - the same , the very same ! - only this time all their livid face 
 be lift and turn towards I , and though their lip never move , 
 the word ' misery ! ' seem utter , for I hear it toll like a funeral 
 bell on the air and across the sea ! ... and Sibyl , with her face of death 
 in the coil of a silent flame , ... Sibyl smile at I ! - - a smile of 
 torture and remorse ! ... God ! - I could endure it no long ! leap from 
 my hammock , I run towards the vessel 's edge , ... one plunge into the 
 cool wave , ... ha ! - there stand Amiel , with his impenetrable dark face 
 and ferret eye ! 

 " can I assist you sir ? " he inquire deferentially . 

 I star at he , - then burst into a laugh . 

 " assist I ? why no ! - you can do nothing . I want rest , ... and I can not 
 sleep here , ... the air be too close and sulphureous , - - the very star 
 be burn hot ! ... " I pause , - he regard I with his usual gravely 
 derisive expression . " I be go down to my cabin " - I continue , try 
 to speak more calmly - - " I shall be alone there ... perhaps ! " again I 
 laugh wildly and involuntarily , and stagger away from he down the 
 deck - stair , afraid to look back lest I should see those three Figures 
 of fate follow I . 

 once safe in my cabin I shut to the door violently , and in feverish 
 haste , seize my case of pistol . I take out one and load it . my heart 
 be beat furiously , - I keep my eye fix on the ground , lest they 
 should encounter the dead eye of Sibyl . 

 " one click of the trigger - " I whisper - " and all be over ! I shall be 
 at peace , - senseless , - sightless and painless . horror can no long 
 haunt I , ... I shall sleep ! " 

 I raise the weapon steadily to my right temple , ... when suddenly my 
 cabin - door open , and Lucio look in . 

 " pardon I ! " he say , as he observe my attitude - " I have no idea you 
 be busy ! I will go away . I would not disturb you for the world ! " 

 his smile have something fiendish in its fine mockery ; - move with a 
 quick revulsion of feel I turn the pistol downward and hold its 
 muzzle firmly against the table near I . 

 " you say that ! " I exclaim in acute anguish , - " you say it - see 
 I thus ! I think you be my friend ! " 

 he look full at I , ... his eye grow large and luminous with a 
 splendour of scorn , passion and sorrow intermingle . 

 " do you ? " and again the terrific smile light up his pale feature , - " you 
 be mistaken ! I be your Enemy ! " 

 a dreadful silence follow . something lurid and unearthly in his 
 expression appal I , ... I tremble and grow cold with fear . 
 mechanically I replace the pistol in its case , - - then I gaze up at 
 he with a vacant wonder and wild piteousness , see that his dark and 
 frown figure seem to increase in stature , tower above I like 
 the gigantic shadow of a storm - cloud ! my blood freeze with an unnameable 
 sickening terror , ... then , thick darkness veil my sight , and I 
 drop down senseless ! 




 XL 


 Thunder and wild tumult , - the glare of lightning , - the shattering roar 
 of great wave leap mountain high and hiss asunder in 
 mid - air , - to this fierce riot of savage element let loose in a whirling 
 boisterous dance of death , I wake at last with a convulsive shock . 
 stagger to my foot I stand in the black obscurity of my cabin , try 
 to rally my scatter force , - the electric lamp be extinguish , and 
 the lightning alone illumine the sepulchral darkness . frantic shouting 
 echo above I on deck , - fiend - like yell that sound now like 
 triumph , now like despair , and again like menace , - the yacht leap to 
 and fro like a hunted stag amid the furious billow , and every frightful 
 crash of thunder threaten , as it seem , to split she in twain . the 
 wind howl like a devil in torment , - it scream and moan and sob 
 as though endow with a sentient body that suffer acutest 
 agony , - anon it rush downwards with an angry swoop as of wide - flap 
 wing , and at each rag gust I think the vessel must surely founder . 
 forget everything but immediate personal danger , I try to open my 
 door . it be lock outside ! - I be a prisoner ! my indignation at this 
 discovery exceed every other feeling , and beat with both hand on 
 the wooden panel , I call , I shout , I threaten , I swear , - - all in 
 vain ! throw down twice by the topsy - turvey lurching of the yacht , I 
 still keep up a desperate hammering and call , strive to raise my 
 voice above the distract pandemonium of noise that seem to possess 
 the ship from end to end , but all to no purpose , - and finally , hoarse 
 and exhaust , I stop and lean against the unyielding door to 
 recover breath and strength . the storm appear to be increase in 
 force and clamour , - the lightning be well - nigh incessant , and the 
 clattering thunder follow each flash so instantaneously as to leave no 
 doubt but that it be immediately above we . I listen , - and presently 
 hear a frenzied cry - 

 " breaker ahead ! " this be follow by peal of discordant laughter . 
 terrify , I strain my ear for every sound , - and all at once some - one 
 speak to I quite closely , as though the very darkness around I have 
 find a tongue . 

 " breaker ahead ! throughout the world , storm and danger and doom ! Doom 
 and death ! - but afterwards - life ! " 

 a certain intonation in these word fill I with such frantic horror 
 that I fall on my knee in abject misery , and almost pray to the God I 
 have through all my life disbelieve in and deny . but I be too mad 
 with fear to find word ; - the dense blackness , - the horrid uproar of the 
 wind and sea , - the infuriated and confused shouting , - all this be to my 
 mind as though hell itself have break loose , and I could only kneel 
 dumbly and tremble . suddenly a swirl sound as of an approach 
 monstrous whirlwind make itself hear above all the rest of the din , - a 
 sound that gradually resolve itself into a howl chorus of thousand 
 of voice sweep along on the gusty blast , - - fierce cry be 
 mingle with the jarring thunder , and I leapt erect as I catch the 
 word of the clangorous shout - 

 " AVE SATHANAS ! AVE ! " 

 rigidly upright , with limb stiffen for sheer terror , I stand 
 listen , - the wave seem to roar " AVE SATHANAS ! " - the wind shriek 
 it to the thunder , - the lightning write it in a snaky line of fire on 
 the darkness " AVE sathana ! " my brain swam round and grow full to 
 burst , - I be go mad , - rave mad surely ! - or why should I thus 
 distinctly hear such unmeaning sound as these ? with a sudden access of 
 superhuman force I throw the whole weight of my body against the door of 
 my cabin in a delirious effort to break it open , - it yield 
 slightly , - and I prepare myself for another rush and similar 
 attempt , - when all at once it be fling widely back , admit a stream 
 of pale light , and Lucio , wrap in heavy shrouding garment , 
 confront I . 

 " follow I , Geoffrey Tempest , - " he say in low clear tone - " your time 
 have come ! " 

 as he speak , all self - possession desert I , - the terror of the storm , 
 and now the terror of his presence , overwhelm my strength , and I 
 stretch out my hand to he appealingly , unknowe what I do or say . 

 " for God 's sake ... ! " I begin wildly . 

 he silence I by an imperious gesture . 

 " spare I your prayer ! for God 's sake , for your own sake , and for mine ! 
 follow ! " 

 he move before I like a black phantom in the pale strange light 
 surround he , - and I , dazzle , daze and terror - stricken , trod in his 
 step closely , move , as it seem by some volition not my own , till I 
 find myself alone with he in the saloon of the yacht , with the wave 
 hiss up against the window like live snake ready to ste . 
 Trembling and scarcely able to stand I sink on a chair , - he turn round 
 and look at I for a moment meditatively . then he throw open one of 
 the window , - a huge wave dash in and scatter its bitter salt spray 
 upon I where I sit , - but I heed nothing , - my agonised look be 
 fix on he , - the Being I have so long make the companion of my day . 
 raise his hand with a gesture of authority he say - 

 " back , ye devil of the sea and wind ! - ye which be not God 's element 
 but my servant , the unrepente soul of man ! lose in the wave , or 
 whirl in the hurricane , whichever ye have make your destiny , get hence 
 and cease your clamour ! this hour be mine ! " 

 Panic - stricken I hear , - aghast I see the great billow that have 
 shoulder up in myriad against the vessel , sink suddenly , - the yelling 
 wind drop , silence , - the yacht glide along with a smooth even 
 motion as though on a tranquil inland lake , - and almost before I could 
 realize it , the light of the full moon beam forth brilliantly and fall 
 in a broad stream across the floor of the saloon . but in the very 
 cessation of the storm the word " AVE SATHANAS ! " tremble as it be 
 upwards to my ear from the underworld of the sea , and die away in 
 distance like a parting echo of thunder . then Lucio face I , - with what 
 a countenance of sublime and awful beauty ! 

 " do you know I now , man whom my million of dross have make 
 wretched ? - or do you need I to tell you who I be ? " 

 my lip move , - but I could not speak ; the dim and dreadful thought that 
 be dawn on my mind seem as yet too frenzied , too outside the 
 boundary of material sense for mortal utterance . 

 " be dumb , - be motionless ! - but hear and feel ! " he continue - " by the 
 supreme power of God , - for there be no other power in any world or any 
 heaven , - I control and command you at this moment , your own will be 
 set aside for once as naught ! I choose you as one out of million to 
 learn in this life the lesson that all must learn hereafter ; - let every 
 faculty of your intelligence be ready to receive that which I shall 
 impart , - and teach it to your fellow - man if you have a conscience as you 
 have a soul ! " 

 again I strove to speak , - he seem so human , - so much my friend still , 
 though he have declare himself my enemy , - - and yet ... what be that 
 lambent radiance encircle his brow ? - that burn glory steadily 
 deepen and flash from his eye ? 

 " you be one of the world 's ' fortunate ' man , - " he go on , survey I 
 straightly and pitilessly - " so at least this world judge you , because 
 you can buy its good - will . but the Forces that govern all world , do not 
 judge you by such a standard , - you can not buy their good - will , not 
 though all the church should offer to sell it you ! they regard you as 
 you be , strip soul - naked , - not as you seem ! they behold in you 
 a shameless egoist , persistently engage in deface their divine image 
 of Immortality , - and for that sin there be no excuse and no escape but 
 Punishment . Whosoever prefer Self to God , and in the arrogance of that 
 self , presume to doubt and deny God , invite another power to compass 
 his destiny , - the power of Evil , make evil and keep evil by the 
 disobedience and wickedness of Man alone , - that power whom mortal call 
 Satan , Prince of Darkness , - but whom once the angel know as Lucifer , 
 Prince of Light ! " ... he break off , - pause , - and his flaming regard 
 fall full upon I . " do you know I , ... now ? " 

 I sit a rigid figure of fear , dumbly star , ... be this man , for he 
 seem man , mad that he should thus hint at a thing too wild and 
 terrible for speech ? 

 " if you do not know I , - if you do not feel in your convict soul that 
 you be aware of I , - it be because you will not know ! thus do I come 
 upon man , when they rejoice in their wilful self - blindness and 
 vanity ! - thus do I become their constant companion , humour they in 
 such vice as they good love ! - thus do I take on the shape that please 
  they , and fit myself to their humour ! they make I what I be ; - they 
 mould my very form to the fashion of their flitting time . through all 
 their change and repeat era , they have find strange name and 
 title for I , - and their creed and church have make a monster of 
 I , - as though imagination could compass any bad monster than the 
 Devil in Man ! " 

 frozen and mute I hear , ... the dead silence , and his resonant voice 
 vibrate through it , seem more terrific than the wild storm . 

 " you , - God 's work , - endow as every conscious atom of his creation be 
 endow , - with the infinite germ of immortality ; - you , absorb in the 
 gathering together of such perishable trash as you conceive good for 
 yourself on this planet , - you dare , in the puny reach of your mortal 
 intelligence to dispute and question the everlaste thing invisible ! 
 you , by the Creator 's will , be permit to see the natural 
 Universe , - but in mercy to you , the veil be draw across the 
 super - natural ! for such thing as exist there , would break your puny 
 earth - brain as a frail shell be break by a pass wheel , - and because 
 you can not see , you doubt ! you doubt not only the surpass Love and 
 wisdom that keep you in ignorance till you shall be strong enough to 
 bear full knowledge , but you doubt the very fact of such another 
 universe itself . arrogant fool ! - your hour be count by super - natural 
 time ! - your day be compass by super - natural law ! - your every 
 thought , word , deed and look must go to make up the essence and shape of 
 your be in super - natural life hereafter ! - and what you have be in 
 your Soul here , must and shall be the aspect of your Soul there ! 
 that law know no changing ! " 

 the light about his face deepen , - he go on in clear accent that 
 vibrate with the strange music . 

 " man make their own choice and form their own future , " he say - " and 
 never let they dare to say they be not free to choose ! from the 
 uttermost reach of high Heaven the Spirit of God descend to they as 
 Man , - from the uttermost depth of low Hell , I , the Spirit of 
 Rebellion , come , - equally as man ! but the God - in - Man be reject and 
 slain , - I , the Devil - in - man live on , forever accept and adore ! Man 's 
 choice this be - not God 's or mine ! be this self - seek human race 
 once to reject I utterly , I should exist no more as I be , - nor would 
 they exist who be with I . listen , while I trace your career ! - it be a 
 copy of the life of many man ; - and judge how little the power of 
 Heaven can have to do with you ! - how much the power of Hell ! " 

 I shudder involuntarily ; - dimly I begin to realize the awful nature of 
 this unearthly interview . 

 " you , Geoffrey Tempest , be a man in whom a Thought of God be once 
 implant , - that subtle fire or note of music out of heaven call 
 Genius . so great a gift be rarely bestow on any mortal , - and woe 
 betide he , who have receive it , hold it as of mere personal value , 
 to be use for Self and not for God ! divine law move you gently in 
 the right path of study , - the path of suffering , of disappointment , of 
 self - denial and poverty , - for only by these thing be humanity make 
 noble and train in the way of perfection . through pain and endure 
 labour the soul be armed for battle , and strengthen for conquest . for 
 it be more difficult to bear a victory well , than to endure many 
 buffeting of war ! but you , - you resent Heaven 's good - will towards 
 you , - the Valley of Humiliation suit you not at all . poverty madden 
 you , - starvation sicken you . yet poverty be well than arrogant 
 wealth , - and starvation be healthy than self - indulgence ! you could not 
 wait , - your own trouble seem to you enormous , - your own effort 
 laudable and marvellous , - the trouble and effort of other be 
 nothing to you ; - you be ready to curse God and die . compassionate 
 yourself , admire yourself and none other , with a heart full of 
 bitterness , and a mouth full of cursing , you be eager to make quick 
 havoc of both your genius and your soul . for this cause , your million 
 of money come - - and , - so do I ! " 

 stand now full height he confront I , - his eye be less 
 brilliant , but , they reflect in their dark splendour a passionate 
 scorn and sorrow . 

 " o fool ! - in my very come I warn you ! - on the very day we meet I tell 
 you I be not what I seem ! God 's element crash a menace when we 
 make our compact of friendship ! and I , - when I see the faint last 
 struggle of the not quite torpid soul in you to resist and distrust I , 
 do I not urge you to let that well instinct have its way ? 
 you , - jester with the Supernatural ! - you , - base scoffer at Christ ! a 
 thousand hint have be give you , - a thousand chance of do such 
 good as must have force I to leave you , - as would have bring I a 
 welcome respite from sorrow , - a moment 's cessation of torture ! " 

 his brow contract in a sombre frown , - he be silent a moment , - then 
 he resume - 

 " now learn from I the weaving of the web you so willingly become 
 entangle in ! your million of money be mine ! - the man that leave you 
 heir to they , be a wretched miser , evil to the soul 's core ! by virtue 
 of his own deed he and his dross be mine ! and madden by the sheer 
 accumulation of world 's wealth , he slay himself in a fit of frenzy . he 
 live again in a new and much more realistic phase of existence , and 
 know the actual value of mankind 's cash - payment ! this you have yet 
 to learn ! " 

 he advance a step or two , fix his eye more steadily upon I . 

 " Wealth be like Genius , - bestow not for personal gratification , but 
 for the benefit of those who lack it . what have you do for your 
 fellow - man ? the very book you write and launch upon the tide of 
 bribery and corruption be publish with the intention to secure 
 applause for yourself , not to give help or comfort to other . your 
 marriage be prompt by Lust and Ambition , and in the fair Sensuality 
 you wed , you get your desert ! no love be in the union , - it be 
 sanctify by the blessing of Fashion , but not the blessing of God . you 
 have do without God ; so you think ! every act of your existence have 
 be for the pleasure and advancement of Yourself , - and this be why I 
 have choose you out to hear and see what few mortal ever hear or see 
 till they have pass the dividing - line between this life and the next . 
 I have choose you because you be a type of the apparently respected and 
 unblamable man ; - you be not what the world call a criminal , - you have 
 murder no - one , - you have steal no neighbour 's good - , your 
 unchastitie and adultery be those of every ' fashionable ' 
 vice - monger , - and your blasphemy against the Divine be no bad than 
 those of the most approve modern magazine - contributor . you be guilty 
 nevertheless of the chief crime of the age - Sensual Egotism - the 
 black sin know to either angel or devil , because hopeless . the 
 murderer may repent , and save a hundred life to make up for the one he 
 snatch , - the thief may atone with honest labour , - the adulterer may 
 scourge his flesh and do grim penance for late pardon , - the blasphemer 
 may retrieve his blasphemy , - but for the Egoist there be no chance of 
 wholesome penitence , since to himself he be perfect , and count his 
 Creator as somewhat inferior . this present time of the world breathe 
 Egotism , - the taint of Self , the hideous worship of money , corrode all 
 life , all thought , all feel . for vulgar cash , the fair and noblest 
 scene of Nature be wantonly destroy without public protest , 5   - the 
 earth , create in beauty , be make hideous , - parent and child , wife 
 and husband be ready to slay each other for a little gold , - Heaven be 
 bar out , - God be deny , - and Destruction darken over this planet , 
 know to all angel as the Sorrowful Star ! be no long blind , 
 millionaire whose million have minister to Self without relieve 
 sorrow ! - - for when the world be totally corrupt , - when Self be 
 dominant , - when cunning supersede honesty , - when gold be man 's chief 
 ambition , - when purity be condemn , - when poet teach lewdness , and 
 scientist blasphemy , - when love be mock , and God forget , - the end 
 be near ! I take my part in that end ! - for the soul of mankind be not 
 do with when they leave their fleshly tenement ! when this planet be 
 destroy as a bubble break in the air , the soul of man and woman live 
 on , - as the soul of the woman you love live on , - as the soul of the 
 mother who bear she , live on , - aye ! - as all my worshipper live on 
 through a myriad world , a myriad phase , till they learn to shape their 
 destiny for Heaven ! and I , with they live on , in many shape , in many 
 way ! - when they return to God cleanse and perfect , so shall I 
 return ! - but not till then ! " 

 he pause again , - and I hear a faint sigh sound everywhere as of 
 wail voice , and the name " Ahrimanes ! " be breathe suddenly upon the 
 silence . I start up listen , every nerve strain - - Ahrimanes ? - or 
 Rimânez ? I gaze fearfully at he , ... always beautiful , his countenance 
 be now sublime , ... and his eye shine with a lustrous flame . 

 " you think I friend ! " he say - " you should have know I Foe ! for 
 everyone who flatter a man for his virtue , or humour he in his vice 
 be that man 's bad enemy , whether demon or angel ! but you judge I a 
 fitting comrade , - hence I be bind to serve you , - I and my follower 
 with I . you have no perception to realize this , - you , supreme scorner of 
 the Supernatural ! little do you think of the terrifying agency that 
 work the wonder of your betrothal feast at Willowsmere ! little do 
 you dream that fiend prepare the costly banquet and pour out the 
 luscious wine ! " 

 at this , a smothered groan of horror escape I , - I look wildly round 
 I , long to find some deep grave of oblivious rest wherein to fall . 

 " Aye ! " he continue - " the festival be fit to the time of the world 
 to - day ! - Society , gorge itself blind and senseless , and attend by a 
 retinue from Hell ! my servant look like man ! - for truly there be 
 little difference ' twixt man and devil ! ' twas a brave gathering ! - England 
 have never see so strange a one in all her annal ! " 

 the sigh , wail cry increase in loudness , - my limb shake under 
 I , and all power of thought be paralyse in my brain . he bend his 
 pierce look upon I with a new expression of infinite wonder , pity 
 and disdain . 

 " what a grotesque creation you man have make of I ! " he say - " as 
 grotesque as your conception of God ! with what trifle human attribute 
 you have endow I ! know you not that the changeless , yet ever - change 
 Essence of Immortal Life can take a million million shape and yet 
 remain unalterably the same ? be I as hideous as your church figure 
 I , - could the eternal beauty with which all angel be endow , ever 
 change to such loathsomeness as haunt mankind 's distorted imagination , 
 perchance it would be well , - for none would make of I their comrade , 
 and none would cherish I as friend ! as fit each separate human nature , 
 so seem my image , - for thus be my fate and punishment command . yet 
 even in this mask of man I wear , man own I their superior , - think you 
 not that when the Supreme Spirit of God wear that same mask on earth , 
 man do not know he for their Master ? yea , they do know ! - and know , 
 murder he , - as they ever strive to murder all divine thing as soon 
 as their divinity be recognise . face to face I stand with he upon the 
 mountain - top , and there fulfil my vow of temptation . Worlds and 
 kingdom , supremacy and power ! - - what be they to the Ruler of 
 they all ! ' get thee hence , Satan ! ' say the golden - sound 
 Voice ; - ah ! - glorious behest ! - happy respite ! - for I reach the very 
 gate of Heaven that night , and hear the angel sing ! " 

 his accent sink to an infinitely mournful cadence . 

 " what have your teacher do with I and my eternal sorrow ? " he go 
 on - " have not they , and the unthinke church , proclaim a lie 
 against I , say that I rejoice in evil ? o man to whom , by God 's will 
 and because the world 's end draw nigh , I unveil a portion of the 
 mystery of my doom , learn now once and for all , that there be no 
 possible joy in evil ! - it be the despair and the discord of the 
 Universe , - it be Man 's creation , - my torment , - God 's sorrow ! every sin 
 of every human being add weight to my torture , and length to my 
 doom , - yet my oath against the world must be keep ! I have swear to 
 tempt , - to do my uttermost to destroy mankind , - but man have not swear to 
 yield to my tempting . he be free ! - let he resist and I depart ; - let he 
 accept I , I remain ! eternal Justice have speak , - Humanity , through the 
 teaching of God make human , must work out its own redemption , - and 
 mine ! " 

 here , suddenly advance he stretch out his hand , - his figure grow 
 tall , vaster and more majestic . 

 " come with I now ! " he say in a low penetrate voice that sound 
 sweet , yet menacing - " Come ! - for the veil be down for you to - night ! you 
 shall understand with WHOM you have dwell so long in your shifting 
 cloud - castle of life ! - and in what company you have sail perilous 
 sea ! - one , who proud and rebellious , like you , err less , in that he 
 own GOD as his Master ! " 

 at these word a thunder crash assail my ear , - all the window on 
 either side of the saloon fly open , and show a strange glitter as of 
 steely spear point aloft to the moon , - ... then , ... half - fainting , 
 I feel myself grasp and lift suddenly and forcibly upwards , ... and 
 in another moment find myself on the deck of ' the flame , ' hold fast as 
 a prisoner in the fierce grip of hand invisible . raise my eye in 
 deadly despair , - prepare for hellish torture , and with a horrible 
 sense of conviction in my soul that it be too late to cry out to God 
 for mercy , - I see around I a frozen world ! - a world that seem as if 
 the sun have never shine upon it . thick glassy - green wall of ice press 
 round the vessel on all side and shut she in between their inflexible 
 barrier ! - fantastic palace , pinnacle , tower , bridge and arch of 
 ice form in their architectural outline and grouping the semblance 
 of a great city , - over all the coldly glistening peak , the round moon , 
 emerald - pale , look down , - and stand opposite to I against the 
 mast , I behold , ... not Lucio , ... but an Angel ! 


   5   Witness the destruction of Foyers , to the historical shame and 
  disgrace of Scotland and Scotsmen . 




 XLI 


 crown with a mystic radiance as of tremble star of fire , that 
 sublime figure tower between I and the moonlit sky ; the face , 
 austerely grand and beautiful , shine forth luminously pale , - the eye 
 be full of unquenchable pain , unspeakable remorse , unimaginable 
 despair ! the feature I have know so long and see day by day in 
 familiar intercourse be the same , - the same , yet transfigure with 
 ethereal splendour , while shadow by an everlasting sorrow ! bodily 
 sensation I be scarcely conscious of ; - only the Soul of I , hitherto 
 dormant , be awake and palpitate with fear . gradually I become aware 
 that other be around I , and look , I see a dense crowd of face , 
 wild and wonderful , - implore eye be turn upon I in piteous or 
 stern agony , - and pallid hand be stretch towards I more in appeal 
 than menace . and I behold as I gaze , the air darkening , and anon 
 lightening with the shadow and the brightness of wing ! - vast pinion of 
 crimson flame begin to unfurl and spread upwards all round the ice - bind 
 vessel , - upwards till their glowing tip seem well - nigh to touch the 
 moon . and he , my Foe , who lean against the mast , become likewise 
 encircled with these shaft pinion of burn rose , which like 
 finely - web cloud colour by a strong sunset , stream outward 
 flaringly from his dark Form and spring aloft in a blaze of scintillant 
 glory . and a voice infinitely sad , yet infinitely sweet , strike solemn 
 music from the frozen silence . 

 " steer onward , Amiel ! onward , to the boundary of the world ! " 

 with every spiritual sense arouse , I glance towards the steerman 's 
 wheel , - be that Amiel whom I have instinctively loathe ? - that be , 
 stern as a figure of deadly fate , with sable wing and torture 
 countenance ? if so , I know he now for a fiend in very truth ! - if 
 burn horror and endless shame can so transfigure the soul of man ! a 
 history of crime be write in his anguished look , ... what secret 
 torment rack he no live mortal might dare to guess ! with pallid 
 skeleton hand he move the wheel ; - and as it turn , the wall of ice 
 around we begin to split with a noise of thunder . 

 " Onward Amiel ! " say the great sad Voice again - " onward where never man 
 hath trod , - steer on to the world 's end ! " 

 the crowd of weird and terrible face grow denser , - the flame and 
 darkening of wing become thick than drive storm - cloud rent by 
 lightning , - wail cry , groan and dreary sound of sob echo 
 about I on all side , ... again the shattering ice roar like an 
 earthquake under the water , ... and , unhindered by her frozen 
 prison - wall , the ship move on ! dizzily , and as one in a mad dream I 
 see the great glitter berg rock and bend forward , - the massive 
 ice - city shake to its foundation , ... glisten pinnacle drop and 
 vanish , ... tower lurch over , break and plunge into the sea , - huge 
 mountain of ice split up like fine glass , yawn asunder with a green 
 glare in the moonlight as the ' Flame ' propel , so it seem , by the 
 demon - wing of her terrific crew , cut through the frozen passage with 
 the sharpness of a sword and the swiftness of an arrow ! whither be we 
 bind ? I dare not think , - I deem myself dead . the world I see be not 
 the world I know , - I believe I be in some spirit - land beyond the 
 grave , whose secret I should presently realize perchance too well ! 
 on , - on we go , - I keep my strained sight fix for the most part on 
 the supreme Shape that always confront I , - that Angel - Foe whose eye 
 be wild with an eternity of sorrow ! face to face with such an 
 Immortal Despair , I stand confound and slay forever in my own 
 regard , - a worthless atom , merit naught but annihilation . the wail 
 cry and groan have cease , - and we speed on in an awful silence , - while 
 countless tragedy , - unnameable history , - be urge upon I in the 
 dumb eloquence of the dreary face round I , and the expressive teaching 
 of their terrific eye ! 

 soon the barrier of ice be pass , - and the ' Flame ' float out 
 beyond they into a warm inland sea , calm as a lake , and bright as silver 
 in the broad radiance of the moon . on either side be undulate 
 shore , rich with lofty and luxuriant verdure , - I see the distant hazy 
 outline of dusky purple hill , - I hear the little wave plash 
 against hidden rock , and murmur upon the sand . Delicious odour 
 fill the air ; - a gentle breeze blew , ... be this the lost 
 Paradise ? - this semi - tropic zone conceal behind a continent of ice and 
 snow ? suddenly , from the top of the dark branching tree , come float 
 the sound of a bird 's singing , - and so sweet be the song , so 
 heart - whole be the melody , that my ache eye fill with tear . 
 beautiful memory rush upon I , - the value and graciousness of 
 life , - life on the kindly sunlit earth , - seem very dear to my soul ! 
 life 's opportunity , - its joy , its wonder , its blessing , all 
 shower down upon a thankless race by a love creator , - these appear 
 to I all at once as marvellous ! oh for another chance of such life ! - to 
 redeem the past , - to gather up the waste gem of lose moment , - to live 
 as a man should live , in accordance with the will of God , and in 
 brotherhood with his fellow - man ! ... the unknown bird sing on in a 
 cadence like that of a mavis in spring , only more tunefully , - surely no 
 other woodland songster ever sing half so well ! and as its dulcet note 
 drop roundly one by one upon the mystic silence , I see a pale 
 creature move out from amid the shadowing of black and scarlet wing , - a 
 white woman - shape , clothe in her own long hair . she glide to the 
 vessel 's edge , and there she lean , with anguished face upturne , - it 
 be the face of Sibyl ! and even while I look upon she , she cast 
 herself wildly down upon the deck and wept ! my soul be stir within 
 I , ... I see in very truth all that she might have be , - I realize 
 what an angel a little guide love and patience might have make she , 
 ... and at last I pity she ! I never pity she before ! 

 and now many familiar face shine upon I like white star in a mist of 
 rain , - all face of the dead , - all mark with unquenchable remorse and 
 sorrow . one figure pass before I drearily , in fetter glisten with 
 a weight of gold , - I know he for my college - friend of olden day ; 
 another , crouch on the ground in fear , I recognise as he who have 
 stake his last possession at play , even to his immortal soul , - I even 
 see my father 's face , wear and aghast with grief , and tremble lest the 
 sacred beauty of she who have die to give I birth , should find a place 
 among these direful horror . but no ! - thank God I never see 
 she ! - - her spirit have not lose its way to Heaven ! 

 again my eye revert to the Mover of this mystic scene , - that Fallen 
 Splendour whose majestic shape now seem to fill both earth and sky . a 
 fiery glory blaze about he , ... he raise his hand , ... the ship 
 stop , - and the dark steersman rest motionless on the wheel . round 
 we the moonlit landscape be spread like a glitter dream of 
 fairyland , - and still the unknown bird of God sing on with such 
 entrance tenderness as must have soothe hell 's torture soul . 

 " Lo , here we pause ! " say the command Voice - " here , where the 
 distorted shape of Man hath never cast a shadow ! - here , - where the 
 arrogant mind of Man hath never conceive a sin ! - here , where the 
 godless greed of Man hath never deface a beauty , or slay a woodland 
 thing ! - here , the last spot on earth leave untainted by Man 's presence ! 
 here be the world 's end ! - when this land be find , and these shore 
 profane , - when Mammon plant its foot upon this soil , - then dawn the 
 Judgment - Day ! but , until then , ... here , where only God doth work 
 perfection , angel may look down undismayed , and even fiend find 
 rest ! " 

 a solemn sound of music surge upon the air , - and I who have be as one 
 in chain , bind by invisible bond and unable to stir , be suddenly 
 liberate . fully conscious of freedom I still face the dark gigantic 
 figure of my Foe , - for his luminous eye be now upon I , and his 
 penetrate voice address I only . 

 " Man , deceive not thyself ! " he say - " think not the terror of this 
 night be the delusion of a dream or the snare of a vision ! thou art 
 awake , - not sleep , - thou art flesh as well as spirit ! this place be 
 neither hell nor heaven nor any space between , - it be a corner of thine 
 own world on which thou livest . wherefore know from henceforth that the 
 Supernatural Universe in and around the Natural be no lie , - but the 
 chief reality , inasmuch as God surroundeth all ! fate strike thine 
 hour , - and in this hour ' tis give thee to choose thy Master . now , by 
 the will of God , thou se I as Angel ; - but take heed thou forget not 
 that among man I be as Man ! in human form I move with all humanity 
 through endless age , - to king and counsellor , to priest and 
 scientist , to thinker and teacher , to old and young , I come in the 
 shape their pride or vice demand , and be as one with all . self find in 
 I another ego ; - but from the pure in heart , the high in faith , the 
 perfect in intention , I do retreat with joy , offer naught save 
 reverence , demand naught save prayer ! so be I , - so must I ever 
 be , - till Man of his own will release and redeem I . mistake I not , 
 but know I ! - and choose thy Future for truth 's sake and not out of 
 fear ! choose and change not in any time hereafter , - this hour , this 
 moment be thy last probation , - choose , I say ! wilt thou serve Self and 
 I ? or God only ? " 

 the question seem thunder on my ear , ... shudder , I look from 
 right to left , and see a gathering crowd of face , white , wistful , 
 wonder , threaten and imploring , - they press about I close , with 
 glisten eye and lip that move dumbly . and as they star upon I I 
 behold another spectral thing , - the image of Myself ! - a poor frail 
 creature , pitiful , ignorant , and undiscerning , - limit in both 
 capacity and intelligence , yet full of strange egotism and still 
 stranger arrogance ; every detail of my life be suddenly present to I 
 as in a magic mirror , and I read my own chronicle of paltry intellectual 
 pride , vulgar ambition and vulgar ostentation , - I realise with shame 
 my miserable vice , my puny scorn of God , my effrontery and 
 blasphemy ; and in the sudden strong repulsion and repudiation of my 
 own worthless existence , be and character , I find both voice and 
 speech . 

 " GOD only ! " I cry fervently - " Annihilation at his hand , rather than 
 life without he ! GOD only ! I have choose ! " 

 my word vibrate passionately on my own ear , ... and ... even as they 
 be speak , the air grow misty with a snowy opalescent radiance , ... 
 the sable and crimson wing uplifted in such multitudinous array around 
 I , palpitate with a thousand changeful hue , ... and over the face of 
 my dark Foe a light celestial fall like the smile of dawn ! awed and 
 afraid I gaze upward , ... and there I see a new and yet more wondrous 
 glory , ... a shin figure outline against the sky in such surpass 
 beauty and vivid brilliancy as make I think the sun itself have rise in 
 vast Angel - shape on rainbow pinion ! and from the brighten heaven 
 there ring a silver voice , clear as a clarion - call , - 

 " Arise , Lucifer , Son of the Morning ! one soul reject thee , - one hour 
 of joy be grant thee ! hence and arise ! " 

 Earth , air , and sea blaze suddenly into fiery gold , - blind and 
 stun , I be seize by compelling hand and hold firmly down by a 
 force invisible , ... the yacht be slowly sink under I ! overwhelmed 
 with unearthly terror , my lip yet murmur , 

 " GOD ! God only ! " the heaven change from gold to crimson - anon to 
 shin blue , ... and against this mass of waver colour that seem 
 to make a jewel archway of the sky , I see the Form of he whom I have 
 know as man , swiftly ascend god - like , with flaming pinion and upturned 
 glorious visage , like a vision of light in darkness ! around he 
 cluster a million wing shape , - but he , supreme , majestic , 
 wonderful , tower high above they all , a very king of splendour , the 
 glory round his brow resemble meteor - fire in an Arctic 
 midnight , - his eye , twin star , ablaze with such great rapture as 
 seem half agony ! breathless and giddy , I strain my sight to follow 
 he as he flee ; ... and hear the musical calling of strange sweet 
 voice everywhere , from east to west , from north to south . 

 " Lucifer ! ... belovëd and unforgotten ! Lucifer , Son of the morning ! 
 Arise ! ... arise ! ... " 

 with all my remain strength I strove to watch the vanish upward of 
 that sublime Luminance that now fill the visible universe , - the 
 demon - ship be still sink steadily , ... invisible hand still hold I 
 down , ... I be fall , - fall , - into unimaginable depth , ... when 
 another Voice , till then unheard , solemn yet sweet , speak aloud - 

 " bind he hand and foot , and cast he into the outermost darkness of the 
 world ! there let he find my light ! " 

 I hear , - yet feel no fear . 

 " God only ! " I say , as I sink into the vast profound , - and lo ! while the 
 word yet tremble on my lip , I see the sun ! the sweet earth 's 
 sun ! - the kindly orb familiar , - the lamp of God 's protection , - its 
 golden rim come glitter upwards in the east , - high and high it 
 rise , make a shin background for that mighty figure , whose darkly 
 luminous wing now seem like sable storm - cloud stretch wide across 
 the horizon ! once more ... yet once , ... the Angel - visage bend its 
 warning look on I , ... I see the anguished smile , ... the great eye 
 burn with immortal sorrow ! ... then , I be plunge forcibly 
 downward and thrust into an abysmal grave of frozen cold . 




 XLII 


 the blue sea - the blue sky ! - and God 's sunshine over all ! to this I 
 wake , after a long period of unconsciousness , and find myself afloat on 
 a wide ocean , fast bind to a wooden spar . so strongly knot be my 
 bond that I could not stir either hand or foot , ... and after one or 
 two ineffectual struggle to move I give up the attempt , and lay 
 submissively resign to my fate , face upturned and gaze at the 
 infinite azure depth above I , while the heave breath of the sea 
 rock I gently to and fro like an infant in its mother 's arm . alone 
 with God and Nature , I , a poor human wreck , drift , - - lost , yet find ! 
 lose on this vast sea which soon should serve my body as a sepulchre , 
 ... but find , inasmuch as I be fully conscious of the existence and 
 awakening of the Immortal Soul within I , - that divine , actual and 
 imperishable essence , which now I recognise as be all that be 
 valuable in a man in the sight of his creator . I be to die , soon and 
 surely ; - this I think , as the billow sway I in their huge cradle , 
 run in foamy ripple across my bound body , and dash cool spray 
 upon my brow , - what could I do now , doom and helpless as I be , to 
 retrieve my waste past ? nothing ! save repent , - and could repentance at 
 so late an hour fit the law of eternal justice ? humbly and sorrowfully 
 I consider , ... to I have be give a terrific and unprecedented 
 experience of the awful reality of the Spirit - world around we , - and now 
 I be cast out on the sea as a thing worthless , I feel that the brief 
 time remain to I of life in this present sphere be indeed my " last 
 probation , " as that Supernatural Wonder , the declare Enemy of mankind , 
 whom still in my thought I call Lucio , have declare . 

 " if I dare , - after a life 's denial and blasphemy , - turn to Christ ! " I 
 say - " would he , - the Divine Brother and Friend of man , - reject I ? " 

 I whisper the question to the sky and sea , ... solemn silence seem 
 to invest the atmosphere , and marvellous calm . no other answer come than 
 this , ... a deep and charmëd peace , that insensibly steal over my 
 fret conscience , my remorseful soul , my ache heart , my tired mind . 
 I remember certain word hear long ago , and lightly forget . " he 
 who cometh unto I will I in no wise cast out . " look up to the clear 
 heaven and radiant sun , I smile ; and with a complete abandonment of 
 myself and my fear to the Divine Will , I murmur the word that in my 
 stress of mystic agony have so far save I , - 

 " God only ! Whatsoever he shall choose for I in life , in death , and 
 after death , be good . " 

 and close my eye , I resign my life to the mercy of the soft wave , 
 and with the sunbeam warm upon my face , I sleep . 

          
      
  

 I wake again with an icy shudder and cry , - rough cheery voice sound 
 in my ear , - strong hand be at work busily unfasten the cord with 
 which I be bind , ... I be on the deck of a large steamer , surround 
 by a group of man , - and all the glory of the sunset fire the sea . 
 question be pour upon I , ... I could not answer they , for my 
 tongue be parch and blister , ... lift upright upon my foot by 
 sturdy arm , I could not stand for sheer exhaustion . dimly , and in 
 feeble dread I star around I , - - be this great vessel with smoking 
 funnel and grind engine another devil 's craft set sailing round 
 the world ! too weak to find a voice I make dumb sign of terrified 
 inquiry , ... a broad - shoulder bluff - look man come forward , whose 
 keen eye rest on I with kindly compassion . 

 " this be an english vessel , " he say - " we be bind for Southampton . our 
 helmsman see you float ahead , - we stop and send a boat for rescue . 
 where be you wreck ? any more of the crew afloat ? " 

 I gaze at he , but could not speak . the strange thought crowd into 
 my brain , move I to wild tear and laughter . England ! the word strike 
 clash music on my mind , and set all my pulse tremble . England ! the 
 little spot upon the little world , most love and honour of all man , 
 save those who envy its worth ! I make some gesture , whether of joy or 
 mad amazement I know not , - - have I be able to speak I could have 
 relate nothing that those man around I could have comprehend or 
 believe , ... then I sink back again in a dead swoon . 

 they be very good to I , all those english sailor . the captain give 
 I his own cabin , - the ship 's doctor attend I with a zeal that be 
 only exceed by his curiosity to know where I come from , and the nature 
 of the disaster that have befall I . but I remain dumb , and lie inert 
 and feeble in my berth , grateful for the care bestow upon I , as well 
 as for the temporary exhaustion that deprive I of speech . for I have 
 enough to do with my own thought , - thought far too solemn and weighty 
 for utterance . I be save , - I be give another chance of life in the 
 world , - and I know why ! my one absorb anxiety now be to retrieve 
 my waste time , and to do active good where hitherto I have do nothing ! 

 the day come at last , when I be sufficiently recover to be able to 
 sit on deck and watch with eager eye the approach coast - line of 
 England . I seem to have live a century since I leave it , - aye , almost 
 an eternity , - for time be what the Soul make it , and no more . I be an 
 object of interest and attention among all the passenger on board , for 
 as yet I have not break silence . the weather be calm and bright , ... 
 the sun shine gloriously , - and far off the pearly rim of Shakespeare 's 
 ' happy isle ' glistened jewel - like upon the edge of the sea . the captain 
 come and look at I , - nod encouragingly , - and after a moment 's 
 hesitation , say - 

 " glad to see you out on deck ! almost yourself again , eh ? " 

 I silently assent with a faint smile . 

 " perhaps " - he continue , " as we be so near home , you will let I know your 
 name ? it be not often we pick up a man alive and drift in 
 mid - Atlantic . " 

 in mid - Atlantic ! what force have fling I there I dare not think , ... 
 nor whether it be hellish or divine . 

 " my name ? " I murmur , surprise into speech , - how odd it be I have 
 never think of myself lately as have a name or any other thing 
 belong to I ! - " why certainly ! Geoffrey Tempest be my name . " 

 the captain 's eye open widely . 

 " Geoffrey Tempest ! dear I ! ... the Mr Tempest ? - - the great 
 millionaire that be ? " 

 it be now my turn to stare . 

 " that be ? " I repeat - " what do you mean ? " 

 " have you not hear ? " he ask excitedly . 

 " Heard ? I have hear nothing since I leave England some month ago - with 
 a friend , on board his yacht ... we go on a long voyage and ... a 
 strange one ! we be wreck , ... you know the rest , and how I owe my 
 life to your rescue . but of news I be ignorant ... " 

 " good heaven ! " he interrupt quickly - " bad news travel fast as a rule 
 they say , - but you have miss it ... and I confess I do not   like to be 
 the bearer of it ... " 

 he break off , and his genial face look troubled . I smile , - yet 
 wonder . 

 " pray speak out ! " I say - " I do not   think you can tell I anything that 
 will deeply affect I , - now . I know the good and bad of most thing 
 in the world , I assure you ! " 

 he eye I dubiously ; - then , go into his smoking - cabin , he bring 
 I out an american newspaper seven day old . he hand it to I point 
 to its lead column without a word . there I see in large type - " A 
 Millionaire ruin ! Enormous Frauds ! Monster Forgeries ! gigantic 
 Swindle ! on the track of Bentham and Ellis ! " 

 my brain swam for a minute , - then I read on steadily , and soon grasp 
 the situation . the respectable pair of lawyer whom I have implicitly 
 rely on for the management of all my business affair in my absence , 
 have succumb to the temptation of have so much cash in charge for 
 investment , - and have become a pair of practised swindler . deal with 
 the same bank as myself , they have forge my name so cleverly that the 
 genuineness of the signature have never be even suspect , - and , after 
 draw enormous sum in this way , and invest in various ' bubble ' 
 company with which they personally be concern , they have finally 
 abscond , leave I almost as poor as I be when I first hear of my 
 inherit fortune . I put aside the paper , and look up at the good 
 captain , who stand watch I with sympathetic anxiety . 

 " thank you ! " I say - " these thief be my trust lawyer , - and I can 
 cheerfully say that I be much more sorry for they than I be for myself . 
 a thief be always a thief , - a poor man , if he be honest , be at any rate 
 the thief 's superior . the money they have steal will bring they misery 
 rather than pleasure , - of that I be convinced . if this account be 
 correct , they have already lose large sum in bogus company , - and the 
 man Bentham , whom I think the very acme of shrewd caution have sink an 
 enormous amount of capital in a wear - out gold mine . their forgery must 
 have be admirably do ! - a sad waste of time and cleverness . it 
 appear too that the investment I have myself make be 
 worthless ; - well , well ! - it do not matter , - I must begin the world 
 again , that be all ! " he look amazed . 

 " I do not   think you quite realize your own misfortune , Mr Tempest " - he 
 say - " you take it too quietly by half . you will think bad of it 
 presently . " 

 " I hope not ! " I respond , with a smile - " it never do to think the 
 bad of anything . I assure you I realize perfectly . I be in the world 's 
 sight a ruin man , - I quite understand ! " 

 he shrug his shoulder with quite a desperate air , and leave I . I be 
 convince he think I mad , - but I know I have never be so sane . I do 
 indeed entirely comprehend my ' misfortune , ' or rather the great chance 
 bestow on I of win something far high than all the coffer of 
 Mammon ; I read in my loss of world 's cash the working of such a merciful 
 providence and pity as give I a grander hope than any I have ever know . 
 Clear before I rise the vision of that most divine and beautiful 
 necessity of happiness , - work ! - the grand and too often misprize Angel 
 of Labour , which mould the mind of man , steady his hand , control 
 his brain , purify his passion , and strengthen his whole mental and 
 physical being . a rush of energy and health fill my vein , - and I 
 thank God devoutly for the golden opportunity hold out afresh for I 
 to accept and use . gratitude there should be in every human soul for 
 every gift of heaven , - but nothing merit more thankfulness and praise 
 to the Creator than the call to work , and the ability to respond to it . 

 England at last ! I bade farewell to the good ship that have rescue I , 
 and to all on board she , most of whom now know my name and look upon 
 I with pity as well as curiosity . the story of my be wreck on a 
 friend 's yacht be readily accept , - and the subject of that adventure 
 be avoid , as the general impression be that my friend , whoever he 
 be , have be drown with his crew , and that I be the one survivor . I 
 do not offer any further explanation , and be content to so let the 
 matter rest , though I be careful to send both the captain and the 
 ship 's doctor a handsome recompense for their united attention and 
 kindness . I have reason to believe , from the letter they write I , that 
 they be more than satisfied with the sum receive , and that I really 
 do some actual good with those few last fragment of my vanish 
 wealth . 

 on reach London , I interview the police concern the thief and 
 forger , Bentham and Ellis , and stop all proceeding against they . 

 " call I mad if you like , " - I say to the utterly confound chief of 
 the detective force - " I do not mind ! but let these rascal keep the 
 trash they have steal . it will be a curse to they , as it have be to 
 I ! it be devil 's money ! half of it be already go , be settle on 
 my late wife , - at her death , it revert by the same deed of settlement , 
 to any live member of her family , and it now belong to Lord Elton . I 
 have live to make a noble Earl rich , who be once bankrupt , - and I 
 doubt if he would lend I a ten - pound - note for the asking ! however , I 
 shall not ask he . the rest have go into the universal waste of 
 corruption and sham - let it stay there ! I shall never bother myself to 
 get it back . I prefer to be a free man . " 

 " but the bank , - the principle of the thing ! " exclaim the detective 
 with indignation . 

 I smile . 

 " exactly ! the principle of the thing have be perfectly carry out . a 
 man who have too much money create forger and thief about he , - he 
 can not expect to meet with honesty . let the bank prosecute if it 
 like , - I shall not . I be free ! - free to work for my living . what I earn 
 I shall enjoy , - what I inherit , I have learn to loathe ! " 

 with that I leave he , puzzle and irate , - and in a day or two the paper 
 be full of strange story concern I , and numerous lie as well . I 
 be call ' mad , ' ' unprincipled , ' ' thwart the end of justice , ' - and 
 sundry other name , while scurrilous civility know only to the penny 
 paragraphist be heap upon I by the score . to complete my entire 
 satisfaction , a man on the staff of one of the lead journal , dig out 
 my book from Mudie 's underground cellar , and ' slash ' it with a 
 bitterness and venom only excel by my own violence when anonymously 
 libel the work of Mavis Clare ! and the result be remarkable , - for 
 in a sudden wind of caprice , the public make a rush for my neglect 
 literary offspring , - they take it up , handle it tenderly , read it 
 lingeringly , find something in it that please they , and finally buy 
 it by thousand ! ... whereat the astute Morgeson , as virtuous publisher , 
 write to I in wonder and congratulation , enclose a cheque for a 
 hundred pound on ' royalty , ' and promise more in due course , should 
 the ' run ' continue . ah , the sweetness of that earn hundred pound ! I 
 feel a king of independence ! - realm of ambition and attainment open 
 out before I , - life smile upon I as it have never smile before . talk 
 of poverty ! I be rich ! - - rich with a hundred pound make out of my own 
 brain - labour , - and I envy no millionaire that ever flaunt his gold 
 beneath the sun ! I think of Mavis Clare , ... but dare not dwell too 
 long upon her gentle image . in time perhaps , ... when I have settle down 
 to fresh work , ... when I have form my life as I mean to form it , in 
 the habit of faith , firmness and unselfishness , I would write to she 
 and tell she all , - all , even to that dread insight into world unseen , 
 beyond the boundary of an unknown region of everlaste frozen snow ! 
 but now , - - now I resolve to stand alone , - fight my battle as a man 
 should fight , seek for neither help nor sympathy , and trust not in 
 Self , but God only . moreover I could not induce myself yet to look again 
 upon Willowsmere . the place be terror - haunted for I ; and though Lord 
 Elton with a curious condescension ,   see that it be to I he owe 
 the free gift of his former property   invite I to stay there , and 
 profess a certain lame regret for the ' heavy financial loss ' I have 
 sustain , I see in the tone of his epistle that he look upon I 
 somewhat in the light of a madman after my refusal to take up the matter 
 of my absconding solicitor , and that he would rather I stay away . and 
 I do stay away ; - and even when his marriage with Diana Chesney take 
 place with great pomp and splendour , I refuse his invitation to be 
 present . in the publish list of guest , however which appear in the 
 principal paper , I be scarcely surprised to read the name of ' Prince 
 Lucio Rimânez . ' 

 I now take a humble room and set to work on a new literary enterprise , 
 avoid everyone I have hitherto know , for be now almost a poor man , 
 I be aware that ' swagger society ' wish to blot I from its 
 visit - list . I live with my own sorrowful thought , - muse on many 
 thing , train myself to humility , obedience , and faith with 
 fortitude , - and day by day I do battle with the monster , Egotism , that 
 present itself in a thousand disguise at every turn in my own life as 
 well as in the life of other . I have to re - form my character , - to mould 
 the obstinate nature that rebel , and make its obstinacy serve for the 
 attainment of high object than world 's renown , - the task be 
 difficult , - but I gain ground a little with every fresh effort . 

 I have live for some month like this in bitter self - abasement , when all 
 the reading world be suddenly electrify by another book of Mavis 
 Clare 's . my lately favour first work be again forget and thrust 
 aside , - her , slat and scream at as usual by the criticaster , be 
 bear along to fame by a great wave of honest public praise and 
 enthusiasm . and I ? I rejoice ! - no long grudge or envious of her 
 sweet fame , I stand apart in spirit as it be , while the bright car of 
 her triumph go by , deck , not only with laurel , but with rose , - the 
 blossom of a people 's love and honour . with all my soul I reverence 
 her genius , - with all my heart I honour her pure womanliness ! and in 
 the very midst of her brilliant success , when all the world be talk 
 of she , she write to I , a simple little letter , as gracious as her own 
 fair name . 

  Dear Mr Tempest , 

  I hear by chance the other day that you have return to England . I 
  therefore send this note to the care of your publisher to express my 
  sincere delight in the success your clever book have now attain 
  after its interval of probation . I fancy the public appreciation of 
  your work must go far to console you for the great loss you have 
  have both in life and fortune , of which I will not here speak . when 
  you feel that you can bear to look again upon scene which I know 
  will be sure to rouse in your mind many sad and poignant memory , 
  will you come and see I ? 

  your friend 
  Mavis Clare . 

 a mist come before my eye , - I almost feel her gentle presence in my 
 room , - I see the tender look , the radiant smile , - the innocent yet 
 earnest joy in life and love of purity that emanate from the fair 
 personality of the sweetest woman I have ever know . she call herself 
 my friend ! - ... it be a privilege of which I feel myself unworthy ! I 
 fold the letter and put it near my heart to serve I as a talisman , 
 ... she , of all bright creature in the world surely know the secret of 
 happiness ! ... some - day , ... yes , ... I would go and see she , ... my 
 Mavis that sing in her garden of lily , - some day when I have force and 
 manliness enough to tell she all , - save my love for she ! for that , I 
 feel , must never be speak , - Self must resist Self , and clamour no more 
 at the gate of a forfeited Paradise ! some day I would see she , ... but 
 not for a long time , ... not till I have , in part at least , work out my 
 secret expiation . as I sit muse thus , a strange memory come into my 
 brain , ... I think I hear a voice resemble my own , which say - 

 " Lift , oh lift the shroud veil , spirit of the City Beautiful ! for I 
 feel I shall read in your eye the secret of happiness ! " 

 a cold shudder run through I , - I spring up erect , in a kind of horror . 
 lean at my open window I look down into the busy street below , - and 
 my thought revert to the strange thing I have see in the East , - the 
 face of the dead egyptian dancer , uncover to the light again after two 
 thousand year , - the face of Sibyl ! - then I remember the vision of the 
 " City Beautiful , " in which one face have remain veil , - the face I 
 most desire to see ! - - and I tremble more and more as my mind , despite 
 my will , begin to weave together link of the past and present , till 
 they seem grow into one and the same . be I again to be the prey of 
 evil force ? - - do some new danger threaten I ? - have I , by some 
 unconscious wicked wish invite new temptation to assail I ? 

 overcome by my sensation , I leave my work and go out into the fresh 
 air , ... it be late at night , - and the moon be shin . I feel for the 
 letter of Mavis , - it press against my heart , a shield against all 
 vileness . the room I occupy be in a house not far from Westminster 
 Abbey , and I instinctively bent my step towards that grey old shrine of 
 king and poet dead . the square around it be almost deserted , - - I 
 slacken my pace , stroll meditatively along the narrow pave way 
 that form a short cut across into Old Palace Yard , ... when suddenly a 
 Shadow cross my path , and look up , I come face to face 
 with - - Lucio ! the same as ever , - the perfect impersonation of perfect 
 manhood ! ... his countenance , pale , proud , sorrowful yet scornful , 
 flash upon I like a star ! - - he look full at I , and a questioning 
 smile rest on his lip ! 

 my heart almost stop beat , ... I draw a quick sharp breath , ... 
 again I feel for the letter of Mavis , and then , ... meet his gaze 
 fixedly and straightly in my turn , I move slowly on in silence . he 
 understand , - his eye flash with the jewel - like strange brilliancy I 
 know so well , and so well remember , - and draw back he stand aside 
 and - let I pass ! I continue my walk steadily , though daze and like 
 one in a dream , - till reach the shadowed side of the street opposite 
 the Houses of Parliament , I stop for a moment to recover my startled 
 sens . there again I see he ! - - the superb man 's form , - the Angel 's 
 face , - the haunting , splendid sorrowful eye ! - - he come with his usual 
 ease and grace of step into the full moonlight and pause , - apparently 
 wait for some one . for I ? - ah no ! - I keep the name of God upon my 
 lip , - I gather all the strength of faith within my soul , - and though 
 I be wholesomely afraid of Myself , I fear no other foe ! I linger 
 therefore - watching ; - and presently I see a few member of Parliament 
 walk singly and in group towards the House , - one or two greet the 
 tall dark figure as a friend and familiar , and other know he not . 
 still he wait on , ... and so do I. at last , just as Big Ben chime 
 the quarter to eleven , one man whom I instantly recognise as a 
 well - know Cabinet minister , come walk briskly towards the House , ... 
 then , and then only , he , whom I have know as Lucio , advanced smile . 
 greet the minister cordially , in that musical rich voice I know of 
 old , he take his arm , - and they both walk on slowly , talk 
 earnestly . I watch they till their figure recede in the moonlight , 
 ... the one tall , kingly and commanding , ... the other burly and broad , 
 and self - assertive in demeanour ; - I see they ascend the step , and 
 finally disappear within the House of England 's Imperial 
 Government , - Devil and Man , - together ! 
