A Romance of Two Worlds 

 A novel . 


 BY 

 MARIE CORELLI , 
 PROLOGUE . 


 we live in an age of universal inquiry , ergo of universal scepticism . 
 the prophecy of the poet , the dream of the philosopher and 
 scientist , be be daily realize - thing formerly consider mere 
 fairy - tale have become fact - yet , in spite of the marvel of learn 
 and science that be hourly accomplish among we , the attitude of 
 mankind be one of disbelief . " there be no God ! " cry one theorist ; " or 
 if there be one , I can obtain no proof of his existence ! " " there be 
 no creator ! " exclaim another . " the Universe be simply a rushing 
 together of atom . " " there can be no immortality , " assert a third . " we 
 be but dust , and to dust we shall return . " " what be call by 
 idealist the SOUL , " argue another , " be simply the vital principle 
 compose of heat and air , which escape from the body at death , and 
 mingle again with its native element . a candle when light emit flame ; 
 blow out the light , the flame vanish - where ? would it not be madness 
 to assert the flame immortal ? yet the soul , or vital principle of human 
 existence , be no more than the flame of a candle . " 

 if you propound to these theorist the eternal question WHY ? - why be 
 the world in existence ? why be there a universe ? why do we live ? why do 
 we think and plan ? why do we perish at the last ? - their grandiose reply 
 be , " because of the Law of Universal Necessity . " they can not explain 
 this mysterious Law to themselves , nor can they probe deep enough to 
 find the answer to a still more tremendous why - namely , WHY , be there a 
 Law of Universal Necessity ? - but they be satisfied with the result of 
 their reasoning , if not wholly , yet in part , and seldom try to search 
 beyond that great vague vast necessity , lest their finite brain should 
 reel into madness bad than death . recognize , therefore , that in 
 this cultivate age a wall of scepticism and cynicism be gradually 
 be build up by intellectual thinker of every nation against all 
 that treat of the Supernatural and Unseen , I be aware that my 
 narration of the event I have recently experience will be read with 
 incredulity . at a time when the great empire of the Christian Religion 
 be be assail , or politely ignore by government and public 
 speaker and teacher , I realize to the full extent how daring be 
 any attempt to prove , even by a plain history of strange occurrence 
 happen to one 's self , the actual existence of the Supernatural 
 around we ; and the absolute certainty of a future state of be , after 
 the passage through that brief soul - torpor in which the body perishe , 
 know to we as Death . 

 in the present narration , which I have purposely call a " romance , " I 
 do not expect to be believe , as I can only relate what I myself have 
 experience . I know that man and woman of to - day must have proof , or 
 what they be willing to accept as proof , before they will credit 
 anything that purport to be of a spiritual tendency ; - something 
 startling - some miracle of a stupendous nature , such as accord to 
 prophecy they be all unfit to receive . few will admit the subtle 
 influence and incontestable , though mysterious , authority exercise 
 upon their life by high intelligence than their own - intelligence 
 unseen , unknown , but feel . yes ! feel by the most careless , the most 
 cynical ; in the uncomfortable prescience of danger , the inner 
 foreboding of guilt - the moral and mental torture endure by those who 
 fight a protract battle to gain the hardly - win victory in themselves 
 of right over wrong - in the thousand and one sudden appeal make 
 without warn to that compass of a man 's life , Conscience - and in 
 those brilliant and startling impulse of generosity , bravery , and 
 self - sacrifice which carry we on , heedless of consequence , to the 
 performance of great and noble deed , whose fame make the whole world 
 one resounding echo of glory - deed that we wonder at ourselves even in 
 the performance of they - act of heroism in which mere life go for 
 nothing , and the Soul for a brief space be pre - eminent , obey blindly 
 the guide influence of a something akin to itself , yet high in the 
 realm of Thought . 

 there be no proof as to why such thing should be ; but that they be , 
 be indubitable . the miracle enact now be silent one , and be 
 work in the heart and mind of man alone . Unbelief be nearly supreme 
 in the world to - day . be an angel to descend from heaven in the middle 
 of a great square , the crowd would think he have get himself up on 
 pulley and wire , and would try to discover his apparatus . be he , in 
 wrath , to cast destruction upon they , and with fire blaze from his 
 wing , slay a thousand of they with the mere shaking of a pinion , those 
 who be leave alive would either say that a tremendous dynamite 
 explosion have occur , or that the square be build on an extinct 
 volcano which have suddenly break out into frightful activity . anything 
 rather than believe in angel - the nineteenth century protest against 
 the possibility of their existence . it see no miracle - it pooh - poohs 
 the very enthusiasm that might work they . 

 " give a positive sign , " it say ; " prove clearly that what you say be 
 true , and I , in spite of my Progress and Atom Theory , will believe . " 
 the answer to such a request be speak eighteen hundred year and more 
 ago . " a faithless and perverse generation asketh for a sign , and no 
 sign shall be give unto they . " 

 be I now to assert that a sign have be give to me - to I , as one 
 out of the thousand who demand it - such daring assurance on my part 
 would meet with the most strenuous opposition from all who peruse the 
 follow page ; each person who read have his own idea on all 
 subject , and naturally consider they to be the good if not the only 
 idea worth anything . therefore I wish it to be plainly understand that 
 in this book I personally advocate no new theory of either religion or 
 philosophy ; nor do I hold myself answerable for the opinion express 
 by any of my character . my aim throughout be to let fact speak for 
 themselves . if they seem strange , unreal , even impossible , I can only 
 say that the thing of the invisible world must always appear so to 
 those whose thought and desire be centre on this life only . 






 CHAPTER I. 

 AN ARTIST 'S STUDIO . 


 in the winter of 188- , I be afflict by a series of nervous ailment , 
 bring on by overwork and overworry . chief among these be a 
 protract and terrible insomnia , accompany by the utmost depression 
 of spirit and anxiety of mind . I become fill with the gloomiest 
 anticipation of evil ; and my system be string up by slow degree to 
 such a high tension of physical and mental excitement , that the 
 quiet and most soothing of friendly voice have no other effect upon 
 I than to jar and irritate . work be impossible ; music , my one 
 passion , intolerable ; book become wearisome to my sight ; and even a 
 short walk in the open air bring with it such lassitude and 
 exhaustion , that I soon grow to dislike the very thought of move out 
 of door . in such a condition of health , medical aid become necessary ; 
 and a skilful and amiable physician , Dr. R - - , of great repute in 
 nervous ailment , attend I for many week , with but slight success . 
 he be not to blame , poor man , for his failure to effect a cure . he have 
 only one way of treatment , and he apply it to all his patient with 
 more or less happy result . some die , some recover ; it be a lottery 
 on which my medical friend stake his reputation , and win . the patient 
 who die be never hear of more - those who recover sing the praise 
 of their physician everywhere , and send he gift of silver plate and 
 hamper of wine , to testify their gratitude . his popularity be very 
 great ; his skill consider marvellous ; and his inability to do I any 
 good arose , I must perforce imagine , out of some defect or hidden 
 obstinacy in my constitution , which be to he a new experience , and 
 for which he be unprepared . poor Dr. R - - ! how many bottle of your 
 tastily prepared and expensive medicine have I not swallow , in blind 
 confidence and blinder ignorance of the offence I thus commit 
 against all the principle of that nature within I , which , if leave to 
 itself , always heroically struggle to recover its own proper balance 
 and effect its own cure ; but which , if subject to the experimental 
 test of various poison or drug , often lose strength in the 
 unnatural contest and sink exhaust , perhaps never to rise with 
 actual vigour again . baffle in his attempt to remedy my ailment , Dr. 
 R - - at last resort to the usual plan adopt by all physician when 
 their medicine have no power . he recommend change of air and scene , 
 and urge my leave London , then dark with the fog of a dreary 
 winter , for the gaiety and sunshine and rose of the Riviera . the idea 
 be not unpleasant to I , and I determine to take the advice 
 proffer . hear of my intention , some american friend of mine , 
 Colonel Everard and his charming young wife , decide to accompany I , 
 share with I the expense of the journey and hotel accommodation . we 
 leave London all together on a damp foggy evening , when the cold be so 
 intense that it seem to bite the flesh like the sharp tooth of an 
 animal , and after two day ' rapid journey , during which I feel my 
 spirit gradually rise , and my gloomy foreboding vanish slowly 
 one by one , we arrive at Cannes , and put up at the Hotel de L - - . it 
 be a lovely place , and most beautifully situate ; the garden be a 
 perfect wilderness of rose in full bloom , and an avenue of 
 orange - tree begin to flower cast a delicate fragrance on the warm 
 delicious air . 

 Mrs. Everard be delighted . 

 " if you do not recover your health here , " she say half laughingly to 
 I on the second morning after our arrival , " I be afraid your case be 
 hopeless . what sunshine ! what a balmy wind ! it be enough to make a 
 cripple cast away his crutch and forget he be ever lame . do not   you 
 think so ? " 

 I smile in answer , but inwardly I sigh . beautiful as the scenery , 
 the air , and the general surrounding be , I could not disguise from 
 myself that the temporary exhilaration of my feeling , cause by the 
 novelty and excitement of my journey to Cannes , be slowly but surely 
 pass away . the terrible apathy , against which I have fight for so 
 many month , be again creep over I with its cruel and resistless 
 force . I do my good to struggle against it ; I walk , I ride , I 
 laugh and chat with Mrs. Everard and her husband , and force 
 myself into sociability with some of the visitor at the hotel , who 
 be dispose to show we friendly attention . I summon all my stock of 
 will - power to beat back the insidious physical and mental misery that 
 threaten to sap the very spring of my life ; and in some of these 
 effort I partially succeed . but it be at night that the terror of 
 my condition manifest themselves . then sleep forsook my eye ; a dull 
 throbbing weight of pain encircle my head like a crown of thorn ; 
 nervous terror shake I from head to foot ; fragment of my own musical 
 composition hum in my ear with weary persistence - fragment 
 that always leave I in a state of distressed conjecture ; for I never 
 could remember how they end , and I puzzle myself vainly over 
 crotchet and quaver that never would consent to arrange themselves in 
 any sort of finale . so the day go on ; for Colonel Everard and his 
 wife , those day be full of merriment , sight - seeing , and enjoyment . 
 for I , though outwardly I appear to share in the universal gaiety , 
 they be laden with increase despair and wretchedness ; for I begin 
 to lose hope of ever recover my once buoyant health and strength , 
 and , what be even bad , I seem to have utterly part with all 
 working ability . I be young , and up to within a few month life have 
 stretch brightly before I , with the prospect of a brilliant career . 
 and now what be I ? a wretched invalid - a burden to myself and to 
 other - a broken spar fling with other fragment of ship wreck life 
 on the great ocean of Time , there to be whirl away and forget . but 
 a rescue be approach ; a rescue sudden and marvellous , of which , in 
 my wild fancy , I have never dream . 

 stay in the same hotel with we be a young italian artist , Raffaello 
 Cellini by name . his picture be begin to attract a great deal of 
 notice , both in Paris and Rome : not only for their faultless drawing , 
 but for their wonderfully exquisite colouring . so deep and warm and 
 rich be the hue he transfer to his canvas , that other of his 
 art , less fortunate in the management of the palette , declare he must 
 have invent some foreign compound whereby he be enable to deepen 
 and brighten his colour for the time be ; but that the effect be 
 only temporary , and that his picture , expose to the air for some 
 eight or ten year , would fade away rapidly , leave only the trace of 
 an indistinct blur . other , more generous , congratulate he on have 
 discover the secret of the old master . in short , he be admire , 
 condemn , envy , and flatter , all in a breath ; while he himself , 
 be of a singularly serene and unruffled disposition , work away 
 incessantly , care little or nothing for the world 's praise or blame . 

 Cellini have a pretty suite of room in the Hotel de L - - , and my 
 friend Colonel and Mrs. Everard fraternize with he very warmly . he 
 be by no mean slow to respond to their overture of friendship , and 
 so it happen that his studio become a sort of lounge for we , where we 
 would meet to have tea , to chat , to look at the picture , or to discuss 
 our plan for future enjoyment . these visit to Cellini 's studio , 
 strange to say , have a remarkably soothing and calm effect upon my 
 suffering nerve . the lofty and elegant room , furnish with that 
 " admire disorder " and mixed luxuriousness peculiar to artist , with 
 its heavily droop velvet curtain , its glimpse of white marble 
 bust and broken column , its flash and fragrance of flower that 
 bloom in a tiny conservatory opening out from the studio and lead 
 to the garden , where a fountain bubble melodiously - all this please 
 I and give I a curious , yet most welcome , sense of absolute rest . 
 Cellini himself have a fascination for I , for exactly the same reason . 
 as an example of this , I remember escape from Mrs. Everard on one 
 occasion , and hurry to the most secluded part of the garden , in 
 order to walk up and down alone in an endeavour to calm an attack of 
 nervous agitation which have suddenly seize I . while thus pace about 
 in feverish restlessness , I see Cellini approach , his head bend as 
 if in thought , and his hand clasp behind his back . as he draw near 
 I , he raise his eye - they be clear and darkly brilliant - he 
 regard I steadfastly with a kindly smile . then lift his hat with 
 the graceful reverence peculiar to an Italian , he pass on , say no 
 word . but the effect of his momentary presence upon I be 
 remarkable - it be ELECTRIC . I be no long agitate . Calmed , soothe 
 and almost happy , I return to Mrs. Everard , and enter into her 
 plan for the day with so much alacrity that she be surprised and 
 delighted . 

 " if you go on like this , " she say , " you will be perfectly well in a 
 month . " 

 I be utterly unable to account for the remedial influence Raffaello 
 Cellini 's presence have upon I ; but such as it be I could not but be 
 grateful for the respite it give I from nervous suffering , and my now 
 daily visit to the artist 's studio be a pleasure and a privilege not 
 to be foregone . moreover , I be never tired of look at his picture . 
 his subject be all original , and some of they be very weird and 
 fantastic . one large picture particularly attract I . it be entitle 
 " Lords of our life and death . " surround by rolling mass of cloud , 
 some silver - crest , some shoot through with red flame , be depict the 
 World , as a globe half in light , half in shade . poise above it be a 
 great Angel , upon whose calm and noble face rest a mingled expression 
 of deep sorrow , yearn pity , and infinite regret . Tears seem to 
 glitter on the droop lash of this sweet yet stern Spirit ; and in 
 his strong right hand he hold a draw sword - the sword of 
 destruction - point forever downwards to the fated globe at his foot . 
 beneath this Angel and the world he dominate be darkness - utter 
 illimitable darkness . but above he the cloud be tear asunder , and 
 through a transparent veil of light golden mist , a face of surpass 
 beauty be see - a face on which youth , health , hope , love , and 
 ecstatic joy all shine with ineffable radiance . it be the 
 personification of life - not life as we know it , brief and full of 
 care - but Life Immortal and Love Triumphant . often and often I find 
 myself stand before this masterpiece of Cellini 's genius , gaze at 
 it , not only with admiration , but with a sense of actual comfort . one 
 afternoon , while rest in my favourite low chair opposite the 
 picture , I rouse myself from a reverie , and turn to the artist , who 
 be show some water - colour sketch to Mrs. Everard , I say abruptly : 

 " do you imagine that face of the Angel of Life , Signor Cellini , or have 
 you a model to copy from ? " 

 he look at I and smile . 

 " it be a moderately good portrait of an exist original , " he say . 

 " a woman 's face then , I suppose ? how very beautiful she must be ! " 

 " actual beauty be sexless , " he reply , and be silent . the expression 
 of his face have become abstracted and dreamy , and he turn over the 
 sketch for Mrs. Everard with an air which show his thought to be 
 far away from his occupation . 

 " and the Death Angel ? " I go on . " have you a model for that also ? " 

 this time a look of relief , almost of gladness , pass over his 
 feature . 

 " no indeed , " he answer with ready frankness ; " that be entirely my own 
 creation . " 

 I be about to compliment he on the grandeur and force of his poetical 
 fancy , when he stop I by a slight gesture of his hand . 

 " if you really admire the picture , " he say , " pray do not say so . if it 
 be in truth a work of art , let it speak to you as art only , and spare 
 the poor workman who have call it into existence the shame of have 
 to confess that it be not above human praise . the only true criticism 
 of high art be silence - silence as grand as heaven itself . " 

 he speak with energy , and his dark eye flash . Amy   Mrs. Everard 
 look at he curiously . 

 " say now ! " she exclaim , with a ring laugh , " be not   you a little 
 bit eccentric , signor ? you talk like a long - haired prophet ! I never meet 
 an artist before who could not   stand praise ; it be generally a matter of 
 wonder to I to notice how much of that intoxicate sweet they can 
 swallow without reel . but you be an exception , I must admit . I 
 congratulate you ! " 

 Cellini bow gaily in response to the half - friendly , half - mocking 
 curtsey she give he , and , turn to I again , say : 

 " I have a favour to ask of you , mademoiselle . will you sit to I for 
 your portrait ? " 

 " I ! " I exclaim , with astonishment . " Signor Cellini , I can not imagine 
 why you should wish so to waste your valuable time . there be nothing in 
 my poor physiognomy worthy of your brief attention . " 

 " you must pardon I , mademoiselle , " he reply gravely , " if I presume 
 to differ from you . I be exceedingly anxious to transfer your feature 
 to my canvas . I be aware that you be not in strong health , and that 
 your face have not that roundness and colour formerly habitual to it . 
 but I be not an admirer of the milkmaid type of beauty . everywhere I 
 seek for intelligence , for thought , for inward refinement - in short , 
 mademoiselle , you have the face of one whom the inner soul consume , 
 and , as such , may I plead again with you to give I a little of your 
 spare time ? you will not regret it , I assure you . " 

 these last word be utter in a low tone and with singular 
 impressiveness . I rise from my seat and look at he steadily ; he 
 return I glance for glance , a strange thrill run through I , 
 follow by that inexplicable sensation of absolute calm that I have 
 before experienced . I smile - I could , not help smile . 

 " I will come to - morrow , " I say . 

 " a thousand thank , mademoiselle ! can you be here at noon ? " 

 I look inquiringly at Amy , who clap her hand with delighted 
 enthusiasm . 

 " of course ! any time you like , signor . we will arrange our excursion 
 so that they shall not interfere with the sitting . it will be most 
 interesting to watch the picture grow day by day . what will you call 
 it , signor ? by some fancy title ? " 

 " it will depend on its appearance when complete , " he reply , as he 
 throw open the door of the studio and bow we out with his usual 
 ceremonious politeness . 

 " Au revoir , madame ! a demain , mademoiselle ! " and the violet velvet 
 curtain of the portiere fall softly behind we as we make our exit . 

 " be there not something strange about that young man ? " say Mrs. 
 Everard , as we walk through the long gallery of the Hotel de L - - 
 back to our own room . " something fiendish or angelic , or a little of 
 both quality mix up ? " 

 " I think he be what people term PECULIAR , when they fail to understand 
 the poetical vagary of genius , " I reply . " he be certainly very 
 uncommon . " 

 " well ! " continue my friend meditatively , as she contemplate she 
 pretty mignonne face and graceful figure in a long mirror place 
 attractively in a corner of the hall through which we be pass ; 
 " all I can say be that I would not   let he paint MY portrait if he be 
 to ask ever so ! I should be scared to death . I wonder you , be so 
 nervous , be not afraid of he . " 

 " I think you like he , " I say . 

 " so I do . so do my husband . he be awfully handsome and clever , and all 
 that - but his conversation ! there now , my dear , you must own he be 
 slightly queer . why , who but a lunatic would say that the only 
 criticism of art be silence ? be not   that utter rubbish ? " 

 " the only true criticism , " I correct she gently . 

 " well , it be all the same . how can there be any criticism at all in 
 silence ? accord to his idea when we admire anything very much we 
 ought to go round with long face and gag on our mouth . that would be 
 entirely ridiculous ! and what be that dreadful thing he say to you ? " 

 " I do not   quite understand you , " I answer ; " I can not remember his 
 say anything dreadful . " 

 " oh , I have it now , " continue Amy with rapidity ; " it be awful ! he 
 say you have the face of one WHOM the SOUL CONSUMES . you know that be 
 most horribly mystical ! and when he say it he look - ghastly ! what 
 do he mean by it , I wonder ? " 

 I make no answer ; but I think I know . I change the conversation as 
 soon as possible , and my volatile american friend be soon absorb in 
 a discussion on dress and jewellery . that night be a blessed one for 
 I ; I be free from all suffering , and sleep as calmly as a child , 
 while in my dream the face of Cellini 's " Angel of life " smile at I , 
 and seem to suggest peace . 




 CHAPTER II . 

 the MYSTERIOUS POTION . 


 the next day , punctually at noon , accord to my promise , I enter 
 the studio . I be alone , for Amy , after some qualm of conscience 
 respecting chaperonage , propriety , and Mrs. Grundy , have yield to my 
 entreaty and go for a drive with some friend . in spite of the 
 fear she begin to entertain concern the mephistophelian character 
 of Raffaello Cellini , there be one thing of which both she and I feel 
 morally certain : namely , that no truer or more honourable gentleman 
 than he ever walk on the earth . under his protection the lovely 
 and lonely woman that ever live would have be perfectly safe - as 
 safe as though she be shut up , like the princess in the fairy - tale , 
 in a brazen tower , of which only an undiscoverable serpent possess 
 the key . when I arrive , the room be desert , save for the presence 
 of a magnificent Newfoundland dog , who , as I enter , rise , and shake 
 his shaggy body , sit down before I and offer I his huge paw , 
 wag his tail in the most friendly manner all the while , I at once 
 respond to his cordial greeting , and as I stroke his noble head , I 
 wonder where the animal have come from ; for though - we have visit 
 Signor Cellini 's studio every day , there have be no sign or mention of 
 this stately , brown - eye , four - footed companion . I seat myself , and 
 the dog immediately lie down at my foot , every now and then look up 
 at I with an affectionate glance and a renew wagging of his tail . 
 Glancing round the well - know room , I notice that the picture I 
 admire so much be veil by a curtain of oriental stuff , in which 
 be embroider thread of gold mingle with silk of various 
 brilliant hue . on the work easel be a large square canvas , already 
 prepare , as I suppose , for my feature to be trace thereon . it be 
 an exceedingly warm morning , and though the window as well as the 
 glass door of the conservatory be wide open , I find the air of the 
 studio very oppressive . I perceive on the table a finely - wrought 
 decanter of venetian glass , in which clear water sparkle temptingly . 
 rise from my chair , I take an antique silver goblet from the 
 mantelpiece , fill it with the cool fluid , and be about to drink , 
 when the cup be suddenly snatch from my hand , and the voice of 
 Cellini , change from its usual softness to a tone both imperious and 
 commanding , startle I . 

 " do not drink that , " he say ; " you must not ! you dare not ! I forbid 
 you ! " 

 I look up at he in mute astonishment . his face be very pale , and 
 his large dark eye shine with suppress excitement . slowly my 
 self - possession return to I , and I say calmly : 

 " you forbid I , signor ? surely you forget yourself . what harm have I 
 do in help myself to a simple glass of water in your studio ? you 
 be not usually so inhospitable . " 

 while I speak his manner change , the colour return to his face , and 
 his eye soften - he smile . 

 " forgive I , mademoiselle , for my brusquerie . it be true I forget 
 myself for a moment . but you be in danger , and - - " 

 " in danger ! " I exclaim incredulously . 

 " yes , mademoiselle . this , " and he hold up the venetian decanter to the 
 light , " be not water simply . if you will observe it now with the 
 sunshine beat full against it , I think you will perceive 
 peculiarity in it that will assure you of my veracity . " 

 I look as he bid I , and see , to my surprise , that the fluid be 
 never actually still for a second . a sort of internal bubbling seem 
 to work in its centre , and curious speck and line of crimson and gold 
 flash through it from time to time . 

 " what be it ? " I ask ; add with a half - smile , " be you the possessor 
 of a speciman of the far - fame Aqua Tofana ? " 

 Cellini place the decanter carefully on a shelf , and I notice that he 
 choose a particular spot for it , where the ray of the sun could fall 
 perpendicularly upon the vessel contain it . then turn to I , he 
 reply : 

 " Aqua Tofana , mademoiselle , be a deadly poison , know to the ancient 
 and also to many learn chemist of our day . it be a clear and 
 colourless liquid , but it be absolutely still - as still as a stagnant 
 pool . what I have just show you be not poison , but quite the reverse . 
 I will prove this to you at once . " and take a tiny liqueur glass from 
 a side table , he fill it with the strange fluid and drink it off , 
 carefully replace the stopper in the decanter . 

 " but , Signor Cellini , " I urge , " if it be so harmless , why do you 
 forbid my tasting it ? why do you say there be danger for I when I 
 be about to drink it ? " 

 " because , mademoiselle , for you it would be dangerous . your health be 
 weak , your nerve unstrung . that elixir be a powerful vivifying tonic , 
 act with great rapidity on the entire system , and rush through 
 the vein with the swiftness of ELECTRICITY . I be accustomed to it ; it 
 be my daily medicine . but I be bring to it by slow , and almost 
 imperceptible degree . a single teaspoonful of that fluid , 
 mademoiselle , administer to anyone not prepared to receive it , would 
 be instant death , though its actual use be to vivify and strengthen 
 human life . you understand now why I say you be in danger ? " 

 " I understand , " I reply , though in sober truth I be mystify and 
 puzzle . 

 " and you forgive my seem rudeness ? " 

 " oh , certainly ! but you have arouse my curiosity . I should like to 
 know more about this strange medicine of your . " 

 " you shall know more if you wish , " say Cellini , his usual equable 
 humour and good spirit now quite restore . " you shall know everything ; 
 but not to - day . we have too little time . I have not yet commence your 
 picture . and I forget - you be thirsty , and I be , as you say , 
 inhospitable . you must permit I to repair my fault . " 

 and with a courteous salute he leave the room , to return almost 
 immediately with a tumbler full of some fragrant , golden - colour 
 liquid , in which lump of ice glitter refreshingly . a few loose 
 rose - leaf be scatter on the top of this dainty - look beverage . 

 " you may enjoy this without fear , " say he , smile ; " it will do you 
 good . it be an eastern wine , unknown to trade , and therefore untampered 
 with . I see you be look at the rose - leaf on the surface . that be 
 a persian custom , and I think a pretty one . they float away from your 
 lip in the action of drinking , and therefore they be no obstacle . " 

 I taste the wine and find it delicious , soft and mellow as summer 
 moonlight . while I sip it the big Newfoundland , who have stretch 
 himself in a couchant posture on the hearth - rug ever since Cellini have 
 first enter the room , rise and walk majestically to my side and 
 rub his head caressingly against the fold of my dress . 

 " Leo have make friend with you , I see , " say Cellini . " you should take 
 that as a great compliment , for he be most particular in his choice of 
 acquaintance , and most steadfast when he have once make up his mind . he 
 have more decision of character than many a statesman . " 

 " how be it we have never see he before ? " I inquire . " you never tell 
 we you have such a splendid companion . " 

 " I be not his master , " reply the artist . " he only favour I with a 
 visit occasionally . he arrive from Paris last night , and come straight 
 here , sure of his welcome . he do not confide his plan to I , but I 
 suppose he will return to his home when he think it advisable . he 
 know his own business well . " 

 I laugh . 

 " what a clever dog ! do he journey on foot , or do he take the train ? " 

 " I believe he generally patronize the railway . all the official know 
 he , and he get into the guard 's van as a matter of course . sometimes 
 he will alight at a station en route , and walk the rest of the way . but 
 if he be lazily incline , he do not stir till the train reach its 
 destination . at the end of every six month or so , the railway 
 authority send the bill of Leo 's journeying in to his master , when 
 it be always settle without difficulty . " 

 " and who be his master ? " I venture to ask . 

 Cellini 's face grow serious and absorb , and his eye be full of 
 grave contemplation as he answer : 

 " his master , mademoiselle , be MY master - one who among man , be 
 supremely intelligent ; among teacher , absolutely unselfish ; among 
 thinker , purely impersonal ; among friend , inflexibly faithful . to he 
 I owe everything - even life itself . for he no sacrifice , no extreme 
 devotion would be too great , could I hope thereby to show my gratitude . 
 but he be as far above human thank or human reward as the sun be 
 above the sea . not here , not now , dare I say to he , MY FRIEND , BEHOLD 
 how MUCH I love THEE ! such language would be all too poor and 
 unmeaning ; but hereafter - who know ? - - " and he break off abruptly 
 with a half - sigh . then , as if force himself to change the tenor of 
 his thought , he continue in a kind tone : " but , mademoiselle , I be 
 waste your time , and be take no advantage of the favour you have 
 show I by your presence to - day . will you seat yourself here ? " and he 
 place an elaborately carve oaken settee in one corner of the studio , 
 opposite his own easel . " I should be sorry to fatigue you at all , " he 
 go on ; " do you care for read ? " 

 I answer eagerly in the affirmative , and he hand I a volume bind 
 in curiously emboss leather , and ornament with silver clasp . it 
 be entitle " letter of a Dead Musician . " 

 " you will find clear gem of thought , passion , and feel in this 
 book , " say Cellini ; " and be a musician yourself , you will know how 
 to appreciate they . the writer be one of those genius whose work the 
 world repay with ridicule and contempt . there be no fate more 
 enviable ! " 

 I look at the artist with some surprise as I take the volume he 
 recommend , and seat myself in the position he indicate ; and while 
 he busy himself in arrange the velvet curtain behind I as a 
 background , I say : 

 " do you really consider it enviable , Signor Cellini , to receive the 
 world 's ridicule and contempt ? " 

 " I do indeed , " he reply , ' since it be a certain proof that the world 
 do not understand you . to achieve something that be above human 
 comprehension , that be greatness . to have the serene sublimity of the 
 God - man Christ , and consent to be crucify by a gibe world that be 
 fat to be afterwards civilized and dominate by his teaching , what 
 can be more glorious ? to have the magnificent versatility of a 
 Shakespeare , who be scarcely recognize in his own day , but whose 
 gift be so vast and various that the silly multitude wrangle over 
 his very identity and the authenticity of his play to this hour - what 
 can be more triumphant ? to know that one 's own soul can , if 
 strengthen and encourage by the force of will , rise to a supreme 
 altitude of power - be not that sufficient to compensate for the little 
 whine cry of the common herd of man and woman who have forget 
 whether they ever have a spiritual spark in they , and who , strain up 
 to see the light of genius that burn too fiercely for their 
 earth - dim eye , exclaim : ' we see nothing , therefore there can be 
 nothing . ' ah , mademoiselle , the knowledge of one 's own inner 
 Self - Existence be a knowledge surpass all the marvel of art and 
 science ! " 

 Cellini speak with enthusiasm , and his countenance seem illumined by 
 the eloquence that warm his speech . I listen with a sort of dreamy 
 satisfaction ; the visual sensation of utter rest that I always 
 experience in this man 's presence be upon I , and I watch he with 
 interest as he draw with quick and facile touch the outline of my 
 feature on his canvas . 

 gradually he become more and more absorb in his work ; he glance at 
 I from time to time , but do not speak , and his pencil work rapidly . 
 I turn over the " letter of a Dead Musician " with some curiosity . 
 several passage strike I as be remarkable for their originality 
 and depth of thought ; but what particularly impress I as I read on , 
 be the tone of absolute joy and contentment that seem to light up 
 every page . there be no wailing over disappointed ambition , no 
 regret for the past , no complaint , no criticism , no word for or 
 against the brother of his art ; everything be treat from a lofty 
 standpoint of splendid equality , save when the writer speak of himself , 
 and then he become the humblest of the humble , yet never abject , and 
 always happy . 

 " O music ! " he write , " Music , thou Sweetest Spirit of all that serve 
 God , what have I do that thou shouldst so often visit I ? it be not 
 well , o thou Lofty and Divine One , that thou shouldst stoop so low as 
 to console he who be the unworthi of all thy servant . for I be too 
 feeble to tell the world how soft be the sound of thy rustling pinion , 
 how tender be the sigh breath of thy lip , how beyond all thing 
 glorious be the vibration of thy light whisper ! remain aloft , thou 
 Choicest Essence of the Creator 's voice , remain in that pure and 
 cloudless ether , where alone thou art fit to dwell . my touch must 
 desecrate thee , my voice affright thee . suffice it to thy servant , O 
 Beloved , to dream of thee and die ! " 

 Meeting Cellini 's glance as I finish read these line , I ask : 

 " do you know the author of this book , signor ? " 

 " I know he well , " he reply ; " he be one of the gentle soul that 
 ever dwelt in human clay . as ethereal in his music as John Keats in his 
 poetry , he be one of those creature bear of dream and rapture that 
 rarely visit this planet . happy fellow ! what a death be his ! " 

 " how do he die ? " I inquire . 

 " he be play the organ in one of the great church of Rome on the 
 day of the Feast of the Virgin . a choir of finely train voice sing 
 to his accompaniment his own glorious setting of the " Regina Coeli . " 
 the music be wonderful , startling , triumphant - ever rise in power 
 and majesty to a magnificent finale , when suddenly a slight crash be 
 hear ; the organ cease abruptly , the singer break off . the musician 
 be dead . he have fall forward on the key of the instrument , and when 
 they raise he , his face be fair than the face of any sculpture 
 angel , so serene be its expression , so rapt be its smile . no one 
 could tell exactly the cause of his death - he have always be 
 remarkably strong and healthy . everyone say it be heart - disease - it 
 be the usual reason assign by medical savant for these sudden 
 departure out of the world . his loss be regret by all , save myself 
 and one other who love he . we rejoice , and still do rejoice , at his 
 release . " 

 I speculate vaguely on the meaning of these last word , but I feel 
 disinclined to ask any more question , and Cellini , probably see 
 this , work on at his sketch without further converse . my eye be 
 grow heavy , and the print word in the " Dead Musician 's letter " 
 dance before my sight like active little black demon with thin wave 
 arm and leg . a curious yet not unpleasant drowsiness steal over I , 
 in which I hear the humming of the bee at the open window , the 
 singing of the bird , and the voice of people in the hotel garden , 
 all unite in one continuous murmur that seem a long way off . I see 
 the sunshine and the shadow - I see the majestic Leo stretch full 
 length near the easel , and the slight supple form of Raffaello Cellini 
 stand out in bold outline against the light ; yet all seem shift 
 and mingle strangely into a sort of wide radiance in which there be 
 nothing but vary tint of colour . and could it have be my fancy , 
 or do I actually see the curtain fall gradually away from my favourite 
 picture , just enough for the face of the " Angel of Life " to be see 
 smile down upon I ? I rub my eye violently , and start to my 
 foot at the sound of the artist 's voice . 

 " I have try your patience enough for to - day , " he say , and his word 
 sound muffle , as though they be be speak through , a thick 
 wall . " you can leave I now if you like . " 

 I stand before he mechanically , still hold the book he have lend I 
 clasp in my hand . irresolutely I raise my eye towards the " Lords of 
 our life and death . " it be closely veil . I have then experience an 
 optical illusion . I force myself to speak - to smile - to put back the 
 novel sensation that be overwhelm I . 

 " I think , " I say , and I hear myself speak as though I be somebody 
 else at a great distance off - " I think , Signor Cellini , your eastern 
 wine have be too potent for I . my head be quite heavy , and I feel 
 daze . " 

 " it be mere fatigue and the heat of the day , " he reply quietly . " I be 
 sure you be not too dazed , as you call it , to see your favourite 
 picture , be you ? " 

 I tremble . be not that picture veil ? I look - there be no curtain 
 at all , and the face of the two Angels shine out of the canvas with 
 intense brilliancy ! strange to say , I feel no surprise at this 
 circumstance , which , have it occur a moment previously , would have 
 unquestionably astonish and perhaps alarm I . the mistiness of my 
 brain suddenly clear ; I see everything plainly ; I hear distinctly ; 
 and when I speak , the tone of my voice sound as full and ringing as 
 it have previously seem low and muffled . I gaze steadfastly at the 
 painting , and reply , half smile : 

 " I should be indeed ' far go , ' as the saying be , if I could not see 
 that , signor ! it be truly your masterpiece . why have you never 
 exhibit it ? " 

 " can you ask that ? " he say with impressive emphasis , at the same time 
 draw nearer and fix upon I the penetrate glance of his dark 
 fathomless eye . it then seem to I that some great inner force 
 compel I to answer this half - inquiry , in word of which I have take 
 no previous thought , and which , as I utter they , convey no special 
 meaning to my own ear . 

 " of course , " I say slowly , as if I be repeat a lesson , " you would 
 not so betray the high trust commit to your charge . " 

 " well say ! " reply Cellini ; " you be fatigued , mademoiselle . Au 
 revoir ! till to - morrow ! " and , throw open the door of his studio , he 
 stand aside for I to pass out . I look at he inquiringly . 

 " must I come at the same time to - morrow ? " I ask . 

 " if you please . " 

 I pass my hand across my forehead perplexedly , I feel I have something 
 else to say before I leave he . he wait patiently , hold back with 
 one hand the curtain of the portiere . 

 " I think I have a parting word to give you , " I say at last , meet his 
 gaze frankly ; " but I seem to have forget what it be . " Cellini 
 smile gravely . 

 " do not trouble to think about it , mademoiselle . I be unworthy the 
 effort on your part . " 

 a flash of vivid light cross my eye for a second , and I exclaim 
 eagerly : 

 " I remember now ! it be ' Dieu vous garde ' signor ! " 

 he bend his head reverentially . 

 " merci mille fois , mademoiselle ! Dieu vous garde - vous aussi . Au 
 revoir . " 

 and clasp my hand with a light yet friendly pressure , he close the 
 door of his room behind I . once alone in the passage , the sense of 
 high elation and contentment that have just possess I begin gradually 
 to decrease . I have not become actually dispirit , but a languid 
 feeling of weariness oppress I , and my limb ache as though I have 
 walk incessantly for many mile . I go straight to my own room . I 
 consult my watch ; it be half - past one , the hour at which the hotel 
 luncheon be usually serve . Mrs. Everard have evidently not return 
 from her drive . I do not care to attend the table d'hote alone ; 
 besides , I have no inclination to eat . I draw down the window - blind to 
 shut out the brilliancy of the beautiful southern sunlight , and 
 throw myself on my bed I determine to rest quietly till Amy come 
 back . I have bring the " letter of a Dead Musician " away with I from 
 Cellini 's studio , and I begin to read , intend to keep myself awake 
 by this mean . but I find I could not fix my attention on the page , 
 nor could I think at all connectedly . little by little my eyelid 
 close ; the book drop from my nerveless hand ; and in a few minute I 
 be in a deep and tranquil slumber . 




 CHAPTER III . 

 three vision . 


 rose , rose ! an interminable chain of these royal blossom , red and 
 white , wreathe by the radiant finger of small rainbow - wing 
 creature as airy as moonlight mist , as delicate as thistledown ! they 
 cluster round I with smile face and eager eye ; they place the end 
 of their rose - garland in my hand , and whisper , " follow ! " gladly I obey , 
 and hasten onward . guide myself by the fragrant chain I hold , I pass 
 through a labyrinth of tree , whose luxuriant branch quiver with the 
 flight and song of bird . then come a sound of water ; the riotous 
 rushing of a torrent unchecked , that leap sheer down from rock a 
 thousand foot high , thunder forth the praise of its own beauty as it 
 toss in the air triumphant crown of silver spray . how the living 
 diamond within it shift , and change , and sparkle ! fain would I linger 
 to watch this magnificence ; but the coil of rose still unwind before 
 I , and the fairy voice still cry , " follow ! " I press on . the tree 
 grow thick ; the song of the bird cease ; the light around I grow 
 pale and subdue . in the far distance I see a golden crescent that 
 seem suspend by some invisible thread in the air . be it the young 
 moon ? no ; for as I gaze it break apart into a thousand point of vivid 
 light like wander star . these meet ; they blaze into letter of 
 fire . I strain my dazzled eye to spell out their meaning . they form 
 one word - HELIOBAS . I read it . I utter it aloud . the rose - chain break 
 at my foot , and disappear . the fairy voice die away on my ear . there 
 be utter silence , utter darkness , - save where that one name write 
 itself in burn gold on the blackness of the heaven . 

          

 the interior of a vast cathedral be open before my gaze . the lofty 
 white marble column support a vaulted roof paint in fresco , from 
 which be suspend a thousand lamp that emit a mild and steady 
 effulgence . the great altar be illuminate ; the priest , in glitter 
 raiment , pace slowly to and fro . the large voice of the organ , 
 murmur to itself awhile , break forth in a shout of melody ; and a 
 boy 's clear , sonorous treble tone pierce the incense - laden air . 
 " Credo ! " - and the silver , trumpet - like note fall from the immense 
 height of the building like a bell ring in a pure atmosphere - " Credo 
 in unum Deum ; Patrem omni - potentum , factorem coeli et terrae , 
 visibilium omnium et invisibilium . " 

 the cathedral echo with answer voice ; and , involuntarily 
 kneeling , I follow the word of the grand chant . I hear the music 
 slacken ; the note of rejoice change to a sobbing and remorseful 
 wail ; the organ shudder like a forest of pine in a temp , 
 " Crucifixus etiam pro nobis ; passus et sepultus est . " a darkness grow 
 up around I ; my sens swim . the music altogether cease ; but a 
 brilliant radiance stream through a side - door of the church , and 
 twenty maiden , clothe in white and crown with myrtle , pace two by 
 two , approach I . they gaze at I with joyous eye . " art thou also one 
 of we ? " they murmur ; then they pass onward to the altar , where again 
 the light be glimmer . I watch they with eager interest ; I hear 
 they uplift their fresh young voice in prayer and praise . one of they , 
 whose deep blue eye be full of lustrous tenderness , leave she 
 companion , and softly approach I . she hold a pencil and tablet in 
 her hand . 

 " Write ! " she say , in a thrilling whisper ; " and write quickly ! for 
 whatsoever thou shalt now inscribe be the clue to thy destiny . " 

 I obey she mechanically , impel not by my own will , but by some 
 unknown powerful force act within and around I . I trace upon the 
 tablet one word only ; it be a name that startle I even while I myself 
 write it down - HELIOBAS . Scarcely have I write it when a thick white 
 cloud veil the cathedral from my sight ; the fair maiden vanishe , and 
 all be again still . 

          

 I be listen to the accent of a grave melodious voice , which , from 
 its slow and measured tone , would seem to be in the action of reading 
 or recite aloud . I see a small room sparely furnish , and at a table 
 cover with book and manuscript be seat a man of noble feature 
 and command presence . he be in the full prime of life ; his dark hair 
 have no thread of silver to mar its luxuriance ; his face be unwrinkle ; 
 his forehead unfurrowe by care ; his eye , deeply sink beneath his 
 shelving brow , be of a singularly clear and penetrate blue , with an 
 absorb and watchful look in they , like the eye of one accustom to 
 gaze far out at sea . his hand rest on the open page of a massive 
 volume ; he be read , and his expression be intent and earnest - as if 
 he be litter his own thought aloud , with the conviction and force 
 of an orator who know the truth of which he speak : 

 " the Universe be uphold solely by the Law of Love . a majestic invisible 
 Protectorate govern the wind , the tide , the incoming and outgoing of 
 the season , the birth of the flower , the growth of forest , the 
 outpouring of the sunlight , the silent glittering of the star . a wide 
 illimitable Beneficence embrace all creation . a vast Eternal Pity 
 exist for all sorrow , all sin . he who first swing the planet in the 
 air , and bid they revolve till Time shall be no more - he , the 
 fountain - Head of Absolute Perfection , be no deaf , blind , capricious , or 
 remorseless be . to he the death of the small singing - bird be as 
 great or as little as the death of a world 's emperor . for he the 
 timeless withering of an innocent flower be as pitiful as the decay of 
 a mighty nation . an infant 's first prayer to he be hear with as 
 tender a patience as the united petition of thousand of worshipper . 
 for in everything and around everything , from the sun to a grain of 
 sand , he hath a portion , small or great , of his own most perfect 
 Existence . should he hate his creation , he must perforce hate himself ; 
 and that Love should hate Love be an impossibility . therefore he love 
 all his work ; and as Love , to be perfect , must contain Pity , 
 Forgiveness , and Forbearance , so doth he pity , forgive , and forbear . 
 shall a mere man deny himself for the sake of his child or friend ? and 
 shall the Infinite Love refuse to sacrifice itself - yea , even to as 
 immense a humility as its greatness be immeasurable ? shall we deny 
 those merciful attribute to God which we acknowledge in his creature , 
 man ? o my Soul , rejoice that thou hast pierce the veil of the Beyond ; 
 that thou hast see and know the Truth ! that to thee be make clear the 
 Reason of Life , and the Recompense of Death : yet while rejoice , 
 grieve that thou art not fat to draw more than a few soul to the 
 comfort thou hast thyself attain ! " 

 fascinate by the speaker 's voice and countenance , I listen , strain 
 my ear to catch every word that fall from his lip . he rise ; he 
 stand erect ; he stretch out his hand as though in solemn entreaty . 

 " Azul ! " he exclaim . " Messenger of my fate ; thou who art a guide 
 spirit of the element , thou who ridest the storm - cloud and sitt 
 throne on the edge of the lightning ! by that electric spark within I , 
 of which thou art the Twin Flame , I ask of thee to send I this one 
 more poor human soul ; let I change its unrestfulness into repose , its 
 hesitation to certainty , its weakness to strength , its weary 
 imprisonment to the light of liberty ! Azul ! " 

 his voice cease , his extended hand fall slowly , and gradually , 
 gradually he turn his whole figure towards I . he face I - his 
 intense eye burn through I - his strange yet tender smile absorb I . 
 yet I be full of unreasone terror ; I tremble - I strive to turn away 
 from that searching and magnetic gaze . his deep , melodious tone again 
 ring softly on the silence . he address I . 

 " fear thou I , my child ? be I not thy friend ? know thou not the 
 name of HELIOBAS ? " 

 at this word I start and gasp for breath ; I would shriek , but can not , 
 for a heavy hand seem to close my mouth , and an immense weight press 
 I down . I struggle violently with this unseen Power - little by little 
 I gain the advantage . one effort more ! I win the victory - I wake ! 

          

 " sake alive ! " say a familiar voice ; " you have have a spell of sleep ! I 
 get home about two , nearly starve , and I find you here curl up ' in 
 a rosy infant slumber , ' as the song say . so I hunt up the Colonel 
 and have lunch , for it seem a sin to disturb you . it be just strike 
 four . shall we have some tea up here ? " 

 I look at Mrs. Everard , and smile assent . so I have be sleep for 
 two hour and a half , and I have evidently be dream all the time ; 
 but my dream have be as vivid as reality . I feel still rather 
 drowsy , but I be thoroughly rest and in a state of delicious 
 tranquillity . my friend ring the bell for the tea , and then turn 
 round and survey I with a sort of wonder . 

 " what have you do to yourself , child ? " she say at last , approach 
 the bed where I lay , and star fixedly at I . 

 " what do you mean ? " 

 " why , you look a different creature . when I leave you this morning you 
 be pale and haggard , a sort of die - away delicate invalid ; now your 
 eye be bright ; and your cheek have quite a lovely colour in they ; 
 your lip , too , be the right tint . but perhaps , " and here she look 
 alarmed - " perhaps you have   get the fever ? " 

 " I do not   think so , " I say amusedly , and I stretch out my hand for 
 she to feel . 

 " no , you have not , " she continue , evidently reassure ; " your palm be 
 moist and cool , and your pulse be regular . well , you look spry , anyhow . 
 I should not   wonder if you make up your mind to have a dance to - night . " 

 " Dance ? " I query . " what dance , and where ? " 

 " well , Madame Didier , that jolly little furbelowe Frenchwoman with 
 whom I be drive just now , have get up a regular party to - night - " 

 " Hans Breitmann gib a barty ? " I interpose , with a mock solemn air of 
 inquiry . 

 Amy laugh . 

 " well , yes , it may be that kind of thing , for all I know to the 
 contrary . anyhow , she be hire the band and order a right - down elegant 
 supper . half the folk in the hotel be go , and a lot of outsider 
 have get invitation . she ask if we could not   come - myself , the 
 Colonel , and you . I say I could answer for myself and the Colonel , but 
 not for you , as you be an invalid . but if you keep on look as you 
 do at present , no one will believe that there be anything the matter 
 with you . - Tea , Alphonse ! " 

 this to a polite waiter , who be our special attendant , and who just 
 then knock at the door to know " madame 's " order . 

 utterly disbelieve what my friend say in regard to my improved 
 appearance , I rise from the bed and go to the dressing - table to look 
 in the mirror and judge for myself . I almost recoil from my own 
 reflection , so great be my surprise . the heavy mark under my eye , 
 the line of pain that have be for month deepen in my forehead , 
 the plaintive droop of the mouth that have give I such an air of 
 ill - health and anxiety - all be go as if by magic . I see a 
 rose - tint complexion , a pair of laugh , lustrous eye , and , 
 altogether , such a happy , mirthful young face smile back at I , that I 
 half doubt whether it be indeed myself I see . 

 " there now ! " cry Amy in triumph , watch I as I push my 
 cluster hair from my brow , and examine myself more intently . " do 
 I not tell you so ? the change in you be marvellous ! I know what it be . 
 you have be get well unconsciously to yourself in this lovely 
 air and scene , and the long afternoon sleep you have   just have have 
 complete the cure . " 

 I smile at her enthusiasm , but be force to admit that she be right 
 as far as my actual look go . no one would believe that I be , or 
 ever have be , ill . in silence I loosen my hair and begin to brush it 
 and put it in order before the mirror , and as I do so my thought be 
 very busy . I remember distinctly all that have happen in the studio 
 of Raffaello Cellini , and still more distinctly be I able to recall 
 every detail of the three dream that have visit I in my slumber . the 
 name , too , that have be the key - note of they all I also remember , 
 but some instinct forbid I to utter it aloud . once I think , " shall 
 I take a pencil and write it down lest I forget it ? " and the same 
 instinct say " no . " Amy 's voluble chatter run on like the sound of a 
 ripple brook all the time I thus meditate over the occurrence of 
 the day . 

 " say , child ! " she exclaim ; " will you go to the dance ? " 

 " certainly I will , with pleasure , " I answer , and indeed I feel as if 
 I should thoroughly enjoy it . 

 " Brava ! it will be real fun . there be no end of foreign title come , 
 I believe . the Colonel 's a bit grumpy about it , - he always be when he 
 have to wear his dress suit . he just hat it . that man have not   a 
 particle of vanity . he look handsomer in his evening clothe than in 
 anything else , and yet he do not   see it . but tell I , " and her pretty 
 face become serious with a true feminine anxiety , " whatever will you 
 wear ? you have   bring no ball fixing , have you ? " 

 I finish twist up the last coil of my hair , and turn and kiss 
 she affectionately . she be the most sweet - temper and generous of 
 woman , and she would have place any one of her elaborate costume at 
 my disposal have I express the least desire in that direction . I 
 answer : 

 " no , dear ; I certainly have no regular ball ' fixing , ' for I never 
 expect to dance here , or anywhere for that matter . I do not bring 
 the big trunk full of parisian toilette that you indulge in , you 
 spoilt bride ! still I have something that may do . in fact it will have 
 to do . " 

 " what be it ? have I see it ? do show ! " and her curiosity be 
 unappeasable . 

 the discreet alphonse tap at the door again just at this moment . 

 " Entrez ! " I answer ; and our tea , prepare with the tempting nicety 
 peculiar to the Hotel de L - - , appear . alphonse set the tray down 
 with his usual artistic nourish , and produce a small note from his 
 vest - pocket . 

 " for mademoiselle , " he say with a bow ; and as he hand it to I , his 
 eye open wide in surprise . he , too , perceive the change in my 
 appearance . but he be dignity itself , and instantly suppress his 
 astonishment into the polite impassiveness of a truly accomplish 
 waiter , and glide from the room on the point of his toe , as be his 
 usual custom , he disappear . the note be from Cellini , and run as 
 follow : 


 " if mademoiselle will be so good as to refrain from choose any 
 flower for her toilette this evening , she will confer a favour on her 
 humble friend and servant , 

 " RAFFAELLO CELLINI . " 


 I hand it to Amy , who be evidently burn with inquisitiveness to 
 know its content . 

 " do not   I say he be a queer young man ? " she exclaim , as she peruse 
 the missive attentively . " this be only his way of say that he mean 
 to send you some flower himself . but what puzzle I be to think how 
 he could possibly know you be go to make any special ' toilette ' 
 this evening . it be really very mysterious when I come to think of it , 
 for Madame Didier say plainly that she would not ask Cellini to the 
 dance till she see he at the table d'hote to - night . " 

 " perhaps Alphonse have tell he all about it , " I suggest . 

 my friend 's countenance brighten . 

 " of course ! that be it ; and Mr. Cellini take it for grant that a 
 girl of your age would not be likely to refuse a dance . still there be 
 something odd about it , too . by - the - bye , I forget to ask you how the 
 picture get on ? " 

 " oh , very well , I believe , " I reply evasively . " Signor Cellini only 
 make a slight outline sketch as a beginning . " 

 " and be it like you ? - a really good resemblance ? " 

 " I really do not examine it closely enough to be able to judge . " 

 " what a demure young person you be ! " laugh Mrs. Everard . " now , I 
 should have rush straight up to the easel and examine every line of 
 what he be do . you be a model of discretion , really ! I shall not   be 
 anxious about leave you alone any more . but about your dress for 
 to - night . let I see it , there be a good girl . " 

 I open my trunk and take out a robe of ivory - tint crepe . it be 
 make with almost severe simplicity , and be unadorned , save by a soft 
 ruffle of old Mechlin lace round the neck and sleeve . Amy examine it 
 critically . 

 " now , you would have look perfectly ghastly in this last night , when 
 you be as pale and hollow - eyed as a sick nun ; but to - night , " and she 
 raise her eye to my face , " I believe you will do . do not   you want the 
 bodice cut lower ? " 

 " no , thank ! " I say , smile . " I will leave that to the portly 
 dowager - they will expose neck enough for half - a - dozen other woman . " 

 my friend laugh . 

 " do as you like , " she return ; " only I see your gown have short 
 sleeve , and I think you might like a square neck instead of that 
 little simple greek round . but perhaps it be well as it be . the stuff 
 be lovely ; where do you get it ? " 

 " at one of the London emporium of eastern art , " I answer . " my dear , 
 your tea be get cold . " 

 she lay the dress on the bed , and in do so , perceive the 
 antique - look book with the silver clasp which I have leave there . 

 " what be this ? " she ask , turn it round to discover its name . 
 " ' letter of a Dead Musician ! ' what a shivery title ! be it morbid 
 reading ? " 

 " not at all , " I reply , as I lean comfortably back in an easy - chair 
 and sip my tea . " it be a very scholarly , poetical , and picturesque 
 work . signor Cellini lend it to I ; the author be a friend of his . " 

 Amy look at I with a knowing and half - serious expression . 

 " say now - take care , take care ! be not   you and Cellini get to be 
 rather particular friend - something a little beyond the Platonic , eh ? " 

 this notion strike I as so absurd that I laugh heartily . then , 
 without pause for one instant to think what I be say , I answer 
 with amazing readiness and frankness , consider that I really know 
 nothing about it : 

 " why , my dear , Raffaello Cellini be betroth , and he be a most devoted 
 lover . " 

 a moment after I have utter this assertion I be surprised at myself . 
 what authority have I for say that Cellini be betroth ? what do I 
 know about it ? confused , I endeavour to find some mean of retract 
 this unfounded and rash remark , but no word of explanation would come 
 to my lip that have be so ready and prim to deliver what might be , 
 for all I know , a falsehood . Amy do not perceive my embarrassment . she 
 be pleased and interested at the idea of Cellini 's be in love . 

 " really ! " she exclaim , " it make he a more romantic character than 
 ever ! Fancy his tell you that he be betroth ! how delightful ! I 
 must ask he all about his choose fair one . but I be positively thankful 
 it be not   you , for I be sure he be just a little bit off his head . even 
 this book he have lend you look like a wizard 's property ; " and she 
 flutter the leaf of the " Dead Musician 's " volume , turn they 
 rapidly over in search of something attractive . suddenly she pause and 
 cry out : " why , this be right - down awful ! he must have be a regular 
 madman ! just listen ! " and she read aloud : 

 " ' how mighty be the Kingdoms of the Air ! how vast they be - how 
 densely populate - how glorious be their destiny - how all - powerful 
 and wise be their inhabitant ! they possess everlaste health and 
 beauty - their movement be music - their glance be light - they can not 
 err in their law or judgment , for their existence be love . throne , 
 principality , and power be among they , yet all be equal . each one 
 have a different duty to perform , yet all their labour be lofty . but 
 what a fate be our on this low earth ! for , from the cradle to the 
 grave , we be watch by these spiritual spectator - watch with 
 unflinche interest , unhesitate regard . o Angelic Spirits , what be 
 there in the poor and shabby spectacle of human life to attract your 
 mighty Intelligences ? sorrow , sin , pride , shame , ambition , failure , 
 obstinacy , ignorance , selfishness , forgetfulness - enough to make ye 
 veil your radiant face in unpierceable cloud to hide forever the 
 sight of so much crime and misery . yet if there be the faint , 
 feeble effort in our soul to answer to the call of your voice , to 
 rise above the earth by force of the same will that pervade your 
 destiny , how the sound of great rejoicing permeate those wide 
 continent ye inhabit , like a wave of thunderous music ; and ye be 
 glad , blessed Spirits ! - glad with a gladness beyond that of your own 
 life , to feel and to know that some vestige , however fragile , be 
 spar from the general wreck of selfish and unbelieve Humanity . 
 truly we work under the shadow of a " cloud of witness . " disperse , 
 disperse , o dense yet brilliant multitude ! turn away from I your 
 burning , truthful , immutable eye , fill with that look of divine , 
 perpetual regret and pity ! Lo , how unworthy be I to behold your glory ! 
 and yet I must see and know and love you all , while the mad blind world 
 rush on to its own destruction , and none can avert its doom . ' " 

 here Amy throw down the book with a sort of contempt , and say to I : 

 " if you be go to muddle your mind with the raving of a lunatic , 
 you be not what I take you for . why , it be regular spiritualism ! 
 kingdom of the air indeed ! and his cloud of witness ! rubbish ! " 

 " he quote the cloud of witness from St. Paul , " I remark . 

 " More shame for he ! " reply my friend , with the usual inconsistent 
 indignation that good protestant invariably display when their pet 
 corn , the Bible , be accidentally tread on . " it have be very well 
 say that the devil can quote Scripture , and this musician   a good job 
 he be dead , I be sure   be perfectly blasphemous to quote the Testament 
 in support of his ridiculous idea ! St. Paul do not mean by ' a cloud 
 of witness , ' a lot of ' air multitude ' and ' burning , immutable eye , ' 
 and all that nonsense . " 

 " well , what do he mean ? " I gently persist . 

 " oh , he mean - why , you know very well what he mean , " say Amy , in a 
 tone of reproachful solemnity . " and I wonder at your ask I such a 
 question ! surely you know your Bible , and you must be aware that St. 
 Paul could never have approve of spiritualism . " 

 " ' and there be body celestial and body terrestrial , but one be the 
 glory of the celestial ? " I quote with , a slight smile . 

 Mrs. Everard look shocked and almost angry . 

 " my dear , I be ashamed of you ! you be a believer in spirit , I do 
 declare ! why , I think Maskelyne and Cook have cure everybody of such 
 notion ; and now here be this horrid book go to make you more nervous 
 than ever . I shall have you get up one night and shriek about 
 burning , immutable eye look at you . " 

 I laugh merrily as I rise to pick up the discard volume from the 
 floor . 

 " do not   be afraid , " I say ; " I will give back the book to Signor Cellini 
 to - morrow , and I will tell he that you do not like the idea of my 
 read it , and that I be go to study the Bible instead . come now , 
 dear , do not   look cross ! " and I embrace she warmly , for I like she far 
 too well to wish to offend she . " let we concentrate our attention on 
 our finery for to - night , when a ' dense and brilliant multitude , ' not of 
 air , but of the ' earth earthy , ' will pass we under critical survey . I 
 assure you I mean to make the good of my improved look , as I do not 
 believe they will last . I dare say I shall be the ' sick nun ' that you 
 term I again to - morrow . " 

 " I hope not , dearest , " say my friend kindly , return my caress and 
 forget her momentary ill - humour . " a jolly dance will do you good if 
 you be careful to avoid over - exertion . but you be quite right , we 
 must really fix our thing ready for the evening , else we shall be all 
 in a flurry at the last moment , and nothing rile the Colonel so much 
 as to see woman in a fuss . I shall wear my lace dress ; but it want 
 see to . will you help I ? " 

 readily assent , we be soon deep in the arrangement of the 
 numberless little mystery that make up a woman 's toilette ; and 
 nothing but the most frivolous conversation ensue . but as I assist 
 in the sorting of lace , jewel , and other dainty appendage of evening 
 costume , I be deep in earnest meditation . review in my own mind the 
 various sensation I have experience since I have taste that Eastern 
 wine in Cellini 's studio , I come to the conclusion that he must have 
 try an experiment on I with some foreign drug , of which he alone 
 know the property . why he should do this I could not determine ; but 
 that he have do it I be certain . besides this , I feel sure that he 
 personally exert some influence upon I - a soothe and calm 
 influence I be force to admit - still , it could hardly be allow to 
 continue . to be under the control , however slight , of one who be 
 almost a stranger to I , be , at the least , unnatural and unpleasant . I 
 be bind to ask he a few plain question . and , suppose Mrs. Everard 
 be to speak to he about his be betroth , and he be to deny it , 
 and afterwards be to turn round upon I and ask what authority I have 
 for make such a statement , what should I say ? Convict myself of 
 falsehood ? however , it be no use to puzzle over the solution of this 
 difficulty till it positively present itself . at any rate , I 
 determine I would ask he frankly , face to face , for some explanation 
 of the strange emotion I have feel ever since meet he ; and thus 
 resolve , I wait patiently for the evening . 




 CHAPTER IV . 

 a dance and a promise . 


 our little french friend , Madame Didier , be not a woman to do thing 
 by half . she be one of those rare exception among parisian 
 lady - she be a perfectly happy wife ; nay , more , she be in love with 
 her own husband , a fact which , consider the present state of society 
 both in France and England , render she almost contemptible in the 
 eye of all advanced thinker . she be plump and jolly in appearance ; 
 round - eyed and brisk as a lively robin . her husband , a large , 
 mild - face placid man - " mon petit mari , " as she call he - permit 
 she to have her own way in everything , and consider all she do as 
 perfectly well do . therefore , when she have propose this informal 
 dance at the Hotel de L - - , he make no objection , but enter into her 
 plan with spirit ; and , what be far more important , open his purse 
 readily to her demand for the necessary expense . so nothing be 
 stint ; the beautiful ballroom attach to the hotel be throw open , 
 and lavishly decorate with flower , fountain , and twinkle light ; 
 an awning extend from its window right down the avenue of dark 
 ilex - tree , which be ornament with chinese lantern ; an elegant 
 supper be lay out in the large dining - room , and the whole 
 establishment be en fete . the delicious strain of a viennese band 
 float to our ear as Colonel Everard , his wife , and myself descend 
 the staircase on our way to the scene of revelry ; and suggestion of 
 fairyland be present to we in the graceful girlish form , clothe in 
 light , diaphanous attire , that flit here and there , or occasionally 
 pass we . Colonel Everard march proudly along with the military 
 bear that always distinguish he , now and then glance admiringly 
 at his wife , who , indeed , look she very well . her dress be of the 
 fine Brussels lace , loop over a skirt of the pale shell - pink 
 satin ; deep crimson velvet rose cluster on her breast , and nestle 
 in her rich hair ; a necklace of magnificent ruby clasp her neck , 
 and the same jewel glitter on her round white arm . her eye shine 
 with pleasurable excitement , and the prettiest colour imaginable tint 
 her delicate cheek . 

 " when an american woman be lovely , she be very lovely , " I say . " you 
 will be the belle of the room to - night , Amy ! " 

 " nonsense ! " she reply , well pleased , though , at my remark . " you must 
 remember I have a rival in yourself . " 

 I shrug my shoulder incredulously . 

 " it be not like you to be sarcastic , " I say . " you know very well I 
 have the air of a resuscitated corpse . " 

 the Colonel wheel round suddenly , and bring we all up to a 
 standstill before a great mirror . 

 " if you be like a resuscitated corpse , I will throw a hundred dollar 
 into the next mud - pond , " he observe . " look at yourself . " 

 I look , at first indifferently , and then with search scrutiny . I 
 see a small , slender girl , clothe in white , with a mass of gold hair 
 twist loosely up from her neck , and fasten with a single star of 
 diamond . a superb garniture of natural lily of the valley be 
 fasten on this girl 's shoulder ; and , fall loosely across her 
 breast , lose itself in the trail fold of her gown . she hold a 
 palm - leaf fan entirely cover with lily of the valley , and a girdle 
 of the same flower encircle her waist . her face be serious , but 
 content ; her eye be bright , but with an intense and thoughtful 
 lustre ; and her cheek be softly colour , as though a west wind have 
 blow freshly against they . there be nothing either attractive or 
 repulsive about she that I could see ; and yet - I turn away from the 
 mirror hastily with a faint smile . 

 " the lily form the good part of my toilette , " I say . 

 " that they do , " assert Amy , with emphasis . " they be the fine 
 specimen I ever see . it be real elegant of Mr. Cellini to send they 
 all fix up ready like that , fan and all . you must be a favourite of 
 his ! " 

 " come , let we proceed , " I answer , with some abruptness . " we be 
 lose time . " 

 in a few second more we enter the ballroom , and be meet at once by 
 Madame Didier , who , resplendent in black lace and diamond , give we 
 hearty greeting . she star at I with unaffected amazement . 

 " Mon dieu ! " she exclaim - her conversation with we be always a 
 mixture of French and break English - " I should not ' ave know zis young 
 lady again ! she ' ave si bonne mine . you veel dance , san doute ? " 

 we readily assent , and the usual assortment of dancing - man of all 
 age and size be bring forward for our inspection ; while the 
 Colonel , be introduce to a beam english girl of some seventeen 
 summer , whirl she at once into the merry maze of dancer , who be 
 spin easily round to the lively melody of one of Strauss 's most 
 fascinating waltz . presently I also find myself circle the room 
 with an amiable young German , who amble round with a certain amount of 
 cleverness , consider that he be evidently ignorant of the actual 
 waltz step ; and I catch a glimpse now and then of Amy 's ruby as they 
 flash past I in the dance - she be foot it merrily with a 
 handsome Austrian Hussar . the room be pleasantly full - not too crowd 
 for the movement of the dancer ; and the whole scene be exceedingly 
 pretty and animate . I have no lack of partner , and I be surprised to 
 find myself so keenly alive to enjoyment , and so completely free from 
 my usual preoccupied condition of nervous misery I look everywhere 
 for Raffaello Cellini , but he be not to be see . the lily that I 
 wear , which he have send I , seem quite unaffected by the heat and 
 glare of the gaslight - not a leaf droop , not a petal wither ; and 
 their remarkable whiteness and fragrance elicit many admiring remark 
 from those with whom I converse . it be grow very late ; there be 
 only two more waltz before the final cotillon . I be stand near 
 the large open window of the ballroom , converse with one of my recent 
 partner , when a sudden inexplicable thrill shoot through I from head 
 to foot . instinctively I turn , and see Cellini approach . he look 
 remarkably handsome , though his face be pale and somewhat weary in 
 expression . he be laugh and converse gaily with two lady , one 
 of whom be Mrs. Everard ; and as he come towards I he bow 
 courteously , say : 

 " I be too much honour by the kindness mademoiselle have show in not 
 discard my poor flower . " 

 " they be lovely , " I reply simply ; " and I be very much oblige to 
 you , signor , for send they to I . " 

 " and how fresh they keep ! " say Amy , bury her little nose in the 
 fragrance of my fan ; " yet they have be in the heat of the room all 
 the evening . " 

 " they can not perish while mademoiselle wear they , " say Cellini 
 gallantly . " her breath be their life . " 

 " Bravo ! " cry Amy , clap her hand . " that be very prettily say , 
 be not   it ? " 

 I be silent . I never could endure compliment . they be seldom 
 sincere , and it give I no pleasure to be tell lie , however prettily 
 they may be word . Signor Cellini appear to divine my thought , for 
 he say in a low tone : 

 " pardon I , mademoiselle ; I see my observation displease you ; but 
 there be more truth in it than you perhaps know . " 

 " oh , say ! " interrupt Mrs. Everard at this juncture ; " I be so 
 interested , signor , to hear you be engage ! I suppose she be a dream 
 of beauty ? " 

 the hot colour rush to my cheek , and I bite my lip in confusion and 
 inquietude . what would he answer ? my anxiety be not of long duration . 
 Cellini smile , and seem in no way surprised . he say quietly : 

 " who tell you , madame , that I be engage ? " 

 " why , she do , of course ! " go on my friend , nod towards I , 
 regardless of an implore look I cast at she . " and say you be 
 perfectly devoted ! " 

 " she be quite right , " reply Cellini , with another of those rare sweet 
 smile of his ; " and you also be right , madame , in your supposition : my 
 betroth be a dream of Beauty . " 

 I be infinitely relieve . I have not , then , be guilty of a falsehood . 
 but the mystery remain : how have I discover the truth of the matter 
 at all ? while I puzzle my mind over this question , the other lady who 
 have accompany Mrs. Everard speak . she be an Austrian of brilliant 
 position and attainment . 

 " you quite interest I , signor ! " she say . " be your fair fiancee here 
 to - night ? " 

 " no , madame , " reply Cellini ; ' she be not in this country . " 

 " what a pity ! " exclaim Amy . " I want to see her real bad . do not   you ? " 
 she ask , turn to I . 

 I raise my eye and meet the dark clear one of the artist fix full 
 upon I . 

 " yes , " I say hesitatingly ; " I should like to meet she . perhaps the 
 chance will occur at some future time . " 

 " there be not the slight doubt about that , " say Cellini . " and now , 
 mademoiselle , will you give I the pleasure of this waltz with you ? or 
 be you promise to another partner ? " 

 I be not engage , and I at once accept his proffered arm . two 
 gentleman come hurriedly up to claim Amy and her austrian friend ; and 
 for one brief moment Signor Cellini and I stand alone in a 
 comparatively quiet corner of the ballroom , wait for the music to 
 begin . I open my lip to ask he a question , when he stop I by a 
 slight gesture of his hand . 

 " Patience ! " he say in a low and earnest tone . " in a few moment you 
 shall have the opportunity you seek . " 

 the band burst forth just then in the voluptuous strain of a waltz by 
 Gung'l , and together we float away to its exquisite gliding measure . 
 I use the word FLOATED , advisedly , for no other term could express the 
 delightful sensation I enjoy . Cellini be a superb dancer . it seem 
 to I that our foot scarcely touch the floor , so swiftly , so easily 
 and lightly we speed along . a few rapid turn , and I notice we be 
 near the open french window , and , before I well realize it , we have 
 stop dance and be pace quietly side by side down the ilex 
 avenue , where the little lantern twinkle like red firefly and green 
 glow - worm among the dark and leafy branch . 

 we walk along in silence till we reach the end of the path . there , 
 before we , lie the open garden , with its broad green lawn , bath in 
 the lovely light of the full moon , sail aloft in a cloudless sky . 
 the night be very warm , but , regardless of this fact , Cellini wrap 
 carefully round I a large fleecy white burnous that he have take from 
 a chair where it be lie , on his way through the avenue . 

 " I be not cold , " I say , smile . 

 " no ; but you will be , perhaps . it be not wise to run any useless risk . " 

 I be again silent . a low breeze rustle in the tree - top near we ; the 
 music of the ballroom reach we only in faint and far echo ; the 
 scent of rose and myrtle be waft delicately on the balmy air ; the 
 radiance of the moon soften the outline of the landscape into a 
 dreamy suggestiveness of its reality . suddenly a sound break on our 
 ear - a delicious , long , plaintive trill ; then a wonderful shower of 
 sparkling roulade ; and finally , a clear , implore , passionate note 
 repeat many time . it be a nightingale , sing as only the 
 nightingale of the South can sing . I listen entrance . 

  " ' thou wast not bear for death , immortal Bird ! 
  no hungry generation tread thee down ; 
  the voice I hear this pass night be hear 
  in ancient day by emperor and clown , ' " 

 quote Cellini in earnest tone . 

 " you admire Keats ? " I ask eagerly . 

 " More than any other poet that have live , " he reply . " his be the 
 most ethereal and delicate muse that ever consent to be tie down to 
 earth . but , mademoiselle , you do not wish to examine I as to my taste 
 in poetry . you have some other question to put to I , have you not ? " 

 for one instant I hesitate . then I speak out frankly , and answer : 

 " yes , signor . what be there in that wine you give I this morning ? " 

 he meet my search gaze unflinchingly . 

 " a medicine , " he say . " an excellent and perfectly simple remedy make 
 of the juice of plant , and absolutely harmless . " 

 " but why , " I demand , " why do you give I this medicine ? be it not 
 wrong to take so much responsibility upon yourself ? " 

 he smile . 

 " I think not . if you be injure or offend , then I be wrong ; but if , 
 on the contrary , your health and spirit be ever so little improve , 
 as I see they be , I deserve your thank , mademoiselle . " 

 and he wait with an air of satisfaction and expectancy . I be puzzle 
 and half - angry , yet I could not help acknowledge to myself that I 
 feel well and more cheerful than I have do for many month . I look 
 up at the artist 's dark , intelligent face , and say almost humbly : 

 " I do thank you , signor . but surely you will tell I your reason for 
 constitute yourself my physician without even ask my leave . " 

 he laugh , and his eye look very friendly . 

 " Mademoiselle , I be one of those strangely constitute being who 
 can not bear to see any innocent thing suffer . it matter not whether it 
 be a worm in the dust , a butterfly in the air , a bird , a flower , or a 
 human creature . the first time I see you I know that your state of 
 health preclude you from the enjoyment of life natural to your sex and 
 age . I also perceive that the physician have be at work upon you 
 try to probe into the cause of your ailment , and that they have 
 signally fail . Physicians , mademoiselle , be very clever and 
 estimable man , and there be a few thing which come within the limit 
 of their treatment ; but there be also other thing which baffle their 
 utmost profundity of knowledge . one of these be that wondrous piece of 
 human machinery , the nervous system ; that intricate and delicate 
 network of fine thread - electric wire on which run the message of 
 thought , impulse , affection , emotion . if these thread or wire become , 
 from any subtle cause , entangle , the skill of the mere medical 
 practitioner be of no avail to undo the injurious knot , or to unravel 
 the confused skein . the drug generally use in such case be , for the 
 most part , repellent to the human blood and natural instinct , therefore 
 they be always dangerous , and often deadly . I know , by study your 
 face , mademoiselle , that you be suffer as acutely as I , too , 
 suffer some five year ago , and I venture to try upon you a simple 
 vegetable essence , merely to see if you be capable of benefit by 
 it . the experiment have be so far successful ; but - - " 

 he pause , and his face become graver and more abstracted . 

 " but what ? " I query eagerly . 

 " I be about to say , " he continue , " that the effect be only 
 transitory . within forty - eight hour you must naturally relapse into 
 your former prostrate condition , and I , unfortunately , be powerless to 
 prevent it . " 

 I sigh wearily , and a feeling of disappointment oppress I . be it 
 possible that I must again be the victim of miserable dejection , pain , 
 and stupor ? 

 " you can give I another dose of your remedy , " I say . 

 " that I can not , mademoiselle , " he answer regretfully ; " I dare not , 
 without further advice and guidance . " 

 " advice and guidance from whom ? " I inquire . 

 " from the friend who cure I of my long and almost hopeless illness , " 
 say Cellini . " he alone can tell I whether I be right in my theory 
 respect your nature and constitution . " 

 " and what be those theory ? " I ask , become deeply interested in 
 the conversation . 

 Cellini be silent for a minute or so ; he seem absorb in a sort of 
 inward communion with himself . then he speak with impressiveness and 
 gravity : 

 " in this world , mademoiselle , there be no two nature alike , yet all 
 be bear with a small portion of divinity within they , which we call 
 the Soul . it be a mere spark smouldering in the centre of the weight of 
 clay with which we be encumber , yet it be there . now this particular 
 germ or seed can be cultivate if we will - that be , if we desire and 
 insist on its growth . as a child 's taste for art or learning can be 
 educate into high capability for the future , so can the human Soul 
 be educate into so high , so supreme an attainment , that no merely 
 mortal standard of measurement can reach its magnificence . with much 
 more than half the inhabitant of the globe , this germ of immortality 
 remain always a germ , never sprout , overlay and weight down by 
 the lymphatic laziness and materialistic propensity of its shell or 
 husk - the body . but I must put aside the forlorn prospect of the 
 multitude in whom the Divine Essence attain to no large quantity 
 than that proportion out to a dog or bird - I have only to speak of 
 the rare few with whom the soul be everything - those who , perceive 
 and admit its existence within they , devote all their power to 
 fan up their spark of light till it become a radiant , burning , 
 inextinguishable flame . the mistake make by these example of beatified 
 Humanity be that they too often sacrifice the body to the demand of 
 the spirit . it be difficult to find the medium path , but it can be 
 find ; and the claim of both body and soul can be satisfied without 
 sacrifice the one to the other . I beg your earnest attention , 
 mademoiselle , for what I say concern the rare few with whom the SOUL 
 be EVERYTHING . you be one of those few , unless I be greatly in error . 
 and you have sacrifice your body so utterly to your spirit that the 
 flesh rebel and suffer . this will not do . you have work before you in 
 the world , and you can not perform it unless you have bodily health as 
 well as spiritual desire . and why ? because you be a prisoner here on 
 earth , and you must obey the law of the prison , however unpleasant 
 they may be to you . be you free as you have be in age past and as 
 you will be in age to come , thing would be different ; but at present 
 you must comply with the order of your gaoler - the Lords of Life and 
 death . " 

 I hear he , half awed , half fascinated . his word be full of 
 mysterious suggestion . 

 " how do you know I be of the temperament you describe ? " I ask in a 
 low voice . 

 " I do not know , mademoiselle ; I can only guess . there be but one person 
 who can perhaps judge of you correctly , - a man old than myself by 
 many year - whose life be the very acme of spiritual perfection - whose 
 learning be vast and unprejudiced . I must see and speak to he before I 
 try any more of my , or rather his , remedy . but we have linger long 
 enough out here , and unless you have something more to say to I , we 
 will return to the ballroom . you will otherwise miss the cotillon ; " and 
 he turn to retrace the way through the illuminated grove . 

 but a sudden thought have strike I , and I resolve to utter it aloud . 
 lay my hand on his arm and look he full in the face , I say 
 slowly and distinctly : 

 " this friend of yours that you speak of - be not his name HELIOBAS ? " 

 Cellini start violently ; the blood rush up to his brow and as 
 quickly recede , leave he pale than before . his dark eye glow 
 with suppress excitement - his hand tremble . recover himself 
 slowly , he meet my gaze fixedly ; his glance soften , and he bend his 
 head with an air of respect and reverence . 

 " Mademoiselle , I see that you must know all . it be your fate . you be 
 greatly to be envy . come to I to - morrow , and I will tell you 
 everything that be to be tell . afterwards your destiny rest in your 
 own hand . ask nothing more of I just now . " 

 he escort I without further word back to the ballroom , where the 
 merriment of the cotillon be then at its height . whisper to Mrs. 
 Everard as I pass she that I be tired and be go to bed , I 
 reach the outside passage , and there , turn to Cellini , I say 
 gently : 

 " good - night , signor . to - morrow at noon I will come . " 

 he reply : 

 " good - night , mademoiselle ! to - morrow at noon you will find I ready . " 

 with that he salute I courteously and turn away . I hurry up to my 
 own room , and on arrive there I could not help observe the 
 remarkable freshness of the lily I wear . they look as if they have 
 just be gather . I unfasten they all from my dress , and place 
 they carefully in water ; then quickly disrobe , I be soon in bed . I 
 meditate for a few minute on the various odd occurrence of the day ; 
 but my thought soon grow misty and confuse , and I travel quickly 
 off into the Land of Nod , and thence into the region of sleep , where I 
 remain undisturbed by so much as the shadow of a dream . 




 CHAPTER V. 

 CELLINI 'S STORY . 


 the following morning at the appoint hour , I go to Cellini 's 
 studio , and be receive by he with a sort of gentle courtesy and 
 kindliness that become he very well . I be already begin to 
 experience an increase languor and weariness , the sure forerunner of 
 what the artist have prophesy - namely , a return of all my old 
 suffering . Amy , tired out by the dancing of the previous night , be 
 still in bed , as be many of those who have enjoy Madame Didier 's 
 fete ; and the hotel be unusually quiet , almost seem as though half 
 the visitor have depart during the night . it be a lovely morning , 
 sunny and calm ; and Cellini , observe that I look listless and 
 fatigue , place a comfortable easy - chair for I near the window , from 
 whence I could see one of the prettiest parterre of the garden , gay 
 with flower of every colour and perfume . he himself remain stand , 
 one hand rest lightly on his writing - table , which be strew with a 
 confusion of letter and newspaper . 

 " where be Leo ? " I ask , as I glance round the room in search of that 
 noble animal . 

 " Leo leave for Paris last night , " reply Cellini ; " he carry an 
 important despatch for I , which I fear to trust to the post - office . " 

 " be it safe in Leo 's charge ? " I inquire , smile , for the sagacity of 
 the dog amuse as well as interested I . 

 " much safe ! Leo carry on his collar a small tin case , just large 
 enough to contain several fold sheet of paper . when he know he have 
 that box to guard during his journey , he be simply unapproachable . he 
 would fight any one who attempt to touch it with the ferocity of a 
 hungry tiger , and there be no edible dainty yet invent that could 
 tempt his appetite or coax he into any momentary oblivion of his duty . 
 there be no more trustworthy or faithful messenger . " 

 " I suppose you have send he to your friend - his master , " I say . 

 " yes . he have go straight home to - Heliobas . " 

 this name now awaken in I no surprise or even curiosity . it simply 
 sound homelike and familiar . I gaze abstractedly out of the window 
 at the brilliant blossom in the garden , that nod their head at I 
 like so many little elf with coloured cap on , but I say nothing . I 
 feel that Cellini watch I keenly and closely . presently he continue : 

 " shall I tell you everything now , mademoiselle ? " 

 I turn towards he eagerly . 

 " if you please , " I answer . 

 " may I ask you one question ? " 

 " certainly . " 

 " how and where do you hear the name of Heliobas ? " 

 I look up hesitatingly . 

 " in a dream , signor , strange to say ; or rather in three dream . I will 
 relate they to you . " 

 and I describe the vision I have see , be careful to omit no 
 detail , for , indeed , I remember everything with curious distinctness . 

 the artist listen with grave and fix attention . when I have 
 conclude he say : 

 " the elixir I give you act more potently than even I imagine it 
 would . you be more sensitive than I think . do not fatigue yourself 
 any more , mademoiselle , by talk . with your permission I will sit 
 down here opposite to you and tell you my story . afterwards you must 
 decide for yourself whether you will adopt the method of treatment to 
 which I owe my life , and something more than my life - my reason . " 

 he turn his own library - chair towards I , and seat himself . a few 
 moment pass in silence ; his expression be very earnest and 
 absorb , and he regard my face with a sympathetic interest which 
 touch I profoundly . though I feel myself become more and more 
 enervate and apathetic as the time go on , and though I know I be 
 gradually sink down again into my old Slough of Despond , yet I feel 
 instinctively that I be somehow actively concerned in what be about 
 to be say , therefore I force myself to attend closely to every word 
 utter . Cellini begin to speak in low and quiet tone as follow : 

 " you must be aware , mademoiselle , that those who adopt any art as a 
 mean of livelihood begin the world heavily handicap - weight down , 
 as it be , in the race for fortune . the following of art be a very 
 different thing to the following of trade or mercantile business . in 
 buying or selling , in undertake the work of import or export , a good 
 head for figure , and an average quantity of shrewd common sense , be 
 all that be necessary in order to win a fair share of success . but in 
 the fine occupation , whose result be find in sculpture , painting , 
 music and poetry , demand be make upon the imagination , the emotion , 
 the entire spiritual susceptibility of man . the most delicate fibre of 
 the brain be tax ; the subtle inner working of thought be bring 
 into active play ; and the temperament become daily and hourly more 
 finely string , more sensitive , more keenly alive to every pass 
 sensation . of course there be many so - call ' ARTISTS ' who be mere 
 sham of the real thing ; person who , have a little surface - education 
 in one or the other branch of the art , play idly with the paint - brush , 
 or dabble carelessly in the deep water of literature , - or borrow a few 
 crotchet and quaver from other composer , and put they together 
 in haste , call it original composition . among these be to be find the 
 self - call ' professor ' of painting ; the sculptor who allow the work 
 of their ' ghost ' to be admire as their own ; the magazine - scribbler ; 
 the ' smart ' young leader - writer and critic ; the half - hearte 
 performer on piano or violin who object to any innovation , and prefer 
 to grind on in the unemotional , coldly correct manner which they be 
 pleased to term the ' classical ' - such person exist , and will exist , so 
 long as good and evil be lead force of life . they be the aphis 
 on the rose of art . but the man and woman I speak of as ARTISTS be 
 those who work day and night to attain even a small degree of 
 perfection , and who be never satisfied with their own good effort . I 
 be one of these some year ago , and I humbly assert myself still to be 
 of the same disposition ; only the difference between myself then and 
 myself now be , that then I struggle blindly and despairingly , and now 
 I labour patiently and with calmness , know positively that I shall 
 obtain what I seek at the duly appoint hour . I be educate as a 
 painter , mademoiselle , by my father , a good , simple - hearted man , whose 
 little landscape look like bit cut out of the actual field and 
 woodland , so fresh and pure be they . but I be not content to follow 
 in the plain path he first teach I to tread . merely correct drawing , 
 merely correct colouring , be not sufficient for my ambition . I have 
 dazzle my eye with the loveliness of Correggio 's ' Madonna , ' and have 
 marvel at the wondrous blue of her robe - a blue so deep and intense 
 that I use to think one might scrape away the paint till a hole be 
 bored in the canvas and yet not reach the end of that fathomless azure 
 tint ; I have study the warm hue of Titian ; I have feel ready to float 
 away in the air with the marvellous ' Angel of the Annunciation ' - and 
 with all these thought in I , how could I content myself with the 
 ordinary aspiration of modern artist ? I grow absorb in one 
 subject - colour . I note how lifeless and pale the colouring of to - day 
 appear beside that of the old master , and I meditate deeply on the 
 problem thus present to I . what be the secret of Correggio - of Fra 
 Angelico - of Raphael ? I try various experiment ; I buy the most 
 expensive and highly guarantee pigment . in vain , for they be all 
 adulterate by the dealer ! then I obtain colour in the rough , and 
 ground and mix they myself ; still , though a little well result be 
 obtain , I find trade adulteration still at work with the oil , the 
 varnish , the medium - in fact , with everything that painter use to 
 gain effect in their work . I could nowhere escape from vicious 
 dealer , who , to gain a miserable percentage on every article sell , be 
 content to be among the most dishonest man in this dishonest age . 

 " I assure you , mademoiselle , that not one of the picture which be now 
 be paint for the salon of Paris and London can possibly last a 
 hundred year . I recently visit that Palace of Art , the South 
 Kensington Museum , in London , and see there a large fresco by Sir 
 Frederick Leighton . it have just be complete , I be inform . it be 
 already fade ! within a few year it will be a blur of indistinct 
 outline . I compare its condition with the cartoon of Raphael , and a 
 superb Giorgione in the same building ; these be as warm and bright as 
 though recently paint . it be not Leighton 's fault that his work be 
 doom to perish as completely off the canvas as though he have never 
 trace they ; it be his dire misfortune , and that of every other 
 nineteenth - century painter , thank to the magnificent institution of 
 free trade , which have result in a vulgar competition of all country 
 and all class to see which can most quickly jostle the other out of 
 existence . but I be weary you , mademoiselle - pardon I ! to resume my 
 own story . as I tell you , I could think of nothing but the one subject 
 of Colour ; it haunt I incessantly . I see in my dream vision , of 
 exquisite form and face that I long to transfer to my canvas , but I 
 could never succeed in the attempt . my hand seem to have lose all 
 skill . about this time my father die , and I , have no other relation 
 in the world , and no tie of home to cling to , live in utter solitude , 
 and torture my brain more and more with the one question that baffle 
 and perplex I . I become moody and irritable ; I avoid intercourse 
 with everyone , and at last sleep forsook my eye . then come a terrible 
 season of feverish trouble , nervous dejection and despair . at time I 
 would sit silently brooding ; at other I start up and walk rapidly 
 for hour , in the hope to calm the wild unrest that take possession of 
 my brain . I be then live in Rome , in the studio that have be my 
 father 's . one evening - how well I remember it ! - I be attack by one 
 of those fierce impulse that forbid I to rest or think or sleep , 
 and , as usual , I hurry out for one of those long aimless excursion I 
 have latterly grow accustomed to . at the open street - door stand the 
 proprietress of the house , a stout , good - natured contadina , with she 
 young child Pippa hold to her skirt . as she see I approach , 
 she start back with an exclamation of alarm , and catch the little 
 girl up in her arm , she make the sign of the cross rapidly . astonish 
 at this , I pause in my hasty walk , and say with as much calmness as I 
 could muster : 

 " ' what do you mean by that ? have I the evil - eye , think you ? ' 

 " curly - haired Pippa stretch out her arm to I - I have often caress 
 the little one , and give her sweetmeat and toy - but her mother hold 
 she back with a sort of smother scream , and mutter : 

 " ' Holy Virgin ! Pippa must not touch he ; he be mad . ' 

 " mad ? I look at the woman and child in scornful amazement . then 
 without further word I turn , and go swiftly away down the street 
 out of their sight . mad ! be I indeed lose my reason ? be this the 
 terrific meaning of my sleepless night , my troubled thought , my 
 strange inquietude ? fiercely I stride along , heedless whither I be 
 go , till I find myself suddenly on the border of the desolate 
 Campagna . a young moon gleam aloft , look like a slender sickle 
 thrust into the heaven to reap an over - abundant harvest of star . I 
 pause irresolutely . there be a deep silence everywhere . I feel faint 
 and giddy : curious flash of light dance past my eye , and my limb 
 shake like those of a palsied old man . I sink upon a stone to rest , to 
 try and arrange my scatter idea into some sort of connection and 
 order . mad ! I clasp my ache head between my hand , and brood on 
 the fearful prospect loom before I , and in the word of poor King 
 Lear , I pray in my heart : 

  " ' o let I not be mad , not mad , sweet heaven ! ' 

 " PRAYER ! there be another thought . how could I pray ? for I be a 
 sceptic . my father have educate I with broadly materialistic view ; he 
 himself be a follower of Voltaire , and with his finite rod he take the 
 measure of divinity , greatly to his own satisfaction . he be a good 
 man , too , and he die with exemplary calmness in the absolute certainty 
 of there be nothing in his composition but dust , to which he be as 
 bind to return . he have not a shred of belief in anything but what he 
 call the Universal Law of Necessity ; perhaps this be why all his 
 picture lack inspiration . I accept his theory without think 
 much about they , and I have manage to live respectably without any 
 religious belief . but now - now with the horrible phantom of madness 
 rise before I - my firm nerve quail . I try , I long to PRAY . 
 yet to whom ? to what ? to the Universal Law of Necessity ? in that there 
 could be no hearing or answering of human petition . I meditate on 
 this with a kind of sombre ferocity . who portion out this Law of 
 necessity ? what brutal Code compel we to be bear , to live , to suffer , 
 and to die without recompense or reason ? why should this Universe be an 
 ever - circle Wheel of Torture ? then a fresh impetus come to I . I rise 
 from my recumbent posture and stand erect ; I tremble no more . a 
 curious sensation of defiant amusement possess I so violently that I 
 laugh aloud . such a laugh , too ! I recoil from the sound , as from a 
 blow , with a shudder . it be the laugh of - a madman ! I think no more ; 
 I be resolve . I would fulfil the grim Law of Necessity to its letter . 
 if Necessity cause my birth , it also demand my death . necessity 
 could not force I to live against my will . well eternal nothingness 
 than madness . slowly and deliberately I take from my vest a milanese 
 dagger of thin sharp steel - one that I always carry with I as a 
 mean of self - defence - I draw it from its sheath , and look at the 
 fine edge glitter coldly in the pallid moon - ray . I kiss it 
 joyously ; it be my final remedy ! I poise it aloft with firm 
 finger - another instant and it would have be bury deep in my 
 heart , when I feel a powerful grasp on my wrist , and a strong arm 
 struggle with mine force the dagger from my hand . savagely angry at 
 be thus foil in my desperate intent , I stagger back a few pace 
 and sullenly star at my rescuer . he be a tall man , clothe in a dark 
 overcoat border with fur ; he look like a wealthy Englishman or 
 american travel for pleasure . his feature be fine and 
 commanding ; his eye gleam with a gentle disdain as he coolly meet my 
 resentful gaze . when he speak his voice be rich and mellifluous , 
 though his accent have a touch in they of grave scorn . 

 " ' so you be tired of your life , young man ! all the more reason have 
 you to live . anyone can die . a murderer have moral force enough to jeer 
 at his hangman . it be very easy to draw the last breath . it can be 
 accomplish successfully by a child or a warrior . one pang of far less 
 anguish than the toothache , and all be over . there be nothing heroic 
 about it , I assure you ! it be as common as go to bed ; it be almost 
 prosy . life be heroism , if you like ; but death be a mere cessation of 
 business . and to make a rapid and rude exit off the stage before the 
 prompter give the sign be always , to say the least of it , ungraceful . 
 act the part out , no matter how bad the play . what say you ? ' 

 " and , balance the dagger lightly on one finger , as though it be a 
 paper - knife , he smile at I with so much frank kindliness that it be 
 impossible to resist he . I advance and hold out my hand . 

 " ' whoever you be , ' I say , ' you speak like a true man . but you be 
 ignorant of the cause which compel I to - - ' and a hard sob choke 
 my utterance . my new acquaintance press my proffered hand cordially , 
 but the gravity of his tone do not vary as he reply : 

 " ' there be no cause , my friend , which compel we to take violent leave 
 of existence , unless it be madness or cowardice . ' 

 " ' aye , and what if it be madness ? ' I ask he eagerly . he scan I 
 attentively , and lay his finger lightly on my wrist , feel my pulse . 

 " ' Pooh , my dear sir ! ' he say ; ' you be no more mad than I be . you be 
 a little overwrought and excited - that I admit . you have some mental 
 worry that consume you . you shall tell I all about it . I have no 
 doubt I can cure you in a few day . ' 

 " cure I ? I look at he in wonderment and doubt . 

 " ' be you a physician ? ' I ask . 

 " he laugh . ' not I ! I should be sorry to belong to the profession . yet 
 I administer medicine and give advice in certain case . I be simply a 
 remedial agent - not a doctor . but why do we stand here in this bleak 
 place , which must be people by the ghost of olden hero ? come with 
 I , will you ? I be go to the Hotel Costanza , and we can talk there . 
 as for this pretty toy , permit I to return it to you . you will not 
 force it again to the unpleasant task of despatch its owner . ' 

 " and he hand the dagger back to I with a slight bow . I sheathe it 
 at once , feel somewhat like a chidden child , as I meet the slightly 
 satirical gleam of the clear blue eye that watch I . 

 " ' will you give I your name , signor ? ' I ask , as we turn from the 
 Campagna towards the city . 

 " ' with pleasure . I be call Heliobas . a strange name ? oh , not at all ! 
 it be pure Chaldee . my mother - as lovely an Eastern houri as Murillo 's 
 Madonna , and as devout as Santa Teresa - give I the christian saint 's 
 name of Casimir also , but Heliobas pur et simple suit I well , and by 
 it I be generally know . ' 

 " ' you be a Chaldean ? ' I inquire . 

 " ' exactly so . I be descend directly from one of those " wise man of 
 the East "   and , by the way , there be more than three , and they be 
 not all king , who , be wide awake , happen to notice the 
 birth - star of Christ on the horizon before the rest of the world 's 
 inhabitant have so much as rub their sleepy eye . the Chaldeans have 
 be always quick of observation from time immemorial . but in return 
 for my name , you will favour I with your ? ' 

 " I give it readily , and we walk on together . I feel wonderfully 
 calm and cheer - as soothe , mademoiselle , as I have notice you 
 yourself have feel when in MY company . " 

 here Cellini pause , and look at I as though expect a question ; 
 but I prefer to remain silent till I have hear all he have to say . he 
 therefore resume : 

 " we reach the Hotel Costanza , where Heliobas be evidently well 
 know . the waiter address he as Monsieur le Comte ; but he give I 
 no information as to this title . he have a superb suite of room in the 
 hotel , furnish with every modern luxury ; and as soon as we enter a 
 light supper be serve . he invite I to partake , and within the space 
 of half an hour I have tell he all my history - my ambition - my 
 striving after the perfection of colour - my disappointment , dejection , 
 and despair - and , finally , the fearful dread of come madness that have 
 drive I to attempt my own life . he listen patiently and with 
 unbroken attention . when I have finish , he lay one hand on my 
 shoulder , and say gently : 

 " ' young man , pardon I if I say that up to the present your career have 
 be an inactive , useless , selfish " kicking against the prick , " as St. 
 Paul say . you set before yourself a task of noble effort , namely , to 
 discover the secret of colour as know to the old master ; and 
 because you meet with the petty difficulty of modern trade adulteration 
 in your material , you think that there be no chance - that all be lose . 
 Fie ! do you think Nature be overcome by a few dishonest trader ? she 
 can still give you in abundance the unspoilt colour she give to 
 Raphael and Titian ; but not in haste - not if you vulgarly scramble for 
 her gift in a mood that be impatient of obstacle and delay . " Ohne 
 hast , ohne rast , " be the motto of the star . learn it well . you have 
 injure your bodily health by useless fretfulness and peevish 
 discontent , and with that we have first to deal . in a week 's time , I 
 will make a sound , sane man of you ; and then I will teach you how to 
 get the colour you seek - yes ! ' he add , smile , ' even to the 
 compassing of Correggio 's blue . ' 

 " I could not speak for joy and gratitude ; I grasp my friend and 
 preserver by the hand . we stand thus together for a brief interval , 
 when suddenly Heliobas draw himself up to the full stateliness of his 
 height and bent his calm eye deliberately upon I . a strange thrill 
 run through I ; I still hold his hand . 

 " ' rest ! ' he say in slow and emphatic tone , ' weary and overwrought 
 frame , take thy full and needful measure of repose ! struggle and 
 deeply injure spirit , be free of thy narrow prison ! by that Force 
 which I acknowledge within I and thee and in all create thing , I 
 command thee , rest ! ' 

 " fascinated , awed , overcome by his manner , I gaze at he and would 
 have speak , but my tongue refuse its office - my sens swam - my eye 
 close - my limb give way - I fall senseless . " 

 Cellini again pause and look at I . intent on his word , I would not 
 interrupt he . he go on : 

 " when I say senseless , mademoiselle , I allude of course to my body . but 
 I , myself - that be , my soul - be conscious ; I live , I move , I hear , 
 I see . of that experience I be forbid to speak . when I return to 
 mortal existence I find myself lie on a couch in the same room where 
 I have sup with Heliobas , and Heliobas himself sit near I read . 
 it be broad noonday . a delicious sense of tranquillity and youthful 
 buoyancy be upon I , and without speak I spring up from my 
 recumbent position and touch he on the arm . he look up . 

 " ' well ? ' he ask , and his eye smile . 

 " I seize his hand , and press it reverently to my lip . 

 " ' my good friend ! ' I exclaim . ' what wonder have I not see - what 
 truth have I not learn - what mystery ! ' 

 " ' on all these thing be silent , ' reply Heliobas . ' they must not be 
 lightly speak of . and of the question you naturally desire to ask I , 
 you shall have the answer in due time . what have happen to you be not 
 wonderful ; you have simply be act upon by scientific mean . but 
 your cure be not yet complete . a few day more pass with I will 
 restore you thoroughly . will you consent to remain so long in my 
 company ? ' 

 " gladly and gratefully I consent , and we spend the next ten day 
 together , during which Heliobas administer to I certain remedy , 
 external and internal , which have a marvellous effect in renovating and 
 invigorate my system . by the expiration of that time I be strong and 
 well - a sound and sane man , as my rescuer have promise I should be - my 
 brain be fresh and eager for work , and my mind be fill with new and 
 grand idea of art . and I have gain through Heliobas two inestimable 
 thing - a full comprehension of the truth of religion , and the secret 
 of human destiny ; and I have win a love so exquisite ! " 

 here Cellini pause , and his eye be uplifted in a sort of wonder 
 rapture . he continue after a pause : 

 " yes , mademoiselle , I discover that I be love , and watch over and 
 guide by one so divinely beautiful , so gloriously faithful , that 
 mortal language fail before the description of such perfection ! " 

 he pause again , and again continue : 

 " when he find I perfectly healthy again in mind and body , Heliobas 
 show I his art of mix colour . from that hour all my work be 
 successful . you know that my picture be eagerly purchase as soon as 
 complete , and that the colour I obtain in they be to the world a 
 mystery almost magical . yet there be not one among the humblest of 
 artist who could not , if he choose , make use of the same mean as I 
 have do to gain the nearly imperishable hue that still glow on the 
 canvas of Raphael . but of this there be no need to speak just now . I 
 have tell you my story , mademoiselle , and it now rest with I to apply 
 its meaning to yourself . you be attend ? " 

 " perfectly , " I reply ; and , indeed , my interest at this point be so 
 strong that I could almost hear the expectant beating of my heart . 
 Cellini resume : 

 " Electricity , mademoiselle , be , as you be aware , the wonder of our 
 age . no end can be foresee to the marvel it be capable of 
 accomplish . but one of the most important branch of this great 
 science be ignorantly deride just now by the large portion of 
 society - I mean the use of human electricity ; that force which be in 
 each one of we - in you and in I - and , to a very large extent , in 
 Heliobas . he have cultivate the electricity in his own system to such 
 an extent that his mere touch , his light glance , have healing in 
 they , or the reverse , as he choose to exert his power - I may say it be 
 never the reverse , for he be full of kindness , sympathy , and pity for 
 all humanity . his influence be so great that he can , without speak , 
 by his mere presence suggest his own thought to other people who be 
 perfect stranger , and cause they to design and carry out certain 
 action in accordance with his plan . you be incredulous ? 
 Mademoiselle , this power be in every one of we ; only we do not 
 cultivate it , because our education be yet so imperfect . to prove the 
 truth of what I say , I , though I have only advance a little way in 
 the cultivation of my own electric force , even I have influence you . 
 you can not deny it . by my thought , impel to you , you see clearly my 
 picture that be actually veil . by MY force , you reply correctly to 
 a question I ask you concern that same picture . by MY desire , you 
 give I , without be aware of it , a message from one I love when you 
 say , ' Dieu vous garde ! ' you remember ? and the elixir I give you , which 
 be one of the simple remedy discover by Heliobas , have the effect 
 of make you learn what he intend you to learn - his name . " 

 " he ! " I exclaim . " why , he do not know I - he can have no intention 
 towards I ! " 

 " Mademoiselle , " reply Cellini gravely , " if you will think again of 
 the last of your three dream , you will not doubt that he have 
 intention towards you . as I tell you , he be a PHYSICAL ELECTRICIAN . by 
 that be mean a great deal . he know by instinct whether he be or will 
 be need soon or later . let I finish what I have to say . you be 
 ill , mademoiselle - ill from over - work . you be an improvisatrice - that 
 be , you have the emotional genius of music , a spiritual thing 
 unfettere by rule , and utterly misunderstood by the world . you 
 cultivate this faculty , regardless of cost ; you suffer , and you will 
 suffer more . in proportion as your power in music grow , so will your 
 health decline . go to Heliobas ; he will do for you what he do for I . 
 surely you will not hesitate ? between year of weak invalidism and 
 perfect health , in less than a fortnight , there can be no question of 
 choice . " 

 I rise from my seat slowly . 

 " where be this Heliobas ? " I ask . " in Paris ? " 

 " yes , in Paris . if you decide to go there , take my advice , and go 
 alone . you can easily make some excuse to your friend . I will give you 
 the address of a lady ' Pension , where you will be make at home and 
 comfortable . may I do this ? " 

 " if you please , " I answer . 

 he write rapidly in pencil on a card of his own : 

  " MADAME DENISE , 
  " 36 , Avenue du Midi , 
  " Paris , " 

 and hand it to I . I stand still where I have rise , think deeply . 
 I have be impress and somewhat startle by Cellini 's story ; but I 
 be in no way alarm at the idea of trust myself to the hand of a 
 physical electrician such as Heliobas profess to be . I know that 
 there be many case of serious illness be cure by mean of 
 electricity - that electric bath and electric appliance of all 
 description be in ordinary use ; and I see no reason to be surprised 
 at the fact of a man be in existence who have cultivate electric 
 force within himself to such an extent that he be able to use it as a 
 healing power . there seem to I to be really nothing extraordinary in 
 it . the only part of Cellini 's narration I do not credit be the 
 soul - transmigration he profess to have experience ; and I put that 
 down to the over - excitement of his imagination at the time of his first 
 interview with Heliobas . but I keep this thought to myself . in any 
 case , I resolve to go to Paris . the great desire of my life be to be 
 in perfect health , and I determine to omit no mean of obtain this 
 inestimable blessing . Cellini watch I as I remain stand before 
 he in silent abstraction . 

 " will you go ? " he inquire at last . 

 " yes ; I will go , " I reply . " but will you give I a letter to your 
 friend ? " 

 " Leo have take it and all necessary explanation already , " say 
 Cellini , smile ; " I know you would go . Heliobas expect you the day 
 after to - morrow . his residence be Hotel Mars , Champs Elysees . you be 
 not angry with I , mademoiselle ? I could not help know that you 
 would go . " 

 I smile faintly . 

 " electricity again , I suppose ! no , I be not angry . why should I be ? I 
 thank you very much , signor , and I shall thank you more if Heliobas 
 indeed effect my cure . " 

 " oh , that be certain , positively certain , " answer Cellini ; " you can 
 indulge that hope as much as you like , mademoiselle , for it be one that 
 can not be disappoint . before you leave I , you will look at your own 
 picture , will you not ? " and , advance to his easel , he uncover it . 

 I be greatly surprised . I think he have but trace the outline of my 
 feature , whereas the head be almost complete . I look at it as I 
 would look at the portrait of a stranger . it be a wistful , sad - eye , 
 plaintive face , and on the pale gold of the hair rest a coronal of 
 lily . 

 " it will soon be finish , " say Cellini , cover the easel again ; " I 
 shall not need another sitting , which be fortunate , as it be so 
 necessary for you to go away . and now will you look at the ' Life and 
 Death ' once more ? " 

 I raise my eye to the grand picture , unveil that day in all its 
 beauty . 

 " the face of the Life - Angel there , " go on Cellini quietly , " be a poor 
 and feeble resemblance of the one I love . you know I be betroth , 
 mademoiselle ? " 

 I feel confused , and be endeavour to find an answer to this when he 
 continue : 

 " do not trouble to explain , for I know how you know . but no more of 
 this . will you leave Cannes to - morrow ? " 

 " yes . in the morning . " 

 " then good - bye , mademoiselle . should I never see you again - - " 

 " never see I again ! " I interrupt . " why , what do you mean ? " 

 " I do not allude to your destiny , but to mine , " he say , with a 
 kindly look . " my business may call I away from here before you come 
 back - our path may lie apart - many circumstance may occur to prevent 
 our meeting - so that , I repeat , should I never see you again , you will , 
 I hope , bear I in your friendly remembrance as one who be sorry to 
 see you suffer , and who be the humble mean of guide you to renew 
 health and happiness . " 

 I hold out my hand , and my eye fill with tear . there be something 
 so gentle and chivalrous about he , and withal so warm and sympathetic , 
 that I feel indeed as if I be bid adieu to one of the true 
 friend I should ever have in my life . 

 " I hope nothing will cause you to leave canne till I return to it , " I 
 say with real earnestness . " I should like you to judge of my 
 restoration to health . " 

 " there will be no need for that , " he reply ; " I shall know when you 
 be quite recover through Heliobas . " 

 he press my hand warmly . 

 " I bring back the book you lend I , " I go on ; " but I should like a 
 copy of it for myself . can I get it anywhere ? " 

 " Heliobas will give you one with pleasure , " reply Cellini ; " you have 
 only to make the request . the book be not on sale . it be print for 
 private circulation only . and now , mademoiselle , we part . I 
 congratulate you on the comfort and joy await you in Paris . do not 
 forget the address - Hotel Mars , Champs Elysees . farewell ! " 

 and again shake my hand cordially , he stand at his door watch I 
 as I pass out and begin to ascend the stair lead to my room . on 
 the landing I pause , and , look round , see he still there . I smile 
 and wave my hand . he do the same in response , once - twice ; then 
 turn abruptly , disappear . 

 that afternoon I explain to Colonel and Mrs. Everard that I have 
 resolve to consult a celebrated physician in Paris   whose name , 
 however , I do not mention , and should go there alone for a few day . 
 on hear that I know of a well - recommend lady ' Pension , they make 
 no objection to my arrangement , and they agree to remain at the Hotel 
 de L - -till I return . I give they no detail of my plan , and of 
 course never mention Raffaello Cellini in connection with the matter . 
 a nervous and wretchedly agitated night make I more than ever 
 determined to try the mean of cure propose to I . at ten o'clock the 
 follow morning I leave Cannes by express train for Paris . just before 
 start I notice that the lily of the valley Cellini have give I 
 for the dance have , in spite of my care , entirely wither , and be 
 already black with decay - so black that they look as though they have 
 be scorch by a flash of lightning . 




 CHAPTER VI . 

 the HOTEL MARS and its owner . 


 it be between three and four o'clock in the afternoon of the day 
 succeed the night of my arrival in Paris , when I find myself 
 stand at the door of the Hotel Mars , Champs Elysees . I have prove 
 the Pension keep by Madame Denise to be everything that could be 
 desire ; and on my presentation of Raffaello Cellini 's card of 
 introduction , I have be welcome by the maitresse de la maison with a 
 cordial effusiveness that amount almost to enthusiasm . 

 " ce cher Cellini ! " the cheery and pleasant little woman have exclaim , 
 as she set before I a deliciously prepare breakfast . " Je l'aime tant ! 
 Il a si bon coeur ! et ses beaux yeux ! Mon Dieu , comme un ange ! " 

 as soon as I have settle the various little detail respect my room 
 and attendance , and have change my travel - dress for a quiet 
 visit toilette , I start for the abode of Heliobas . 

 the weather be very cold ; I have leave the summer behind I at Cannes , 
 to find winter reign supreme in Paris . a bitter east wind blew , and 
 a few flake of snow fall now and then from the frown sky . the house 
 to which I betook myself be situate at a command corner of a road 
 face the Champs Elysees . it be a noble - look building . the broad 
 step lead to the entrance be guard on either side by a 
 sculpture Sphinx , each of whom hold , in its massive stone paw , a 
 plain shield , inscribe with the old Roman greeting to stranger , 
 " Salve ! " over the portico be design a scroll which bear the name 
 " Hotel Mars " in clearly cut capital , and the monogram " C. H. " 

 I ascend the step with some hesitation , and twice I extend my hand 
 towards the bell , desire yet fear to awaken its summon . I notice 
 it be an electric bell , not need to be pull but press ; and at 
 last , after many doubt and anxious supposition , I very gently lay my 
 finger on the little button which form its handle . Scarcely have I 
 do this than the great door slide open rapidly without the least 
 noise . I look for the servant in attendance - there be none . I pause 
 an instant ; the door remain invitingly open , and through it I catch 
 a glimpse of flower . resolve to be bold , and to hesitate no long , 
 I enter . as I cross the threshold , the door close behind I 
 instantly with its previous swiftness and silence . 

 I find myself in a spacious hall , light and lofty , surround with 
 flute pillar of white marble . in the centre a fountain bubble 
 melodiously , and toss up every now and then a high jet of sparkle 
 spray , while round its basin grow the rare fern and exotic , which 
 emit a subtle and delicate perfume . no cold air penetrate here ; it 
 be as warm and balmy as a spring day in Southern Italy . Light Indian 
 bamboo chair provide with luxurious velvet cushion be place in 
 various corner between the marble column , and on one of these I 
 seat myself to rest a minute , wonder what I should do next , and 
 whether anyone would come to ask I the cause of my intrusion . my 
 meditation be soon put to flight by the appearance of a young lad , 
 who cross the hall from the left - hand side and approach I . he be 
 a handsome boy of twelve or thirteen year of age , and he be attire 
 in a simple greek costume of white linen , relieve with a broad crimson 
 silk sash . a small flat crimson cap rest on his thick black curl ; 
 this he lift with deferential grace , and , salute I , say 
 respectfully : 

 " my master be ready to receive you , mademoiselle . " 

 I rise without a word and follow he , scarcely permit myself to 
 speculate as to how his master know I be there at all . 

 the hall be soon traverse , and the lad pause before a magnificent 
 curtain of deep crimson velvet , heavily border with gold . pull a 
 twisted cord that hang beside it , the heavy , regal fold part in 
 twain with noiseless regularity , and display an octagon room , so 
 exquisitely design and ornament that I gaze upon it as upon some 
 rare and beautiful picture . it be unoccupied , and my young escort 
 place a chair for I near the central window , inform I as he do 
 so that " Monsieur le Comte " would be with I instantly ; whereupon he 
 depart . 

 leave alone , I gaze in bewilderment at the loveliness round I . the 
 wall and ceiling be paint in fresco . I could not make out the 
 subject , but I could see face of surpass beauty smile from 
 cloud , and peer between star and crescent . the furniture appear 
 to be of very ancient arabian design ; each chair be a perfect 
 masterpiece of wood - carving , pick out and inlay with gold . the sight 
 of a semi - grand piano , which stand open , bring I back to the 
 realization that I be live in modern time , and not in a dream of 
 the Arabian Nights ; while the Paris Figaro and the London Times - both 
 of that day 's issue - lie on a side - table , demonstrate the nineteenth 
 century to I with every possible clearness . there be flower 
 everywhere in this apartment - in graceful vas and in gild osi 
 basket - and a queer lop - side oriental jar stand quite near I , fill 
 almost to overflow with Neapolitan violet . yet it be winter in 
 Paris , and flower be rare and costly . 

 look about I , I perceive an excellent cabinet photograph of 
 Raffaello Cellini , frame in antique silver ; and I rise to examine it 
 more closely , as be the face of a friend . while I look at it , I 
 hear the sound of an organ in the distance play softly an old 
 familiar church chant . I listen . suddenly I bethink myself of the 
 three dream that have visit I , and a kind of nervous dread come upon 
 I . this Heliobas , - be I right after all in come to consult he ? be 
 he not perhaps a mere charlatan ? and might not his experiment upon I 
 prove fruitless , and possibly fatal ? an idea seize I that I would 
 escape while there be yet time . yes ! ... I would not see he to - day , 
 at any rate ; I would write and explain . these and other disjointed 
 thought cross my mind ; and yield to the unreasone impulse of 
 fear that possess I , I actually turn to leave the room , when I see 
 the crimson velvet portiere divide again in its regular and graceful 
 fold , and Heliobas himself enter . 

 I stand mute and motionless . I know he well ; he be the very man I have 
 see in my third and last dream ; the same noble , calm feature ; the 
 same commanding presence ; the same keen , clear eye ; the same 
 compelling smile . there be nothing extraordinary about his appearance 
 except his stately bearing and handsome countenance ; his dress be that 
 of any well - to - do gentleman of the present day , and there be no 
 affectation of mystery in his manner . he advance and bow 
 courteously ; then , with a friendly look , hold out his hand . I give he 
 mine at once . 

 " so you be the young musician ? " he say , in those warm mellifluous 
 accent that I have hear before and that I so well remember . " my 
 friend Raffaello Cellini have write to I about you . I hear you have 
 be suffer from physical depression ? " 

 he speak as any physician might do who inquire after a patient 's 
 health . I be surprised and relieve . I have prepare myself for 
 something darkly mystical , almost cabalistic ; but there be nothing 
 unusual in the demeanour of this pleasant and good - look gentleman 
 who , bid I be seat , take a chair himself opposite to I , and 
 observe I with that sympathetic and kindly interest which any 
 well - breed doctor would esteem it his duty to exhibit . I become quite at 
 ease , and answer all his question fully and frankly . he feel my 
 pulse in the customary way , and study my face attentively . I 
 describe all my symptom , and he listen with the utmost patience . 
 when I have conclude , he lean back in his chair and appear to 
 ponder deeply for some moment . then he speak . 

 " you know , of course , that I be not a doctor ? " 

 " I know , " I say ; " Signer Cellini explain to I . " 

 " ah ! " and Heliobas smile . " Raffaello explain as much as he might ; 
 but not everything . I must tell you I have a simple pharmacopoeia of my 
 own - it contain twelve remedy , and only twelve . in fact there I no 
 more that be of any use to the human mechanism . all be make of the 
 juice of plant , and six of they be electric . Raffaello try you with 
 one of they , do he not ? " 

 as he put this question , I be aware of a keenly inquire look send 
 from the eye of my interrogator into mine . 

 " yes , " I answer frankly , " and it make I dream , and I dream of you . " 

 Heliobas laugh lightly . 

 " so ! - that be well . now I be go in the first place to give you what 
 I be sure will be satisfactory information . if you agree to trust 
 yourself to my care , you will be in perfect health in a little less 
 than a fortnight - but you must follow my rule exactly . " 

 I start up from my seat . 

 " of course ! " I exclaim eagerly , forget all my previous fear of 
 he ; " I will do all you advise , even if you wish to magnetize I as you 
 magnetize Signor Cellini ! " 

 " I never magnetize Raffaello , " he say gravely ; " he be on the verge 
 of madness , and he have no faith whereby to save himself . I simply set 
 he free for a time , know that his be a genius which would find out 
 thing for itself or perish in the effort . I let he go on a voyage of 
 discovery , and he come back perfectly satisfied . that be all . you do 
 not need his experience . " 

 " how do you know ? " I ask . 

 " you be a woman - your desire be to be well and strong , health being 
 beauty - to love and to be belove - to wear pretty toilette and to be 
 admire ; and you have a creed which satisfy you , and which you 
 believe in without proof . " 

 there be the slight possible tinge of mockery in his voice as he 
 say these word . a tumultuous rush of feeling overcome I . my high 
 dream of ambition , my innate scorn of the trite and commonplace , my 
 deep love of art , my desire of fame - all these thing bear down upon 
 my heart and overcome it , and a pride too deep for tear arise in I 
 and find utterance . 

 " you think I be so slight and weak a thing ! " I exclaim . " you , who 
 profess to understand the secret of electricity - you have no well 
 instinctive knowledge of I than that ! do you deem woman all alike - all 
 on one common level , fit for nothing but to be the toy or drudge of 
 man ? can you not realize that there be some among they who despise the 
 inanity of everyday life - who care nothing for the routine of 
 society , and whose heart be fill with craving that no mere human 
 love or life can satisfy ? yes - even weak woman be capable of 
 greatness ; and if we do sometimes dream of what we can not accomplish 
 through lack of the physical force necessary for large achievement , 
 that be not our fault but our misfortune . we do not create ourselves . 
 we do not ask to be bear with the over - sensitiveness , the fatal 
 delicacy , the highly - string nervousness of the feminine nature . 
 Monsieur Heliobas , you be a learn and far - see man , I have no 
 doubt ; but you do not read I aright if you judge I as a mere woman 
 who be perfectly content with the petty commonplace of ordinary 
 living . and as for my creed , what be it to you whether I kneel in the 
 silence of my own room or in the glory of a light cathedral to pour 
 out my very soul to one whom I know exist , and whom I be satisfied to 
 believe in , as you say , without proof , save such proof as I obtain 
 from my own inner consciousness ? I tell you , though , in your opinion it 
 be evident my sex be against I , I would rather die than sink into the 
 miserable nonentity of such life as be live by the majority of 
 woman . " 

 I pause , overcome by my own feeling . Heliobas smile . 

 " so ! you be sting ! " he say quietly ; ' sting into action . that be as it 
 should be . resume your seat , mademoiselle , and do not be angry with I . 
 I be study you for your own good . in the meantime permit I to 
 analyze your word a little . you be young and inexperienced . you speak 
 of the ' over - sensitiveness , the fatal delicacy , the highly - string 
 nervousness of the feminine nature . ' my dear lady , if you have live as 
 long as I have , you would know that these be mere stock phrase - for 
 the most part meaningless . as a rule , woman be less sensitive than 
 man . there be many of your sex who be nothing but lump of lymph and 
 fatty matter - woman with less instinct than the dumb beast , and with 
 more brutality . there be other who , - add the low cunning of the 
 monkey to the vanity of the peacock , - seek no other object but the 
 furtherance of their own design , which be always petty even when not 
 absolutely mean . there be obese woman whose existence be a doze 
 between dinner and tea . there be woman with thin lip and point 
 nose , who only live to squabble over domestic grievance and interfere 
 in their neighbour ' business . there be your murderous woman with 
 large almond eye , fair white hand , and voluptuous red lip , who , 
 deprive of the dagger or the poison - bowl , will slay a reputation in a 
 few lazily enunciate word , deliver with a perfectly high - breed 
 accent . there be the miserly woman , who look after cheese - paring and 
 candle - end , and lock up the soap . there be the spiteful woman whose 
 very breath be acidity and venom . there be the frivolous woman whose 
 chitter - chatter and senseless giggle be as empty as the rattling of 
 dry pea on a drum . in fact , the delicacy of woman be extremely 
 overrate - their coarseness be never do full justice to . I have hear 
 they recite in public selection of a kind that no man would dare to 
 undertake - such as Tennyson 's ' Rizpah , ' for instance . I know a woman 
 who utter every line of it , with all its questionable allusion , 
 boldly before any and everybody , without so much as an attempt at 
 blushing . I assure you man be far more delicate than woman - far more 
 chivalrous - far large in their view , and more generous in their 
 sentiment . but I will not deny the existence of about four woman in 
 every two hundred and fifty , who may be , and possibly be , example of 
 what the female sex be originally intend to be - pure - hearted , 
 self - deny , gentle and truthful - fill with tenderness and 
 inspiration . Heaven know my own mother be all this and more ! and my 
 sister be - . but let I speak to you of yourself . you love music , I 
 understand - you be a professional artist ? " 

 " I be , " I answer , " till my state of health stop I from work . " 

 Heliobas bend his eye upon I in friendly sympathy . 

 " you be , and you will be again , an improvisatrice " he go on . " do 
 you not find it difficult to make your audience understand your aim ? " 

 I smile as the remembrance of some of my experience in public come to 
 my mind . 

 " yes , " I say , half laugh . " in England , at least , people do not know 
 what be mean by improvise . they think it be to take a little theme 
 and compose variation on it - the mere ABC of the art . but to sit down 
 to the piano and plan a whole sonata or symphony in your head , and play 
 it while plan it , be a thing they do not and will not understand . 
 they come to hear , and they wonder and go away , and the critic declare 
 it to be clap - TRAP . " 

 " exactly ! " reply Heliobas . " but you be to be congratulate on have 
 attain this verdict . everything that people can not quite understand 
 be call CLAP - TRAP in England ; as for instance the matchless 
 violin - playing of Sarasate ; the tempestuous splendor of Rubinstein ; the 
 wail throb of passion in Hollmann 's violoncello - this be , accord 
 to the London press , CLAP - TRAP ; while the coldly correct performance 
 of Joachim and the ' icily - null ' rendering of Charles Halle be vote 
 ' magnificent ' and ' full of colour . ' but to return to yourself . will you 
 play to I ? " 

 " I have not touch the instrument for two month , " I say ; " I be 
 afraid I be out of practice . " 

 " then you shall not exert yourself to - day , " return Heliobas kindly . 
 " but I believe I can help you with your improvisation . you compose the 
 music as you play , you tell I . well , have you any idea how the 
 melody or the harmony form themselves in your brain ? " 

 " not the least in the world , " I reply . 

 " be the act of think they out an effort to you ? " he ask . 

 " not at all . they come as though someone else be plan they for 
 I . " 

 " well , well ! I think I can certainly be of use to you in this matter as 
 in other . I understand your temperament thoroughly . and now let I 
 give you my first prescription . " 

 he go to a corner of the room and lift from the floor an ebony 
 casket , curiously carve and ornament with silver . this he unlock . 
 it contain twelve flask of cut glass , stopper with gold and 
 number in order . he next pull out a side drawer in this casket , and 
 in it I see several little thin empty glass tube , about the size of a 
 cigarette - holder . take two of these he fill they from two of the 
 large flask , cork they tightly , and then turn to I , say : 

 " to - night , on go to bed , have a warm bath , empty the content of the 
 tube mark no . 1 into it , and then immerse yourself thoroughly for 
 about five minute . after the bath , put the fluid in this other tube 
 mark 2 , into a tumbler of fresh spring water , and drink it off . then 
 go straight to bed . " 

 " shall I have any dream ? " I inquire with a little anxiety . 

 " certainly not , " reply Heliobas , smile . " I wish you to sleep as 
 soundly as a year - old child . dream be not for you to - night . can you 
 come to I tomorrow afternoon at five o'clock ? if you can arrange to 
 stay to dinner , my sister will be pleased to meet you ; but perhaps you 
 be otherwise engage ? " 

 I tell he I be not , and explain where I have take room , add 
 that I have come to Paris expressly to put myself under his treatment . 

 " you shall have no cause to regret this journey , " he say earnestly . " I 
 can cure you thoroughly , and I will . I forget your nationality - you be 
 not english ? " 

 " no , not entirely . I be half italian . " 

 " ah , yes ! I remember now . but you have be educate in England ? " 

 " partly . " 

 " I be glad it be only partly , " remark Heliobas . " if it have be 
 entirely , your improvisation would have have no chance . in fact you 
 never would have improvise . you would have play the piano like poor 
 mechanical Arabella Goddard . as it be , there be some hope of 
 originality in you - you need not be one of the rank and file unless you 
 choose . " 

 " I do not choose , " I say . 

 " well , but you must take the consequence , and they be bitter . a woman 
 who do not go with her time be vote eccentric ; a woman who prefer 
 music to tea and scandal be an undesirable acquaintance ; and a woman 
 who prefer Byron to Austin Dobson be - in fact , no measure can gauge 
 her general impossibility ! " I laugh gaily . " I will take all the 
 consequence as willingly as I will take your medicine , " I say , 
 stretch out my hand for the little vas which he give I wrap in 
 paper . " and I thank you very much , monsieur . and " - here I hesitate . 
 ought I not to ask he his fee ? surely the medicine ought to be pay 
 for ? 

 Heliobas appear to read my thought , for he say , as though answer 
 my unuttered question : 

 " I do not accept fee , mademoiselle . to relieve your mind from any 
 responsibility of gratitude to I , I will tell you at once that I never 
 promise to effect a cure unless I see that the person who come to be 
 cure have a certain connection with myself . if the connection exist I 
 be bind by fix law to serve he or she . of course I be able also to 
 cure those who be not by nature connect with I ; but then I have to 
 establish a connection , and this take time , and be sometimes very 
 difficult to accomplish , almost as tremendous a task as the lay down 
 of the atlantic cable . but in your case I be actually compel to do 
 my good for you , so you need be under no sense of obligation . " 

 here be a strange speech - the first really inexplicable one I have 
 hear from his lip . 

 " I be connect with you ? " I ask , surprised . " how ? in what way ? " 

 " it would take too long to explain to you just now , " say Heliobas 
 gently ; " but I can prove to you in a moment that a connection do 
 exist between your inner self , and my inner self , if you wish it . " 

 " I do wish it very much , " I answer . 

 " then take my hand , " continue Heliobas , stretch it out , " and look 
 steadily at I . " 

 I obey , half tremble . as I gaze , a veil appear to fall from my 
 eye . a sense of security , of comfort , and of absolute confidence come 
 upon I , and I see what might be term the image of another face 
 look at I through or behind the actual form and face of Heliobas . 
 and that other face be his , and yet not his ; but whatever it appear 
 to be , it be the face of a friend to I , one that I be certain I have 
 know long , long ago , and moreover one that I must have love in some 
 distant time , for my whole soul seem to yearn towards that indistinct 
 haze where smile the fully recognise yet unfamiliar countenance . this 
 strange sensation last but a few second , for Heliobas suddenly 
 drop my hand . the room swam round I ; the wall seem to rock ; then 
 everything steady and come right again , and all be as usual , only I 
 be amazed and bewildered . 

 " what do it mean ? " I murmur . 

 " it mean the simple thing in nature , " reply Heliobas quietly , 
 " namely , that your soul and mine be for some reason or other place on 
 the same circle of electricity . nothing more nor less . therefore we 
 must serve each other . whatever I do for you , you have it in your power 
 to repay I amply for hereafter . " 

 I meet the steady glance of his keen eye , and a sense of some 
 indestructible force within I give I a sudden courage . 

 " decide for I as you please , " I answer fearlessly . " I trust you 
 completely , though I do not know why I do so . " 

 " you will know before long . you be satisfied of the fact that my touch 
 can influence you ? " 

 " yes ; most thoroughly . " 

 " very well . all other explanation , if you desire they , shall be give 
 you in due time . in the power I possess over you and some other , there 
 be neither mesmerism nor magnetism - nothing but a purely scientific 
 fact which can be clearly and reasonably prove and demonstrate . but 
 till you be thoroughly restore to health , we will defer all 
 discussion . and now , mademoiselle , permit I to escort you to the door . 
 I shall expect you to - morrow . " 

 together we leave the beautiful room in which this interview have take 
 place , and cross the hall . as we approach the entrance , Heliobas 
 turn towards I and say with a smile : 

 " do not the manoeuvre of my street - door astonish you ? " 

 " a little , " I confess . 

 " it be very simple . the button you touch outside be electric ; it open 
 the door and at the same time ring the bell in my study , thus 
 inform I of a visitor . when the visitor step across the threshold 
 he tread , whether he will or no , on another apparatus , which close 
 the door behind he and ring another bell in my page 's room , who 
 immediately come to I for order . you see how easy ? and from within 
 it be manage in almost the same manner . " 

 and he touch a handle similar to the one outside , and the door open 
 instantly . Heliobas hold out his hand - that hand which a few minute 
 previously have exercise such strange authority over I . 

 " good - bye , mademoiselle . you be not afraid of I now ? " 

 I laugh . " I do not think I be ever really afraid of you , " I say . 
 " if I be , I be not so any long . you have promise I health , and 
 that promise be sufficient to give I entire courage . " 

 " that be well , " say Heliobas . " courage and hope in themselves be the 
 precursor of physical and mental energy . remember to - morrow at five , 
 and do not keep late hour to - night . I should advise you to be in bed 
 by ten at the late . " 

 I agree to this , and we shake hand and part . I walk blithely 
 along , back to the Avenue du Midi , where , on my arrival indoor , I 
 find a letter from Mrs. Everard . she write " in haste " to give I the 
 name of some friend of hers whom she have discover , through the 
 " American Register , " to be stay at the Grand Hotel . she beg I to 
 call upon they , and enclose two letter of introduction for the 
 purpose . she conclude her epistle by say : 


 " Raffaello Cellini have be invisible ever since your departure , but 
 our inimitable waiter , Alphonse , say he be very busy finish a 
 picture for the Salon - something that we have never see . I shall 
 intrude myself into his studio soon on some pretence or other , and will 
 then let you know all about it . in the meantime , believe I , 

 " your ever devoted friend , AMY . " 


 I answer this letter , and then spend a pleasant evening at the 
 Pension , chat sociably with Madame Denise and another cheery little 
 Frenchwoman , a day governess , who board there , and who have no end of 
 droll experience to relate , her enviable temperament be to always 
 see the humorous side of life . I thoroughly enjoy her sparkling 
 chatter and her expressive gesticulation , and we all three make 
 ourselves merry till bedtime . act on the advice of Heliobas , I 
 retire early to my room , where a warm bath have be prepare in 
 compliance with my order . I uncork the glass tube no . 1 , and pour 
 the colourless fluid it contain into the water , which immediately 
 bubble gently , as though begin to boil . after watch it for a 
 minute or two , and observe that this seethe movement steadily 
 continue , I undress quickly and step in . never shall I forget the 
 exquisite sensation I experience ! I can only describe it as the poor 
 little Doll 's Dressmaker in " our Mutual Friend " describe her angel 
 visitant , her " bless child , " who use to come and " take she up 
 and make her light . " if my body have be compose of no gross matter 
 than fire and air , I could not have feel more weightless , more buoyant , 
 more thoroughly exhilarate than when , at the end of the prescribed 
 five minute , I get out of that marvellous bath of healing ! as I 
 prepare for bed , I notice that the bubbling of the water have entirely 
 cease ; but this be easy of comprehension , for if it have contain 
 electricity , as I suppose , my body have absorb it by contact , which 
 would account for the movement be still . I now take the second 
 little phial , and prepare it as I have be tell . this time the fluid 
 be motionless . I notice it be very faintly ting with amber . I 
 drink it off - it be perfectly tasteless . once in bed , I seem to have 
 no power to think any more - my eye close readily - the slumber of a 
 year - old child , as Heliobas have say , come upon I with resistless and 
 sudden force , and I remember no more . 




 CHAPTER VII . 

 ZARA and PRINCE IVAN . 


 the sun pour brilliantly into my room when I awake the next morning . 
 I be free from all my customary ache and pain , and a delightful 
 sense of vigour and elasticity pervade my frame . I rise at once , and , 
 look at my watch , find to my amazement that it be twelve o'clock 
 in the day ! hastily throw on my dressing - gown , I ring the bell , and 
 the servant appear . 

 " be it actually mid - day ? " I ask she . " why do you not call I ? " 

 the girl smile apologetically . 

 " I do knock at mademoiselle 's door , but she give I no answer . Madame 
 Denise come up also , and enter the room ; but see mademoiselle in 
 so sound a sleep , she say it be a pity to disturb mademoiselle . " 

 which statement good Madame Denise , toil upstairs just then with 
 difficulty , she be stout and short of breath , confirm with many 
 smile nod of her head . 

 " breakfast shall be serve at the instant , " she say , rub her fat 
 hand together ; " but to disturb you when you sleep - ah , Heaven ! the 
 sleep of an infant - I could not do it ! I should have be wicked ! " 

 I thank she for her care of I ; I could have kiss she , she look 
 so motherly , and kind , and altogether lovable . and I feel so merry and 
 well ! she and the servant retire to prepare my coffee , and I proceed 
 to make my toilette . as I brush out my hair I hear the sound of a 
 violin . someone be play next door . I listen , and recognise a 
 famous Beethoven Concerto . the unseen musician play brilliantly and 
 withal tenderly , both touch and tone remind I of some beautiful 
 verse in a book of poem I have recently read , call " Love - letter of 
 a Violinist , " in which the poet   FOOTNOTE : author of the equally 
 beautiful idyl , " gladys the singer , " include in the new American 
 copyright edition just issue .   talk of his " love Amati , " and say : 
 " I pray my prayer . I wove into my song 

  Fervour , and joy , and mystery , and the bleak , 
  the wan despair that word could never speak . 
  I pray as if my spirit do belong 
  to some old master who be wise and strong , 
  because he lov'd and suffer , and be weak . 

  " I trill'd the note , and curb'd they to a sigh , 
  and when they falter'd most , I make they leap 
  Fierce from my bow , as from a summer sleep 
  a young she - devil . I be fire thereby 
  to bolder effort - and a muffle cry 
  come from the string as if a saint do weep . 

  " I change the theme . I dally with the bow 
  just time enough to fit it to a mesh 
  of merry tone , and draw it back afresh , 
  to talk of truth , and constancy , and woe , 
  and life , and love , and madness , and the glow 
  of mine own soul which burn into my flesh . " 

 all my love for music well freshly up in my heart ; I , who have feel 
 disinclined to touch the piano for month , now long to try my 
 strength again upon the familiar and responsive key - board . for a piano 
 have never be a mere piano to I ; it be a friend who answer to my 
 thought , and whose note meet my finger with caress readiness and 
 obedience . 

 Breakfast come , and I take it with great relish . then , to pass the day , 
 I go out and call on Mrs. Everard 's friend , Mr. and Mrs. Challoner 
 and their daughter . I find they very agreeable , with that easy 
 bonhomie and lack of stiffness that distinguish the good Americans . 
 find out through Mrs. Everard 's letter that I be an " artiste " they 
 at once conclude I must need support and patronage , and with impulsive 
 large - heartedness be begin to plan as to the good mean of 
 organize a concert for I . I be take by surprise at this , for I have 
 generally find the exact reverse of this sympathy among English 
 patron of art , who be never tired of murmur the usual platitude 
 about there be ' so many musician , " " music be overdone , " 
 " improvise be not understand or care for , " etc . , etc . 

 but these agreeable Americans , as soon as they discover that I have 
 not come for any professional reason to Paris , but only to consult a 
 physician about my health , be actually disappointed . 

 " oh , we shall persuade you to give a recital some time ! " persist the 
 handsome smile mother of the family . " I know lot of people in Paris . 
 we will get it up for you ! " 

 I protest , half laugh , that I have no idea of the kind , but they 
 be incorrigibly generous . 

 " nonsense ! " say Mrs. Challoner , arrange her diamond ring on her 
 pretty white hand with pardonable pride . " brain do not   go for nothing 
 in our country . as soon as you be fix up in health , we will give you a 
 grand soiree in Paris , and we will work up all our folk in the place . 
 do not   tell I you be not as glad of dollar as any one of we . " 

 " dollar be very good , " I admit , " but real appreciation be far 
 well . " 

 " well , you shall have both from we , " say Mrs. Challoner . " and now , 
 will you stop to luncheon ? " 

 I accept this invitation , give as it be with the most friendly 
 affability , and enjoy myself very much . 

 " you do not   look ill , " say the eld Miss Challoner to I , later on . 
 " I do not   see that you want a physician . " 

 " oh , I be get much well now , " I reply ; " and I hope soon to be 
 quite well . " 

 " who be your doctor ? " 

 I hesitate . somehow the name of Heliobas would not come to my lip . 
 fortunately Mrs. Challoner divert her daughter 's attention at this 
 moment by the announcement that a dressmaker be wait to see she ; 
 and in the face of such an important visit , no one remember to ask I 
 again the name of my medical adviser . 

 I leave the Grand Hotel in good time to prepare for my second visit to 
 Heliobas . as I be go there to dinner I make a slightly dressy 
 toilette , if a black silk robe relieve with a cluster of pale pink 
 rose can be call dressy . this time I drive to the Hotel Mars , 
 dismiss the coachman , however , before ascend the step . the door 
 open and close as usual , and the first person I see in the hall be 
 Heliobas himself , seat in one of the easy - chair , read a volume of 
 Plato . he rise and greet I cordially . before I could speak a word , 
 he say : 

 " you need not tell I that you sleep well . I see it in your eye and 
 face . you feel well ? " 

 my gratitude to he be so great that I find it difficult to express 
 my thank . tear rush to my eye , yet I try to smile , though I 
 could not speak . he see my emotion , and continue kindly : 

 " I be as thankful as you can be for the cure which I see have begin , and 
 will soon be effect . my sister be wait to see you . will you come 
 to her room ? " 

 we ascend a flight of stair thickly carpet , and border on each 
 side by tropical fern and flower , place in exquisitely paint china 
 pot and vas . I hear the distant singing of many bird mingle with 
 the ripple and plash of water . we reach a landing where the 
 afterglow of the set sun stream through a high oriel window of richly 
 stain glass . turn towards the left , Heliobas draw aside the fold 
 of some azure satin hanging , and call in a low voice " Zara ! " 
 motion I to enter . I step into a spacious and lofty apartment 
 where the light seem to soften and merge into many shade of opaline 
 radiance and delicacy - a room the beauty of which would at any other 
 time have astonish and delight I , but which now appear as 
 nothing beside the surpass loveliness of the woman who occupy it . 
 never shall I behold again any face or form so divinely beautiful ! she 
 be about the medium height of woman , but her small finely - shape head 
 be set upon so slender and proud a throat that she appear tall 
 than she actually be . her figure be most exquisitely rounded and 
 proportion , and she come across the room to give I greet with a 
 sort of glide graceful movement , like that of a stately swan float 
 on calm sunlit water . her complexion be transparently clear - most 
 purely white , most delicately rosy , her eye - large , luminous and dark 
 as night , fringe with long silky black lash - look like 

  " Fairy lake , where tender thought 
  swam softly to and fro . " 

 her rich black hair be arrange a la Marguerite , and hang down in one 
 long loose thick braid that nearly reach the end of her dress , and 
 she be attire in a robe of deep old gold indian silk as soft as 
 cashmere , which be gather in round her waist by an antique belt of 
 curious jewel - work , in which ruby and turquoise seem to be thickly 
 stud . on her bosom shine a strange gem , the colour and form of which 
 I could not determine . it be never the same for two minute together . 
 it glow with many various hue - now bright crimson , now 
 lightning - blue , sometimes deepen into a rich purple or tawny orange . 
 its lustre be intense , almost dazzle to the eye . its beautiful 
 wearer give I welcome with a radiant smile and a few cordial word , 
 and draw I by the hand to the low couch she have just vacate , make 
 I sit down beside she . Heliobas have disappear . 

 " and so , " say Zara - how soft and full of music be her voice ! - ' so you 
 be one of Casimir 's patient ? I can not help consider that you be 
 fortunate in this , for I know my brother 's power . if he say he will 
 cure you , you may be sure he mean it . and you be already well , be 
 you not ? " 

 " much well , " I say , look earnestly into the lovely star - like eye 
 that regard I with such interest and friendliness . " indeed , to - day I 
 have feel so well , that I can not realize ever have be ill . " 

 " I be very glad , " say Zara , " I know you be a musician , and I think 
 there can be no bitterer fate than for one belong to your art to be 
 incapacitate from performance of work by some physical obstacle . poor 
 grand old Beethoven ! can anything be more pitiful to think of than his 
 deafness ? yet how splendidly he bear up against it ! and Chopin , too - so 
 delicate in health that he be too often morbid even in his music . 
 Strength be need to accomplish great thing - the double strength of 
 body and soul . " 

 " be you , too , a musician ? " I inquire . 

 " no . I love music passionately , and I play a little on the organ in our 
 private chapel ; but I follow a different art altogether . I be a mere 
 imitator of noble form - I be a sculptress . " 

 " you ? " I say in some wonder , look at the very small , beautifully 
 form white hand that lie passively on the edge of the couch beside 
 I . " you make statue in marble like Michael Angelo ? " 

 " like Angelo ? " murmur Zara ; and she lower her brilliant eye with a 
 reverential gravity . " no one in these modern day can approach the 
 immortal splendour of that great master . he must have know hero and 
 talk with god to be able to hew out of the rock such perfection of 
 shape and attitude as his ' David . ' alas ! my strength of brain and hand 
 be mere child 's play compare to what have be do in sculpture , and 
 what will yet be do ; still , I love the work for its own sake , and I 
 be always try to render a resemblance of - " 

 here she break off abruptly , and a deep blush suffuse her cheek . 
 then , look up suddenly , she take my hand impulsively , and press it . 

 " be my friend , " she say , with a caress inflection in her rich 
 voice , " I have no friend of my own sex , and I wish to love you . my 
 brother have always have so much distrust of the companionship of woman 
 for I . you know his theory ; and he have always assert that the 
 sphere of thought in which I have live all my life be so widely apart 
 from those in which other woman exist - that nothing but unhappiness for 
 I could come out of associate we together . when he tell I yesterday 
 that you be come to see I to - day , I know he must have discover 
 something in your nature that be not antipathetic to mine ; otherwise 
 he would not have bring you to I . do you think you can like 
 I ? - perhaps love I after a little while ? " 

 it would have be a cold heart indeed that would not have respond to 
 such a speech as this , utter with the plead prettiness of a love 
 child . besides , I have warm to she from the first moment I have touch 
 her hand ; and I be overjoyed to think that she be willing to elect I 
 as a friend . I therefore reply to her word by put my arm 
 affectionately round her waist and kiss she . my beautiful , tender 
 Zara ! how innocently happy she seem to be thus embrace ! and how 
 gently her fragrant lip meet mine in that sisterly caress ! she lean 
 her dark head for a moment on my shoulder , and the mysterious jewel on 
 her breast flash into a weird red hue like the light of a stormy 
 sunset . 

 " and now we have draw up , sign , and seal our compact of 
 friendship , " she say gaily , " will you come and see my studio ? there be 
 nothing in it that deserve to last , I think ; still , one have patience 
 with a child when he build his brick house , and you must have equal 
 patience with I . come ! " 

 and she lead the way through her lovely room , which I now notice be 
 full of delicate statuary , fine painting , and exquisite embroidery , 
 while flower be everywhere in abundance . lift the hanging at the 
 farther end of the apartment , she pass , I follow , into a lofty 
 studio , fill with all the appurtenance of the sculptor 's art . here 
 and there be the usual spectral effect which be always suggest to 
 the mind by unfinished plaster model - an arm in one place , a head in 
 another ; a torso , or a single hand , protrude ghost - like from a fold 
 of dark drapery . at the very end of the room stand a large erect 
 figure , the outline of which could but dimly be see through its linen 
 covering ; and to this work , whatever it be , Zara do not appear 
 desirous of attract my attention . she lead I to one particular 
 corner ; and , throw aside a small crimson velvet curtain , say : 

 " this be the last thing I have finish in marble . I call it 
 ' Approaching Evening . ' " 

 I stand silently before the statue , lose in admiration . I could not 
 conceive it possible that the fragile little hand of the woman who 
 stand beside I could have execute such a perfect work . she have 
 depict " evening " as a beautiful nude female figure in the act of 
 step forward on tip - toe ; the eye be half closed , and the sweet 
 mouth slightly part in a dreamily serious smile . the right forefinger 
 be lay lightly on the lip , as though suggest silence ; and in the 
 leave hand be loosely clasp a bunch of poppy . that be all . but the 
 poetry and force of the whole conception as carry out in the statue 
 be marvellous . 

 " do you like it ? " ask Zara , half timidly . 

 " like it ! " I exclaim . " it be lovely - wonderful ! it be worthy to rank 
 with the fine italian masterpiece . " 

 " oh , no ! " remonstrate Zara ; " no , indeed ! when the great italian 
 sculptor live and work - ah ! one may say with the scripture , ' there 
 be giant in those day . ' Giants - veritable one ; and we modernist 
 be the pigmy . we can only see art now through the eye of other who 
 come before we . we can not create anything new . we look at paint 
 through Raphael ; sculpture through Angelo ; poetry through Shakespeare ; 
 philosophy through Plato . it be all do for we ; we be copyist . the 
 world be get old - how glorious to have live when it be young ! but 
 nowadays the very child be blase . " 

 " and you - be not you blase to talk like that , with your genius and all 
 the world before you ? " I ask laughingly , slip my arm through 
 her . " come , confess ! " 

 Zara look at I gravely . 

 " I sincerely hope the world be not all before I , " she say ; " I should 
 be very sorry if I think so . to have the world all before you in the 
 general acceptation of that term mean to live long , to barter whatever 
 genius you have for gold , to hear the fulsome and unmeaning flattery 
 of the ignorant , who be as ready with condemnation as praise - to be 
 envy and malign by those less lucky than you be . Heaven defend I 
 from such a fate ! " 

 she speak with earnestness and solemnity ; then , drop the curtain 
 before her statue , turn away . I be admire the vine - wreathe head 
 of a young Bacchante that stand on a pedestal near I , and be about to 
 ask Zara what subject she have choose for the large veiled figure at the 
 farth end of her studio , when we be interrupt by the entrance of 
 the little greek page whom I have see on my first visit to the house . 
 he salute we both , and address himself to Zara , say : 

 " Monsieur le Comte desire I to tell you , madame , that Prince Ivan 
 will be present at dinner . " 

 Zara look somewhat vexed ; but the shade of annoyance flit away 
 from her fair face like a pass shadow , as she reply quietly : 

 " tell Monsieur le Comte , my brother , that I shall be happy to receive 
 Prince Ivan . " 

 the page bow deferentially and depart . Zara turn round , and I see 
 the jewel on her breast flash with a steely glitter like the blade 
 of a sharp sword . 

 " I do not like Prince Ivan myself , " she say ; " but he be a singularly 
 brave and resolute man , and Casimir have some reason for admit he 
 to our companionship . though I greatly doubt if - " here a flood of 
 music break upon our ear like the sound of a distant orchestra . Zara 
 look at I and smile . " dinner be ready ! " she announce ; " but you 
 must not imagine that we keep a band to play we to our table in 
 triumph . it be simply a musical instrument work by electricity that 
 imitate the orchestra ; both Casimir and I prefer it to a gong ! " 

 and slip her arm affectionately through mine , she draw I from the 
 studio into the passage , and together we go down the staircase into a 
 large dining - room , rich with oil - painting and carve oak , where 
 Heliobas await we . close by he stand another gentleman , who be 
 introduce to I as Prince Ivan Petroffsky . he be a fine - look , 
 handsome - feature young man , of about thirty , tall and 
 broad - shoulder , though beside the command stature of Heliobas , his 
 figure do not show to so much advantage as it might have do beside a 
 less impose contrast . he bow to I with easy and courteous grace ; 
 but his deeply reverential salute to Zara have something in it of that 
 humility which a slave might render to a queen . she bend her head 
 slightly in answer , and still hold I by the hand , move to her seat 
 at the bottom of the table , while her brother take the head . my seat 
 be at the right hand of Heliobas , Prince Ivan 's at the left , so that 
 we directly face each other . 

 there be two man - servant in attendance , dress in dark livery , who 
 wait upon we with noiseless alacrity . the dinner be exceedingly 
 choice ; there be nothing coarse or vulgar in the dish - no great 
 heavy joint swim in thin gravy a la Anglaise ; no tureen of 
 unpalatable sauce ; no clumsy decanter fill with burn sherry or 
 drowsy port . the table itself be lay out in the most perfect taste , 
 with the fine venetian glass and old Dresden ware , in which tempt 
 fruit gleam amid cluster of glossy dark leaf . flower in tall 
 vas bloom wherever they could be place effectively ; and in the 
 centre of the board a small fountain play , tinkle as it rise and 
 fall like a very faintly echo fairy chime . the wine that be 
 serve to we be most delicious , though their flavour be quite 
 unknown to I - one in especial , of a pale pink colour , that sparkle 
 slightly as it be pour into my glass , seem to I a kind of nectar 
 of the god , so soft it be to the palate . the conversation , at first 
 somewhat desultory , grow more concentrated as the time go on , though 
 Zara speak little and seem absorb in her own thought more than 
 once . the Prince , warm with the wine and the general good cheer , 
 become witty and amusing in his conversation ; he be a man who have 
 evidently see a good deal of the world , and who be accustomed to take 
 everything in life a la bagatelle . he tell we gay story of his life 
 in St. Petersburg ; of the prank he have play in the Florentine 
 Carnival ; of his journey to the American States , and his narrow escape 
 from the matrimonial clutch of a Boston heiress . 

 Heliobas listen to he with a sort of indulgent kindness , only 
 smile now and then at the preposterous pun the young man would 
 insist on make at every opportunity that present itself . 

 " you be a lucky fellow , Ivan , " he say at last . " you like the good 
 thing of life , and you have get they all without any trouble on your 
 own part . you be one of those man who have absolutely nothing to wish 
 for . " 

 Prince Ivan frown and pull his dark moustache with no very 
 satisfied air . 

 " I be not so sure about that , " he return . " no one be content in 
 this world , I believe . there be always something leave to desire , and 
 the last thing long for always seem the most necessary to happiness . " 

 " the true philosophy , " say Heliobas , " be not to long for anything in 
 particular , but to accept everything as it come , and find out the 
 reason of its coming . " 

 " what do you mean by ' the reason of its coming ' ? " question Prince 
 Ivan . " do you know , Casimir , I find you sometimes as puzzle as 
 Socrates . " 

 " Socrates ? - Socrates be as clear as a drop of morning dew , my dear 
 fellow , " reply Heliobas . " there be nothing puzzle about he . his 
 remark be all true and trenchant - hit smartly home to the heart 
 like dagger plunge down to the hilt . that be the bad of he - he 
 be too clear - too honest - too disdainful of opinion . society do not 
 love such man . what do I mean , you ask , by accept everything as it 
 come , and try to find out the reason of its coming ? why , I mean 
 what I say . each circumstance that happen to each one of we bring its 
 own special lesson and meaning - form a link or part of a link in the 
 chain of our existence . it seem nothing to you that you walk down a 
 particular street at a particular hour , and yet that slight action of 
 yours may lead to a result you wot not of . ' accept the hint of each new 
 experience , ' say the american imitator of Plato - Emerson . if this 
 advice be faithfully follow , we all have enough to occupy we busily 
 from the cradle to the grave . " 

 Prince Ivan look at Zara , who sit quietly thoughtful , only lift 
 her bright eye now and then to glance at her brother as he speak . 

 " I tell you , " he say , with sudden moroseness , " there be some hint 
 that we can not accept - some circumstance that we must not yield to . 
 why should a man , for instance , be subject to an undeserved and 
 bitter disappointment ? " 

 " because , " say Zara , join in the conversation for the first time , 
 " he have most likely desire what he be not fat to obtain . " 

 the Prince bite his lip , and give a forced laugh . 

 " I know , madame , you be against I in all our argument , " he observe , 
 with some bitterness in his tone . " as Casimir suggest , I be a bad 
 philosopher . I do not pretend to more than the ordinary attribute of 
 an ordinary man ; it be fortunate , if I may be permit to say so , that 
 the rest of the word 's inhabitant be very like I , for if everyone 
 reach to the sublime height of science and knowledge that you and 
 your brother have attain - - " 

 " the course of human destiny would run out , and Paradise would be an 
 establish fact , " laugh Heliobas . " Come , Ivan ! you be a true 
 Epicurean . have some more wine , and a truce to discussion for the 
 present . " and , beckon to one of the servant , he order the 
 Prince 's glass to be refill . 

 Dessert be now serve , and luscious fruit in profusion , include 
 peach , banana , plantain , green fig , melon , pine - apple , and 
 magnificent grape , be offer for our choice . as I make a selection 
 for my own plate , I become aware of something soft rub itself 
 gently against my dress ; and look down , I see the noble head and 
 dark intelligent eye of my old acquaintance Leo , whom I have last meet 
 at Cannes . I give an exclamation of pleasure , and the dog , encourage , 
 stand up and lay a caressing paw on my arm . 

 " you know Leo , of course , " say Heliobas , turn to I . " he go to 
 see Raffaello while you be at Cannes . he be a wonderful animal - more 
 valuable to I than his weight in gold . " 

 Prince Ivan , whose transient moodiness have pass away like a bad devil 
 exorcise by the power of good wine , join heartily in the praise 
 bestow on this four - footed friend of the family . 

 " it be really through Leo , " he say , " that you be induce to follow 
 out your experiment in human electricity , Casimir , be it not ? " 

 " yes , " reply Heliobas , call the dog , who go to he immediately 
 to be fondle . " I should never have be much encourage in my 
 research , have he not be at hand . I fear to experimentalize much 
 on my sister , she be young at the time - and woman be always frail 
 of construction - but Leo be willing and ready to be a victim to 
 science , if necessary . instead of a martyr he be a live triumph - be 
 you not , old boy ? " he continue , stroke the silky coat of the animal , 
 who respond with a short low bark of satisfaction . 

 my curiosity be much excited by these remark , and I say eagerly : 

 " will you tell I in what way Leo have be useful to you ? I have a 
 great affection for dog , and I never tire of hear story of their 
 wonderful intelligence . " 

 " I will certainly tell you , " reply Heliobas . " to some people the 
 story might appear improbable , but it be perfectly true and at the same 
 time simple of comprehension . when I be a very young man , young than 
 Prince Ivan , I absorb myself in the study of electricity - its 
 wonderful power , and its various capability . from the consideration 
 of electricity in the different form by which it be know to civilized 
 Europe , I begin to look back through history , to what be ignorantly 
 call ' the dark age , ' but which might more justly be term the 
 enlightened youth of the world . I find that the force of electricity 
 be well understand by the ancient - well understand by they , in 
 fact , than it be by the scientist of our day . the ' MENE , MENE , TEKEL , 
 UPHARSIN ' that glitter in unearthly character on the wall at 
 Belshazzar 's feast , be write by electricity ; and the chaldean king 
 and priest understand a great many secret of another form of electric 
 force which the world to - day scoff at and almost ignore - I mean human 
 electricity , which we all possess , but which we do not all cultivate 
 within we . when once I realize the existence of the fact of human 
 electric force , I apply the discovery to myself , and spar no pain 
 to foster and educate whatever germ of this power lie within I . I 
 succeed with more ease and celerity than I have imagine possible . at 
 the time I pursue these study , Leo here be quite a young dog , full 
 of the clumsy playfulness and untrained ignorance of a newfoundland 
 puppy . one day I be very busy read an interesting Sanskrit scroll 
 which treat of ancient medicine and remedy , and Leo be gambol 
 in his awkward way about the room , play with an old slipper and 
 worry it with his tooth . the noise he make irritated and disturb 
 I , and I rise in my chair and call he by name , somewhat angrily . he 
 pause in his game and look up - his eye meet mine exactly . his head 
 droop ; he shiver uneasily , whine , and lie down motionless . he 
 never stir once from the position he have take , till I give he 
 permission - and remember , he be untraine . this strange behaviour lead 
 I to try other experiment with he , and all succeed . I gradually 
 lead he up to the point I desire - that be , I force HIM to receive 
 MY THOUGHT and ACT upon IT , as far as his canine capability could do , 
 and he have never once fail . it be sufficient for I to strongly will 
 he to do a certain thing , and I can convey that command of mine to his 
 brain without utter a single word , and he will obey I . " 

 I suppose I show surprise and incredulity in my face , for Heliobas 
 smile at I and continue : 

 " I will put he to the proof at any time you like . if you wish he to 
 fetch anything that he be physically able to carry , and will write the 
 name of whatever it be on a slip of paper , just for I to know what you 
 require , I guarantee Leo 's obedience . " 

 I look at Zara , and she laugh . 

 " it seem like magic to you , do it not ? " she say ; " but I assure you 
 it be quite true . " 

 " I be bind to admit , " say Prince Ivan , " that I once doubt both Leo 
 and his master , but I be quite convert . here , mademoiselle , " he 
 continue , hand I a leaf from his pocket - book and a pencil - " write 
 down something that you want ; only do not   send the dog to Italy on an 
 errand just now , as we want he back before we adjourn to the 
 drawing - room . " 

 I remember that I have leave an embroidered handkerchief on the couch 
 in Zara 's room , and I write this down on the paper , which I pass to 
 Heliobas . he glance at it and tear it up . Leo be indulge himself 
 with a bone under the table , but come instantly to his master 's call . 
 Heliobas take the dog 's head between his two hand , and gaze steadily 
 into the grave brown eye that regard he with equal steadiness . this 
 interchange of look last but a few second . Leo leave the room , 
 walk with an unruffled and dignified pace , while we await his 
 return - Heliobas and Zara with indifference , Prince Ivan with 
 amusement , and I with interest and expectancy . two or three minute 
 elapse , and the dog return with the same majestic demeanour , 
 carry between his tooth my handkerchief . he come straight to I and 
 place it in my hand ; shake himself , wag his tail , and convey a 
 perfectly human expression of satisfaction into his face , go under 
 the table again to his bone . I be utterly amazed , but at the same time 
 convince . I have not see the dog since my arrival in Paris , and it be 
 impossible for he to have know where to find my handkerchief , or to 
 recognize it as be mine , unless through the means Heliobas have 
 explain . 

 " can you command human being so ? " I ask , with a slight tremor of 
 nervousness . 

 " not all , " return Heliobas quietly . " in fact , I may say , very few . 
 those who be on my own circle of power I can , naturally , draw to or 
 repel from I ; but those who be not , have to be treat by different 
 mean . sometimes case occur in which person , at first not on my 
 circle , be irresistibly attract to it by a force not mine . 
 sometimes , in order to perform a cure , I establish a communication 
 between myself and a totally alien sphere of thought ; and to do this be 
 a long and laborious effort . but it can be do . " 

 " then , if it can be do , " say Prince Ivan , " why do you not accomplish 
 it for I ? " 

 " because you be be forcibly draw towards I without any effort on 
 my part , " reply Heliobas , with one of his steady , keen look . " for 
 what motive I can not at present determine ; but I shall know as soon as 
 you touch the extreme edge of my circle . you be a long way off it yet , 
 but you be come in spite of yourself , Ivan . " 

 the Prince fidget restlessly in his chair , and toy with the fruit 
 on his plate in a nervous manner . 

 " if I do not know you to be an absolutely truthful and honourable man , 
 Casimir , " he say , " I should think you be try to deceive I . but I 
 have see what you can do , therefore I must believe you . still I 
 confess I do not follow you in your circle theory . " 

 " to begin with , " return Heliobas , " the Universe be a circle . 
 everything be circular , from the motion of planet down to the human 
 eye , or the cup of a flower , or a drop of dew . MY ' circle theory , ' as 
 you call it , apply to human electric force , be very simple ; but I 
 have prove it to be mathematically correct . every human being be 
 provide INTERNALLY and EXTERNALLY with a certain amount of 
 electricity , which be as necessary to existence as the life - blood to 
 the heart or fresh air to the lung . internally it be the germ of a 
 soul or spirit , and be place there to be either cultivate or 
 neglect as suit the WILL of man . it be indestructible ; yet , if 
 neglect , it remain always a germ ; and , at the death of the body it 
 inhabit , go elsewhere to seek another chance of development . if , on 
 the contrary , its growth be foster by a persevering , resolute WILL , 
 it become a spiritual creature , glorious and supremely powerful , for 
 which a new , brilliant , and endless existence commence when its clay 
 chrysali perishe . so much for the INTERNAL electrical force . the 
 EXTERNAL bind we all by fix law , with which our will have nothing 
 whatever to do .   each one of we walk the earth encompass by an 
 invisible electric ring - wide or narrow accord to our capability . 
 sometimes our ring meet and form one , as in the case of two absolutely 
 sympathetic soul , who labour and love together with perfect faith in 
 each other . sometimes they clash , and storm ensue , as when a strong 
 antipathy between person cause they almost to loathe each other 's 
 presence .   all these human electric ring be capable of attraction and 
 repulsion . if a man , during his courtship of a woman , experience once 
 or twice a sudden instinctive feeling that there be something in her 
 nature not altogether what he expect or desire , let he take warning 
 and break off the attachment ; for the electric circle do not combine , 
 and nothing but unhappiness would come from force a union . I would 
 say the same thing to a woman . if my advice be follow , how many 
 unhappy marriage would be avoid ! but you have tempt I to talk too 
 much , Ivan . I see the lady wish to adjourn . shall we go to the 
 smoking - room for a little , and join they in the drawing - room 
 afterwards ? " 

 we all rise . 

 " well , " say the Prince gaily , as he prepare to follow his host , " I 
 realize one thing which give I pleasure , Casimir . if in truth I be 
 be attract towards your electric circle , I hope I shall reach it 
 soon , as I shall then , I suppose , be more en rapport with madame , your 
 sister . " 

 Zara 's luminous eye survey he with a sort of queenly pity and 
 forbearance . 

 " by the time you arrive at that goal , Prince , " she say calmly , " it be 
 most probable that I shall have depart . " 

 and with one arm throw round my waist , she salute he gravely , and 
 leave the room with I beside she . 

 " would you like to see the chapel on your way to the drawing - room ? " she 
 ask , as we cross the hall . 

 I gladly accept this proposition , and Zara take I down a flight of 
 marble step , which terminate in a handsomely - carve oaken door . 
 push this softly open , she make the sign of the cross and sink on 
 her knee . I do the same , and then look with reverential wonder at 
 the loveliness and serenity of the place . it be small , but lofty , and 
 the paint dome - shape roof be support by eight light marble 
 column , wreathe with minutely - carve garland of vine - leaf . the 
 chapel be fit up in accordance with the rite of the Catholic 
 religion , and before the High Altar and Tabernacle burn seven roseate 
 lamp , which be suspend from the roof by slender gilt chain . a 
 large crucifix , bear a most sorrowful and pathetic figure of Christ , 
 be hang on one of the side wall ; and from a corner altar , shin 
 with soft blue and silver , an exquisite statue of the Madonna and child 
 be dimly see from where we knelt . a few minute pass , and Zara 
 rise . look towards the Tabernacle , her lip move as though 
 murmur a prayer , and then , take I by the hand , she lead I gently 
 out . the heavy oaken door swing softly behind we as we ascend the 
 chapel step and re - enter the great hall . 

 " you be a Catholic , be you not ? " then say Zara to I . 

 " yes , " I answer ; " but - " 

 " but you have doubt sometimes , you would say ! of course . one always 
 doubt when one see the dissension , the hypocrisy , the false 
 pretence and wickedness of many profess Christians . but Christ and 
 his religion be live fact , in spite of the suicide of soul he 
 would gladly save . you must ask Casimir some day about these thing ; he 
 will clear up all the knotty point for you . here we be at the 
 drawing - room door . " 

 it be the same room into which I have first be show . Zara seat 
 herself , and make I occupy a low chair beside she . 

 " tell I , " she say , " can you not come here and stay with I while you 
 be under Casimir 's treatment ? " 

 I think of Madame Denise and her Pension . 

 " I wish I could , " I say ; " but I fear my friend would want to know 
 where I be stay , and explanation would have to be give , which I do 
 not feel disposed to enter upon . " 

 " why , " go on Zara quietly , " you have only to say that you be be 
 attend by a Dr. Casimir who wish to have you under his own 
 supervision , and that you be therefore stay in his house under the 
 chaperonage of his sister . " 

 I laugh at the idea of Zara play the chaperon , and tell she she 
 be far too young and beautiful to enact that character . 

 " do you know how old I be ? " she ask , with a slight smile . 

 I guess seventeen , or at any rate not more than twenty . 

 " I be thirty - eight , " say Zara . 

 thirty - eight ! impossible ! I would not believe it . I could not . I 
 laugh scornfully at such an absurdity , look at she as she sit 
 there a perfect model of youthful grace and loveliness , with her 
 lustrous eye and rose - tint complexion . 

 " you may doubt I if you choose , " she say , still smile ; " but I have 
 tell you the truth . I be thirty - eight year of age accord to the 
 world 's counting . what I be , measure by another standard of time , 
 matter not just now . you see I look young , and , what be more , I be 
 young . I enjoy my youth . I hear that woman of society at thirty - eight 
 be often fade and blase - what a pity it be that they do not 
 understand the first law of self - preservation ! but to resume what I 
 be say , you know now that I be quite old enough in the eye of the 
 world to chaperon you or anybody . you have well arrange to stay here . 
 Casimir ask I to settle the matter with , you . " 

 as she speak , Heliobas and Prince Ivan enter . the latter look 
 flushed and excited - Heliobas be calm and stately as usual . he 
 address himself to I at once . 

 " I have order my carriage , mademoiselle , to take you back this 
 evening to the Avenue du Midi . if you will do as Zara tell you , and 
 explain to your friend the necessity there be for your be under the 
 personal supervision of your doctor , you will find everything will 
 arrange itself very naturally . and the soon you come here the 
 well - in fact , Zara will expect you here to - morrow early in the 
 afternoon . I may rely upon you ? " 

 he speak with a certain air of command , evidently expect no 
 resistance on my part . indeed , why should I resist ? already I love 
 Zara , and wish to be more in her company ; and then , most probably , my 
 complete restoration to health would be more successfully and quickly 
 accomplish if I be actually in the house of the man who have 
 promise to cure I . therefore I reply : 

 " I will do as you wish , monsieur . have place myself in your hand , I 
 must obey . in this particular case , " I add , look at Zara , 
 " obedience be very agreeable to I . " 

 Heliobas smile and seem satisfied . he then take a small goblet from 
 a side - table and leave the room . return , however , almost immediately 
 with the cup fill to the brim , he say , hand it to I : 

 " drink this - it be your dose for to - night ; and then you will go home , 
 and straight to bed . " 

 I drink it off at once . it be delicious in flavour - like very fine 
 Chianti . 

 " have you no soothing draught for I ? " say Prince Ivan , who have be 
 turn over a volume of photograph in a sullenly abstract sort of 
 way . 

 " no , " reply Heliobas , with a keen glance at he ; " the draught fit 
 for your present condition might soothe you too thoroughly . " 

 the Prince look at Zara , but she be mute . she have take a piece of 
 silk embroidery from a workbasket near she , and be busily employ 
 with it . Heliobas advance and lay his hand on the young man 's arm . 

 " sing to we , Ivan , " he say , in a kind tone . " sing we one of your wild 
 russian air - Zara love they , and this young lady would like to hear 
 your voice before she go . " 

 the Prince hesitate , and then , with another glance at Zara 's bent 
 head , go to the piano . he have a brilliant touch , and accompany 
 himself with great taste and delicacy ; but his voice be truly 
 magnificent - a baritone of deep and mellow quality , sonorous , and at 
 the same time tender . he sing a french rendering of a slavonic 
 love - song , which , as nearly as I can translate it into English , run as 
 follow : 

  " as the billow fle shell on the shore , 
  as the sun poureth light on the sea , 
  as a lark on the wing scatter song to the spring , 
  so rush my love to thee . 

  " as the ivy cling close to the tower , 
  as the dew lieth deep in a flower , 
  as the shadow to light , as the day unto night , 
  so cling my wild soul to thee ! 

  " as the moon glitter coldly alone , 
  above earth on her cloud - weave throne , 
  as the rocky - bind cave repulse a wave , 
  so thy anger repulseth I . 

  " as the bitter black frost of a night 
  slay the rose with pitiless might , 
  as a sharp dagger - thrust hurl a king to the dust , 
  so thy cruelty murdereth I . 

  " yet in spite of thy queenly disdain , 
  thou art sear by my passion and pain ; 
  Thou shalt hear I repeat , till I die for it , sweet ! 
  ' I love thee ! I dare to love THEE ! ' " 

 he end abruptly and with passion , and rise from the piano directly . 

 I be enthusiastic in my admiration of the song and of the splendid 
 voice which have give it utterance , and the Prince seem almost 
 grateful for the praise accord he both by Heliobas and myself . 

 the page enter to announce that " the carriage be wait for 
 mademoiselle , " and I prepare to leave . Zara kiss I affectionately , 
 and whispering , " come early to - morrow , " make a graceful salute to 
 Prince Ivan , and leave the room immediately . 

 Heliobas then offer I his arm to take I to the carriage . Prince 
 Ivan accompany we . as the hall door open in its usual noiseless 
 manner , I perceive an elegant light brougham draw by a pair of black 
 horse , who be give the coachman a great deal of trouble by the 
 fret and spirited manner in which they paw the stone and 
 prance . before descend the step I shake hand with Heliobas , and 
 thank he for the pleasant evening I have pass . 

 " we will try to make all your time with we pass as pleasantly , " he 
 return . " good - night ! what , Ivan , " as he perceive the Prince attire 
 himself in his great - coat and hat , " be you also go ? " 

 " yes , I be off , " he reply , with a kind of forced gaiety ; " I be bad 
 company for anyone to - night , and I will not   inflict myself upon you , 
 Casimir . Au revoir ! I will put mademoiselle into the carriage if she 
 will permit I . " 

 we go down the step together , Heliobas watch we from the open 
 door . as the Prince assist I into the brougham , he whisper : 

 " be you one of they ! " 

 I look at he in bewilderment . 

 " one of they ! " I repeat . " what do you mean ? " 

 " never mind , " he mutter impatiently , as he make a pretence of 
 cover I with the fur rug inside the carriage : " if you be not now , 
 you will be , or Zara would not have kiss you . if you ever have the 
 chance ask she to think of I at my good . good - night . " 

 I be touch and a little sorry for he . I hold out my hand in 
 silence . he press it hard , and call to the coachman , " 36 , Avenue 
 du Midi , " stand on the pavement bareheade , look singularly pale and 
 grave in the starlight , as the carriage roll swiftly away , and the 
 door of the Hotel Mars close . 




 CHAPTER VIII . 

 a symphony in the AIR . 


 within a very short time I become a temporary resident in the house of 
 Heliobas , and feel myself to be perfectly at home there . I have 
 explain to Madame Denise the cause of my leave her comfortable 
 Pension , and she have fully approve of my be under a physician 's 
 personal care in order to ensure rapid recovery ; but when she hear the 
 name of that physician , which I give   in accordance with Zara 's 
 instruction   as Dr. Casimir , she hold up her fat hand in dismay . 

 " oh , mademoiselle , " she exclaim , " have you not dread of that terrible 
 man ? be it not he that be report to be a cruel mesmerist who 
 sacrifice everybody - yes , even his own sister , to his medical 
 experiment ? ah , mon Dieu ! it make I to shudder ! " 

 and she shudder directly , as a proof of her veracity . I be amuse . I 
 see in she an example of the common multitude , who be more ready to 
 believe in vulgar spirit - rapping and mesmerism than to accept an 
 establish scientific fact . 

 " do you know Dr. Casimir and his sister ? " I ask she . 

 " I have see they , mademoiselle ; perhaps once - twice - three time ! it 
 be true madame be lovely as an angel ; but they say " - here she lower 
 her voice mysteriously - " that she be wed to a devil ! it be true , 
 mademoiselle - all people say so . and Suzanne Michot - a very respectable 
 young person , mademoiselle , from Auteuil - she be employ at one time 
 as under - housemaid at Dr. Casimir 's , and she have thing to say - ah , to 
 make the blood like ice ! " 

 " what do she say ? " I ask with a half smile . 

 " well , " and Madame Denise come close to I and look confidential , 
 " Suzanne - I assure you a most respectable girl - say that one evening 
 she be cross the passage near Madame Casimir 's boudoir , and she see 
 a light like fire come through the curtain of the portiere . and she 
 stop to listen , and she hear a strange music like the sound of 
 harp . she venture to go near - Suzanne be a brave girl , 
 mademoiselle , and most virtuous - and to raise the curtain the small 
 portion just to permit the glance of an eye . and - imagine what she see . " 

 " well ! " I exclaim impatiently . " what do she see ? " 

 " ah , mademoiselle , you will not believe I - but Suzanne Michot have 
 respectable parent , and would not tell a lie - well , Suzanne see her 
 mistress , Madame Casimir , stand up near her couch with both arm 
 extend as to embrace the air . round she there be - believe it or not , 
 mademoiselle , as you please - a ring of light like a red fire , which 
 seem to grow large and redder always . all suddenly , madame grow pale 
 and more pale , and then fall on her couch as one dead , and all the red 
 fire go out . Suzanne have fear , and she try to call out - but now see 
 what happen to Suzanne ! she be pushed from the spot , mademoiselle , 
 push along as though by some strong personage ; yet she see no one 
 till she reach her own door , and in her room she faint from alarm . 
 the very next morning Dr. Casimir dismiss she , with her full wage 
 and a handsome present beside ; but he look at she , Suzanne say , in 
 a manner to make her tremble from head to foot . now , mademoiselle , 
 judge yourself whether it be fit for one who be suffer with nerve 
 to go to so strange a house ! " 

 I laugh . her story have not the least effect upon I . in fact , I make 
 up my mind that the so respectable and virtuous Suzanne Michot have be 
 drink some of her master 's wine . I say : 

 " your word only make I more desirous to go , Madame Denise . besides , 
 Dr. Casimir have already do I a great deal of good . you must have 
 hear thing of he that be not altogether bad , surely ? " 

 the little woman reflect seriously , and then say , as with some 
 reluctance : 

 " it be certainly true , mademoiselle , that in the quarter of the poor he 
 be much beloved . Jean Duclos - he be a chiffonnier - have his one child 
 dying of typhoid fever , and he be watch it struggle for breath ; 
 it be at the point to die . Monsieur le Comte Casimir , or Dr. 
 Casimir - for he be call both - come in all suddenly , and in half an 
 hour have save the little one 's life . I do not deny that he may have 
 some good in he , and that he understand medicine ; but there be 
 something wrong - " and Madame Denise shake her head forlornly a great 
 number of time . 

 none of her statement deter I from my intention , and I be 
 delighted when I find myself fairly instal at the Hotel Mars . Zara 
 give I a beautiful room next to her own ; she have take pain to fit it 
 up herself with everything that be in accordance with my particular 
 taste , such as a choice selection of book ; music , include many of 
 the fascinating score of Schubert and Wagner ; write material ; and a 
 pretty , full - toned pianette . my window look out on a small courtyard , 
 which have be cover over with glass and transform into a 
 conservatory . I could enter it by go down a few step , and could 
 have the satisfaction of gather rose and lily of the valley , 
 while outside the east wind blow and the cold snowflake fall over 
 Paris . I write to Mrs. Everard from my retreat , and I also inform the 
 Challoners where they could find I if they want I . these duty 
 do , I give myself up to enjoyment . Zara and I become inseparable ; we 
 work together , read together , and together every morning give those 
 finishing - touch to the ordering and arrangement of the household 
 which be essentially feminine , and which not the wise philosopher in 
 all the world have be , or ever will be , able to accomplish 
 successfully . we grow to love each other dearly , with that ungrudging , 
 sympathize , confide friendship that be very rarely find between 
 two woman . in the meantime my cure go on rapidly . every night on 
 retire to rest Heliobas prepare a medicinal dose for I , of the 
 quality of which I be absolutely ignorant , but which I take 
 trustingly from his hand . every morning a different little phial of 
 liquid be place in the bathroom for I to empty into the water of my 
 daily bath , and every hour I grow well , bright , and strong . the 
 natural vivacity of my temperament return to I ; I suffer no pain , 
 no anxiety , no depression , and I sleep as soundly as a child , unvisite 
 by a single dream . the mere fact of my be alive become a joy to I ; 
 I feel grateful for everything - for my eyesight , my speech , my hearing , 
 my touch - because all my sens seem to be sharpen and invigorate 
 and brace up to the keen delight . this happy condition of my system 
 do not come suddenly - sudden cure mean sudden relapse ; it be a 
 gradual , steady , ever - increase , reliable recovery . 

 I find the society of Heliobas and his sister very fascinating . their 
 conversation be both thoughtful and brilliant , their manner be 
 evenly gracious and kindly , and the life they lead be a model of 
 perfect household peace and harmony . there be never a fuss about 
 anything : the domestic arrangement seem to work on smoothly oil 
 wheel ; the different repast be serve with quiet elegance and 
 regularity ; the servant be few , but admirably train ; and we all 
 live in an absolutely calm atmosphere , unruffled by so much as a 
 breath of worry . nothing of a mysterious nature go on , as far as I 
 could see . 

 Heliobas pass the great part of the day in his study - a small , 
 plainly furnish room , the facsimile of the one I have behold he in 
 when I have dream those three dream at canne . whether he receive 
 many or few patient there I could not tell ; but that some apply to 
 he for advice I know , as I often meet stranger cross the hall on 
 their way in and out . he always join we at dinner , and be invariably 
 cheerful , generally entertain we with lively converse and sparkle 
 narrative , though now and then the thoughtful tendency of his mind 
 predominate , and give a serious tone to his remark . 

 Zara be uniformly bright and even in her temperament . she be my very 
 ideal of the Greek Psyche , radiant yet calm , pensive yet mirthful . she 
 be full of beautiful idea and poetical fancy , and so thoroughly 
 untouched by the world and its aim , that she seem to I just to 
 poise on the earth like a delicate butterfly on a flower ; and I should 
 have be scarcely surprised have I see she unfold a pair of shin 
 wing and fly away to some other region . yet in spite of this 
 spirituelle nature , she be physically strong and more robust than 
 any other woman I ever see . she be gay and active ; she be never 
 tired , never ail , and she enjoy life with a keen zest such as be 
 unknown to the tired multitude who toil on hopelessly and wearily , 
 wonder , as they work , why they be bear . Zara evidently have no 
 doubt or speculation of this kind ; she drink in every minute of her 
 existence as if it be a drop of honey - dew prepare specially for her 
 palate . I never could believe that her age be what she have declare it 
 to be . she seem to look young every day ; sometimes her eye have 
 that limpid , lustrous innocence that be see in the eye of a very 
 little child ; and , again , they would change and glow with the earnest 
 and lofty thought of one who have live through year of study , 
 research , and discovery . for the first few day of my visit she do not 
 work in her studio at all , but appear to prefer reading or talk 
 with I . one afternoon , however , when we have return from a short 
 drive in the Bois de Boulogne , she say half hesitatingly : 

 " I think I will go to work again to - morrow morning , if you will not 
 think I unsociable . " 

 " why , Zara dearest ! " I reply . " of course I shall not think you 
 unsociable . I would not interfere with any of your pursuit for the 
 world . " 

 she look at I with a sort of wistful affection , and continue : 

 " but you must know I like to work quite alone , and though it may look 
 churlish , still not even you must come into the studio . I never can do 
 anything before a witness ; Casimir himself know that , and keep away 
 from I . " 

 " well ! " I say , " I should be an ungrateful wretch if I could not oblige 
 you in so small a request . I promise not to disturb you , Zara ; and do 
 not think for one moment that I shall be dull . I have book , a piano , 
 flower - what more do I want ? and if I like I can go out ; then I have 
 letter to write , and all sort of thing to occupy I . I shall be 
 quite happy , and I shall not come near you till you call I . " 

 Zara kiss I . 

 " you be a dear girl , " she say ; " I hate to appear inhospitable , but I 
 know you be a real friend - that you will love I as much away from you 
 as near you , and that you have none of that vulgar curiosity which some 
 woman give way to , when what they desire to see be hide from they . 
 you be not inquisitive , be you ? " 

 I laugh . 

 " the affair of other people have never appear so interesting to I 
 that I have care to bother myself about they , " I reply . 
 " Blue - Beard 's Chamber would never have be unlocked have I be that 
 worthy man 's wife . " 

 " what a fine moral lesson the old fairy - tale teach ! " say Zara . " I 
 always think those wife of Blue - Beard deserve their fate for not 
 be able to obey he in his one request . but in regard to your 
 pursuit , dear , while I be at work in my studio , you can use the grand 
 piano in the drawing - room when you please , as well as the little one in 
 your own room ; and you can improvise on the chapel organ as much as you 
 like . " 

 I be delighted at this idea , and thank she heartily . she smile 
 thoughtfully . 

 " what happiness it must be for you to love music so thoroughly ! " she 
 say . " it fill you with enthusiasm . I use to dislike to read the 
 biography of musical people ; they all seem to find so much fault 
 with one another , and grudge each other every little bit of praise 
 wring from the world 's cold , death - doom lip . it be to I 
 pathetically absurd to see gifted person all struggle along , and 
 rudely elbow each other out of the way to win - what ? a few stilte 
 commonplace word of approbation or fault - finding in the newspaper of 
 the day , and a little clapping and shout from a gathering of 
 ordinary minded person , who only clap and shout because it be possibly 
 the fashion to do so . it be really ludicrous . if the music the musician 
 offer to the public be really great , it will live by itself and defy 
 praise or blame . because Schubert die of want and sorrow , that do 
 not interfere with the life of his creation . because Wagner be vote 
 impossible and absurd by many who think themselves good judge of 
 musical art , that do not offer any obstacle to the steady spread of 
 his fame , which be destine to become as universal as that of 
 Shakespeare . poor Joachim , the violinist , have get a picture in his 
 private house , in which Wagner be paint as suffer the torture of 
 hell ; can anything be more absurd , when we consider how soon the 
 learn fiddler , who have occupy his life in play other people 's 
 composition , will be a handful of forget dust , while multitude yet 
 to come will shout their admiration of ' Tristran ' and ' Parsifal . ' yes , 
 as I say , I never care for musical people much , till I meet a friend 
 of my brother 's - a man whose inner life be an exquisite harmony . " 

 " I know ! " I interrupt she . " he write the ' letter of a Dead 
 Musician . ' " 

 " yes , " say Zara . " I suppose you see the book at Raffaello 's studio . 
 Good Raffaello Cellini ! his be another absolutely ungrudging and 
 unselfish spirit . but this musician that I speak of be like a child in 
 humility and reverence . Casimir tell I he have never sound so perfect 
 a nature . at one time he , too , be a little anxious for recognition and 
 praise , and Casimir see that he be likely to wreck himself on that 
 fatal rock of poor ambition . so he take he in hand , and teach he the 
 meaning of his work , and why it be especially give he to do ; and 
 that man 's life become ' one grand sweet song . ' but there be tear in 
 your eye , dear ! what have I say to grieve you ? " 

 and she caress I tenderly . the tear be indeed thick in my eye , 
 and a minute or two elapse before I could master they . at last I 
 raise my head and endeavour to smile . 

 " they be not sad tear , Zara , " I say ; " I think they come from a 
 strong desire I have to be what you be , what your brother be , what 
 that dead musician must have be . why , I have long , and do long for 
 fame , for wealth , for the world 's applause , for all the thing which 
 you seem to think so petty and mean . how can I help it ? be not fame 
 power ? be not money a double power , strong to assist one 's self and 
 those one love ? be not the world 's favour a necessary mean to gain 
 these thing ? " 

 Zara 's eye gleam with a soft and pity gentleness . 

 " do you understand what you mean by power ? " she ask . " World 's fame ? 
 World 's wealth ? will these thing make you enjoy life ? you will perhaps 
 say yes . I tell you no . Laurels of earth 's grow fade ; gold of 
 earth 's getting be good for a time , but it pall quickly . suppose a man 
 rich enough to purchase all the treasure of the world - what then ? he 
 must die and leave they . suppose a poet or musician so famous that all 
 nation know and love he : he too must die , and go where nation exist 
 no long . and you actually would grasp ash and drink wormwood , 
 little friend ? music , the heaven - bear spirit of pure sound , do not 
 teach you so ! " 

 I be silent . the gleam of the strange jewel Zara always wear flash 
 in my eye like lightning , and anon change to the similitude of a 
 crimson star . I watch it , dreamily fascinate by its unearthly 
 glitter . 

 " still , " I say , " you yourself admit that such fame as that of 
 Shakespeare or Wagner become a universal monument to their memory . 
 that be something , surely ? " 

 " not to they , " reply Zara ; " they have partly forget that they ever 
 be imprison in such a narrow gaol as this world . perhaps they do 
 not care to remember it , though memory be part of immortality . " 

 " ah ! " I sigh restlessly ; " your thought go beyond I , Zara . I can not 
 follow your theory . " 

 Zara smile . 

 " we will not talk about they any more , " she say ; " you must tell 
 Casimir - he will teach you far well than I can . " 

 " what shall I tell he ? " I ask ; " and what will he teach I ? " 

 " you will tell he what a high opinion you have of the world and its 
 judgment , " say Zara , " and he will teach you that the world be no more 
 than a grain of dust , measure by the standard of your own soul . this 
 be no mere platitude - no repetition of the poetical statement ' the 
 MIND 's the STANDARD of the MAN ; ' it be a fact , and can be prove as 
 completely as that two and two make four . ask Casimir to set you free . " 

 " to set I free ? " I ask , surprised . 

 " yes ! " and Zara look at I brightly . " he will know if you be strong 
 enough to travel ! " and , nod her head gaily to I , she leave the room 
 to prepare for the dinner - hour which be fast approach . 

 I ponder over her word a good deal without arrive at any 
 satisfactory conclusion as to the meaning of they . I do not resume the 
 conversation with she , nor do I speak to Heliobas as yet , and the day 
 go on smoothly and pleasantly till I have be nearly a week in 
 residence at the Hotel Mars . I now feel perfectly well and strong , 
 though Heliobas continue to give I his remedy regularly night and 
 morning . I begin an energetic routine of musical practice : the 
 beautiful piano in the drawing - room answer readily to my touch , and 
 many a delightful hour slip by as I try various new difficulty 
 on the key - board , or work out different combination of harmony . I 
 spend a great deal of my time at the organ in the little chapel , the 
 bellow of which be work by electricity , in a manner that give not 
 the least trouble , and be perfectly simple of management . 

 the organ itself be peculiarly sweet in tone , the " vox humana " stop 
 especially produce an entrancingly rich and tender sound . the 
 silence , warmth , and beauty of the chapel , with the winter sunlight 
 stream through its stain window , and the unbroken solitude I 
 enjoy there , all give fresh impetus to the fancy of my brain , and a 
 succession of solemn and tender melody wove themselves under my 
 finger as a broidered carpet be weave on the loom . 

 one particular afternoon , I be sit at the instrument as usual , and 
 my thought begin to busy themselves with the sublime tragedy of 
 Calvary . I muse , play softly all the while , on the wonderful , 
 blameless , glorious life that have end in the shame and cruelty of the 
 Cross , when suddenly , like a cloud swoop darkly across the heaven of 
 my thought , come the suggestive question : " be it all true ? be Christ 
 indeed Divine - or be it all a myth , a fable - an imposture ? " 
 unconsciously I strike a discordant chord on the organ - a faint tremor 
 shake I , and I cease play . an uncomfortable sensation come over 
 I , as of some invisible presence be near I and approach softly , 
 slowly , yet always more closely ; and I hurriedly rise from my seat , 
 shut the organ , and prepare to leave the chapel , overcome by a strange 
 incomprehensible terror . I be glad when I find myself safely outside 
 the door , and I rush into the hall as though I be be pursue ; 
 yet the oddest part of my feeling be , that whoever thus pursue I , 
 do so out of love , not enmity , and that I be almost wrong in run 
 away . I lean for a moment against one of the column in the hall , 
 try to calm the excited beating of my heart , when a deep voice 
 startle I : 

 " so ! you be agitated and alarmed ! Unbelief be easily scared ! " 

 I look up and meet the calm eye of Heliobas . he appear to be 
 tall , stately , more like a chaldean prophet or king than I have ever 
 see he before . there be something in his steady scrutiny of my face 
 that put I to a sort of shame , and when he speak again it be in a 
 tone of mild reproof . 

 " you have be lead astray , my child , by the conflict and vain 
 opinion of mankind . you , like many other in the world , delight to 
 question , to speculate , to weigh this , to measure that , with little or 
 no profit to yourself or your fellow - creature . and you have come 
 freshly from a land where , in the great Senate - house , a poor perishable 
 lump of clay call itself a man , dare to stand up boldly and deny 
 the existence of God , while his compeer , less bold than he , pretend a 
 holy displeasure , yet secretly support he - all blind worm deny the 
 existence of the sun ; a land where so - call Religion be split into 
 hundred of cold and narrow sect , gathering assemble for the 
 practice of hypocrisy , lip - service and lie - where Self , not the 
 Creator , be the prime object of worship ; a land , mighty once among the 
 mighty , but which now , like an over - ripe pear , hang loosely on its 
 tree , await but a touch to make it fall ! a land - let I not name 
 it ; - where the wealthy , high - feed minister of the nation slowly argue 
 away the life of well man than themselves , with vain word of colder 
 and more cruel force than the whirling spear of untaught savage ! what 
 have you , an ardent disciple of music , to do in such a land where 
 favouritism and backstair influence win the day over even the merit of 
 a Schubert ? suppose you be a second Beethoven , what could you do in 
 that land without faith or hope ? that land which be like a 
 disappoint , churlish , and aged man with tottering foot and purblind 
 eye , who have long ago exhaust all enjoyment and see nothing new 
 under the sun . the world be wide - faith be yet extant - and the 
 teaching of Christ be true . ' believe and live ; doubt and die ! ' that 
 saying be true also . " 

 I have listen to these word in silence ; but now I speak eagerly and 
 impatiently , remember what Zara have tell I . 

 " then , " I say , " if I have be misguide by modern opinion - if I have 
 unconsciously absorb the doctrine of modern fashionable 
 atheism - lead I right . teach I what you know . I be willing to learn . 
 let I find out the reason of my life . SET ME free ! " 

 Heliobas regard I with earnest solemnity . 

 " set you free ! " he murmur , in a low tone . " do you know what you ask ? " 

 " no , " I answer , with reckless fervour . " I do not know what I ask ; but 
 I feel that you have the power to show I the unseen thing of another 
 world . do you not yourself tell I in our first interview that you have 
 let Raffaello Cellini ' go on a voyage of discovery , and that he come 
 back perfectly satisfied ? ' besides , he tell I his history . from you he 
 have gain all that give he peace and comfort . you possess electric 
 secret undreamt of by the world . prove your power upon I ; I be not 
 afraid . " 

 Heliobas smile . " not afraid ! and you run out of the chapel just now as 
 if you be pursue by a fiend ! you must know that the only woman I 
 ever try my great experiment upon be my sister Zara . she be 
 train and prepare for it in the most careful manner ; and it 
 succeed . now " - and Heliobas look half - sad , half - triumphant - ' she 
 have pass beyond my power ; she be dominate by one great than I. but 
 she can not use her force for other ; she can only employ it to defend 
 herself . therefore , I be willing to try you if you indeed desire it - to 
 see if the same thing will occur to you as to Zara ; and I firmly 
 believe it will . " 

 a slight tremor come over I ; but I say with an attempt at 
 indifference : 

 " you mean that I shall be dominate also by some great force or 
 influence ? " 

 " I think so , " reply Heliobas musingly . " your nature be more prone to 
 love than to command . try and follow I in the explanation I be go 
 to give you . do you know some line by Shelley that run - 

  " ' nothing in the world be single , 
  all thing by a law divine 
  in one another be be mingle - 
  why not I with thine ? ' " 

 " yes , " I say . " I know the line well . I use to think they very 
 sentimental and pretty . " 

 " they contain , " say Heliobas , " the germ of a great truth , as many of 
 the most fanciful verse of the poet do . as the ' image of a voice ' 
 mention in the Book of Job hint at the telephone , and as 
 Shakespeare 's ' girdle round the earth ' foretell the electric telegraph , 
 so the utterance of the inspire starveling of the world , know as 
 poet , suggest many more wonder of the universe than may be at first 
 apparent . poet must always be prophet , or their calling be in vain . 
 put this standard of judgment to the verse - writer of the day , and 
 where would they be ? the English Laureate be no seer : he be a mere 
 relater of pretty story . Algernon Charles Swinburne have more fire in 
 he , and more wealth of expression , but he do not prophesy ; he have a 
 clever way of combine biblical simile with Provengal passion - et 
 voila tout ! the prophet be always poor - the sackcloth and ash of 
 the world be their portion ; and their body moulder a hundred year 
 or more in the grave before the world find out what they mean by 
 their raving . but apropos of these line of Shelley . he speak of the 
 duality of existence . ' nothing in the world be single . ' he might have 
 go far , and say nothing in the universe be single . cold and 
 heat , storm and sunshine , good and evil , joy and sorrow - all go in 
 pair . this double life extend to all the sphere and above the 
 sphere . do you understand ? " 

 " I understand what you say , " I say slowly ; " but I can not see your 
 meaning as apply to myself or yourself . " 

 " I will teach you in a few word , " go on Heliobas . " you believe in 
 the soul ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " very well . now realize that there be no soul on this earth that be 
 complete , alone . like everything else , it be dual . it be like half a 
 flame that seek the other half , and be dissatisfied and restless till 
 it attain its object . lover , mislead by the blind light of love , 
 think they have reach completeness when they be unite to the person 
 belove . now , in very , very rare case , perhaps one among a thousand , 
 this desirable result be effect ; but the majority of people be 
 content with the union of body only , and care little or nothing about 
 the sympathy or attachment between soul . there be people , however , 
 who do care , and who never find their twin - Flame or companion Spirit at 
 all on earth , and never will find it . and why ? because it be not 
 imprison in clay ; it be elsewhere . " 

 " well ? " I ask eagerly . 

 " well , you seem to ask I by your eye what this all mean . I will 
 apply it at once to myself . by my research into human electrical 
 science , I discover that MY companion , my other half of existence , 
 though not on earth , be near I , and could be command by I ; and , on 
 be command , obey . with Zara it be different . she could not 
 COMMAND - she obey ; she be the weak of the two . with you , I think 
 it will be the same thing . man sacrifice everything to ambition ; woman 
 to love . it be natural . I see there be much of what I have say that 
 appear to have mystify you ; it be no good puzzle your brain any 
 more about it . no doubt you think I be talk very wildly about 
 Twin - Flames and Spiritual Affinities that live for we in another 
 sphere . you do not believe , perhaps , in the existence of being in the 
 very air that surround we , invisible to ordinary human eye , yet 
 actually akin to we , with a close relationship than any tie of blood 
 know on earth ? " 

 I hesitate . Heliobas see my hesitation , and his eye darken with a 
 sombre wrath . 

 " be you one of those also who must see in order to believe ? " he say , 
 half angrily . " where do you suppose your music come from ? where do you 
 suppose any music come from that be not mere imitation ? the great 
 composer of the world have be mere receptacle of sound ; and the 
 emptier they be of self - love and vanity , the great quantity of 
 heaven - bear melody they hold . the German Wagner - do he not himself say 
 that he walk up and down in the avenue , ' try to catch the 
 harmony as they float in the air ' ? come with I - come back to the 
 place you leave , and I will see if you , like Wagner , be able to catch a 
 melody fly . " 

 he grasp my unresisting arm , and lead I , half - frightened , 
 half - curious , into the little chapel , where he bid I seat myself at 
 the organ . 

 " do not play a single note , " he say , " till you be compel . " 

 and stand beside I , Heliobas lay his hand on my head , then 
 press they on my ear , and finally touch my hand , that rest 
 passively on the keyboard . 

 he then raise his eye , and utter the name I have often think of 
 but never mention - the name he have call upon in my dream . 

 " Azul ! " he say , in a low , penetrate voice , " open the gateway of the 
 Air that we may hear the sound of Song ! " 

 a soft rushing noise of wind answer his adjuration . this be follow 
 by a burst of music , transcendently lovely , but unlike any music I have 
 ever hear . there be sound of delicate and entrancing tenderness 
 such as no instrument make by human hand could produce ; there be 
 singing of clear and tender tone , and of infinite purity such as no 
 human voice could be capable of . I listen , perplexed , alarmed , yet 
 entrance . suddenly I distinguish a melody run through the 
 wonderful air - symphony - a melody like a flower , fresh and perfect . 
 instinctively I touch the organ and begin to play it ; I find I could 
 produce it note for note . I forget all fear in my delight , and I play 
 on and on in a sort of deepening rapture . gradually I become aware that 
 the strange sound about I be die slowly away ; fainter and fainter 
 they grow - soft - far - and finally cease . but the melody - that 
 one distinct passage of note I have follow out - remain with I , and 
 I play it again and again with feverish eagerness lest it should 
 escape I . I have forget the presence of Heliobas . but a touch on my 
 shoulder rouse I . I look up and meet his eye fix upon , I with a 
 steady and earnest regard . a shiver run through , I , and I feel 
 bewilder . 

 " have I lose it ? " I ask . 

 " lost what ? " he demand . 

 " the tune I hear - the harmony . " 

 " no , " he reply ; " at least I think not . but if you have , no matter . 
 you will hear other . why do you look so distressed ? " 

 " it be lovely , " I say wistfully , " all that music ; but it be not mine ; " 
 and tear of regret fill my eye . " oh , if it be only mine - my very 
 own composition ! " 

 Heliobas smile kindly . 

 " it be as much yours as any thing belong to anyone . your ? why , what 
 can you really call your own ? every talent you have , every breath you 
 draw , every drop of blood flow in your vein , be lend to you only ; 
 you must pay it all back . and as far as the art go , it be a bad sign 
 of poet , painter , or musician , who be arrogant enough to call his work 
 his own . it never be his , and never will be . it be plan by a high 
 intelligence than his , only he happen to be the hire labourer choose 
 to carry out the conception ; a sort of mechanic in whom boastfulness 
 look absurd ; as absurd as if one of the stonemason work at the 
 cornice of a cathedral be to vaunt himself as the designer of the 
 whole edifice . and when a work , any work , be complete , it pass out 
 of the labourer 's hand ; it belong to the age and the people for whom 
 it be accomplish , and , if deserve , go on belong to future 
 age and future people . so far , and only so far , music be your own . 
 but be you convince ? or do you think you have be dream all that 
 you hear just now ? " 

 I rise from the organ , close it gently , and , move by a sudden 
 impulse , hold out both my hand to Heliobas . he take they and hold they 
 in a friendly clasp , watch I intently as I speak . 

 " I believe in you , " I say firmly ; " and I know thoroughly well that I 
 be not dream ; I certainly hear strange music , and entrance 
 voice . but in acknowledge your power over something unseen , I must 
 explain to you the incredulity I at first feel , which I believe annoyed 
 you . I be make sceptical on one occasion , by attend a so - call 
 spiritual seance , where they try to convince I of the truth of 
 table - turn - " 

 Heliobas laugh softly , still hold my hand . 

 " your reason will at once tell you that disembody spirit never 
 become so undignified as to upset furniture or rap on table . neither 
 do they write letter in pen and ink and put they under door . 
 spiritual being be purely spiritual ; they can not touch anything 
 human , much less deal in such vulgar display as the throwing about of 
 chair , and the opening of locked sideboard . you be very rightly 
 sceptical in these matter . but in what I have endeavour to prove to 
 you , you have no doubt , have you ? " 

 " none in the world , " I say . " I only ask you to go on teach I the 
 wonder that seem so familiar to you . let I know all I may ; and soon ! " 
 I speak with trembling eagerness . 

 " you have be only eight day in the house , my child , " say Heliobas , 
 loosen my hand , and sign I to come out of the chapel with he ; 
 " and I do not consider you sufficiently strong as yet for the 
 experiment you wish I to try upon you . even now you be agitated . wait 
 one week more , and then you shall be - " 

 " what ? " I ask impatiently . 

 " lift up , " he reply . " lift up above this little speck call 
 earth . but now , no more of this . go to Zara ; keep your mind well 
 employ ; study , read , and pray - pray much and often in few and simple 
 word , and with as utterly unselfish a heart as you can prepare . think 
 that you be go to some high festival , and attire your soul in 
 readiness . I do not say to you ' have faith ; ' I would not compel your 
 belief in anything against your own will . you wish to be convince of a 
 future existence ; you seek proof ; you shall have they . in the meantime 
 avoid all conversation with I on the subject . you can confide your 
 desire to Zara if you like ; her experience may be of use to you . you 
 have well join she now . Au revoir ! " and with a kind parting gesture , he 
 leave I . 

 I watch his stately figure disappear in the shadow of the passage 
 lead to his own study , and then I hasten to Zara 's room . the 
 musical episode in the chapel have certainly startle I , and the word 
 of Heliobas be full of mysterious meaning ; but , strange to say , I be 
 in no way render anxious or alarm by the prospect I have before I 
 of be " lift up , " as my physician have express it . I think of 
 Raffaello Cellini and his history , and I determine within myself that 
 no cowardly hesitation or fear should prevent I from make the 
 attempt to see what he profess to have see . I find Zara reading . 
 she look up as I enter , and greet I with her usual bright smile . 

 " you have have a long practice , " she begin ; " I think you be never 
 come . " 

 I sit down beside she , and relate at once all that have happen to I 
 that afternoon . Zara listen with deep and almost breathless interest . 

 " you be quite resolve , " she say , when I have conclude , " to let 
 Casimir exert his force upon you ? " 

 " I be quite resolve , " I answer . 

 " and you have no fear ? " 

 " none that I be just now conscious of . " 

 Zara 's eye become dark and deep in the gravity of her intense 
 meditation . at last she say : 

 " I can help you to keep your courage firmly to the point , by let 
 you know at once what Casimir will do to you . beyond that I can not go . 
 you understand the nature of an electric shock ? " 

 " yes , " I reply . 

 " well , there be different kind of electric shock - some that be 
 remedial , some that be fatal . there be cure perform by a careful 
 use of the electric battery - again , people be strike dead by 
 lightning , which be the fatal result of electric force . but all this be 
 external electricity ; now what Casimir will use on you will be internal 
 electricity . " 

 I beg she to explain more clearly . she go on : 

 " you have internally a certain amount of electricity , which have be 
 increase recently by the remedy prescribe for you by Casimir . but , 
 however much you have , Casimir have more , and he will exert his force 
 over your force , the great over the less . you will experience an 
 INTERNAL electric shock , which , like a sword , will separate in twain 
 body and spirit . the spiritual part of you will be lift up above 
 material force ; the bodily part will remain inert and useless , till 
 the life , which be actually you , return to put its machinery in motion 
 once more . " 

 " but shall I return at all ? " I ask half doubtfully . 

 " you must return , because God have fix the limit of your life on 
 earth , and no human power can alter his decree . Casimir 's will can set 
 you free for a time , but only for a time . you be bind to return , be 
 it never so reluctantly . eternal liberty be give by Death alone , and 
 death can not be force to come . " 

 " how about suicide ? " I ask . 

 " the suicide , " reply Zara , " have no soul . he kill his body , and by 
 the very act prove that whatever germ of an immortal existence he may 
 have have once , have escape from its unworthy habitation , and go , like 
 a fly spark , to find a chance of growth elsewhere . surely your own 
 reason prove this to you ? the very animal have more soul than a man 
 who commit suicide . the beast of prey slay each other for hunger or 
 in self - defence , but they do not slay themselves . that be a brutality 
 leave to man alone , with its companion degradation , drunkenness . " 

 I muse awhile in silence . 

 " in all the wickedness and cruelty of mankind , " I say , " it be almost a 
 wonder that there be any spiritual existence leave on earth at all . why 
 should God trouble himself to care for such few soul as thoroughly 
 believe in and love he ? - they can be but a mere handful . " 

 " such a mere handful be worth more than the world to he , " say Zara 
 gravely . " oh , my dear , do not say such thing as why should God trouble 
 himself ? why do you trouble yourself for the safety and happiness of 
 anyone you love ? " 

 her eye grow soft and tender , and the jewel she wear glimmer like 
 moonlight on the sea . I feel a little abash , and , to change the 
 subject , I say : 

 " tell I , Zara , what be that stone you always wear ? be it a talisman ? " 

 " it belong to a king , " say Zara , - " at least , it be find in a 
 king 's coffin . it have be in our family for generation . Casimir say 
 it be an electric stone - there be such still to be find in remote 
 part of the sea . do you like it ? " 

 " it be very brilliant and lovely , " I say . 

 " when I die , " go on Zara slowly , " I will leave it to you . " 

 " I hope I shall have to wait a long time before I get it , then , " I 
 exclaim , embrace she affectionately . " indeed , I will pray never to 
 receive it . " 

 " you will pray wrongly , " say Zara , smile . " but tell I , do you quite 
 understand from my explanation what Casimir will do to you ? " 

 " I think I do . " 

 " and you be not afraid ? " 

 " not at all . shall I suffer any pain ? " 

 " no actual pang . you will feel giddy for a moment , and your body will 
 become unconscious . that be all . " 

 I meditate for a few moment , and then look up , see Zara 's eye 
 watch I with a wistful inquire tenderness . I answer her look 
 with a smile , and say , half gaily : 

 " l'audace , l'audace , et toujour l'audace ! that must be my motto , Zara . 
 I have a chance now of prove how far a woman 's bravery can go , and I 
 assure you I be proud of the opportunity . your brother utter some 
 very cut remark on the general inaptitude of the female sex when I 
 first make his acquaintance ; so , for the honour of the thing , I must 
 follow the path I have begin to tread . a plunge into the unseen world 
 be surely a bold step for a woman , and I be determined to take it 
 courageously . " 

 " that be well , " say Zara . " I do not think it possible for you ever to 
 regret it . it be grow late - shall we prepare for dinner ? " 

 I assent , and we separate to our different room . before commencing 
 to dress I open the pianette that stand near my window , and try 
 very softly to play the melody I have hear in the chapel . to my joy it 
 come at once to my finger , and I be able to remember every note . I 
 do not attempt to write it down - somehow I feel sure it would not 
 escape I now . a sense of profound gratitude fill my heart , and , 
 remember the counsel give by Heliobas , I kneel reverently down and 
 thank God for the joy and grace of music . as I do so , a faint breath 
 of sound , like a distant whisper of harp play in unison , float 
 past my ear , - then appear to sweep round in ever - widen circle , 
 till it gradually die away . but it be sweet and entrance enough for 
 I to understand how glorious and full of rapture must have be the 
 star - symphony play on that winter 's night long ago , when the angel 
 chant together , " glory to God in the high , and on earth peace and 
 good - will to man ! " 




 CHAPTER IX . 

 an ELECTRIC shock . 


 Prince Ivan Petroffsky be a constant visitor at the Hotel Mars , and I 
 begin to take a certain interest in he , not unmingled with pity , for 
 it be evident that he be hopelessly in love with my beautiful friend 
 Zara . she receive he always with courtesy and kindness ; but her 
 behaviour to he be mark by a somewhat cold dignity , which , like a 
 barrier of ice , repel the warmth of his admiration and attention . 
 once or twice , remember what he have say to I , I endeavour to 
 speak to she concern he and his devotion ; but she so instantly and 
 decisively turn the conversation that I see I should displease she if 
 I persist in it . Heliobas appear to be really attach to the 
 Prince , at which I secretly wonder ; the worldly and frivolous young 
 nobleman be of so entirely different a temperament to that of the 
 thoughtful and studious chaldean philosopher . yet there be evidently 
 some mysterious attraction between they - the Prince appear to be 
 profoundly interested in electric theory and experiment , and 
 Heliobas never weary of expound they to so attentive a listener . 
 the wonderful capability of the dog Leo also be bring into 
 constant requisition for Prince Ivan 's benefit , and without doubt they 
 be most remarkable . this animal , command - or , I should say , 
 brain - electrify - by Heliobas , would fetch anything that be name to 
 he through his master 's force , provide it be light enough for he 
 to carry ; and he would go into the conservatory and pluck off with his 
 tooth any rare or common flower within his reach that be describe to 
 he by the same mean . speak to or command by other , he be simply 
 a good - natured intelligent newfoundland ; but under the authority of 
 Heliobas , he become more than human in ready wit and quick obedience , 
 and would have bring in a golden harvest to any great circus or 
 menagerie . 

 he be a never - fail source of wonder and interest to I , and even 
 more so to the Prince , who make he the subject of many an abstruse and 
 difficult discussion with his friend Casimir . I notice that Zara 
 seem to regret the frequent companionship of Ivan Petroffsky and her 
 brother , and a shade of sorrow or vexation often cross her fair face 
 when she see they together absorb in conversation or argument . 

 one evening a strange circumstance occur which startle and deeply 
 impress I . Prince Ivan have din with we ; he be in extraordinarily 
 high spirit - his gaiety be almost boisterous , and his face be deeply 
 flushed . Zara glance at he half indignantly more than once when his 
 laughter become unusually uproarious , and I see that Heliobas watch 
 he closely and half - inquiringly , as if he think there be something 
 amiss . 

 the Prince , however , heedless of his host 's observant eye , toss off 
 glass after glass of wine , and talk incessantly . after dinner , when 
 we all assemble in the drawing - room , he seat himself at the piano 
 without be ask , and sing several song . whether he be influence 
 by drink or strong excitement , his voice at any rate show no sign of 
 weakness or deterioration . never have I hear he sing so magnificently . 
 he seem possess not by an angel but by a demon of song . it be 
 impossible not to listen to he , and while listen , equally 
 impossible not to admire he . even Zara , who be generally indifferent 
 to his music , became , on this particular night , fascinate into a sort 
 of dreamy attention . he perceive this , and suddenly address himself 
 to she in soften tone which bear no trace of their previous loudness . 

 " Madame , you honour I to - night by listen to my poor effort . it be 
 seldom I be thus reward ! " 

 Zara flush deeply , and then grow very pale . 

 " indeed , Prince , " she answer quietly , " you mistake I . I always 
 listen with pleasure to your singing - to - night , perhaps , my mood be 
 more fitted to music than be usual with I , and thus I may appear to 
 you to be more attentive . but your voice always delight I as it must 
 delight everybody who hear it . " 

 " while you be in a musical mood then , " return Prince Ivan , " let I 
 sing you an english song - one of the lovely ever pen . I have set 
 it to music myself , as such word be not of the kind to suit ordinary 
 composer or publisher ; they be too much in earnest , too passionate , 
 too full of real human love and sorrow . the song that suit modern 
 drawing - room and concert - hall , as a rule , be those that be full of 
 sham sentiment - a real , strong , throb HEART pulse through a song 
 be too terribly exciting for lackadaisical society . listen ! " and , 
 play a dreamy , murmur prelude like the sound of a brook flow 
 through a hollow cavern , he sing Swinburne 's " Leave - taking , " surely one 
 of the sad and most beautiful poem in the English language . 

 he subdue his voice to suit the melancholy hopelessness of the line , 
 and render it with so much intensity of pathetic expression that it 
 be difficult to keep tear from fill the eye . when he come to the 
 last verse , the anguish of a waste life seem to declare itself in 
 the complete despair of his low vibrate tone : 

  " let we go hence and rest ; she will not love . 
  she shall not hear we if we sing hereof , 
  nor see love 's way , how sore they be and steep . 
  come hence , let be , lie still ; it be enough . 
  Love be a barren sea , bitter and deep ; 
  and though she see all heaven in flower above , 
  she would not love ! " 

 the deep melancholy of the music and the quiver pathos of the deep 
 baritone voice be so affect that it be almost a relief when the 
 song cease . I have be look out of the window at the fantastic 
 pattern of the moonlight on the garden walk , but now I turn to see 
 in Zara 's face her appreciation of what we have just hear . to my 
 surprise she have leave the room . Heliobas recline in his easy - chair , 
 glance up and down the column of the Figaro ; and the Prince still 
 sit at the piano , move his finger idly up and down the key without 
 playing . the little page enter with a letter on a silver salver . it 
 be for his master . Heliobas read it quickly , and rise , say : 

 " I must leave you to entertain yourself for ten minute while I 
 answer this letter . will you excuse I ? " and with the ever - courteous 
 salute to we which be part of his manner , he leave the room . 

 I still remain at the window . Prince Ivan still dumbly play the 
 piano . there be a few minute of absolute silence . then the Prince 
 hastily get up , shut the piano , and approach I . 

 " do you know where Zara be ? " he demand in a low , fierce tone . 

 I look at he in surprise and a little alarm - he speak with so much 
 suppress anger , and his eye glitter so strangely . 

 " no , " I answer frankly . " I never see she leave the room . " 

 " I do , " he say . " she slip out like a ghost , or a witch , or an 
 angel , while I be sing the last verse of Swinburne 's song . do you 
 know Swinburne , mademoiselle ? " 

 " no , " I reply , wonder at his manner more and more . " I only know 
 he , as you do , to be a poet . " 

 " poet , madman , or lover - all three should be one and the same thing , " 
 mutter the Prince , clenching and unclenche that strong right hand 
 of his on which sparkle a diamond like a star . " I have often wonder 
 if poet feel what they write - whether Swinburne , for instance , ever 
 feel the weight of a dead cold thing within he here , " slightly 
 touch the region of his heart , " and realize that he have to drag 
 that corpse of unburied love with he everywhere - even to the grave , 
 and beyond - o god ! - beyond the grave ! " I touch he gently on the arm . 
 I be full of pity for he - his despair be so bitter and keen . 

 " Prince Ivan , " I say , " you be excited and overwrought . Zara mean no 
 slight to you in leave the room before your song be finish . I be 
 quite sure of that . she be kindness itself - her nature be all sweetness 
 and gentleness . she would not willingly offend you - " 

 " offend I ! " he exclaim ; ' she could not offend I if she try . she 
 could tread upon I , stab I , slay I , but never offend I . I see you 
 be sorry for I - and I thank you . I kiss your hand for your gentle 
 pity , mademoiselle . " 

 and he do so , with a knightly grace that become he well . I think 
 his momentary anger be pass , but I be mistaken . suddenly he raise 
 his arm with a fierce gesture , and exclaim : 

 " by heaven ! I will wait no long . I be a fool to hesitate . I may wait 
 a century before I draw out of Casimir the secret that would enable I 
 to measure sword with my rival . listen ! " and he grasp my shoulder 
 roughly . " stay here , you ! if Casimir return , tell he I have go for 
 a walk of half an hour . play to he - keep he occupy - be my friend in 
 this one thing - I trust you . let he not seek for Zara , or for I . I 
 shall not be long absent . " 

 " stay ! " I whisper hurriedly , " what be you go to do ? surely you 
 know the power of Heliobas . he be supreme here . he could find out 
 anything he choose . he could - - " 

 Prince Ivan look at I fixedly . 

 " will you swear to I that you actually do not know ? " 

 " know what ? " I ask , perplexed . 

 he laugh bitterly , sarcastically . 

 " do you ever hear that line of poetry which speak of ' a woman wail 
 for her demon - lover ' ? that be what Zara do . of one thing I be 
 certain - she do not wail or wait long ; he come quickly . " 

 " what do you mean ? " I exclaim , utterly mystify . " who come quickly ? 
 I be sure you do not know what you be talk about . " 

 " I do know , " he reply firmly ; " and I be go to prove my knowledge . 
 remember what I have ask you . " and without another word or look , he 
 throw open the velvet curtain of the portiere , and disappear behind 
 they . 

 leave to myself , I feel very nervous and excited . all sort of odd 
 fancy come into my head , and would not go away , but dance about like 
 will - o'-the - wisps on a morass . what do Prince Ivan mean ? be he mad ? 
 or have he drunk too much wine ? what strange illusion have he in his mind 
 about Zara and a demon ? suddenly a thought flash upon I that make I 
 tremble from head to foot . I remember what Heliobas have say about 
 twin flame and dual affinity ; and I also reflect that he have 
 declare Zara to be dominate by a more powerful force than his own . 
 but then , I have accept it as a matter of course that , whatever the 
 force be , it must be for good , not evil , over a be so pure , so 
 lovely and so intelligent as Zara . 

 I know and feel that there be good and evil force . now , suppose Zara 
 be command by some strange evil thing , unguesse at , undreamt of in 
 the wild night - mare ? I shudder as with icy cold . it could not be . 
 I resolutely refuse to admit such a fearful conjecture . why , I think 
 to myself , with a faint smile , I be no well in my imagining than 
 the so virtuous and ever - respectable Suzanne Michot of whom Madame 
 Denise have speak . still the hateful thought come back again and again , 
 and refuse to go away . 

 I go to my old place at the window and look out . the moonlight fall 
 in cold slanting ray ; but an army of dark cloud be hurry up from 
 the horizon , look in their weird shape like the mount Walkyres in 
 Wagner 's " Niebelungen Ring , " gallop to Walhalla with the body of 
 dead warrior sling before they . a low moaning wind have arise , and be 
 begin to sob round the house like the Banshee . Hark ! what be that ? 
 I start violently . surely that be a faint shriek ? I listen 
 intently . nothing but the wind rustle among some creak branch . 

  " a woman wail for her demon - lover . " 

 how that line haunt I ! and with , it there slowly grow up in my mind 
 a black loom horror ; an idea , vague and ghastly , that freeze my blood 
 and turn I faint and giddy . suppose , when I have consent to be 
 experiment upon by Heliobas - when my soul in the electric trance be 
 lift up to the unseen world - suppose an evil force , terrible and 
 all - compelling , be to dominate I and hold I forever and ever ! I 
 gasp for breath ! oh , so much the more need of prayer ! 

 " pray much and often , with as unselfish a heart as you can prepare . " 

 thus Heliobas have say ; and I think to myself , if all those who be 
 on the brink of great sin or crime could only be bring to feel 
 beforehand what I feel when face the spectral dread of unknown evil , 
 then surely sin would be few and crime never commit . and I 
 murmur softly , " lead we not into temptation , but deliver we from 
 evil . " 

 the mere utterance of these word seem to calm and encourage I ; and 
 as I gaze up at the sky again , with its gathering cloud , one star , 
 like a bright console eye , look at I , glitter cheerfully amid 
 the surround darkness . 

 More than ten minute have elapse since Prince Ivan have leave the room , 
 and there be no sound of return footstep . and where be Zara ? I 
 determine to seek she . I be free to go anywhere in the house , only 
 avoid her studio during her hour of work ; and she never work at 
 night . I would go to she and confide all my strange thought and 
 terror to her friendly sympathy . I hurry through the hall and up the 
 staircase quickly , and should have go straight into Zara 's boudoir 
 have I not hear a sound of voice which cause I to stop precipitately 
 outside the door . Zara be speak . her low , musical accent fall like 
 a silver chime on the air . 

 " I have tell you , " she say , " again and again that it be impossible . 
 you waste your life in the pursuit of a phantom ; for a phantom I must 
 be to you always - a mere dream , not a woman such as your love would 
 satisfy . you be a strong man , in sound health and spirit ; you care 
 for the world and the thing that be in it . I do not . you would make 
 I happy , you say . no doubt you would do your good - your wealth and 
 influence , your good look , your hospitable and friendly nature would 
 make most woman happy . but what should I care for your family 
 diamond ? for your surrounding ? for your ambition ? the society of the 
 world fill I with disgust and prejudice . marriage , as the world 
 consider it , shock and outrage my self - respect ; the idea of a bodily 
 union without that of soul be to I repulsive and loathsome . why , 
 therefore , waste your time in seek a love which do not exist , 
 which never will exist for you ? " 

 I hear the deep , passionate tone of Prince Ivan in answer : 

 " one light kindle another , Zara ! the sunlight melt the snow ! I can not 
 believe but that a long and faithful love may - nay , must - have its 
 reward at last . even accord to your brother 's theory , the emotion 
 of love be capable of powerful attraction . can not I hope that my 
 passion - so strong , so great , so true , Zara ! - will , with patience , draw 
 you , star of my life , close and close , till I at last call you mine ? " 

 I hear the faint rustle of Zara 's silk robe , as though she be move 
 far from he . 

 " you speak ignorantly , Prince . your study with Casimir appear to have 
 bring you little knowledge . attraction ! how can you attract what be 
 not in your sphere ? as well ask for the Moons of Jupiter or the Ring of 
 Saturn ! the law of attraction and repulsion , Prince Ivan , be fix by 
 a high authority than your , and you be as powerless to alter or 
 abate they by one iota , as a child be powerless to repel the advance 
 wave of the sea . " 

 Prince Ivan speak again , and his voice quiver , with suppressed anger . 

 " you may talk as you will , beautiful Zara ; but you shall never persuade 
 I against my reason . I be no dreamer ; no speculator in aerial 
 nothing ; no clever charlatan like Casimir , who , because he be able to 
 magnetize a dog , pretend to the same authority over human being , and 
 dare to risk the health , perhaps the very sanity , of his own sister , 
 and that of the unfortunate young musician whom he have inveigle in 
 here , all for the sake of prove his dangerous , almost diabolical , 
 experiment . oh , yes ; I see you be indignant , but I speak truth . I be 
 a plain man ; - and if I be deficient in electric germ , as Casimir would 
 say , I have plenty of common sense . I wish to rescue you , Zara . you be 
 become a prey to morbid fancy ; your naturally healthy mind be full 
 of extravagant notion concern angel and demon and what not ; and 
 your entire belief in , and enthusiasm for , your brother be a splendid 
 advertisement for he . let I tear the veil of credulity from your 
 eye . let I teach you how good a thing it be to live and love and 
 laugh like other people , and leave electricity to the telegraph - wire 
 and the lamp - post . " 

 again I hear the silken rustle of Zara 's dress , and , impel by a 
 strong curiosity and excitement , I raise a corner of the curtain 
 hang over the door , and be able to see the room distinctly . the 
 Prince stand , or rather lounge , near the window , and opposite to he 
 be Zara ; she have evidently retreat from he as far as possible , and 
 hold herself proudly erect , her eye flash with unusual brilliancy 
 contrast with the pallor of her face . 

 " your insult to my brother , Prince , " she say calmly , " I suffer to 
 pass by I , know well to what a depth of wilful blind ignorance you 
 be fall . I pity you - and - I despise you ! you be indeed a plain man , 
 as you say - nothing more and nothing less . you can take advantage of 
 the hospitality of this house , and pretend friendship to the host , 
 while you slander he behind his back , and insult his sister in the 
 privacy of her own apartment . very manlike , truly ; and perfectly in 
 accordance with a reasonable being who like to live and love and laugh 
 accord to the rule of society - a puppet whose wire society pull , 
 and he dance or die as society please . I tell you a gulf exist 
 between we - you have widen it , for which I thank you ! as I do not 
 impose any of my wish upon you , and therefore can not request you to 
 leave the room , you must excuse I if I retire elsewhere . " 

 and she approach the entrance of her studio , which be opposite to 
 where I stand ; but the Prince reach it before she , and place his 
 back against it . his face be deathly pale , and his dark eye blaze 
 with wrath and love intermingle . 

 " no , Zara ! " he exclaim in a sort of loud whisper . " if you think to 
 escape I so , you be in error . I come to you reckless and resolve ! 
 you shall be mine if I die for it ! " and he strove to seize she in his 
 arm . but she escape he and stand at bay , her lip quivering , her 
 bosom heaving , and her hand clench . 

 " I warn you ! " she exclaim . " by the intense loathing I have for you ; 
 by the force which make my spirit rise in arm against you , I warn 
 you ! do not dare to touch I ! if you care for your own life , leave I 
 while there be time ! " 

 never have she look so supremely , terribly beautiful . I gaze at she 
 from my corner of the doorway , awe , yet fascinated . the jewel on her 
 breast glow with an angry red lustre , and shoot forth dazzle opaline 
 ray , as though it be a sort of living , breathing star . Prince Ivan 
 pause - entrance no doubt , as I be , by her unearthly loveliness . his 
 face flush - he give a low laugh of admiration . then he make two swift 
 stride forward and catch she fiercely in his embrace . his triumph be 
 brief . Scarcely have his strong arm clasp her waist , when it fall numb 
 and powerless - scarcely have his eager lip stoop towards her , when 
 he reel and sink heavily on the ground , senseless ! the spell that have 
 hold I a silent spectator of the scene be break . terrify , I rush 
 into the room , cry out : 

 " Zara , Zara ! what have you do ? " 

 Zara turn her eye gently upon I - they be soft and humid as though 
 recently fill with tear . all the burn scorn and indignation have 
 go out of her face - she look pityingly at the prostrate form of her 
 admirer . 

 " he be not dead , " she say quietly . " I will call Casimir . " 

 I kneel beside the Prince and raise his hand . it be cold and heavy . 
 his lip be blue , and his closed eyelid look as though , in the 
 word of Homer , " death 's purple finger " have shut they fast forever . no 
 breath - no pulsation of the heart . I look fearfully at Zara . she 
 smile half sadly . 

 " he be not dead , " she repeat . 

 " be you sure ? " I murmur . " what be it , Zara , that make he fall ? I 
 be at the door - I see and hear everything . " 

 " I know you do , " say Zara gently ; " and I be glad of it . I wish you 
 to see and hear all . " 

 " be it a fit , do you think ? " I ask again , look sorrowfully at the 
 sad face of the unfortunate Ivan , which seem to I to have already 
 grave upon it the stern sweet smile of those who have pass all 
 passion and pain forever . " oh , Zara ! do you believe he will recover ? " 
 and tear choke my voice - tear of compassion and regret . 

 Zara come and kiss I . 

 " yes , he will recover - do not fret , little one . I have ring my private 
 bell for Casimir ; he will be here directly . the Prince have have a 
 shock - not a fatal one , as you will see . you look doubtful - be you 
 afraid of I , dear ? " 

 I gaze at her earnestly . those clear childlike eye - that frank 
 smile - that gentle and dignified mien - could they accompany evil 
 thought ? no ! I be sure Zara be good as she be lovely . 

 " I be not afraid of you , Zara , " I say gravely ; " I love you too well 
 for that . but I be sorry for the poor Prince ; and I can not 
 understand - - " 

 " you can not understand why those who trespass against fix law should 
 suffer ? " observe Zara calmly . " well , you will understand some day . you 
 will know that in one way or another it be the reason of all suffering , 
 both physical and mental , in the world . " 

 I say no more , but wait in silence till the sound of a firm 
 approach footstep announce Heliobas . he enter the room 
 quickly - glance at the motionless form of the Prince , then at I , and 
 lastly at his sister . 

 " have he be long thus ? " he ask in a low tone . 

 " not five minute , " reply Zara . 

 a pitying and affectionate gentleness of expression fill his keen 
 eye . 

 " reckless boy ! " he murmur softly , as he stoop and lay one hand 
 lightly on Ivan 's breast . " he be the very type of misguided human 
 bravery . you be too hard upon he , Zara ! " 

 Zara sigh . 

 " he speak against you , " she say . " of course he do , " return she 
 brother with a smile . " and it be perfectly natural he should do so . 
 have I not read his thought ? do not I know that he consider I a 
 false pretender and CHARLATAN ? and have I not humour he ? in this he 
 be no bad than any one of his race . every great scientific discovery 
 be vote impossible at the first start . Ivan be not to blame because he 
 be like the rest of the world . he will be wise in time . " 

 " he attempt to force his desire , " begin Zara again , and her cheek 
 flush indignantly . 

 " I know , " answer her brother . " I foresaw how it would be , but be 
 powerless to prevent it . he be wrong - but bold ! such boldness compel 
 a certain admiration . this fellow would scale the star , if he know how 
 to do it , by physical force alone . " 

 I grow impatient , and interrupt these remark . 

 " perhaps he be scale the star now , " I say ; " or at any rate he will 
 do so if death can show he the way . " 

 Heliobas give I a friendly glance . 

 " you also be grow courageous when you can speak to your physician 
 thus abruptly , " he observe quietly . " death have nothing to do with our 
 friend as yet , I assure you . Zara , you have well leave we . your face 
 must not be the first for Ivan 's eye to rest upon . you , " nod to 
 I , " can stay . " 

 Zara press my hand gently as she pass I , and enter her studio , 
 the door of which close behind she , and I hear the key turn in the 
 lock . I become absorb in the proceeding of Heliobas . stoop 
 towards the recumbent form of Prince Ivan , he take the heavy lifeless 
 hand firmly in his own , and then fix his eye fully and steadily on 
 the pale , set feature with an expression of the most forcible calm and 
 absolutely undeniable authority . not one word do he utter , but 
 remain motionless as a statue in the attitude thus assume - he seem 
 scarcely to breathe - not a muscle of his countenance move . perhaps 
 twenty or thirty second might have elapse , when a warm tinge of 
 colour come back to the apparently dead face - the brow twitch - the 
 lip quiver and part in a heavy sigh . the braised appearance of the 
 eyelid give place to the natural tint - they open , disclose the 
 eye , which star directly into those of the compelling Master who 
 thus force their obedience . a strong shudder shake the young man 's 
 frame ; his before nerveless hand grasp those of Heliobas with force 
 and fervour , and still meet that steady look which seem to pierce 
 the very centre of his system , Prince Ivan , like Lazarus of old , arise 
 and stand erect . as he do so , Heliobas withdraw his eye , drop his 
 hand and smile . 

 " you be well , Ivan ? " he inquire kindly . 

 the Prince look about he , bewilder . he pass one hand across his 
 forehead without reply . then he turn slightly and perceive I in 
 the window - embrasure , whither I have retreat in fear and wonderment at 
 the marvellous power of Heliobas , thus openly and plainly display . 

 " tell I , " he say , address I , " have I be dream ? " 

 I could not answer he . I be glad to see he recover , yet I be a 
 little afraid . Heliobas push a chair gently towards he . 

 " sit down , Ivan , " he say quietly . 

 the Prince obey , and cover his face with his hand as though in deep 
 and earnest meditation . I look on in silence and wonderment . Heliobas 
 speak not another word , and together we watch the pensive figure in 
 the chair , so absorb in serious thought . some minute pass . the 
 gentle tick of the clock in the outer hall grow almost obtrusive , so 
 loud do it seem in the utter stillness that surround we . I long to 
 speak - to ask question - to proffer sympathy - but dare not move or 
 utter a syllable . suddenly the Prince rise ; his manner be calm and 
 dignified , yet touch with a strange humility . he advance to 
 Heliobas , hold out his hand . 

 " forgive I , Casimir ! " he say simply . 

 Heliobas at once grasp the proffer palm within his own , and look 
 at the young man with an almost fatherly tenderness . 

 " say no more , Ivan , " he return , his rich voice sound more than 
 usually mellow in its warmth and heartiness . " we must all learn before 
 we can know , and some of our lesson be sharp and difficult . whatever 
 you have think of I , remember I have not , and do not , blame you . to 
 be offend with unbeliever be to show that you be not yourself quite 
 sure of the faith to which you would compel they . " 

 " I would ask you one thing , " go on the Prince , speak in a low 
 tone . " do not let I stay to fall into fresh error . teach I - guide 
 I , Casimir ; I will be the most docile of your pupil . as for Zara - " 

 he pause , as if overcome . 

 " come with I , " say Heliobas , take his arm ; " a glass of good wine 
 will invigorate you . it be well to see Zara no more for a time . let 
 I take charge of you . you , mademoiselle , " turn to I , " will be kind 
 enough to tell Zara that the Prince have recover , and send she a 
 friendly good - night . will that message suffice ? " he inquire of Ivan , 
 with a smile . 

 the Prince look at I with a sort of wistful gravity as I come 
 forward to bid he farewell . 

 " you will embrace she , " he say slowly , " without fear . her eye will 
 rain sunshine upon you ; they will not dart lightning . her lip will 
 meet your , and their touch will be warm - not cold , as sharp steel . 
 yes ; bid her good - night for I ; tell she that an err man kiss the 
 hem of her robe , and pray she for pardon . tell she that I understand ; 
 tell she I have see her lover ! " 

 " with these word , utter distinctly and emphatically , he turn away 
 with . Heliobas , who still hold he by the arm in a friendly , 
 half - protect manner . the tear stand in my eye . I call softly : 

 " good - night , Prince Ivan ! " 

 he look back with a faint smile . 

 " good - night , mademoiselle ! " 

 Heliobas also look back and give I an encouraging nod , which mean 
 several thing at once , such as " do not be anxious , " " he will be all 
 right soon , " and " always believe the good . " I watch their two figure 
 disappear through the doorway , and then , feel almost cheerful again , 
 I knock at the door of Zara 's studio . she open it at once , and come 
 out . I deliver the Prince 's message , word for word , as he have give 
 it . she listen , and sigh deeply . 

 " be you sorry for he , Zara ? " I ask . 

 " yes , " she reply ; " I be sorry for he as far as I can be sorry for 
 anything . I be never actually very sorry for any circumstance , however 
 grievous they may appear . " 

 I be surprised at this avowal . 

 " why , Zara , " I say , " I think you be so keenly sympathetic ? " 

 " so I be sympathetic , but only with suffer ignorance - a die bird 
 that know not why it should die - a withering rise that see not the 
 reason for its withering ; but for human being who wilfully blind 
 themselves to the teaching of their own instinct , and be always 
 do what they know they ought not to do in spite of warning , I can not 
 say I be sorry . and for those who do study the cause and ultimate 
 result of their existence , there be no occasion to be sorry , as they 
 be perfectly happy , know everything that happen to they to be for 
 their advancement and justification . " 

 " tell I , " I ask with a little hesitation , " what do Prince Ivan mean 
 by say he have see your lover , Zara ? " 

 " he mean what he say , I suppose , " reply Zara , with sudden coldness . 
 " excuse I , I think you say you be not inquisitive . " 

 I could not bear this change of tone in she , and I clasp my arm 
 tight about she and smile in her face . 

 " you shall not get angry with ME , Zara . I be not go to be treat 
 like poor Ivan . I have find out what you be , and how dangerous it be 
 to admire you ; but I do admire and love you . and I defy you to knock I 
 down as unceremoniously as you do the Prince - you beautiful living bit 
 of Lightning ! " 

 Zara move restlessly in my embrace , but I hold she fast . at the last 
 epithet I bestow on she , she grow very pale ; but her eye resemble 
 the jewel on her breast in their sheeny glitter . 

 " what have you find out ? " she murmur . " what do you know ? " 

 " I can not say I know , " I go on boldly , still keep my arm round 
 she ; " but I have make a guess which I think come near the truth . your 
 brother have have the care of you ever since you be a little child , and 
 I believe he have , by some method know only to himself , charge you 
 with electricity . yes , Zara , " for she have start and try to loosen 
 my hold of she ; " and it be that which keep you young and fresh as a 
 girl of sixteen , at an age when other woman lose their bloom and grow 
 wrinkle . it be that which give you the power to impart a repelling 
 shock to people you dislike , as in the case of Prince Ivan . it be that 
 which give you such an attractive force for those with whom you have a 
 little sympathy - such as myself , for instance ; and you can not , Zara , 
 with all your electric strength , unclasp my arm from your waist , 
 because you have not the sentiment of repulsion towards I which would 
 enable you to do it . shall I go on guess ? " 

 Zara make a sign of assent - the expression of her face have soften , 
 and a dimple smile play round the corner of her mouth . 

 " your lover , " I go on steadily and slowly , " be a native of some other 
 sphere - perhaps a creation of your own fancy - perhaps   for I will not 
 be sceptical any more   a beautiful and all - powerful angelic spirit . I 
 will not discuss this with you . I believe that when Prince Ivan fall 
 senseless , he see , or fancy he see , that nameless be . and now , " I 
 add , loosen my clasp of she , " have I guess well ? " 

 Zara look meditative . 

 " I do not know , " she say , " why you should imagine - " 

 " stop ! " I exclaim ; " there be no imagination in the case . I have 
 reason it out . here be a book I find in the library on electric 
 organ as they be discover to exist in certain fish . listen : ' they 
 be nervous apparatus which in the arrangement of their part may be 
 compare to a Voltaic pile . they develop electricity and give 
 electrical discharge . ' " 

 " well ! " say Zara . 

 " you say ' well ! ' as if you do not know ! " I exclaim half - angrily , 
 half - laughingly . " these fish have help I to understand a great deal , 
 I assure you . your brother must have discover the seed or 
 commencement of electrical organ like those describe , in the human 
 body ; and he have cultivate they in you and in himself , and have bring 
 they to a high state of perfection . he have cultivate they in Raffaello 
 Cellini , and he be begin to cultivate they in I , and I hope most 
 sincerely he will succeed . I think his theory be a magnificent one ! " 

 Zara gaze seriously at I , and her large eye seem to grow dark 
 with the intensity of her thought . 

 " supposing you have reason out the matter correctly , " she say - " and I 
 will not deny that you have do a great deal towards the comprehension 
 of it - have you no fear ? do you not include some drawback in even 
 Casimir 's learning such a secret , and be able to cultivate and 
 educate such a deadly force as that of electricity in the human being ? " 

 " if it be deadly , it be also life - give , " I answer . " remedy be 
 also poison . you lay the Prince senseless at your foot , but your 
 brother raise he up again . both these thing be do by 
 electricity . I can understand it all now ; I see no obscurity , no 
 mystery . and oh , what a superb discovery it be ! " 

 Zara smile . 

 " you enthusiast ! " she say , " it be nothing new . it be well know to 
 the ancient Chaldeans . it be know to Moses and his follower ; it be 
 practise in perfection by Christ and his disciple . to modern 
 civilization it may seem a discovery , because the tendency of all 
 so - call progress be to forget the past . the scent of the human savage 
 be extraordinarily keen - keener than that of any animal - he can follow 
 a track unerringly by some odour he be able to detect in the air . 
 again , he can lay back his ear to the wind and catch a faint , far - off 
 sound with , certainty and precision , and tell you what it be . civilized 
 being have forget all this ; they can neither smell nor hear with 
 actual keenness . just in the same way , they have forget the use of 
 the electrical organ they all indubitably possess in large or minute 
 degree . as the muscle of the arm be develop by practice , so can the 
 wonderful internal electrical apparatus of man be strengthen and 
 enlarge by use . the world in its youth know this ; the world in its age 
 forget , as an old man forget or smile disdainfully at the past 
 sport of his childhood . but do not let we talk any more to - night . if 
 you think your idea of I be correct - - " 

 " I be sure they be ! " I cry triumphantly . 

 Zara hold out her arm to I . 

 " and you be sure you love I ? " she ask . 

 I nestle into her embrace and kiss she . 

 " sure ! " I answer . " Zara , I love and honour you more than any woman I 
 ever meet or ever shall meet . and you love I - I know you do ! " 

 " how can I help it ? " she say . " be you not one of we ? good - night , 
 dearest ! sleep well ! " 

 " good - night ! " I answer . " and remember Prince Ivan ask for your 
 pardon . " 

 " I remember ! " she reply softly . " I have already pardon he , and I 
 will pray for he . " and a sort of radiant pity and forbearance 
 illumine her lovely feature , as we part for the night . so might an 
 angel look on some repentant sinner plead for Heaven 's forgiveness . 

 I lay awake for some time that night , endeavour to follow out the 
 track of thought I have enter upon in my conversation with Zara . with 
 such electricity as Heliobas practise , once admit that human 
 electric force exist , a fact which no reasoning person could deny , 
 all thing be possible . even a knowledge of superhuman event might 
 be attain , if there be anything in the universe that be 
 superhuman ; and surely it would be arrogant and ignorant to refuse to 
 contemplate such a probability . at one time people mock at the wild 
 idea that a message could flash in a moment of time from one side of 
 the Atlantic to the other by mean of a cable lay under the sea ; now 
 that it be an establish fact , the world have grow accustomed to it , 
 and have cease to regard it as a wonder . grant human electricity to 
 exist , why should not a communication be establish , like a sort of 
 spiritual atlantic cable , between man and the being of other sphere 
 and other solar system ? the more I reflect on the subject the more 
 lose I become in daring speculation concern that other world , to 
 which I be soon to be lift . then in a sort of half - doze , I fancy I 
 see an interminable glitter chain of vivid light compose of circle 
 that be all loop one in another , which seem to sweep round the 
 realm of space and to tie up the sun , moon , and star like flower in 
 a ribbon of fire . after much anxious and humble research , I find 
 myself to be one of the small link in this great chain . I do not 
 know whether I be grateful or afraid at this discovery , for sleep put 
 an end to my drowsy fancy , and drop a dark curtain over my waking 
 dream . 




 CHAPTER X. 

 my strange departure . 


 the next morning bring I two letter ; one from Mrs. Everard , tell 
 I that she and the Colonel have resolve on come to Paris . 

 " all the nice people be go away from here , " she write . " madame 
 Didier and her husband have start for Naples ; and , to crown our 
 lonesomeness , Raffaello Cellini pack up all his trap , and leave we 
 yesterday morning en route for Rome . the weather continue to be 
 delicious ; but as you seem to be get on so well in Paris , in spite 
 of the cold there , we have make up our mind to join you , the more 
 especially as I want to renovate my wardrobe . we shall go straight to 
 the Grand Hotel ; and I be write to Mrs. Challoner by this post , 
 ask she to get we room . we be so glad you be feel nearly 
 recover - of course , you must not leave your physician till you be 
 quite ready . at any rate , we shall not arrive till the end of next 
 week . " 

 I begin to calculate . during that strange interview in the chapel , 
 Heliobas have say that in eight day more I should be strong enough to 
 undergo the transmigration he have promise to effect upon I . those 
 eight day be now complete on this very morning . I be glad of this ; 
 for I do not care to see Mrs. Everard or anyone till the experiment 
 be over . the other letter I receive be from Mrs. Challoner , who 
 ask I to give an " improvisation " at the Grand Hotel that day 
 fortnight . 

 when I go down to breakfast , I mention both these letter , and 
 say , address myself to Heliobas : 

 " be it not rather a sudden freak of Raffaello Cellini 's to leave 
 canne ? we all think he be settle for the winter there . do you 
 know he be go to Rome ? " 

 " yes , " reply Heliobas , as he stir his coffee abstractedly . " I know 
 he be go there some day this month ; his presence be require there 
 on business . " 

 " and be you go to give the Improvisation this Mrs. Challoner ask 
 you for ? " inquire Zara . 

 I glance at Heliobas . he answer for I . 

 " I should certainly give it if I be you , " he say quietly : " there 
 will be nothing to prevent your do so at the date name . " 

 I be relieve . I have not be altogether able to divest myself of the 
 idea that I might possibly never come out alive from the electric 
 trance to which I have certainly consent ; and this assurance on the 
 part of Heliobas be undoubtedly comforting . we be all very silent 
 that morning ; we all wear grave and preoccupied expression . Zara be 
 very pale , and appear lose in thought . Heliobas , too , look slightly 
 careworn , as though he have be up all night , engage in some 
 brain - exhaust labour . no mention be make of Prince Ivan ; we avoid 
 his name by a sort of secret mutual understanding . when the breakfast 
 be over , I look with a fearless smile at the calm face of Heliobas , 
 which appear nobler and more dignified than ever with that slight 
 touch of sadness upon it , and say softly : 

 " the eight day be accomplish ! " 

 he meet my gaze fully , with a steady and serious observation of my 
 feature , and reply : 

 " my child , I be aware of it . I expect you in my private room at noon . 
 in the meantime speak to no one - not even to Zara ; read no book ; touch 
 no note of music . the chapel have be prepare for you ; go there and 
 pray . when you see a small point of light touch the extreme edge of the 
 cross upon the altar , it will be twelve o'clock , and you will then come 
 to I . " 

 with these word , utter in a grave and earnest tone , he leave I . a 
 sensation of sudden awe steal upon I . I look at Zara . she lay she 
 finger on her lip and smile , enjoin silence ; then draw my hand 
 close within her own , she lead I to the door of the chapel . there she 
 take a soft veil of some white transparent fabric , and fling it over 
 I , embrace and kiss I tenderly as she do so , but utter no 
 word . take my hand again , she enter the chapel with I , and 
 accompany I through what seem a blaze of light and colour to the 
 high altar , before which be place a prie - dieu of crimson velvet . 
 motion I to kneel , she kiss I once more through the filmy veil 
 that cover I from head to foot ; then turn noiselessly away she 
 disappear , and I hear the heavy oaken door close behind she . left 
 alone , I be able to quietly take note of everything around I . the 
 altar before which I kneel be ablaze with light candle , and a 
 wealth of the pure white flower decorate it , mingle their 
 delicious fragrance with the faintly perceptible odour of incense . on 
 all side of the chapel , in every little niche , and at every shrine , 
 taper be burn like firefly in a summer twilight . at the foot of 
 the large crucifix , which occupy a somewhat shadowy corner , lie a 
 wreath of magnificent crimson rose . it would seem as though some high 
 festival be about to be celebrate , and I gaze around I with a 
 beat heart , half expect some invisible touch to awaken the note 
 of the organ and a chorus of spirit - voice to respond with the " Gloria 
 in excelsis deo ! " but there be silence - absolute , beautiful , restful 
 silence . I strove to collect my thought , and turn my eye towards 
 the jewelled cross that surmount the high altar , I clasp my hand , 
 and begin to wonder how and for what I should pray . suddenly the idea 
 strike I that surely it be selfish to ask Heaven for anything ; would 
 it not be well to reflect on all that have already be give to I , 
 and to offer up thank ? Scarcely have this thought enter my mind when 
 a sort of overwhelming sense of unworthiness come over I . have I ever 
 be unhappy ? I wonder . if so , why ? I begin to count up my blessing 
 and compare they with my misfortune . exhausted pleasure - seeker may be 
 surprised to hear that I prove the joy of my life to have far 
 exceed my sorrow . I find that I have sight , hearing , youth , sound 
 limb , an appreciation of the beautiful in art and nature , and an 
 intense power of enjoyment . for all these thing , impossible of 
 purchase by mere wealth , should I not give thank ? for every golden ray 
 of sunshine , for every flower that bloom , for the harmony of the 
 wind and sea , for the singing of bird and the shadow of tree , should 
 I not - should we not all give thank ? for be there any human sorrow so 
 great that the blessing of mere daylight on the earth do not far 
 exceed ? we mortal be spoil and pet child - the more gift we 
 have the more we crave ; and when we burn or wound ourselves by our own 
 obstinacy or carelessness , we be ungratefully prone to blame the 
 Supreme Benefactor for our own fault . we don black mourning robe as a 
 sort of sombre protest against he for have remove some special 
 object of our choice and love , whereas , if we believe in he and be 
 grateful to he , we should wear dazzle white in sign of rejoice 
 that our treasure be safe in the land of perfect joy where we ourselves 
 desire to be . do we suffer from illness , loss of money , position , or 
 friend , we rail against Fate - another name for God - and complain like 
 babe who have break their toy ; yet the sun shin on , the season 
 come and go , the lovely panorama of Nature unroll itself all for our 
 benefit , while we murmur and fret and turn our eye away in anger . 

 think of these thing and kneeling before the altar , my heart become 
 fill with gratitude ; and no petition suggest itself to I save one , 
 and that be , " let I believe and love ! " I think of the fair , strong , 
 stately figure of Christ , stand out in the world 's history , like a 
 statue of pure white marble against a dark background ; I muse on the 
 endurance , patience , forgiveness , and perfect innocence of that most 
 spotless life which be finish on the cross , and again I murmur , 
 " let I believe and love ! " and I become so absorb in meditation that 
 the time flee fast , till a sudden sparkle of flame flash across the 
 altar - step cause I to look up . the jewelled cross have become a cross 
 of fire . the point of light I have be , tell to watch for have not only 
 touch the extreme edge , but have creep down among all the precious 
 stone and light they up like star . I afterwards learn that this 
 effect be produce by mean of a thin , electric wire , which , 
 communicate with a timepiece construct on the same system , 
 illuminate the cross at sunrise , noon , and sunset . it be time for I 
 to join Heliobas . I rise gently , and leave the chapel with a quiet and 
 reverent step , for I have always think that to manifest hurry and 
 impatience in any place set apart for the worship of the Creator be to 
 prove yourself one of the unworthi thing create . once outside the 
 door I lay aside my veil , and then , with a perfectly compose and 
 fearless mind , go straight to the Electrician 's study . I shall never 
 forget the intense quiet of the house that morning . the very fountain 
 in the hall seem to tinkle in a sort of subdue whisper . I find 
 Heliobas seat at his table , read . how my dream come vividly back 
 to I , as I see he in that attitude ! I feel that I know what he be 
 read . he look up as I enter , and greet I with a kindly yet 
 grave smile . I break silence abruptly . 

 " your book be open , " I say , " at a passage commencing thus : ' the 
 universe be uphold solely by the Law of Love . a majestic invisible 
 Protectorate govern the wind , the tide . ' be it not so ? " 

 " it be so , " return Heliobas . " be you acquainted with the book ? " 

 " only through the dream I have of you at Cannes , " I answer . " I do 
 think Signor Cellini have some power over I . " 

 " of course he have in your then weak state . but now that you be as 
 strong as he be , he could not influence you at all . let we be brief in 
 our converse , my child . I have a few serious thing to say to you 
 before you leave I , on your celestial journey . " 

 I tremble slightly , but take the chair he point out to I - a large 
 easy - chair in which one could recline and sleep . 

 " listen , " continue Heliobas ; " I tell you , when you first come here , 
 that whatever I might do to restore you to health , you would have it in 
 your power to repay I amply . you be restore to health ; will you give 
 I my reward ? " 

 " I would and will do anything to prove my gratitude to you , " I say 
 earnestly . " only tell I how . " 

 " you be aware , " he go on , " of my theory respect the Electric 
 Spirit or Soul in Man . it be progressive , as I have tell you - it begin 
 as a germ - it go on increase in power and beauty for ever , till it 
 be great and pure enough to enter the last of all world - God 's World . 
 but there be sometimes hindrance to its progression - obstacle in its 
 path , which cause it to recoil and retire a long way back - so far back 
 occasionally that it have to commence its journey over again . now , by my 
 earnest research , I be able to study and watch the progress of my own 
 inner force or soul . so far , all have be well - prayerfully and humbly 
 I may say I believe all have be well . but I foresee an approach 
 shadow - a difficulty - a danger - which , if it can not be repel or 
 pass in some way , threaten to violently push back my advance 
 spiritual nature , so that , with much grief and pain , I shall have to 
 re - commence the work that I have hop be do . I can not , with all my 
 good effort , discover what this darken obstacle be - but you , yes , 
 you " - for I have start up in surprise - " you , when you be lift up 
 high enough to behold these thing , may , be perfectly unselfish in 
 this research , attain to the knowledge of it and explain it to I , when 
 you return . in try to probe the secret for myself , it be of course 
 purely for my own interest ; and nothing clear , nothing satisfactory can 
 be spiritually obtain , in which selfishness have ever so slight a 
 share . you , if indeed I deserve your gratitude for the aid I have give 
 you - you will be able to search out the matter more certainly , be in 
 the position of one soul work for another . still , I can not compel 
 you to do this for I - I only ask , will you ? " 

 his entreating and anxious tone touch I keenly ; but I be amazed and 
 perplexed , and could not yet realize what strange thing be go to 
 happen to I . but whatever occur I be resolve to give a ready 
 consent to his request , therefore I say firmly : 

 " I will do my good , I promise you . remember that I do not know , I 
 can not even guess where I be go , or what strange sensation will 
 overcome I ; but if I be permit to have any recollection of earth at 
 all , I will try to find out what you ask . " 

 Heliobas seem satisfied , and rise from his chair , unlock a 
 heavily - bind iron safe . from this he take a glass flask of a strange , 
 ever - move , glitter fluid , the same in appearance as that which 
 Raffaello Cellini have forbid I to drink . he then pause and look 
 searchingly at I . 

 " tell I , " he say in an authoritative tone , " tell I why you wish to 
 see what to mortal be unseen ? what motive have you ? what ulterior 
 plan ? " 

 I hesitate . then I gather my strength together and answer 
 decisively : 

 " I desire to know why this world , this universe exist ; and also wish 
 to prove , if possible , the truth and necessity of religion . and I think 
 I would give my life , if it be worth anything , to be certain of the 
 truth of Christianity . " 

 Heliobas gaze in my face with a sort of half - pity , half - censure . 

 " you have a daring aim , " he say slowly , " and you be a bold seeker . 
 but shame , repentance and sorrow await you where you be go , as well 
 as rapture and amazement . ' I would give my life if it be worth 
 anything . ' that utterance have save you - otherwise to soar into an 
 unexplored wilderness of sphere , weight by your own doubt and 
 guide solely by your own wild desire , would be a fruitless journey . " 

 I feel abash as I meet his steady , scrutinize eye . 

 " surely it be well to wish to know the reason of thing ? " I ask , with 
 some timidity . 

 " the desire of knowledge be a great virtue , certainly , " he reply ; " it 
 be not truly feel by one in a thousand . Most person be content to 
 live and die , absorb in their own petty commonplace affair , without 
 trouble themselves as to the reason of their existence . yet it be 
 almost well , like these , to wallow in blind ignorance than wantonly 
 to doubt the creator because he be unseen , or to put a self - opinionate 
 construction on his mystery because he choose to veil they from our 
 eye . " 

 " I do not doubt ! " I exclaim earnestly . " I only want to make sure , and 
 then perhaps I may persuade other . " 

 " you can never compel faith , " say Heliobas calmly . " you be go to 
 see wonderful thing that no tongue or pen can adequately describe . 
 well , when you return to earth again , do you suppose you can make 
 people believe the story of your experience ? never ! be thankful if you 
 be the possessor of a secret joy yourself , and do not attempt to 
 impart it to other , who will only repel and mock you . " 

 " not even to one other ? " I ask hesitatingly . 

 a warm , kindly smile seem to illuminate his face as I put this 
 question . 

 " yes , to one other , the other half of yourself - you may tell all 
 thing , " he say . " but now , no more converse . if you be quite ready , 
 drink this . " 

 he hold out to I a small tumbler fill with the sparkle volatile 
 liquid he have pour from the flask . for one moment my courage almost 
 forsook I , and an icy shiver run through my vein . then I bethink 
 myself of all my boasted bravery ; be it possible that I should fail 
 now at this critical moment ? I allow myself no more time for 
 reflection , but take the glass from his hand and drain its content 
 to the last drop . it be tasteless , but sparkling and warm on the 
 tongue . Scarcely have I swallow it , when a curiously light , dizzy 
 sensation overcome I , and the figure of Heliobas stand before I 
 seem to assume gigantic proportion . I see his hand extend - his 
 eye , like lamp of electric flame , burn through and through I - and 
 like a distant echo , I hear the deep vibrate tone of his voice 
 utter the follow word : 

 " Azul ! Azul ! lift up this light and daring spirit unto thyself ; be its 
 pioneer upon the path it must pursue ; suffer it to float untrammelle 
 through the wide and glorious Continents of Air ; give it form and force 
 to alight on any of the vast and beautiful sphere it may desire to 
 behold ; and if worthy , permit it to gaze , if only for a brief interval , 
 upon the supreme vision of the First and last of world . by the force 
 thou giv unto I , I free this soul ; do thou , Azul , quickly receive 
 it ! " 

 a dense darkness now grow thickly around I - -I lose all power over my 
 limb - I feel myself be lift up forcibly and rapidly , up , up , into 
 some illimitable , terrible space of blackness and nothingness . I could 
 not think , move , or cry out - I could only feel that I be rise , 
 rise , steadily , swiftly , breathlessly ... when suddenly a long 
 quivering flash of radiance , like the fragment of a rainbow , strike 
 dazzlingly across my sight . darkness ? what have I to do with darkness ? I 
 know not the word - I be only conscious of light - light exquisitely 
 pure and brilliant - light through which I step as easily as a bird 
 fly in air . perfectly awake to my sensation , I feel somehow that 
 there be nothing remarkable in they - I seem to be at home in some 
 familiar element . delicate hand hold mine - a face far lovely than 
 the lovely face of woman ever dream by poet or painter , smile 
 radiantly at I , and I smile back again . a voice whisper in strange 
 musical murmur , such as I well seem to know and comprehend : 

 " gaze behind thee ere the picture fade . " 

 I obey , half reluctantly , and see as a pass shadow in a glass , or 
 a sort of blurred miniature painting , the room where Heliobas stand , 
 watch some strange imperfect shape , which I seem faintly to 
 recognise . it look like a small cast in clay , very badly execute , of 
 the shape I at present wore ; but it be incomplete , as though the 
 sculptor have give it up as a failure and go away , leave it 
 unfinishe . 

 " do I dwell in that body ? " I muse to myself , as I feel the perfection 
 of my then state of be . " how come I shut in such a prison ? how poor 
 a form - how destitute of faculty - how full of infirmity - how 
 limit in capability - how narrow in all intelligence - how 
 ignorant - how mean ! " 

 and I turn for relief to the shin companion who hold I , and 
 obey an impulse suddenly impart , I feel myself float high and 
 high till the last limit of the atmosphere surround the Earth 
 be pass , and field of pure and cloudless ether extend before we . 
 here we meet myriad of creature like ourselves , all hasten in 
 various direction - all lovely and radiant as a dream of the fairy . 
 some of these being be quite tiny and delicate - some of lofty 
 stature and glorious appearance : their form be human , yet so 
 refine , improve , and perfect , that they be unlike , while so like 
 humanity . 

 " askest thou nothing ? " whisper the voice beside I . 

 " tell I , " I answer , " what I must know . " 

 " these spirit that we behold , " go on the voice , " be the guardian 
 of all the inhabitant of all the planet . their labour be those of 
 love and penitence . their work be to draw other soul to God - to 
 attract they by warning , by plead , by pray . they have all wear 
 the garb of mortality themselves , and they teach mortal by their own 
 experience . for these radiant creature be expiate sin of their own 
 in thus strive to save other - the oftener they succeed the nearer 
 they approach to Heaven . this be what be vaguely understand on your 
 earth as purgatory ; the suffering of spirit who love and long for the 
 presence of their creator , and who yet be not pure enough to approach 
 he . only by serve and save other can they obtain at last their 
 own joy . every act of ingratitude and forgetfulness and wickedness 
 commit by a mortal , detain one or another of these patient worker 
 long away from Heaven - imagine then what a weary while many of they 
 have to wait . " 

 I make no answer , and we float on . high and high - high and 
 high - till at last my guide , whom I know to be that be whom 
 Heliobas have call Azul , bid I pause . we be float close 
 together in what seem a sea of translucent light . from this point I 
 could learn something of the mighty working of the Universe . I gaze 
 upon countless solar system , that like wheel within wheel revolve 
 with such rapidity that they seem all one wheel . I see planet whirl 
 around and around with breathless swiftness , like glitter ball 
 fling through the air - burn comet flare fiercely past like torch 
 of alarm for God 's war against Evil - a marvellous procession of 
 indescribable wonder sweep on for ever in circle , grand , huge , and 
 immeasurable . and as I watch the superb pageant , I be not startle 
 or confuse - I look upon it as anyone might look on any quiet 
 landscape scene in what we know of Nature . I scarcely could perceive 
 the Earth from whence I have come - so tiny a speck be it - nothing but a 
 mere pin 's point in the burn whirl of immensity . I feel , however , 
 perfectly conscious of a superior force in myself to all these enormous 
 force around I - I know without need any explanation that I be 
 form of an indestructible essence , and that be all these star and 
 system suddenly to end in one fall burst of brilliant horror , I should 
 still exist - I should know and remember and feel - should be able to 
 watch the birth of a new universe , and take my part in its growth and 
 design . 

 " remind I why these wonder exist , " I say , turn to my guide , and 
 speak in those dulcet sound which be like music and yet like 
 speech ; " and why amid they all the Earth be believe by its inhabitant 
 to have merit destruction , and yet to have be find worthy of 
 redemption ? " 

 " Thy last question shall be answer first , " reply Azul . " seest thou 
 yonder planet circle with a ring ? it be know to the dweller on 
 Earth , of whom when in clay thou art one , as Saturn . descend with I ! " 

 and in a breath of time we float downward and alight on a broad 
 and beautiful plain , where flower of strange shape and colour grow in 
 profusion . here we be meet by creature of lofty stature and dazzle 
 beauty , human in shape , yet angelic in countenance . they kneel to we 
 with reverence and joy , and then pass on to their toil or pleasure , 
 whichever invite they , and I look to Azul for explanation . 

 " to these child of the creator , " say that radiant guide , " be 
 grant the ability to see and to converse with the spirit of the air . 
 they know they and love they , and implore their protection . in this 
 planet sickness and old age be unknown , and death come as a quiet 
 sleep . the period of existence be about two hundred year , accord to 
 the Earth 's standard of time ; and the process of decay be no more 
 unlovely than the gentle withering of rose . the influence of the 
 electric belt around their world be a bar to pestilence and disease , 
 and scatter health with light . all science , art , and invention 
 know on Earth be know here , only to great perfection . the three 
 important difference between the inhabitant of this planet and those 
 who dwell on Earth be these : first they have no ruler in authority , 
 as each one perfectly govern himself ; second , they do not marry , as 
 the law of attraction which draw together any two of opposite sex , 
 hold they fast in inviolable fidelity ; thirdly , there be no creature 
 in all the immensity of this magnificent sphere who have ever doubt , 
 or who ever will doubt , the existence of the Creator . " 

 a thrill of fiery shame seem to dart through my spiritual being as I 
 hear this , and I make no answer . some fairy - like little creature , the 
 child of the Saturnites , as I suppose , here come run towards we 
 and kneel down , reverently clasp their hand in prayer . they then 
 gather flower and fling they on that portion of ground where we 
 stand , and gaze at we fearlessly and lovingly , as they might have 
 gaze at some rare bird or butterfly . 

 Azul sign to I , and we rise while yet in their sight , and soar 
 through the radiance of the ring , which be like a sun weave into a 
 circle , we soon leave Saturn far behind we , and alight on Venus . here 
 sea , mountain , forest , lake , and meadow be one vast garden , in 
 which the bloom and verdure of all world seem to find a home . here 
 be realize the dream of sculptor and painter , in the graceful 
 form and exquisite face of the woman , and the splendid strength and 
 godlike beauty of the man . a brief glance be sufficient to show I 
 that the move spring of all the civilization of this radiant planet 
 be the love of Nature and art unite . there be no war - for there 
 be no different nation . all the inhabitant be like one vast 
 family ; they work for one another , and vie with each other in pay 
 homage to those of the lofty genius among they . they have one supreme 
 Monarch to whom they all render glad obedience ; and he be a Poet , 
 ready to sacrifice his throne with joy as soon as his people should 
 discover a great than he . for they all love not the artist but the 
 Art ; and selfishness be a vice unknown . here , none love or be 
 wed save those who have spiritual sympathy , and here , too , no 
 creature exist who do not believe in and worship the Creator . the 
 same state of thing exist in Jupiter , the planet we next visit , 
 where everything be perform by electricity . here person live 
 hundred of mile apart could yet converse together with perfect ease 
 through an electric medium ; ship plough the sea by electricity ; 
 printing , an art of which the dweller on Earth be so proud , be 
 accomplish by electricity - in fact , everything in the way of science , 
 art , and invention know to we be also know in Jupiter , only to 
 great perfection , because temper and strengthen by an electric 
 force which never fail . from Jupiter , Azul guide I to many other 
 fair and splendid world - yet none of they be Paradise ; all have some 
 slight drawback - some physical or spiritual ailment , as it be , which 
 have to be combat with and conquer . all the inhabitant of each star 
 long for something they have not - something well , great , and 
 high - and therefore all have discontent . they could not realize their 
 good desire in the state of existence they then be , therefore they 
 all suffer disappointment . they be all compel to work in some 
 way or another ; they be all doom to die . yet , unlike the dweller 
 on Earth , they do not , because their life be more or less 
 constrained and painful , complain of or deny the goodness of God - on 
 the contrary , they believe in a future state which should be as 
 perfect as their present one be imperfect ; and the chief aim and 
 object of all their labour be to become worthy of attain that 
 final grand result - eternal Happiness and Peace . 

 " Readest thou the lesson in these glowing sphere , teem with life 
 and learn ? " murmur Azul to I , as we soar swiftly on together . 
 " know that not one small world in all the myriad system circle 
 before thee , hold a single human creature who doubt his maker . not 
 one ! except thine own doom star ! behold it yonder - sparkle feebly , 
 like a faint flame amid sunshine - how poor a speck it be - how like a 
 scarcely visible point in all the brilliancy of the ever - revolve 
 wheel of Life ! yet there dwell the dwarf of clay - the man and woman 
 who pretend to love while they secretly hate and despise one another . 
 there , wealth be a god , and the greed of gain a virtue . there , genius 
 starve , and heroism die unrewarded . there , faith be martyr , and 
 unbelief elect sovereign monarch of the people . there , the sublime , 
 unreachable mystery of the Universe be haggle over by poor finite 
 mind who can not call their life their own . there , nation war against 
 nation , creed against creed , soul against soul . alas , fated planet ! how 
 soon shalt thou be extinct , and thy place shall know thee no more ! " 

 I gaze earnestly at my radiant guide . " if that be true , " I say , " why 
 then should we have a legend that God , in the person of one call 
 Christ , come to die for so miserable and mean a race of being ? " 

 Azul answer not , but turn her luminous eye upon I with a sort of 
 wide dazzling wonder . some strange impel force bear I onward , and 
 before I could realize it I be alone . alone , in a vast area of light 
 through which I float , serene and conscious of power . a sound fall 
 from a great height reach I ; it be first like a grand organ - chord , 
 and then like a voice , trumpet - clear and far - echoing . 

 " Spirit that searchest for the Unseen , " it say , " because I will not 
 that no atom of true worth should perish , unto thee shall be give a 
 vision - unto thee shall be teach a lesson thou dream not of . THOU 
 shalt create ; THOU shalt design and plan ; THOU shalt be worship , and 
 THOU shalt destroy ! rest therefore in the light and behold the thing 
 that be in the light , for the tune cometh when all that seemeth clear 
 and visible now shall be but darkness . and they that love I not shall 
 have no place of abode in that hour ! " 

 the voice cease . awed , yet console , I listen for it again . there 
 be no more sound . around I be illimitable light - illimitable 
 silence . but a strange scene unfold itself swiftly before I - a sort 
 of shift dream that be a reality , yet so wonderfully unreal - a 
 vision that impress itself on every portion of my intelligence ; a 
 kind of spirit - drama in which I be force to enact the chief part , and 
 where a mystery that I have deem impenetrable be make perfectly clear 
 and simple of comprehension . 




 CHAPTER XI . 

 a miniature creation . 


 in my heaven - uplift dream , I think I see a circular spacious garden 
 in which all the lovely landscape of a superior world appear to form 
 themselves by swift degree . the long I look at it , the more 
 beautiful it become , and a little star shine above it like a sun . tree 
 and flower spring up under my gaze , and all stretch themselves 
 towards I , as though for protection . bird fly about and sing ; some 
 of they try to get as near as possible to the little sun they see ; 
 and other living creature begin to move about in the shadow of the 
 grove , and on the fresh green grass . all the wonderful working of 
 Nature , as know to we in the world , take place over again in this 
 garden , which seem somehow to belong to I ; and I watch everything 
 with a certain satisfaction and delight . then the idea come to I that 
 the place would be fair if there be either man or angel to inhabit 
 it ; and quick as light a whisper come to I : 

  " CREATE ! " 

 and I think in my dream that by the mere desire of my being , 
 express in wave of electric warmth that float downward from I to 
 the earth I possess , my garden be suddenly fill with man , woman 
 and child , each of whom have a small portion of myself in they , 
 inasmuch as it be I who make they move and talk and occupy themselves 
 in all manner of amusement . many of they kneel down to I and pray , 
 and offer thanksgiving for have be create ; but some of they 
 go instead to the little star , which they call a sun , and thank 
 that , and pray to that instead . then other go and cut down the 
 tree in the garden , and dig up stone , and build themselves little 
 city , where they all dwelt together like flock of sheep , and eat and 
 drank and make merry with the thing I have give they . then I think 
 that I increase their intelligence and quickness of perception , and 
 by - and - by they grow so proud that they forget everything but 
 themselves . they cease to remember how they be create , and they 
 care no more to offer praise to their little sun that through I give 
 they light and heat . but because something of my essence still be in 
 they , they always instinctively seek to worship a superior creature 
 to themselves ; and puzzle themselves in their folly , they make 
 hideous image of wood and clay , unlike anything in heaven or earth , 
 and offer sacrifice and prayer to these lifeless puppet instead of 
 to I . then I turn away my eye in sorrow and pity , but never in 
 anger ; for I could not be wrathful with these child of my own 
 creation . and when I thus turn away my eye , all manner of evil come 
 upon the once fair scene - pestilence and storm , disease and vice . a 
 dark shadow steal between my little world and I - the shadow of the 
 people 's own wickedness . and as every delicate fibre of my spiritual 
 be repel evil by the necessity of the pure light in which I dwelt 
 serene . I wait patiently for the mist to clear , so that I might 
 again behold the beauty of my garden . suddenly a soft clamour smote 
 upon my sense of hearing , and a slender stream of light , like a 
 connect ray , seem to be fling upwards through the darkness that 
 hide I from the people I have create and love . I know the sound - it 
 be the mingled music of the prayer of child . an infinite pity and 
 pleasure touch I , my be thrill with love and tenderness ; and 
 yield to these little one who ask I for protection , I turn my 
 eye again towards the garden I have design for fairness and pleasure . 
 but alas ! how change it have become ! no long fresh and sweet , the 
 people have turn it into a wilderness ; they have divide it into small 
 portion , and in so doing have divide themselves into separate 
 company call nation , all of whom fight with each other fiercely 
 for their different little parterre or flower - bed . some haggled and 
 talk incessantly over the mere possession of a stone which they 
 call a rock ; other busy themselves in dig a little yellow 
 metal out of the earth , which , when once obtain , seem to make the 
 owner of it mad , for they straightway forget everything else . as I 
 look , the darkness between I and my creation grow denser , and be 
 only pierce at last by those long wide shafts of radiance cause by 
 the innocent prayer of those who still remember I . and I be full 
 of regret , for I see my people wander hither and thither , restless 
 and dissatisfied , perplex by their own error , and care nothing for 
 the love I bear they . then some of they advance and begin to question 
 why they have be create , forget completely how their life have 
 be originally design by I for happiness , love and wisdom . then 
 they accuse I of the existence of evil , refuse to see that where 
 there be light there be also darkness , and that darkness be the rival 
 force of the Universe , whence cometh silently the Unnamable Oblivion of 
 soul . they could not see , my self - willed child , that they have of 
 their own desire seek the darkness and find it ; and now , because it 
 gloome above they like a pall , they refuse to believe in the light 
 where still I be love and strive to attract they still . yet it be 
 not all darkness , and I know that even what there be might be repel 
 and clear away if only my people would turn towards I once more . so 
 I send down upon they all possible blessing - some they reject 
 angrily , some they snatch at and throw away again , as though they 
 be poor and trivial - none of they be they thankful for , and none 
 do they desire to keep . and the darkness above they deepen , while my 
 anxious pity and love for they increase . for how could I turn 
 altogether away from they , as long as but a few remember I ? there 
 be some of these weak child of mine who love and honour I so 
 well that they absorb some of my light into themselves , and become 
 hero , poet , musician , teacher of high and noble thought , and 
 unselfish , devoted martyr for the sake of the reverence they bear I . 
 there be woman pure and sweet , who wear their existence as innocently 
 as lily , and who turn to I to seek protection , not for themselves , 
 but for those they love . there be little child , whose ask 
 voice be like wave of delicious music to my being , and for whom I 
 have a surpass tenderness . and yet all these be a mere handful 
 compare to the number who deny my existence , and who have wilfully 
 crush out and repel every spark of my essence in themselves . and 
 as I contemplate this , the voice I have hear at the commencement of my 
 dream rush towards I like a mighty wind break through by thunder : 

  " DESTROY ! " 

 a great pity and love possess I . in deep awe , yet solemn 
 earnestness , I plead with that vast command voice . 

 " bid I not destroy ! " I implore . " command I not to disperse into 
 nothingness these child of my fancy , some of whom yet love and trust 
 to I for safety . let I strive once more to bring they out of their 
 darkness into the light - to bring they to the happiness I design they 
 to enjoy . they have not all forget I - let I give they more time 
 for thought and recollection ! " 

 again the great voice shake the air : 

 " they love darkness rather than light ; they love the perishable earth 
 of which they be in part compose , well than the germ of immortality 
 with which they be in the beginning endow . this garden of thine be 
 but a caprice of thy intelligence ; the creature that inhabit it be 
 soulless and unworthy , and be an offence to that indestructible 
 radiance of which thou art one ray . therefore I say unto thee 
 again - destroy ! " 

 my yearning love grow strong , and I plead with renew force . 

 " oh , thou Unseen Glory ! " I cry ; " thou who hast fill I with this 
 emotion of love and pity which permeate and support my existence , how 
 canst thou bid I take this sudden revenge upon my frail creation ! no 
 caprice be it that cause I to design it ; nothing but a thought of 
 love and a desire of beauty . even yet I will fulfil my plan - even yet 
 shall these err child of mine return to I in time , with 
 patience . while one of they still lift a hand in prayer to I , or 
 gratitude , I can not destroy ! bid I rather sink into the darkness of 
 the uttermost deep of shadow ; only let I save these feeble little one 
 from destruction ! " 

 the voice reply not . a flash opal brilliancy shoot across the light 
 in which I rest , and I behold an Angel , grand , lofty , majestic , with 
 a countenance in which shine the lustre of a myriad summer morning . 

 " Spirit that art escape from the Sorrowful Star , " it say in accent 
 clear and sonorous , " wouldst thou indeed be content to suffer the loss 
 of heavenly joy and peace , in order to rescue thy perish creation ? " 

 " I would ! " I answer ; " if I understand death , I would die to save one 
 of those frail creature , who seek to know I and yet can not find I 
 through the darkness they have bring upon themselves . " 

 " to die , " say the Angel , " to understand death , thou wouldst need to 
 become one of they , to take upon thyself their form - to imprison all 
 that brilliancy of which thou art now compose , into a mean and common 
 case of clay ; and even if thou couldst accomplish this , would thy 
 child know thee or receive thee ? " 

 " Nay , but if I could suffer shame by they , " I cry impetuously , " I 
 could not suffer sin . my being would be incapable of error , and I would 
 show these creature of mine the bliss of purity , the joy of wisdom , 
 the ecstasy of light , the certainty of immortality , if they follow 
 I . and then I would die to show they death be easy , and that in die 
 they would come to I and find their happiness for ever ! " 

 the stature of the Angel grow more lofty and magnificent , and its 
 star - like eye flash fire . 

 " then , oh thou wanderer from the Earth ! " it say , " understand thou 
 not the Christ ? " 

 a deep awe tremble through I . meanwhile the garden I have think a 
 world appear to roll up like a cloudy scroll , and vanish , and I 
 know that it have be a vision , and no more . 

 " oh doubting and foolish Spirit ! " go on the Angel - " thou who art but 
 one point of live light in the Supreme Radiance , even thou wouldst 
 consent to immure thyself in the darkness of mortality for sake of thy 
 fancied creation ! even thou wouldst submit to suffer and to die , in 
 order to show the frail child of thy dream a purely sinless and 
 spiritual example ! even THOU hast have the courage to plead with the one 
 all - Sufficing Voice against the destruction of what to thee be but a 
 mirage float in this ether ! even THOU hast have love , forgiveness , 
 pity ! even thou wouldst be willing to dwell among the creature of thy 
 fancy as one of they , know in thy inner self that by so do , thy 
 spiritual presence would have mark thy little world for ever as 
 sanctify and impossible to destroy . even thou wouldst sacrifice a 
 glory to answer a child 's prayer - even thou wouldst have patience ! and 
 yet thou hast dare to deny to God those attribute which thou thyself 
 dost possess - he be so great and vast - thou so small and slight ! for 
 the love thou feel throb through thy being , he be the very 
 commencement and perfection of all love ; if thou hast pity , he have ten 
 thousand time more pity ; if thou canst forgive , remember that from he 
 flow all thy power of forgiveness ! there be nothing thou canst do , 
 even at the high height of spiritual perfection , that he can not 
 surpass by a thousand million fold ! neither shalt thou refuse to 
 believe that he can also suffer . know that nothing be more godlike than 
 unselfish sorrow - and the grief of the Creator over one err human 
 soul be as vast as he himself be vast . why wouldst thou make of he a 
 be destitute of the good emotion that he himself bestow upon thee ? 
 thou wouldst have enter into thy dream - world and live in it and die 
 in it , if by so do thou couldst have draw one of thy creature back 
 to the love of thee ; and wilt thou not receive the Christ ? " 

 I bow my head , and a flood of joy rush through I . 

 " I believe - I believe and I love ! " I murmur . " Desert I not , O 
 radiant Angel ! I feel and know that all these wonder must soon pass 
 away from my sight ; but wilt thou also go ? " 

 the Angel smile and touch I . 

 " I be thy guardian , " it say . " I have be with thee always . I can 
 never leave thee so long as thy soul seek spiritual thing . asleep or 
 awake on the Earth , wherever thou art , I also be . there have be time 
 when I have warn thee and thou wouldst not listen , when I have try 
 to draw thee onward and thou wouldst not come ; but now I fear no more 
 thy disobedience , for thy restlessness be past . come with I ; it be 
 permit thee to see far off the vision of the last Circle . " 

 the glorious figure raise I gently by the hand , and we float on and 
 on , high and high , past little circle which my guide tell I be 
 all solar system , though they look nothing but slender garland of 
 fire , so rapidly do they revolve and so swiftly do we pass they . 
 high and high we go , till even to my untiring spirit the way 
 seem long . beautiful creature in human shape , but as delicate as 
 gossamer , pass we every now and then , some in band of two and 
 three , some alone ; and the high we soar the more dazzlingly lovely 
 these inhabitant of the air seem to be . 

 " they be all bear of the Great Circle , " my guardian Angel explain to 
 I : " and to they be give the power of communicate high thought or 
 inspiration . among they be the Spirits of Music , of poesy , of 
 Prophecy , and of all art ever know in all world . the success of their 
 teaching depend on how much purity and unselfishness there be in the 
 soul to which they whisper their divine message - message as brief as 
 telegram which must be listen to with entire attention and act 
 upon at once , or the lesson be lose and may never come again . " 

 just then I see a Shape come towards I as of a lovely fair - haired 
 child , who seem to be play softly on a strange glitter 
 instrument like a broken cloud string through with sunbeam . heedless 
 of consequence , I catch at its misty robe in a wild effort to detain 
 it . it obey my touch , and turn its deeply luminous eye first upon 
 I , and then upon the Angel who accompany my flight . 

 " what seek thou ? " it ask in a voice like the murmuring of the wind 
 among flower . 

 " music ! " I answer . " sing I thy melody - fill I with harmony 
 divine and unreachable - and I will strive to be worthy of thy 
 teaching ! " 

 the young Shape smile and draw close towards I . 

 " thy wish be grant , Sister Spirit ! " it reply . " the pity I shall 
 feel for thy fate when thou art again pen in clay , shall be teach 
 thee in minor music - thou shalt possess the secret of unwritten sound , 
 and I will sing to thee and bring thee comfort . on Earth , call but my 
 name - Aeon ! and thou shalt behold I . for thy longing voice be know to 
 the Children of Music , and hath oft shake the vibrate light wherein 
 they dwell . fear not ! as long as thou dost love I , I be thine . " and 
 part slowly , still smile , the lovely vision , with its small 
 radiant hand ever wander among the starry string of its cloud - like 
 lyre , float onward . 

 suddenly a clear voice say " welcome ! " and look up I see my first 
 friend , Azul . I smile in glad recognition - I would have speak - but 
 lo ! a wide immensity of blaze glory break like many - colour 
 lightning around I - so dazzling , so overpower , that I instinctively 
 draw back and pause - I feel I could go no far . 

 " here , " say my guardian gently - " here end thy journey . would that it 
 be possible , poor Spirit , for thee to pass this boundary ! but that 
 may not be - as yet . in the meanwhile thou may gaze for a brief space 
 upon the majestic sphere which mortal dream of as Heaven . Behold and 
 see how fair be the incorruptible perfection of God 's World ! " 

 I look and tremble - I should have sink yet far backward , have not 
 Azul and my angel - guide hold I with their light yet forcible clasp . my 
 heart fail I now as I try to write of that tremendous , that sublime 
 scene - the Centre of the Universe - the Cause of all Creation . how 
 unlike Heaven such as we in our ignorance have try to depict ! though 
 it be far well we should have a mistaken idea than none at all . what 
 I behold be a circle , so huge that no mortal measurement could 
 compass it - a wide Ring compose of seven colour , rainbow - like , but 
 flash with perpetual motion and brilliancy , as though a thousand 
 million sun be for ever be weave into it to feed its transcendent 
 lustre . from every part of this Ring dart long broad shaft of light , 
 some of which stretch out so far that I could not see where they 
 end ; sometimes a bubble shower of lightning spark would be fling 
 out on the pure ether , and this would instantly form into circle , 
 small or great , and whirl round and round the enormous girdle of flame 
 from which they have be cast , with the most inconceivable rapidity . 
 but wonderful as the Ring be , it encompass a sphere yet more 
 marvellous and dazzling ; a great Globe of opal - tint light , revolve 
 as it be upon its own axis , and ever surround by that 
 scintillating , jewel - like wreath of electricity , whose only motion be 
 to shine and burn within itself for ever . I could not bear to look upon 
 the brightness of that magnificent central World - so large that 
 multiply the size of the sun by a hundred thousand million , no 
 adequate idea could be form of its vast proportion . and ever it 
 revolve - and ever the Rainbow Ring around it glitter and cast forth 
 those other ring which I know now be live solar system cast forth 
 from that electric band as a volcano cast forth fire and lava . my 
 Angel - guide motion I to look towards that side of the ring which be 
 near to the position of the Earth . I look , and perceive that 
 there the shaft of descend light form themselves as they fall 
 into the shape of a Cross . at this , such sorrow , love , and shame 
 overcome I , that I know not where to turn . I murmur : 

 " send I back again , dear Angel - send I back to that Star of Sorrow 
 and error ! let I hasten to make amend there for all my folly - let I 
 try to teach other what now I know . I be unworthy to be here beside 
 thee - I be unfit to look on yonder splendid world - let I return to do 
 penance for my sin and shortcoming ; for what be I that God should 
 bless I ? and though I should consume myself in labour and suffering , 
 how can I ever hope to deserve the small place in that heavenly 
 glory I now partly behold ? " and could spirit shed tear , I should have 
 weep with remorse and grief . 

 Azul speak , softly and tenderly : 

 " now thou dost believe - henceforth thou must love ! love alone can pass 
 yon flame barrier - love alone can gain for thee eternal bliss . in 
 love and for love be all thing make - God loveth his creature , even 
 so let his creature love he , and so shall the twain be draw 
 together . " 

 " listen ! " add my angel - guide . " thou hast not travel so far as yet 
 to remain in ignorance . that burn Ring thou seest be the result of 
 the Creator 's ever - work intelligence ; from it all the Universe hath 
 sprung . it be exhaustless and perpetually creative ; it be pure and 
 perfect Light . the small spark of that fiery essence in a mortal 
 frame be sufficient to form a soul or spirit , such as mine , or that of 
 Azul , or thine , when thou art perfect . the huge world roll within 
 the Ring be where God dwell . dare not thou to question his shape , his 
 look , his mien ! know that he be the Supreme Spirit in which all Beauty , 
 all Perfection , all love , find consummation . his breath be the fire of 
 the Ring ; his look , his pleasure , cause the motion of his World and all 
 world . there where he dwell , dwell also all pure soul ; there all 
 desire have fulfilment without satiety , and there all loveliness , 
 wisdom or pleasure know in any or all of the other sphere be also 
 know . Speak , Azul , and tell this wanderer from Earth what she will 
 gain in win her place in Heaven . " 

 Azul look tenderly upon I and say : 

 " when thou hast sleep the brief sleep of death , when thou art permit 
 to throw off for ever thy garb of clay , and when by thine own ceaseless 
 love and long thou hast win the right to pass the Great Circle , thou 
 shalt find thyself in a land where the glory of the natural scenery 
 alone shall overpower thee with joy - scenery that for ever change into 
 new wonder and great beauty . thou shalt hear music such as thou 
 canst not dream of . thou shalt find friend , beyond all imagination 
 fair and faithful . thou shalt read and see the history of all the 
 planet , produce for thee in an ever - move panorama . thou shalt love 
 and be belove for ever by thine own Twin Soul ; wherever that spirit 
 may be now , it must join thee hereafter . the joy of learning , memory , 
 consciousness , sleep , wake , and exercise shall all be thine . sin , 
 sorrow , pain , disease and death thou shalt know no more . thou shalt be 
 able to remember happiness , to possess it , and to look forward to it . 
 thou shalt have full and pleasant occupation without fatigue - thy food 
 and substance shall be light and air . flower , rare and imperishable , 
 shall bloom for thee ; bird of exquisite form and tender voice shall 
 sing to thee ; angel shall be thy companion . thou shalt have fresh and 
 glad desire to offer to God with every portion of thy existence , and 
 each one shall be grant as soon as ask , for then thou wilt not be 
 able to ask anything that be displease to he . but because it be a 
 joy to wish , thou shalt wish ! and because it be a joy to grant , so also 
 will he grant . no delight , small or great , be want in that vast 
 sphere ; only sorrow be lacking , and satiety and disappointment have no 
 place . wilt thou seek for admittance there or wilt thou faint by the 
 way and grow weary ? " 

 I raise my eye full of ecstasy and reverence . 

 " my mere effort must count as nothing , " I say ; " but if Love can help 
 I , I will love and long for God 's World until I die ! " 

 my guardian Angel point to those ray of light I have before notice , 
 that slant downwards towards Earth in the form of a Cross . 

 " that be the path by which THOU must travel . mark it well ! all pilgrim 
 from the Sorrowful Star must journey by that road . woe to they that 
 turn aside to roam mid sphere they know not of , to lose themselves in 
 sea of light wherein they can not steer ! remember my warning ! and now , 
 Spirit who art commend to my watchful care , thy brief liberty be 
 end . Thou hast be lift up to the outer edge of the Electric 
 Circle , far we dare not take thee . Hast thou aught else to ask 
 before the veil of mortality again enshroud thee ? " 

 I answer not , but within myself I form a wild desire . the Electric 
 Ring flash fiercely on my uplifted eye , but I keep they fix 
 hopefully and lovingly on its intensely deep brilliancy . 

 " if Love and Faith can avail I , " I murmur , " I shall see what I have 
 seek . " 

 I be not disappointed . the fiery wave of light part on either side 
 of the spot where I with my companion rest ; and a Figure , - majestic , 
 unutterably grand and beautiful , - approach I . at the same moment a 
 number of other face and form shine hoveringly out of the Ring ; one I 
 notice like an exquisitely lovely woman , with float hair and clear , 
 earnest , unfathomable eye . Azul and the Angel sink reverently down and 
 droop their radiant head like flower in hot sunshine . I alone , 
 daringly , yet with inexpressible affection well up within I , 
 watch with unshrinke gaze the swift advance of that supreme Figure , 
 upon whose broad brow rest the faint semblance of a Crown of Thorns . 
 a voice penetratingly sweet address I : 

 " mortal from the Star I save from ruin , because thou hast desire I , 
 I come ! even as thy former unbelief , shall be now thy faith . because 
 thou lov I , I be with thee . for do I not know thee well than the 
 Angels can ? have I not dwelt in thy clay , suffer thy sorrow , weep 
 thy tear , die thy death ? one with my Father , and yet one with thee , 
 I demand thy love , and so through I shalt thou attain immortal life ! " 

 I feel a touch upon I like a scorch flame - a thrill rush through 
 my being - and then I know that I be sink down , down , far and 
 far away . I see that wondrous figure standing serene and smile 
 between the retire wave of electric radiance . I see the great inner 
 sphere revolve , and glitter as it roll , like an enormous diamond 
 encircled with gold and sapphire , and then all suddenly the air grow 
 dim and cloudy , and the sensation of fall become more and more 
 rapid . Azul be beside I still , and I also perceive the outline of my 
 guardian Angel 's form , though that be grow indistinct . I now 
 recall the request of Heliobas , and speak : 

 " Azul , tell I what shadow rest upon the life of he to whom I be now 
 return ? " 

 Azul look at I earnestly , and reply : 

 " Thou dare one ! seek thou to pierce the future fate of other ? be 
 it not enough for thee to have hear the voice that maketh the Angel 's 
 singing silent , and wouldst thou yet know more ? " 

 I be full of a strange unhesitating courage , therefore I say 
 fearlessly : 

 " he be thy beloved one , Azul - thy Twin Soul ; and wilt thou let he fall 
 away from thee when a word or sign might save he ? " 

 " even as he be my Beloved , so let he not fail to hear my voice , " 
 reply Azul , with a tinge of melancholy . " for though he have 
 accomplish much , he be as yet but mortal . thou canst guide he thus 
 far ; tell he , when death lie like a gift in his hand , let he 
 withhold it , and remember I . and now , my friend - farewell ! " 

 I would have speak again , but could not . an oppressed sensation come 
 over I , and I seem to plunge coldly into a depth of inextricable 
 blackness . I feel cramp for room , and struggle for existence , for 
 motion , for breath . what have happen to I ? I wonder indignantly . 
 be I a fetter prisoner ? have I lose the use of my light aerial limb 
 that have bear I so swiftly through the realm of space ? what crush 
 weight overpower I ? why such want of air and loss of delightful 
 ease ? I sigh restlessly and impatiently at the narrow darkness in 
 which I find myself - a sorrowful , deep , shudder sigh .... and WOKE ! 
 that be to say , I languidly open mortal eye to find myself once more 
 pen up in mortal frame , though I retain a perfect remembrance and 
 consciousness of everything I have experience during my 
 spirit - wandering . Heliobas stand in front of I with outstretched 
 hand , and his eye be fix on mine with a mingled expression of 
 anxiety and authority , which change into a look of relief and gladness 
 as I smile at he and utter his name aloud . 




 CHAPTER XII . 

 SECRETS of the SUN and MOON . 


 " have I be long away ? " I ask , as I raise myself upright in the 
 chair where I have be rest . 

 " I send you from hence on Thursday morning at noon , " reply Heliobas . 
 " it be now Friday evening , and within a few minute of midnight . I be 
 grow alarmed . I have never know anyone stay absent for so long ; and 
 you resist my authority so powerfully , that I begin to fear you would 
 never come back at all . " 

 " I wish I have not be compel to do so ! " I say regretfully . 

 he smile . 

 " no doubt you do . it be the general complaint . will you stand up now 
 and see how you feel ? " 

 I obey . there be still a slight sensation about I as of be 
 cramp for space ; but this be pass , and otherwise I feel 
 singularly strong , bright and vigorous . I stretch out my hand in 
 unspeakable gratitude to he through whose scientific power I have 
 gain my recent experience . 

 " I can never thank you enough ! " I say earnestly . " I dare say you know 
 something of what I have see on my journey ? " 

 " something , but not all , " he reply . " of course I know what world and 
 system you see , but what be say to you , or what special lesson be 
 give you for your comfort , I can not tell . " " then I will describe 
 everything while it be fresh upon I , " I return . " I feel that I must 
 do so in order that you may understand how glad I be , - how grateful I 
 be to you . " 

 I then relate the different scene through which I have pass , 
 omit no detail . Heliobas listen with profound interest and 
 attention . when I have finish , he say : 

 " your have be a most wonderful , I may say almost exceptional , 
 experience . it prove to I more than ever the omnipotence of WILL . 
 Most of those who have be place by my mean in the uplifted or 
 electric state of be , have consent to it simply to gratify a sense 
 of curiosity - few therefore have go beyond the pure ether , where , as 
 in a sea , the planet swim . Cellini , for instance , never go far 
 than Venus , because in the atmosphere of that planet he meet the Spirit 
 that rule and divide his destiny . Zara - she be dare , and reach 
 the outer rim of the Great Circle ; but even she never catch a glimpse 
 of the great Central Sphere . you , differ from these , start with a 
 daring aim which you never lose sight of till you have fulfil it . how 
 true be those word : ' ask , and it shall be give you ; seek , and ye 
 shall find ; knock , and it shall be open unto you ' ! it be not 
 possible , " and here he sigh , " that amid such wonder you could have 
 remember I - it be foolish on my part to expect it . " 

 " I confess I think nothing of you , " I say frankly , " till I be 
 approach Earth again ; but then my memory prompt I in time , and I 
 do not forget your request . " 

 " and what do you learn ? " he ask anxiously . 

 " simply this . Azul say that I might deliver you this message : when 
 death lie like a gift in your hand , withhold it , and remember she . " 

 " as if I do not always guide myself by her prompting ! " exclaim 
 Heliobas , with a tender smile . 

 " you might forget to do so for once , " I say . 

 " never ! " he reply fervently . " it could not be . but I thank you , my 
 child , for have thought of I - the message you bring shall be 
 impress strongly on my mind . now , before you leave I to - night , I 
 must say a few necessary word . " 

 he pause , and appear to consider profoundly for some minute . at 
 last he speak . 

 " I have select certain writing for your perusal , " he say . " in they 
 you will find full and clear instruction how to cultivate and educate 
 the electric force within you , and thus continue the work I have begin . 
 with these you will also perceive that I have write out the receipt 
 for the volatile fluid which , if take in a small quantity every day , 
 will keep you in health , strength , and intellectual vigour , while it 
 will preserve your youth and enjoyment of life to a very much long 
 extent than that usually experience by the majority . understand I 
 well - this liquid of itself can not put you into an uplifted state of 
 existence ; you need HUMAN electric force apply strongly to your 
 system to compass this ; and as it be dangerous to try the experiment 
 too often - dangerous to the body , I mean - it will be as well , as you 
 have work to do yet in this life , not to attempt it again . but if you 
 drink the fluid every morning of your life , and at the same time obey 
 my write manual as to the cultivation of your own inner force , which 
 be already existent in a large degree , you will attain to certain 
 advantage over the rest of the people you meet , which will give you 
 not only physical , but mental power . " 

 he pause a minute or two , and again go on : 

 " when you have educate your will to a certain height of electric 
 command , you can at your pleasure see at any time , and see plainly , the 
 spirit who inhabit the air ; and also those who , descend to long 
 distance below the Great Circle , come within the range of human 
 electricity , or the attractive matter contain in the Earth 's 
 atmosphere . you can converse with they , and they with you . you will 
 also be able , at your desire , to see the part spirit of dead 
 person , so long as they linger within Earth 's radius , which they 
 seldom do , be always anxious to escape from it as soon as possible . 
 Love may sometimes detain they , or remorse ; but even these have to 
 yield to the superior longing which possess they the instant they be 
 set free . you will , in your intercourse with your fellow - mortal , be 
 able to discern their motif quickly and unerringly - you will at once 
 discover where you be love and where you be dislike ; and not all 
 the learning and logic of so - call philosopher shall be able to cloud 
 your instinct . you will have a keener appreciation of good and 
 beautiful thing - a delightful sense of humour , and invariable 
 cheerfulness ; and whatever you do , unless you make some mistake by your 
 own folly , will carry with it its success . and , what be perhaps a 
 great privilege , you will find that all who be bring into very 
 close contact with you will be beneficially influence , or the reverse , 
 exactly as you choose to exert your power . I do not think , after what 
 you have see , you will ever desire to exert a malign influence , 
 know that the Creator of your being be all love and forgiveness . at 
 any rate , the great force in the universe , electricity , be 
 yours - that is , it have begin to form itself in you - and you have 
 nothing to do but to encourage its growth , just as you would encourage 
 a taste for music or the fine art . now let I give you the writing . " 

 he unlock a desk , and take from it two small roll of parchment , one 
 tie with a gold ribbon , the other secure in a kind of case with a 
 clasp . this last he hold up before my eye , and say : 

 " this contain my private instruction to you . never make a single one 
 of they public . the world be not ready for wisdom , and the secret of 
 science can only be explain to the few . therefore keep this parchment 
 safely under lock and key , and never let any eye but your own look upon 
 its content . " 

 I promise , and he hand it to I . then take the other roll , which 
 be tie with ribbon , he say , 

 " here be write out what I call the Electric Principle of 
 Christianity . this be for your own study and consideration ; still , if 
 you ever desire to explain my theory to other , I do not forbid you . 
 but as I tell you before , you can never compel belief - the goldfish in 
 a glass bowl will never understand the existence of the ocean . be 
 satisfied if you can guide yourself by the compass you have find , but 
 do not grieve if you be unable to guide other . you may try , but it 
 will not be surprising if you fail . nor will it be your fault . the only 
 sorrow that might happen to you in these effort would be in case you 
 should love someone very dearly , and yet be unable to instil the truth 
 of what yon know into that particular soul . you would then have to make 
 a discovery , which be always more or less painful - namely , that your 
 love be misplace , inasmuch as the nature you have select as worthy 
 of love have no part with your ; and that separation utter and eternal 
 must therefore occur , if not in this life , then in the future . so I 
 would say beware of love , lest you should not love rightly - though I 
 believe you will soon be able to discern clearly the spirit that be by 
 fate destine to complete and perfect your own . and now , though I know 
 you be scarcely fatigued enough to sleep , I will say good - night . " 

 I take the second roll of parchment from his hand , and open it a 
 little way , I see that it be cover with very fine small writing . 
 then I say : 

 " do Zara know how long I have be absent ? " 

 " yes , " reply Heliobas ; " and she , like myself , be surprised and 
 anxious . I think she go to bed long ago ; but you may look into her 
 room and see if she be awake , before you yourself retire to rest . " 

 as he speak of Zara his eye grow melancholy and his brow cloud . an 
 instinctive sense of fear come upon I . 

 " be she not well ? " I ask . 

 " she be perfectly well , " he answer . " why should you imagine she to be 
 otherwise ? " 

 " pardon I , " I say ; " I fancy that you look unhappy when I 
 mention she . " 

 Heliobas make no answer . he step to the window , and throw back 
 the curtain , call I to his side . 

 " look out yonder . " he say in low and earnest tone ; " look at the dark 
 blue veil strew with star , through which so lately your daring soul 
 pierce its flight ! see how the small Moon hang like a lamp in Heaven , 
 apparently outshine the myriad world around she , that be so much 
 vaster and fairer ! how deceptive be the human eye ! - nearly as deceptive 
 as the human reason . tell I - why do you not visit the Moon , or the 
 Sun , in your recent wandering ? " 

 this question cause I some surprise . it be certainly very strange 
 that I have not think of do so . yet , on ponder the matter in my 
 mind , I remember that during my aerial journey sun and moon have 
 be no more to I than flower strew on a meadow . I now regret 
 that I have not seek to know something of those two fair luminary 
 which light and warm our earth . 

 Heliobas , after watch my face intently , resume : 

 " you can not guess the reason of your omission ? I will tell you . there 
 be nothing to see in either Sun or Moon . they be both inhabit 
 world once ; but the dweller in the Sun have age ago live their 
 life and pass to the Central Sphere . the Sun be nothing now but a 
 burn world , burn rapidly , and surely , away : or rather , it be 
 be absorb back into the ELECTRIC CIRCLE from which it ORIGINALLY 
 SPRANG , to be throw out again in some new and GRANDER form . and so 
 with all world , sun and system , for ever and ever . hundred of 
 thousand of those brief time - breathing call year may pass before 
 this consummation of the Sun ; but its destruction be go on now , or 
 rather its absorption - and we on our cold small star warm ourselves , 
 and be glad , in the light of an empty world on fire ! " 

 I listen with awe and interest . 

 " and the Moon ? " I ask eagerly . 

 " the Moon do not exist . what we see be the reflection or the 
 electrograph of what she once be . atmospherical electricity have 
 imprint this picture of a long - ago live world upon the heaven , 
 just as Raphael draw his cartoon for the man of to - day to see . " 

 " but , " I exclaim in surprise , " how about the Moon 's influence on the 
 tide ? and what of eclipse ? " 

 " not the Moon , but the electric photograph of a once live but now 
 absorb world , have certainly an influence on the tide . the sea be 
 impregnate with electricity . just as the Sun will absorb colour , so 
 the electricity in the sea be repel or attract by the electric 
 picture of the Moon in Heaven . because , as a painting be full of 
 colour , so be that faithful sketch of a vanish sphere , draw with a 
 pencil of pure light , full of immense electricity ; and to carry the 
 simile far , just as a painting may be say to be form of various 
 dark and light tint , so the electric portrait of the Moon contain 
 various degree of electric force - which , come in contact with the 
 electricity of the Earth 's atmosphere , produce different effect on we 
 and on the natural scene amid which we dwell . as for eclipse - if you 
 slowly pass a round screen between yourself and a blaze fire , you 
 will only see the edge of the fire . in the same way the electrograph 
 of the Moon pass at state interval between the Earth and the 
 burn world of the Sun . " 

 " yet surely , " I say , " the telescope have enable we to see the Moon as 
 a solid globe - we have discern mountain and valley on its surface ; 
 and then it revolve round we regularly - how do you account for these 
 fact ? " 

 " the telescope , " return Heliobas , " be merely an aid to the human eye ; 
 and , as I tell you before , nothing be so easily deceive as our sense 
 of vision , even when assist by mechanical appliance . the telescope , 
 like the stereoscope , simply enable we to see the portrait of the moon 
 more clearly ; but all the same , the Moon , as a world , do not exist . 
 her likeness , take by electricity , may last some thousand of year , 
 and as long as it last it must revolve around we , because everything 
 in the universe move , and move in a circle . besides which , this 
 portrait of the moon be compose of pure electricity , be attract 
 and force to follow the Earth by the compelling influence of the 
 Earth 's own electric power . therefore , till the picture fade , it must 
 attend the Earth like the haunt spectre of a dead joy . you can 
 understand now why we never see what we imagine to be the other SIDE of 
 the Moon . it simply have no other side , except space . space be the 
 canvas - the Moon be a sketch . how interested we be when a discovery be 
 make of some rare old painting , of which the subject be a perfectly 
 beautiful woman ! it bear no name - perhaps no date - but the face that 
 smile at we be exquisite - the lip yet pout for kiss - the eye brim 
 over , with love ! and we admire it tenderly and reverently - we mark it 
 ' portrait of a lady , ' and give it an honour place among our art 
 collection . with how much more reverence and tenderness ought we to 
 look up at the ' portrait of a Fair Lost Sphere , ' circle yonder in 
 that dense ever - move gallery of wonder where the hurrying throng of 
 spectator be live and die world ! " 

 I have follow the speaker 's word with fascinated attention , but now I 
 say : 

 " Dying , Heliobas ? there be no death . " 

 " true ! " he answer , with hesitate slowness . " but there be what we 
 call death - transition - and it be always a parting . " 

 " but not for long ! " I exclaim , with all the gladness and eagerness of 
 my lately instruct soul . " as world be absorb into the Electric 
 Circle and again throw out in new and more glorious form , so be we 
 absorb and change into shape of perfect beauty , have eye that 
 be strong and pure enough to look God in the face . the body 
 perishe - but what have we to do with the body - our prison and place of 
 experience , except to rejoice when we shake off its weight for ever ! " 

 Heliobas smile gravely . 

 " you have learn your high lesson well , " he say . " you speak with the 
 assurance and delight of a spirit satisfy . but when I talk of DEATH , 
 I mean by that word the parting asunder of two soul who love each 
 other ; and though such separation may be brief , still it be always a 
 separation . for instance , suppose - " he hesitate : ' suppose Zara be 
 to die ? " 

 " well , you would soon meet she again , " I answer . " for though you 
 might live many year after she , still you would know in yourself that 
 those year be but minute in the realm of space - " 

 " minute that decide our destiny , " he interrupt with solemnity . 
 " and there be always this possibility to contemplate - suppose Zara be 
 to leave I now , how can I be sure that I shall be strong enough to 
 live out my remainder of life purely enough to deserve to meet she 
 again ? and if not then Zara 's death would mean utter and almost 
 hopeless separation for ever - though perhaps I might begin over again 
 in some other form , and so reach the goal . " 

 he speak so musingly and seriously that I be surprised , for I have 
 think he impervious to such a folly as the fear of death . 

 " you be melancholy , Heliobas , " I say . " in the first place , Zara be 
 not go to leave you yet ; and secondly , if she do , you know your 
 strong effort would be bring to bear on your career , in order 
 that no shadow of obstinacy or error might obstruct your path . why , the 
 very essence of our belief be in the strength of will - power . what we 
 will to do , especially if it be any act of spiritual progress , we can 
 always accomplish . " 

 Heliobas take my hand and press it warmly . 

 " you be so lately come from the high region , " he say , " that it warm 
 and invigorate I to hear your encouraging word . pray do not think I 
 capable of yield long to the weakness of foreboding . I be , in spite 
 of my advancement in electric science , nothing but a man , and be apt to 
 be hamper oftentime by my mortal trapping . we have prolong our 
 conversation far than I intend . I assure you it be well for you 
 to try to sleep , even though , as I know , you feel so wide awake . let I 
 give you a soothe draught ; it will have the effect of compose your 
 physical nerve into steady working order . " 

 he pour something from a small phial into a glass , and hand it to 
 I . I drink it at once , obediently , and with a smile . 

 " good - night , my Master ! " I then say . " you need have no fear of your 
 own successful upward progress . for if there be the slight chance 
 of your fall into fatal error , all those human soul you have 
 benefit would labour and pray for your rescue ; and I know now that 
 prayer reach Heaven , so long as they be unselfish . I , though I be one 
 of the least of your disciple , out of the deep gratitude of my heart 
 towards you , will therefore pray unceasingly for you , both here and 
 hereafter . " 

 he bend his head . 

 " I thank you ! " he say simply . " More deed be work by prayer than 
 this world dream of ! that be a true saying . God bless you , my child . 
 good - night ! " 

 and he open the door of his study for I to pass out . as I do so , he 
 lay his hand lightly on my head in a sort of unspoken 
 benediction - then he close his door , and I find myself alone in the 
 great hall . a suspend lamp be burn brightly , and the fountain be 
 gurgle melodiously to itself in a subdued manner , as if it be 
 learn a new song for the morning . I speed across the mosaic pavement 
 with a light eager step , and hurry up the stair , intent on find 
 Zara to tell she how happy I feel , and how satisfied I be with my 
 wonderful experience . I reach the door of her bedroom - it be ajar . I 
 softly push it far open , and look in . a small but exquisitely 
 modelled statue of an " Eros " ornament one corner . his uplifted torch 
 serve as a light which glimmer faintly through a rose - colour 
 glass , and shed a tender lustre over the room ; but especially upon the 
 bed , ornament with rich oriental needlework , where Zara lie fast 
 asleep . how beautiful she look ! almost as lovely as any one of the 
 radiant spirit I have meet in my aerial journey ! her rich dark hair be 
 scatter loosely on the white pillow ; her long silky lash curl 
 softly on the delicately tinted cheek ; her lip , tenderly red , like 
 the colour on bud apple - blossom in early spring , be slightly 
 part , show the glimmer of the small white tooth within ; she 
 night - dress be slightly undo , and half display and half disguise 
 her neck and daintily rounded bosom , on which the electric jewel she 
 always wear glitter brilliantly as it rise and sink with her regular 
 and quiet breathing . one fair hand lie outside the coverlet , and the 
 reflection from the lamp of the " Eros " flicker on a ring which 
 adorn it , make its central diamond flash like a wandering star . 

 I look long and tenderly on this perfect ideal of a " sleeping 
 beauty , " and then think I would draw close and see if I could kiss 
 she without awake she . I advance a few step into the room - when 
 suddenly I be stop . within about a yard 's distance from the bed a 
 something oppose my approach ! I could not move a foot forward - I try 
 vigorously , but in vain ! I could step backward , and that be all . 
 between I and Zara there seem to be an invisible barrier , strong , 
 and absolutely impregnable . there be nothing to be see - nothing but 
 the softly - shade room - the ever - smile " Eros , " and the exquisite 
 reposeful figure of my sleeping friend . two step , and I could have 
 touch she ; but those two step I be forcibly prevent from 
 making - as forcibly as though a deep ocean have roll between she and 
 I . I do not stop long to consider this strange occurrence - I feel 
 sure it have something to do with her spiritual life and sympathy , 
 therefore it neither alarmed nor perplex I . kiss my hand tenderly 
 towards my darling , who lie so close to I , and who be yet so 
 jealously and invisibly guard during her slumber , I softly and 
 reverently withdraw . on reach my own apartment , I be more than half 
 inclined to sit up read and study the parchment Heliobas have 
 give I ; but on second thought I resolve to lock up these precious 
 manuscript and go to bed . I do so , and before prepare to sleep I 
 remember to kneel down and offer up praise and honour , with a love 
 and believe heart , to that Supreme Glory , of which I have be 
 marvellously permit to enjoy a brief but transcendent glimpse . and 
 as I knelt , absorb and happy , I hear , like a soft echo fall 
 through the silence of my room , a sound like distant music , through 
 which these word float towards I : " a new commandment give I unto 
 you , that you love one another , even as I have love you ! " 




 CHAPTER xiii . 

 SOCIABLE CONVERSE . 


 the next morning Zara come herself to awaken I , look as fresh and 
 lovely as a summer morning . she embrace I very tenderly , and say : 

 " I have be talk for more than an hour with Casimir . he have tell I 
 everything . what wonder you have see ! and be you not happy , dearest ? 
 be you not strong and satisfied ? " 

 " perfectly ! " I reply . " but , o Zara ! what a pity that all the world 
 should not know what we know ! " 

 " all have not a desire for knowledge , " reply Zara . " even in your 
 vision of the garden you possess , there be only a few who still 
 seek you ; for those few you would have do anything , but for the 
 other your good effort be in vain . " 

 " they might not have be always in vain , " I say musingly . 

 " no , they might not , " agree Zara . " that be just the case of the world 
 to - day . while there be life in it , there be also hope . and talk of 
 the world , let I remind you that you be back in it now , and must 
 therefore be hamper with tiresome triviality . two of these be as 
 follow ; first , here be a letter for you , which have just come ; 
 secondly , breakfast will be ready in twenty minute ! " 

 I look at her smile face attentively . she be the very embodiment 
 of vigorous physical health and beauty ; it seem like a dream to 
 remember she in the past night , guard by that invincible barrier , the 
 work of no mortal hand . I utter nothing , however , of these thought , 
 and respond to her evident gaiety of heart , I smile also . 

 " I will be down punctually at the expiration of the twenty minute , " I 
 say . " I assure you , Zara , I be quite sensible of the claim of earthly 
 existence upon I . for instance , I be very hungry , and I shall enjoy 
 breakfast immensely if you will make the coffee . " 

 Zara , who among her other accomplishment have the secret of make 
 coffee to perfection , promise laughingly to make it extra well , and 
 flit from the room , sing softly as she go a fragment of the 
 Neapolitan Stornello : 

  " Fior di mortelle 
  Queste manine tue son tanto belle ! 
  Fior di limone 
  Ti voglio far morire di passione 
  Salta ! lari - lira . " 

 the letter Zara have bring I be from Mrs. Everard , announce that 
 she would arrive in Paris that very day , Sunday . 


 " by the time you get this note , " so run her word , " we shall have 
 land at the Grand Hotel . come and see we at once , if you can . the 
 Colonel be anxious to judge for himself how you be look . if you be 
 really recover sufficiently to leave your medical pension , we shall 
 be delighted to have you with we again . I , in particular , shall be 
 glad , for it be real lonesome when the Colonel be out , and I do hate to 
 go shop by myself , so take pity upon your affectionate 

 " AMY . " 


 seat at breakfast , I discuss this letter with Heliobas and Zara , 
 and decide that I would call at the Grand Hotel that morning . 

 " I wish you would come with I , Zara , " I say wistfully . 

 to my surprise , she answer : 

 " certainly I will , if you like . but we will attend High Mass at Notre 
 Dame first . there will be plenty of time for the call afterwards . " 

 I gladly agree to this , and Heliobas add with cheerful cordiality : 

 " why not ask your friend to dine here to - morrow ? Zara 's call will be a 
 sufficient opening formality ; and you yourself have be long enough 
 with we now to know that any of your friend will be welcome here . we 
 might have a pleasant little party , especially if you add Mr. and Mrs. 
 Challoner and their daughter to the list . and I will ask Ivan . " 

 I glance at Zara when the Prince 's name be utter , but she make no 
 sign of either offence or indifference . 

 " you be very hospitable , " I say , address Heliobas ; " but I really 
 see no reason why you should throw open your door to my friend , 
 unless , indeed , you specially desire to please I . " 

 " why , of course I do ! " he reply heartily ; and Zara look up and 
 smile . 

 " then , " I return , " I will ask they to come . what be I to say about my 
 recovery , which I know be little short of miraculous ? " 

 " say , " reply Heliobas , " that you have be cure by electricity . 
 there be nothing surprising in such a statement nowadays . but say 
 nothing of the HUMAN electric force employ upon you - no one would 
 believe you , and the effort to persuade unpersuadable people be always 
 a waste of time . " 

 an hour after this conversation Zara and I be in the cathedral of 
 Notre Dame . I attend the service with very different feeling to 
 those I have hitherto experience during the same ceremony . formerly my 
 mind have be distract by harass doubt and perplex 
 contradiction ; now everything have a meaning for I - high , and solemn , 
 and sweet . as the incense rise , I think of those ray of connect 
 light I have see , on which prayer travel exactly as sound travel 
 through the telephone . as the grand organ peal sonorously through the 
 fragrant air , I remember the ever youthful and gracious Spirits of 
 Music , one of whom , Aeon , have promise to be my friend . just to try the 
 strength of my own electric force , I whisper the name and look up . 
 there , on a wide slanting ray of sunlight that fall directly across the 
 altar be the angelic face I well remember ! - the delicate hand 
 hold the semblance of a harp in air ! it be but for an instant I see 
 it - one brief breathing - space in which its smile mingle with the 
 sunbeam and then it vanish . but I know I be not forget , and the 
 deep satisfaction of my soul pour itself in unspoken praise on the 
 flood of the " Sanctus ! Sanctus ! " that just then roll triumphantly 
 through the aisle of Notre Dame . Zara be absorb in silent prayer 
 throughout the Mass ; but at its conclusion , when we come out of the 
 cathedral , she be unusually gay and elate . she converse vivaciously 
 with I concern the social merit and accomplishment of the people 
 we be go to visit ; while the brisk walk through the frosty air 
 brighten her eye and cheek into warm lustre , so that on our 
 arrival at the Grand Hotel she look to my fancy even lovely than 
 usual . 

 Mrs. Everard do not keep we wait long in the private salon to which 
 we be show . she flutter down , array in a wonderful " art " gown of 
 terra - cotta and pale blue hue cunningly intermix , and proceed to 
 hug I with demonstrative fervour . then she hold I a little distance 
 off , and examine I attentively . 

 " do you know , " she say , " you be simply in lovely condition ! I never 
 would have believe it . you be actually as plump and pink as a peach . 
 and you be the same creature that wail and tremble , and have 
 palpitation and headache and stupor ! your doctor must be a perfect 
 magician . I think I must consult he , for I be sure I do not   look half 
 as well as you do . " 

 and indeed she do not . I think she have a tired , drag appearance , 
 but I would not say so . I know she well , and I be perfectly aware that 
 though she be fascinating and elegant in every way , her life be too 
 much engross in trifle ever to yield her healthy satisfaction . 

 after respond warmly to her affectionate greeting , I say : 

 " Amy , you must allow I to introduce the sister of my doctor to you . 
 Madame Zara Casimir - Mrs. Everard . " 

 Zara , who have move aside a little way out of delicacy , to avoid 
 intruding on our meeting , now turn , and with her own radiant smile 
 and exquisite grace , stretch out her little well - glove hand . 

 " I be delighted to know you ! " she say , in those sweet penetrate 
 accent of hers which be like music . " your friend , " here indicate 
 I by a slight yet tender gesture , " have also become mine ; but I do not 
 think we shall be jealous , shall we ? " 

 Mrs. Everard make some attempt at a suitable reply , but she be so 
 utterly lose in admiration of Zara 's beauty , that her habitual 
 self - possession almost desert she . Zara , however , have the most 
 perfect tact , and with it the ability of make herself at home 
 anywhere , and we be soon all three talk cheerfully and without 
 constraint . when the Colonel make his appearance , which he do very 
 shortly , he too be " take off his foot , " as the saying be , by Zara 's 
 loveliness , and the same effect be produce on the Challoners , who 
 soon afterwards join we in a body . Mrs. Challoner , in particular , 
 seem incapable of move her eye from the contemplation of my 
 darling 's sweet face , and I glow with pride and pleasure as I note 
 how greatly she be admire . Miss Effie Challoner alone , who be , by a 
 certain class of young man , consider " doocid pretty , with go in she , " 
 oppose her stock of physical charm to those of Zara , with a certain 
 air of feminine opposition ; but she be only able to keep this barrier 
 up for a little time . Zara 's win power of attraction be too much 
 for she , and she , like all present , fall a willing captive to the 
 enticing gentleness , the intellectual superiority , and the sympathetic 
 influence exercise by the evenly balanced temperament and character of 
 the beautiful woman I love so well . 

 after some desultory and pleasant chat , Zara , in the name of her 
 brother and herself , invite Colonel and Mrs. Everard and the Challoner 
 family to dine at the Hotel Mars next day - an invitation which be 
 accept by all with eagerness . I perceive at once that every one of 
 they be anxious to know more of Zara and her surrounding - a curiosity 
 which I could not very well condemn . Mrs. Everard then want I to 
 remain with she for the rest of the afternoon ; but an instinctive 
 feeling come upon I , that soon perhaps I should have to part from 
 Heliobas and Zara , and all the wonder and delight of their household , 
 in order to resume my own work life - therefore I determine I would 
 drain my present cup of pleasure to the last drop . so I refuse Amy 's 
 request , plead as an excuse that I be still under my doctor 's 
 authority , and could not indulge in such an excitement as an afternoon 
 in her society without his permission . Zara bear I out in this 
 assertion , and add for I to Mrs. Everard : 

 " indeed , I think it will be well for she to remain perfectly quiet 
 with we for a day or two long ; then she will be thoroughly cure , and 
 free to do as she like . " 

 " well ! " say Mrs. Challoner ; " I must say she do not   look as if 
 anything be the matter with she . in fact , I never see two more happy , 
 healthy - look girl than you both . what secret do you possess to make 
 yourself look so bright ? " 

 " no secret at all , " reply Zara , laugh ; " we simply follow the exact 
 law of health , and they suffice . " 

 Colonel Everard , who have be examine I critically and ask I a 
 few question , here turn to Zara and say : 

 " do you really mean to say , Madame Casimir , that your brother cure 
 this girl by electricity ? " 

 " purely so ! " she answer earnestly . 

 " then it be the most wonderful recovery I ever see . why , at canne , 
 she be hollow - eye , pale , and thin as a willow - wand ; now she 
 look - well , she know how she be herself - but if she feel as spry as 
 she look , she be in first - rate training ! " 

 I laugh . 

 " I do feel spry , Colonel , " I say . " life seem to I like summer 
 sunshine . " 

 " Brava ! " exclaim Mr. Challoner . he be a staid , rather slow 
 Kentuckian who seldom speak ; and when he do , seem to find it rather 
 an exertion . " if there be one class of folk I detest more than another , 
 it be those all - possess people who find life unsuited to their 
 fancy . nobody ask they to come into it - nobody would miss they if 
 they go out of it . be in it , it be barely civil to grumble at the 
 deity who send they along here . I never do it myself if I can help it . " 

 we laugh , and Mrs. Challoner 's eye twinkle . 

 " in England , dear , for instance , " she say , with a mischievous glance 
 at her spouse - " in England you never grumble , do you ? " 

 Mr. Challoner look volume - his visage redden , and he clench his 
 broad fist with ominous vigour . 

 " why , by the Lord ! " he say , with even more than his usual deliberate 
 utterance , " in England the lively flea that ever give a triumphal 
 jump in air would find his spirit incline to droop ! I tell you , 
 ma'am , " he continue , address himself to Zara , whose merry laugh 
 ring out like a peal of little golden bell at this last remark - " I 
 tell you that when I walk in the street of London I use to feel as 
 if I be one of a band of criminal . every person I meet look at I 
 as if the universe be about to be destroy next minute , and they have 
 to build another up right away without God to help them ! " 

 " well , I believe I agree with you , " say Colonel Everard . " the English 
 take life too seriously . in their craze for business they manage to do 
 away with pleasure altogether . they seem afraid to laugh , and they even 
 approach the semblance of a smile with due caution . " 

 " I be free to confess , " add his wife , " that I be not easily chill 
 through . but an English ' at home ' act upon I like a patent 
 refrigerator - I get regularly freeze to the bone ! " 

 " dear I ! " laugh Zara ; " you give very bad account of Shakespeare 's 
 land ! it must be very sad ! " 

 " I believe it be not   always so , " pursue Colonel Everard ; " there be 
 legend which speak of it as Merrie England . I dare say it might have 
 be merry once , before it be govern by shopkeeper ; but now , you 
 must get away from it if you want to enjoy life . at least such be my 
 opinion . but have you never be in England , Madame Casimir ? you speak 
 English perfectly . " 

 " oh , I be a fairly good linguist , " reply Zara , " thank to my brother . 
 but I have never cross the Channel . " 

 the Misses Challoner look politely surprised ; their father 's shrewd 
 face wear an expression of grim contentment . 

 " do not   cross it , ma'am , " he say emphatically , " unless you have a 
 special desire to be miserable . if you want to know how Christians love 
 one another and how to be make limply and uselessly wretche , spend a 
 Sunday in London . " 

 " I think I will not try the experiment , Mr. Challoner , " return Zara 
 gaily . " life be short , and I prefer to enjoy it . " 

 " say , " interrupt Mrs. Challoner , turn to I at this juncture , " now 
 you be feel so well , would it be ask you too much to play we a 
 piece of your own improvising ? " 

 I glance at the grand piano , which occupy a corner of the salon 
 where we sit , and hesitate . but at a slight nod from Zara , I rise , 
 draw off my glove , and seat myself at the instrument . pass my 
 hand lightly over the key , I wander through a few running passage ; 
 and as I do so , murmur a brief petition to my aerial friend Aeon . 
 Scarcely have I do this , when a flood of music seem to rush to my 
 brain and thence to my finger , and I play , hardly know what I 
 play , but merely absorb in try to give utterance to the sound 
 which be fall softly upon my inner sense of hear like drop of 
 summer rain on a thirsty soil . I be just aware that I be thread 
 the labyrinth of a minor key , and that the result be a network of 
 delicate and tender melody remind I of Heinrich Heine 's word : 

 " Lady , do you not hear the nightingale sing ? a beautiful silken 
 voice - a web of happy note - and my soul be take in its mesh , and 
 strangle and torture thereby . " 

 a few minute , and the inner voice that converse with I so sweetly , 
 die away into silence , and at the same time my finger find their way 
 to the closing chord . as one awake from a dream , I look up . the 
 little group of friendly listener be rapt in the deep attention ; 
 and when I cease , a murmur of admiration break from they all , while 
 Zara 's eye glisten with sympathetic tear . 

 " how can you do it ? " ask Mrs. Challoner in good - natured amazement . 
 " it seem to I impossible to compose like that while seat at the 
 piano , and without take previous thought ! " 

 " it be not MY doing , " I begin ; " it seem to come to I from - " 

 but I be check by a look from Zara , that gently warn I not to 
 hastily betray the secret of my spiritual communion with the unseen 
 source of harmony . so I smile and say no more . inwardly I be full 
 of a great rejoicing , for I know that however well I have play in past 
 day , it be nothing compare to the vigour and ease which be now 
 give to I - a sort of unlocking of the storehouse of music , with 
 freedom to take my choice of all its vast treasure . 

 " well , it be what we call inspiration , " say Mr. Challoner , give my 
 hand a friendly grasp ; " and wherever it come from , it must be a great 
 happiness to yourself as well as to other . " 

 " it be , " I answer earnestly . " I believe few be so perfectly happy in 
 music as I be . " 

 Mrs. Everard look thoughtful . 

 " no amount of practice could make I play like that , " she say ; " yet I 
 have have two or three master who be suppose to be first - rate . one 
 of they be a German , who use to clutch his hair like a walk 
 tragedian whenever I play a wrong note . I believe he get up his 
 reputation entirely by that clutch , for he often play wrong note 
 himself without mind it . but just because he work himself into a 
 sort of frenzy when other go wrong , everybody praise he , and say 
 he have such an ear and be so sensitive that he must be a great 
 musician . he worry I nearly to death over Bach 's ' well - temper 
 Klavier ' - all to no purpose , for I can not   play a note of it now , and 
 should not   care to if I could . I consider Bach a dreadful old bore , 
 though I know it be heresy to say so . even Beethoven be occasionally 
 prosy , only no one will be courageous enough to admit it . People would 
 rather go to sleep over classical music than confess they do not   like 
 it . " 

 " Schubert would have be a grander master than Beethoven , if he have 
 only live long enough , " say Zara ; " but I dare say very few will agree 
 with I in such an assertion . unfortunately most of my opinion differ 
 from those of everyone else . " 

 " you should say FORTUNATELY , madame , " say Colonel Everard , bow 
 gallantly ; " as the circumstance have the happy result of make you 
 perfectly original as well as perfectly charming . " 

 Zara receive this compliment with her usual sweet equanimity , and we 
 rise to take our leave . as we be pass out , Amy Everard draw I 
 back and cram into the pocket of my cloak a newspaper . 

 " read it when you be alone , " she whisper ; " and you will see what 
 Raffaello Cellini have do with the sketch he make of you . " 

 we part from these pleasant Americans with cordial expression of 
 goodwill , Zara remind they of their engagement to visit she at her 
 own home next day , and fix the dinner - hour for half - past seven . 

 on our return to the Hotel Mars , we find Heliobas in the drawing - room , 
 deep in converse with a catholic priest - a fine - look man of 
 venerable and noble feature . Zara address he as " Father Paul , " and 
 bent humbly before he to receive his blessing , which he give she with 
 almost parental tenderness . he seem , from his familiar manner with 
 they , to be a very old friend of the family . 

 on my being introduce to he , he greet I with gentle courtesy , and 
 give I also his simple unaffected benediction . we all partook of a 
 light luncheon to - gether , after which repast Heliobas and Father Paul 
 withdraw together . Zara look after their retreating figure with a 
 sort of meditative pathos in her large eye ; and then she tell I she 
 have something to finish in her studio - would I excuse she for about an 
 hour ? I readily consent , for I myself be desirous of pass a 
 little time in solitude , in order to read the manuscript Heliobas have 
 give I . " for , " think I , " if there be anything in they not quite 
 clear to I , he will explain it , and I have well take advantage of his 
 instruction while I can . " 

 as Zara and I go upstairs together , we be follow by Leo - a most 
 unusual circumstance , as that faithful animal be generally in 
 attendance on his master . now , however , he seem to have something 
 oppressive on his mind , for he keep close to Zara , and his big brown 
 eye , whenever he raise they to her face , be full of intense 
 melancholy . his tail droop in a forlorn way , and all the vivacity of 
 his nature seem to have go out of he . 

 " Leo do not seem well , " I say , pat the dog 's beautiful silky 
 coat , an attention to which he respond by a heavy sigh and a wistful 
 gaze approach to tear . Zara look at he . 

 " Poor Leo ! " she murmur caressingly . " perhaps he feel lonely . do you 
 want to come with your mistress to - day , old boy ? so you shall . come 
 along - cheer up , Leo ! " 

 and , nod to I , she pass into her studio , the dog follow she . 
 I turn into my own apartment , and then bethink myself of the 
 newspaper Mrs. Everard have thrust into my pocket . it be a roman 
 journal , and the passage mark for my perusal run as follow : 

 " the picture of the improvisatrice , paint by our countryman Signor 
 Raffaello Cellini , have be purchase by Prince N - - for the sum of 
 forty thousand franc . the Prince generously permit it to remain on 
 view for a few day long , so that those who have not yet enjoy its 
 attraction , have still time to behold one of the most wonderful 
 picture of the age . the colouring yet remain a marvel to both 
 student and connoisseur , and the life - like appearance of the girl 's 
 figure , rob in its cling white drapery ornament with lily of 
 the valley , be so strong , that one imago she will step out of the 
 canvas and confront the bystander . Signor Cellini must now be 
 undoubtedly acknowledge as one of the great genius of modern 
 time . " 

 I could see no reason , as I peruse this , to be sure that I have 
 serve as the model for this successful work of art , unless the white 
 dress and the lily of the valley , which I have certainly wear at 
 Cannes , be sufficient authority for form such a conclusion . still 
 I feel quite a curiosity about the picture - the more so as I could 
 foresee no possible chance of my ever behold it . I certainly should 
 not go to Rome on purpose , and in a few day it would be in the 
 possession of Prince N - - , a personage whom in all probability I 
 should never know . I put the newspaper carefully by , and then turn my 
 mind to the consideration of quite another subject - namely , the 
 content of my parchment document . the first one I open be that 
 contain the private instruction of Heliobas to myself for the 
 preservation of my own health , and the cultivation of the electric 
 force within I . these be so exceedingly simple , and yet so wonderful 
 in their simplicity , that I be surprised . they be base upon the 
 plainest and most reasonable common - sense argument - easy enough for a 
 child to understand . have promise never to make they public , it be 
 impossible for I to give the slight hint of their purport ; but I 
 may say at once , without trespass the bound of my pledge word , 
 that if these few concise instruction be know and practise by 
 everyone , doctor would be entirely throw out of employment , and 
 chemist ' shop would no long cumber the street . illness would be 
 very difficult of attainment - though in the event of its occur each 
 individual would know how to treat he or herself - and life could be 
 prolong easily and comfortably to more than a hundred year , bar , 
 of course , accident by sea , rail and road , or by deed of violence . 
 but it will take many generation before the world be UNIVERSALLY 
 self - restrain enough to follow such plain maxim as those lay down 
 for I in the writing of my benefactor , Heliobas - even if it be ever 
 self - restrain at all , which , judge from the present state of 
 society , be much to be doubt . therefore , no more of the subject , on 
 which , indeed , I be forbid to speak . 

 the other document , call " The Electric Principle of Christianity , " I 
 find so curious and original , suggest so many new theory 
 concern that religion which have civilize a great portion of 
 humanity , that , as I be not restrain by any promise on this point , I 
 have resolve to give it here in full . my reader must not be rash 
 enough to jump to the conclusion that I set it forward as an 
 explanation or confession of my own faith ; my creed have nothing to do 
 with anyone save myself . I simply copy the manuscript I possess , as the 
 theory of a deeply read and widely intelligent man , such as Heliobas 
 undoubtedly be and be ; a man , too , in whose vein run the blood of 
 the chaldean king - earnest and thoughtful Orientals , who be far 
 wise in their generation perhaps than we , with all our boast 
 progress , be in ours . the coincidence which have to do with 
 electrical science will , I believe , be generally admit to be curious 
 if not convince . to I , of course , they be only fresh proof of what 
  I know , because I have see the GREAT ELECTRIC CIRCLE , and know its 
 power   guide as it be by the Central Intelligence within   to be 
 capable of anything , from the sending down of a minute spark of 
 instinct into the heart of a flower , to the perpetual manufacture and 
 re - absorption of solar system by the million million . and it be a 
 circle that ever widen without end . what more glorious manifestation 
 can there be of the Creator 's splendour and wisdom ! but as to how this 
 world of ours span round in its own light littleness far and 
 far from the Radiant Ring , till its very Sun begin to be 
 re - absorb , and till its Moon disappear and become a mere 
 picture - till it become of itself like a small blot on the fair scroll 
 of the Universe , while its inhabitant grow to resent all heavenly 
 attraction ; and how it be yet think worth God 's patience and tender 
 consideration , just for the sake of a few human soul upon it who still 
 remember and love he , to give it one more chance before it should 
 be draw back into the Central Circle like a spark within a fire - all 
 this be sufficiently set forth in the word of Heliobas , quote in the 
 next chapter . 




 CHAPTER XIV . 

 the ELECTRIC CREED . 


 the " Electric Principle of Christianity " open as follow : 

 " from all Eternity God , or the SUPREME SPIRIT of LIGHT , exist , and to 
 all Eternity he will continue to exist . this be plainly state in the 
 New Testament thus : ' God be a SPIRIT , and they that worship he must 
 worship he in SPIRIT and in truth . ' 

 " he be a Shape of pure Electric Radiance . those who may be incline to 
 doubt this may search the scripture on which they pin their faith , and 
 they will find that all the vision and appearance of the deity there 
 chronicle be electric in character . 

 " as a poet form poem , or a musician melody , so God form by a 
 Thought the vast central Sphere in which he dwell , and people it with 
 the pure creation of his glorious fancy . and why ? because , be pure 
 light , he be also pure love ; the power or capacity of Love imply the 
 necessity of Loving ; the necessity of love point to the existence of 
 thing to be love - hence the secret of creation . from the ever - work 
 Intelligence of this Divine Love proceed the Electric Circle of the 
 Universe , from whence be bear all world . 

 " this truth vaguely dawn upon the ancient poet of Scripture when 
 they write : ' darkness be upon the face of the deep . and the Spirit of 
 God move upon the face of the water . and God say , let there be 
 light . and there be light . ' 

 " these word apply SOLELY to the creation or production of our OWN 
 EARTH , and in they we read nothing but a simple manifestation of 
 electricity , consist in a heating passage of ray from the Central 
 Circle to the planet newly propel forth from it , which cause that 
 planet to produce and multiply the wonder of the animal , vegetable , 
 and mineral kingdom which we call Nature . 

 " let we now turn again to the poet - prophet of scripture : ' and God 
 say , let we make man in our image . ' the word ' OUR ' here imply an 
 instinctive idea that God be never alone . this idea be correct . love 
 can not exist in a chaos ; and God by the sheer necessity of his being 
 have for ever be surround by radiant and immortal Spirits emanating 
 from his own creative glory - being in whom all beauty and all purity 
 be find . in the IMAGES , therefore   only the IMAGES , of these 
 child of Light and of himself , he make Man - that be , he cause the 
 Earth to be inhabit and dominate by being compose of Earth 's 
 component part , animal , vegetable , and mineral , give they their 
 superiority by place within they his ' likeness ' in the form of an 
 ELECTRIC flame or germ of spiritual existence combine with its 
 companion working - force of WILL - POWER . 

 " like all flame , this electric spark can either be fan into a fire 
 or it can be allow to escape in air - it can never be DESTROYED . it 
 can be foster and educate till it become a live Spiritual Form of 
 absolute beauty - an immortal creature of thought , memory , emotion , and 
 work intelligence . if , on the contrary , he be neglect or 
 forget , and its companion will be draw by the weight of Earth to 
 work for earthly aim alone , then it escape and seek other chance of 
 development in other forms on other planet , while the body it leave , 
 support only BY PHYSICAL sustenance draw from the earth on which IT 
 DWELLS , become a mere lump of clay animate by MERE ANIMAL LIFE 
 SOLELY , full of inward ignorance and corruption and outward incapacity . 
 of such material be the majority of man compose by their OWN 
 FREE - WILL and CHOICE , because they habitually deaden the voice of 
 conscience and refuse to believe in the existence of a spiritual 
 element within and around they . 

 " to resume : the Earth be one of the small of planet ; and not only 
 this , but , from its position in the Universe , receive a less amount of 
 direct influence from the Electric Circle than other world more 
 happily situate . be man wise enough to accept this fact , they would 
 foster to the utmost the germ of electric sympathy within themselves , 
 in order to form a direct communication , or system of attraction , 
 between this planet and the ever - widen Ring , so that some spiritual 
 benefit might accrue to they thereby . but as the age roll on , their 
 chance of do this diminish . the time be swiftly approach when 
 the invincible Law of Absorption shall extinguish Earth as easily as we 
 blow out the flame of a candle . true , it may be again reproduce , and 
 again throw out on space ; but then it will be in a new and grander 
 form , and will doubtless have more godlike inhabitant . 

 " in the meantime - during those brief cycle of century which be as a 
 breath in the working of the Infinite , and which must yet elapse 
 before this world , as we know it , come to an end - God have take pity 
 on the few , very few soul dwell here , pen up in mortal clay , who 
 have blindly try to reach he , like plant strain up to the light , 
 and have establish a broad stream of sympathetic electric 
 communication with himself , which all who care to do so may avail 
 themselves of . 

 " here it may be ask : why should God take pity ? because that Supreme 
 Shape of Light find a portion of himself in all pure soul that love 
 he , and he CANNOT DESPISE himself . also because he be capable of all 
 the high emotion know to man , in a far large and grander degree , 
 besides possess other sentiment and desire unimaginable to the 
 human mind . it be enough to say that all the attribute that accompany 
 perfect goodness he enjoy ; therefore he can feel compassion , 
 tenderness , forgiveness , patience - all or any of the emotion that 
 produce pure , unselfish pleasure . 

 " grant he , therefore , these attribute   and it be both blasphemous 
 and unreasonable to deny HIM those virtue which DISTINGUISH the best 
 of MEN , it be easily understand how he , the All - Fair beneficent ruler 
 of the Central Sphere , perceive the long distance to which the Earth 
 be propel , like a ball fling too far out , from the glory of his 
 Electric Ring , see also that the creature he have make in his image 
 be in danger of crush that image completely out , and with it all 
 remembrance of he , in the fatal attention they give to their merely 
 earthly surrounding , lacking , as they do , and not possess 
 sufficient energy to seek , electric attraction . in brief , this Earth 
 and God 's World be like America and Europe before the Atlantic Cable 
 be lay . now the message of goodwill flash under the wave , heedless 
 of the storm . so also God 's Cable be lay between we and his Heaven in 
 the person of Christ . 

 " for age   always remember that our age be with God a moment   the 
 idea of WORSHIP be in the mind of man . with this idea come also the 
 sentiment of PROPITIATION . the untamed savage have from time immemorial 
 instinctively feel the necessity of look up to a be great than 
 himself , and also of seek a reconciliation with that be for some 
 fault or loss in himself which he be aware of , yet can not explain . this 
 double instinct - worship and propitiation - be the key - note of all the 
 creed of the world , and may be call God 's first thought of the cable 
 to be hereafter lay - a lightning - thought which he instill into the 
 human race to prepare it , as one might test a telegraph - wire from house 
 to house , before stretch it across a continent . 

 " all religion , as know to we , be mere type of Christianity . it be a 
 notable fact that some of the old and most learn race in the 
 world , such as the Armenians and Chaldeans , be the first to be 
 convince of the truth of Christ 's visitation . Buddhism , of which there 
 be so many million follower , be itself a type of Christ 's teaching ; 
 only it lack the supernatural element . Buddha die a hermit at the age 
 of eighty , as any wise and ascetic man might do to - day . the death and 
 resurrection of Christ be widely different . anyone can be a Buddha 
 again ; anyone can not be a Christ . that there be state to be more 
 follower of Buddhism than of Christianity be no proof of any efficacy 
 in the former or lack of power in the latter . buddhist help to swell 
 that very large class of person who prefer a flattering picture to a 
 plain original ; or who , sheep - like by nature , find themselves all 
 together in one meadow , be too lazy , as well as too indifferent , to 
 seek pasture fresher and fairer . 

 " through the divine influence of an Electric Thought , then , the world 
 unconsciously grow to expect something - they know not what . the old 
 creed of the world , like sunflower , turn towards that unknown Sun ; 
 the poet , prophet , seer , all speak of some approach consolation 
 and glory ; and to this day the fat Jews expect it , unwilling to 
 receive as their Messiah the Divine Martyr they slay , though their own 
 scripture testify to his identity . 

 " Christ come , bear of a Virgin ; that is , a radiant angel from God 's 
 Sphere be in the first place send down to Earth to wear the form of 
 Mary of Bethlehem , in Judea . within that vessel of absolute purity God 
 place an Emanation of his own radiance - no germ or small flame such as 
 be give to we in our body to cultivate and foster , but a complete 
 immortal Spirit , a portion of God Himself , wise , sinless , and strong . 
 this Spirit , pen up in clay , be bear as a helpless babe , grow up as 
 man - as man teach , comfort , be slay and bury ; but as pure Spirit 
 rise again and return in peace to Heaven , his mission do . 

 " it be necessary , in order to establish what have be call an 
 electric communication between God 's Sphere and this Earth , that an 
 actual immortal , untainted Spirit in the person of Christ should walk 
 this world , share with man suffering , difficulty , danger , and 
 death . why ? in order that we might first completely confide in and 
 trust he , afterwards realize his spiritual strength and glory by his 
 resurrection . and here may be note the main difference between the 
 Electric Theory of Christianity and other theory . CHRIST do not die 
 because GOD need a sacrifice . the idea of sacrifice be a relic of 
 heathen barbarism ; God be too infinitely love to desire the sacrifice 
 of the small flower . he be too patient to be ever wrathful ; and 
 barbaric ignorance confront we again in the notion that he should need 
 to be appease . and the fancy that he should desire himself or part of 
 himself to become a sacrifice to himself have arise out of the absurd 
 and conflict opinion of err humanity , wherein right and wrong 
 be so jumbled together that it be difficult to distinguish one from 
 the other . Christ 's death be not a sacrifice ; it be simply a means of 
 confidence and communion with the Creator . a sinless Spirit suffer to 
 show we how to suffer ; live on earth to show we how to live ; pray to 
 show we how to pray ; die to show we how to die ; rise again to impress 
 strongly upon we that there be in truth a life beyond this one , for 
 which he strove to prepare our soul . finally , by his re - ascension into 
 Heaven he establish that much - need electric communication between 
 we and the Central Sphere . 

 " it can be prove from the statement of the New Testament that in 
 Christ be an Embodied Electric Spirit . from first to last his career 
 be attend by ELECTRIC PHENOMENA , of which eight example be here 
 quote ; and earnest student of the matter can find many other if they 
 choose to examine for themselves . 

 " 1 . the appearance of the Star and the Vision of Angels on the night of 
 his birth . the Chaldeans see his ' star in the east , ' and they come to 
 worship he . the Chaldeans be always a learn people , and 
 electricity be an advanced science with they . they at once recognize 
 the star to be no new planet , but simply a star - shape flame flit 
 through space . they know what this mean . Observe , too , that they have 
 no doubt upon the point ; they come ' to worship he , ' and provide 
 themselves with gift to offer to this radiant Guest , the offspring of 
 pure Light . the vision of the angel appear to the shepherd be 
 simply a joyous band of the Singing Children of the Electric Ring , who 
 out of pure interest and pleasure float in sight of Earth , draw 
 thither partly by the already strong attractive influence of the 
 Radiance that be imprison there in the form of the Babe of Bethlehem . 

 " 2 . when Christ be baptize by John the baptist , ' the HEAVENS OPENED . ' 

 " 3 . the sympathetic influence of Christ be so powerful that when he 
 select his disciple , he have but to speak to they , and at the sound 
 of his voice , though they be engage in other business , ' THEY LEFT 
 ALL and FOLLOWED HIM . " 

 " 4 . Christ 's body be charge with electricity . thus he be easily able 
 to heal sick and diseased person by a touch or a look . the woman who 
 catch at his garment in the crowd be cure of her long - stand 
 ailment ; and we see that Christ be aware of his own electric force by 
 the word he use on that occasion : ' who touch I ? for I feel that 
 some VIRTUE be go out of me ' - which be the exact feeling that a 
 physical electrician experience at this day after employ his power 
 on a subject . the raising of Jairus 's daughter , of the widow 's son at 
 Nain , and of Lazarus , be all accomplish by the same mean . 

 " 5 . the walking on the sea be a purely electric effort , and can be 
 accomplish now by ANYONE who have cultivate sufficient inner force . 
 the sea be full of electric particle will support anybody 
 sufficiently and similarly charge - the two current combine to 
 procure the necessary equilibrium . Peter , who be able to walk a little 
 way , lose his power directly his will become vanquish by 
 fear - because the sentiment of fear disperse electricity , and be 
 purely human emotion , do away with spiritual strength for the time . 

 " 6 . the Death of Christ be attend by electric manifestation - by the 
 darkness over the land during the Crucifixion ; the tearing of the 
 temple veil in twain ; and the earthquake which finally ensue . 

 " 7 . the Resurrection be a most powerful display of electric force . it 
 will be remember that the angel who be find sit at the entrance 
 of the empty sepulchre ' have a countenance like lightning , ' i.e. , like 
 electric flame . it must also be call to mind how the risen Christ 
 address Mary Magdalene : ' TOUCH I not , for I be but newly rise ! ' why 
 should she not have touch he ? simply because his strength then be 
 the strength of concentrated in - rush current of electricity ; and to 
 touch he at that moment would have be for Magdalene instant death by 
 lightning . this effect of embody electric force have be shadow 
 forth in the greek legend of Apollo , whose glory consume at a breath 
 the mortal who dare to look upon he . 

 " 8 . the descent of the Holy Ghost , by which term be mean an 
 ever - flow current of the inspire work Intelligence of the 
 Creator , be purely electric in character : ' suddenly there come a sound 
 from Heaven as of a rush mighty wind , and it fill all the house 
 where they be sit . and there appear unto they CLOVEN TONGUES 
 LIKE as of FIRE , and sit upon each of they . ' it may here be note that 
 the natural electric flame be dual or ' cloven ' in shape . 

 " let we now take the Creed as accept to - day by the Christian Church , 
 and see how thoroughly it harmonize with the discovery of spiritual 
 electricity . ' I believe in one God the Father Almighty , Maker of Heaven 
 and Earth , and of all thing visible and invisible . ' this be a brief 
 and simple description of the Creator as he exist - a Supreme Centre of 
 Light , out of whom must spring all life , all love , all wisdom . 

 " ' and in one Lord Jesus Christ , the only begotten Son of God , bear of 
 the Father before all age . ' this mean that the only absolute 
 Emanation of his own PERSONAL Radiance that ever wear such mean garb as 
 our clay be find in Christ - who , as part of God , certainly exist 
 ' before all AGES . ' for as the Creed itself say , he be ' God of God , 
 light of light . then we go on through the circumstance of Christ 's 
 birth , life , death , and resurrection , and our profession of faith 
 bring we to ' I believe in the Holy Ghost , the Lord and Giver of Life , 
 who proceedeth from the Father and the Son , ' etc . this , as already 
 state , mean that we believe that since Christ ascend into Heaven , 
 our electric communication with the Creator have be establish , and 
 an ever - flow current of divine inspiration be turn beneficially in 
 the direction of our earth , ' proceed from the Father and the Son . ' 
 we admit in the Creed that this inspiration manifest itself before 
 Christ come and ' spake by the prophet ; ' but , as before state , this 
 only happen at rare and difficult interval , while now Christ Himself 
 speak through those who most strongly adhere to his teaching . 

 " it may here be mention that few seem to grasp the fact of the 
 SPECIAL message to WOMEN intend to be convey in the person of the 
 Virgin Mary . she be actually one of the radiant Spirits of the Central 
 Sphere , imprison by God 's will in woman 's form . after the birth of 
 Christ , she be still keep on earth , to follow his career to the end . 
 there be a secret understanding between himself and she . as for 
 instance , when she find he among the doctor of the law , she for one 
 moment suffer her humanity to get the well of she in anxious 
 inquiry ; and his reply , ' why seek ye I ? wist ye not that I must be 
 about my Father 's business ? ' be a sort of reminder to she , which she 
 at once accept . again , at the marriage feast in Cana of Galilee , when 
 Christ turn the water into wine , he say to his mother , ' WOMAN , what 
 have I to do with thee ? ' which mean simply : what have I to do with 
 thee as WOMAN merely ? - which be another reminder to she of her 
 spiritual origin , cause she at once to address the servant who stand 
 by as follow : ' Whatsoever he saith unto you , do it . ' and why , it may 
 be ask , if Mary be really an imprisoned immortal Spirit , sinless and 
 joyous , should she be force to suffer all the weakness , sorrow , and 
 anxiety of any ordinary woman and mother ? SIMPLY as an example to 
 WOMEN who be the mother of the human race ; and who , be thus lay 
 under a heavy responsibility , need sympathetic guidance . Mary 's life 
 teach woman that the virtue they need be - obedience , purity , 
 meekness , patience , long - suffer , modesty , self - denial , and 
 endurance . she love to hold a secondary position ; she place herself 
 in willing subjection to Joseph - a man of austere and simple life , 
 advance in year , and weight with the care of a family by a 
 previous marriage - who wed she by an influence which compel HIM 
 to become her protector in the eye of the world . out of these fact , 
 simple as they be , can be draw the secret of happiness for woman - a 
 secret and a lesson that , if learn by heart , would bring they and 
 those they love out of storm and bewilderment into peace and safety . 

 " for those who have once BECOME aware of the existence of the CENTRAL 
 SPHERE and of the electric ring surround IT , and who be able to 
 realise to the full the GIGANTIC as well as MINUTE work PERFORMED BY 
 the ELECTRIC waves around US and within US , there can no long be any 
 doubt as to all the fact of Christianity , as none of they , VIEWED BY 
 the ELECTRIC theory , be otherwise than in accordance with the 
 Creator 's love and sympathy with even the small portion of his 
 creation . 

 " why then , if Christianity be a Divine Truth , be not all people 
 christian ? as well ask , if music and poetry be good thing , why all 
 man be not poet and musician . art seek art ; in like manner God 
 seek God - that be , he seek portion of his own essence among his 
 creature . Christ himself say , ' many be call , but few be choose ; ' 
 and it stand to reason that very few soul will succeed in become 
 pure enough to enter the Central Sphere without hindrance . many , on 
 leave Earth , will be detain in the Purgatory of Air , where 
 thousand of spirit work for age , watch over other , help and 
 warn other , and in this unselfish labour succeed in raise 
 themselves , little by little , high and ever high , till they at last 
 reach the long - for goal . it must also be remember that not only 
 from Earth , but from all worlds , release soul seek to attain final 
 happiness in the Central Sphere where God be ; so that , however great 
 the number of those that be permit to proceed thither from this 
 little planet , they can only form , as it be , one drop in a mighty 
 ocean . 

 " it have be ask whether the Electric Theory of Christianity include 
 the doctrine of Hell , or a place of perpetual punishment . eternal 
 Punishment be merely a form of speech for what be really Eternal 
 Retrogression . for as there be a Forward , so there must be a Backward . 
 the electric germ of the Soul - delicate , fiery , and imperishable as it 
 be - can be force by its companion will to take refuge in a low form 
 of material existence , dependent on the body it first inhabit . for 
 instance , a man who be obstinate in pursue ACTIVE EVIL can so 
 retrograde the progress of any spiritual life within he , that it shall 
 lack the power to escape , as it might do , from merely lymphatic and 
 listless temperament , to seek some other chance of development , but 
 shall sink into the form of quadruped , bird , and other creature 
 dominate by purely physical need . but there be one thing it can never 
 escape from - MEMORY . and in that faculty be constitute Hell . so that 
 if a man , by choice , force his soul downward to inhabit hereafter the 
 body of dog , horse , and other like animal , he should know that he 
 do so at the cost of everything except Remembrance . Eternal 
 Retrogression mean that the hopelessly taint electric germ recoil 
 far and far from the Pure Centre whence it spring , always 
 bear within itself the knowledge of what it be once and what it 
 might have be . there be a pathetic meaning in the eye of a dog or a 
 seal ; in the melancholy , patient gaze of the oxen toil at the 
 plough ; there be an unuttered warning in the silent face of flower ; 
 there be more tenderness of regret in the voice of the nightingale than 
 love ; and in the wild upward soaring of the lark , with its throat full 
 of passionate , shout prayer , there be shadow forth the yearning 
 hope that die away in despair as the bird sink to earth again , his 
 instinct not half satisfied . there be no great torture than to be 
 compel to remember , in suffering , joy and glorious opportunity 
 go for ever . 

 " regard the Electric Theory of Religion , it be curious to observe 
 how the truth of it have again and again be dimly shadow forth in 
 the prophecy of Art , Science , and poesy . the old painter who 
 depict a halo of light round the head of their Virgins and Saints do 
 so out of a correct impulse which they do not hesitate to obey . 
  Footnote : an impulse which lead they vaguely to foresee , though , not to 
 explain , the electric principle of spiritual life .   the astronomer 
 who , after year of profound study , have be enable to measure the 
 flame of the burn sun , and to find out that these be from two to 
 four thousand mile high , be nearly arrive at the conclusion that it 
 be a world in a state of conflagration , in which they will be perfectly 
 right . those who hold that this Earth of our be once self - luminous 
 be also right ; for it be indeed so when first project from the 
 Electric Ring . the compiler or inventor of the ' Arabian Nights ' also 
 hit upon a truth when they describe human being as force through 
 evil influence to take the form of low animal - a truth just 
 explain in the Law of Retrogression . all art , all prophecy , all 
 poesy , should therefore be accept eagerly and study earnestly , for 
 in they we find ELECTRIC INSPIRATION out of which we be able to draw 
 lesson for our guidance hereafter . the great point that scientist and 
 artist have hitherto fail to discover , be the existence of the 
 Central Sphere and its Surrounding Electric Circle . once realize these 
 two great fact , and all the wonder and mystery of the Universe be 
 perfectly easy of comprehension . 

 " in conclusion , I offer no opinion as to which be Christ 's Church , or 
 the fountain - head of spirituality in the world . in all church error 
 have intrude through unworthy and hypocritical member . in a crowded 
 congregation of worshipper there may perhaps be only one or two who 
 be free from self - interest and personal vanity . in Sectarianism , for 
 instance , there be no shred of Christianity . lover of God and 
 follower of Christ must , in the first place , have perfect unity ; and 
 the bond unite they must be an electric one of love and faith . no 
 true Christian should be able to hate , despise , or envy the other . be 
 I call upon to select among the church , I should choose that which 
 have most electricity work within it , and which be able to believe in 
 a positive electrical communication between Christ and herself take 
 place daily on her altar - a church which hold , as it be , the other 
 end of the telegraphic ray between Earth and the Central Sphere , and 
 which be , therefore , able to exist among the storm of modern opinion , 
 afford refuge and consolation to the few determined traveller who 
 be bind onward and upward . I shall not name the Church I mean , 
 because it be the duty of everyone to examine and find it out for 
 himself or herself . and even though this Church instinctively work in 
 the right direction , it be full of error introduce by ignorant and 
 unworthy member - error which must be carefully examine and cast 
 aside by degree . but , as I say before , it be the only church which 
 have principle of Electricity within it , and be therefore destine to 
 live , because electricity be life . 

 " now I beseech the reader of this manuscript to which I , Heliobas , 
 append my hand and seal , to remember and realize earnestly the 
 follow invincible fact : first that God and his Christ exist ; 
 secondly , that while the little paltry affair of our temporal state 
 be be build up as crazily as a child 's house of card , the huge 
 Central sphere revolve , and the Electric Ring , strong and 
 indestructible , be ever at its work of production and re - absorption ; 
 thirdly , that every thought and word of EVERY habitant on EVERY PLANET 
 be reflect in lightning language before the Creator 's eye as easily 
 as we receive telegram ; fourthly , that this world be the only SPOT in 
 the UNIVERSE where his existence be actually question and doubt . 
 and the general spread of modern positivism , materialism and atheism be 
 one of the most terrific and mean sign of the time . the work of 
 separate the wheat from the chaff be begin . those who love and 
 believe in God and Spiritual Beauty be about to be place on one side ; 
 the million who worship self be draw together in vast oppose 
 rank on the other ; and the moment approach which be prophesy to be 
 ' as the lightning that lighteneth out of the one part under heaven , and 
 shineth even to the other part . ' in other word , the fiery whirlpool of 
 the Ring be nearly ready to absorb our planet in its vortex ; and out of 
 all who dwell upon its surface , how many shall reach the glorious 
 Central World of God ? of two man work in the same field , shall it 
 not be as Christ foretell - ' the one shall be take , and the other left ' ? 

 " Friend , or Pupil , Reader ! whoever thou art , take heed and foster thine 
 own soul ! for know that nothing can hinder the Immortal Germ within we 
 from take the form impose upon it by our will . through Love and 
 Faith , it can become an Angel , and perform wonder even while in its 
 habitation of clay ; through indifference and apathy , it can desert we 
 altogether and for ever ; through mockery and blasphemous disbelief , it 
 can sink into even a low form than that of snake or toad . in our own 
 unfettered hand lie our eternal destiny . wonderful and terrible 
 responsibility ! who shall dare to say we have no need of prayer ? " 

 this document be sign " Casimir Heliobas , " and bear a seal on which 
 the impression seem to consist of two arabic or Sanskrit word , which 
 I could not understand . I put it carefully away with its companion MS . 
 under lock and key , and while I be yet pause earnestly on its 
 content , Zara come into my room . she have finish her task in the 
 studio , she say , and she now propose a drive in the Bois as an 
 agreeable way of pass the rest of the afternoon . 

 " I want to be as long as possible in your company , " she add , with a 
 caress sweetness in her manner ; " for now your friend have come to 
 Paris , I expect you will soon be leave we , so I must have as much of 
 you as I can . " 

 my heart sink at the thought of part from she , and I look 
 wistfully at her lovely face . Leo have follow she in from the studio , 
 and seem still very melancholy . 

 " we shall always be good friend , Zara dearest , " I say , ' shall we not ? 
 close , fond friend , like sister ? " 

 " sister be not always fond of each other , " remark Zara , half gaily . 
 " and you know ' there be a friend that sticketh close than a brother ' ! " 

 " and what friend be that in your case ? " I ask , half jestingly , half 
 curiously . 

 " death ! " she reply with a strange smile , in which there be both 
 pathos and triumph . 

 I start at her unexpected reply , and a kind of foreboding chill my 
 blood . I endeavour , however , to speak cheerfully as I say : 

 " why , of course , death stick more closely to we than any friend or 
 relative . but you look fitter to receive the embrace of life than of 
 death , Zara . " 

 " they be both one and the same thing , " she answer ; " or rather , the 
 one lead to the other . but do not let we begin to philosophize . put on 
 your thing and come . the carriage be wait . " 

 I readily obey she , and we enjoy an exhilarate drive together . 
 the rest of the day pass with we all very pleasantly and our 
 conversation have principally to do with the progress of art and 
 literature in many land , and maintain itself equably on the level of 
 mundane affair . among other thing , we speak of the spanish violinist 
 Sarasate , and I amuse Heliobas by quote to he some of the 
 criticism of the London daily paper on this great artist , such as , 
 " he play piece which , though adapt to show his wonderful skill , be 
 the veri clap - trap ; " " he lack breadth and colour ; " " a true type of 
 the artist virtuoso , " etc . , etc . 

 " half these people do not know in the least what they mean by ' breadth 
 and colour ' or ' virtuosity , ' " say Heliobas , with a smile . " they think 
 emotion , passion , all true sentiment combine with extraordinary 
 technique , must be ' clap - trap . ' now the Continent of Europe 
 acknowledge Pablo de Sarasate as the first violinist living , and 
 London would not be London unless it could thrust an obtuse oppose 
 opinion in the face of the continent . England be the last country in 
 the world to accept anything new . its people be tired and blase ; like 
 highly train circus - horse , they want to trot or gallop always in the 
 old groove . it will always be so . Sarasate be like a brilliant meteor 
 streaming across their narrow bit of the heaven of music ; they stare , 
 gape , and think it be an unnatural phenomenon - a ' virtuosity ' in the 
 way of meteor , which they be afraid to accept lest it set they on 
 fire . what would you ? the meteor shin and burn ; it be always a 
 meteor ! " 

 so , talk lightly , and glide from subject to subject , the hour 
 wear away , and we at last separate for the night . 

 I shall always be glad to remember how tenderly Zara kiss I and 
 wish I good repose ; and I recall now , with mingled pain , wonder , and 
 gratitude , how perfectly calm and content I feel as , after my 
 prayer , I sink to sleep , unwarned , and therefore happily unconscious , 
 of what await I on the morrow . 




 CHAPTER XV . 

 DEATH by lightning . 


 the morning of the next day dawn rather gloomily . a yellowish fog 
 obscure the air , and there be a closeness and sultriness in the 
 atmosphere that be strange for that wintry season . I have sleep well , 
 and rise with the general sense of ease and refreshment that I always 
 experience since I have be under the treatment of Heliobas . those 
 whose unhappy physical condition cause they to awake from uneasy 
 slumber feeling almost more fatigued than when they retire to rest , 
 can scarcely have any idea of the happiness it engender to open 
 untired , glad eye with the morning light ; to feel the very air a 
 nourishment ; to stand with lithe , rest limb in the bath of cool , 
 pure water , find that limpid element obediently add its quota to 
 the vigour of perfect health ; to tingle from head to foot with the warm 
 current of life run briskly through the vein , make the heart 
 merry , the brain clear , and all the power of body and mind in active 
 working condition . this be indeed most absolute enjoyment . add to it 
 the knowledge of the existence of one 's own inner Immortal Spirit - the 
 beautiful germ of Light in the fostering of which no labour be ever 
 take in vain - the living , wondrous thing that be destine to watch an 
 eternity of world bloom and fade to bloom again , like flower , while 
 itself , superior to they all , shall become ever more strong and 
 radiant - with these surrounding and prospect , who shall say life be 
 not worth live ? 

 Dear Life ! sweet Moment ! gracious Opportunity ! brief Journey so well 
 worth the taking ! gentle Exile so well worth endure ! - thy bitter 
 sorrow be but blessing in disguise ; thy sharp pain be bring 
 upon we by ourselves , and even then be turn to warning for our 
 guidance ; while above we , through we , and around we radiate the 
 Supreme Love , unalterably tender ! 

 these thought , and other like they , all more or less conducive to 
 cheerfulness , occupy I till I have finish dress . Melancholy be 
 now no part of my nature , otherwise I might have be depress by the 
 appearance of the weather and the murkiness of the air . but since I 
 learn the simple secret of physical electricity , atmospheric 
 influence have have no effect upon the equable poise of my 
 temperament - a fact for which I can not be too grateful , see how many 
 of my fellow - creature permit themselves to be affect by change in 
 the wind , intense heat , intense cold , or other thing of the like 
 character . 

 I go down to breakfast , sing softly on my way , and I find Zara 
 already seat at the head of her table , while Heliobas be occupy in 
 reading and sort a pile of letter that lie beside his plate . both 
 greet I with their usual warmth and heartiness . 

 during the repast , however , the brother and sister be strangely 
 silent , and once or twice I fancy that Zara 's eye fill with tear , 
 though she smile again so quickly and radiantly that I feel I be 
 mistaken . 

 a piece of behaviour on the part of Leo , too , fill I with dismay . he 
 have be lie quietly at his master 's foot for some time , when he 
 suddenly arise , sit upright , and lift his nose in air , utter a 
 most prolonged and desolate howl . anything more thoroughly heartbroken 
 and despairing than that cry I have never hear . after he have conclude 
 it , the poor animal seem ashamed of what he have do , and creep 
 meekly along , with droop head and tail , he kiss his master 's hand , 
 then mine , and lastly Zara 's . finally , he go into a distant corner 
 and lie down again , as if his feeling be altogether too much for he . 

 " be he ill ? " I ask pityingly . 

 " I think not , " reply Heliobas . " the weather be peculiar 
 to - day - close , and almost thunderous ; dog be very susceptible to such 
 change . " 

 at that moment the page enter bear a silver salver , on which lay a 
 letter , which he hand to his master and immediately retire . 

 Heliobas open and read it . 

 " Ivan regret he can not dine with we to - day , " he say , glance at his 
 sister ; " he be otherwise engage . he say , however , that he hop to 
 have the pleasure of look in during the latter part of the evening . " 

 Zara incline her head gently , and make no other reply . 

 a few second afterwards we rise from table , and Zara , link her arm 
 through mine , say : 

 " I want to have a talk with you while we can be alone . come to my room . " 

 we go upstairs together , follow by the wise yet doleful Leo , who 
 seem determined not to let his mistress out of his sight . when we 
 arrive at our destination , Zara push I gently into an easy - chair , 
 and seat herself in another one opposite . 

 " I be go to ask a favour of you , " she begin ; " because I know you 
 will do anything to please I or Casimir . be it not so ? " 

 I assure she she might rely upon my observing ; with the true 
 fidelity any request of her , small or great . 

 she thank I and resume : 

 " you know I have be work secretly in my studio for some time past . 
 I have be occupy in the execution of two design - one be finish , 
 and be intend as a gift to Casimir . the other " - she hesitate - " be 
 incomplete . it be the colossal figure which be veil when you first 
 come in to see my little statue of ' evening ' . I make an attempt beyond 
 my power - in short , I can not carry out the idea to my satisfaction . 
 now , dear , pay great attention to what I say . I have reason to believe 
 that I shall be compel to take a sudden journey - promise I that 
 when I be go you will see that unfinished statue completely 
 destroy - utterly demolish . " 

 I could not answer she for a minute or two , I be so surprised by her 
 word . 

 " go on a journey , Zara ? " I say . " well , if you be , I suppose you 
 will soon return home again ; and why should your statue be destroy in 
 the meantime ? you may yet be able to bring it to final perfection . " 

 Zara shake her head and smile half sadly . 

 " I tell you it be a favour I have to ask of you , " she say ; " and now 
 you be unwilling to grant it . " 

 " I be not unwilling - believe I , dearest , I would do anything to please 
 you , " I assure she ; " but it seem so strange to I that you should 
 wish the result of your labour destroy , simply because you be go 
 on a journey . " 

 " strange as it seem , I desire it most earnestly , " say Zara ; 
 " otherwise - but if you will not see it do for I , I must preside at 
 the work of demolition myself , though I frankly confess it would be 
 most painful to I . " 

 I interrupt she . 

 " say no more , Zara ! " I exclaim ; " I will do as you wish . when you be 
 go , you say - " 

 " when I be go , " repeat Zara firmly , " and before you yourself leave 
 this house , you will see that particular statue destroy . you will 
 thus do I a very great service . " 

 " well , " I say , " and when be you come back again ? before I leave 
 Paris ? " 

 " I hope so - I think so , " she reply evasively ; " at any rate , we shall 
 meet again soon . " 

 " where be you go ? " I ask . 

 she smile . such a lovely , glad , and triumphant smile ! 

 " you will know my destination before to - night have pass away , " she 
 answer . " in the meanwhile I have your promise ? " 

 " most certainly . " 

 she kiss I , and as she do so , a lurid flash catch my eye and 
 almost dazzle they . it be a gleam of fiery lustre from the electric 
 jewel she wear . 

 the day go on its usual course , and the weather seem to grow 
 murky every hour . the air be almost sultry , and when during the 
 afternoon I go into the conservatory to gather some of the glorious 
 Marechal Niel rose that grow there in such perfection , the intense 
 heat of the place be nearly insupportable . I see nothing of Heliobas 
 all day , and , after the morning , very little of Zara . she disappear 
 soon after luncheon , and I could not find she in her room nor in her 
 studio , though I knock at the door several time . Leo , too , be 
 miss . after be alone for an hour or more , I think I would pay a 
 visit to the chapel . but on attempt to carry out this intention I 
 find its door lock - an unusual circumstance which rather surprise 
 I . fancy that I hear the sound of voice within , I pause to 
 listen . but all be profoundly silent . stroll into the hall , I take 
 up at random from a side - table a little volume of poem , unknown to I , 
 call " Pygmalion in Cyprus ; " and seat myself in one of the 
 luxurious oriental easy - chair near the silvery sparkle fountain , I 
 begin to read . I open the book I hold at " a Ballad of Kisses , " which 
 run as follow : 

  " there be three kiss that I call to mind , 
  and I will sing their secret as I go , - 
  the first , a kiss too courteous to be kind , 
  be such a kiss as monk and maiden know , 
  as sharp as frost , as blameless as the snow . 

  " the second kiss , ah God ! I feel it yet , - 
  and evermore my soul will loathe the same , - 
  the toy and joy of fate I may forget , 
  but not the touch of that divide shame ; 
  it clove my lip - it burn I like a flame . 

  " the third , the final kiss , be one I use 
  Morning and noon and night , and not amiss . 
  Sorrow be mine if such I do refuse ! 
  and when I die , be Love enrapt in bliss 
  re - sanctify in heaven by such a kiss ! " 

 this little gem , which I read and re - read with pleasure , be only one 
 of many in the same collection , the author be assuredly a man of 
 genius . I study his word - melody with intense interest , and note 
 with some surprise how original and beautiful be many of his fancy 
 and simile . I say I note they with surprise , because he be evidently 
 a modern Englishman , and yet unlike any other of his writing specie . 
 his name be not Alfred Tennyson , nor Edwin Arnold , nor Matthew Arnold , 
 nor Austin Dobson , nor Martin Tupper . he be neither plagiarist nor 
 translator - he be actually an original man . I do not give his name 
 here , as I consider it the duty of his own country to find he out and 
 acknowledge he , which , as it be so proud of its literary standing , of 
 course it will do in due season . on this , my first introduction to his 
 poem , I become speedily absorb in they , and be repeat to myself 
 softly a verse which I remember now : 

  " Hers be sweetest of sweet face , 
  Hers the tender eye of all ; 
  in her hair she have the trace 
  of a heavenly coronal , 
  bring sunshine to sad place 
  where the sunlight could not fall . " 

 then I be startle by the sound of a clock strike six . I bethink 
 myself of the people who be come to dinner , and decide to go to my 
 room and dress . replace the " Pygmalion " book on the table whence I 
 have take it , I make my way upstairs , think as I go of Zara and 
 her strange request , and wonder what journey she be go upon . 

 I could not come to any satisfactory conclusion on this point , besides , 
 I have a curious disinclination to think about it very earnestly , though 
 the subject keep recur to my mind . yet always some inward monitor 
 seem to assure I , as plainly as though the word be speak in my 
 ear : 

 " it be useless for you to consider the reason of this , or the meaning 
 of that . take thing as they come in due order : one circumstance 
 explain the other , and everything be always for the good . " 

 I prepare my indian crepe dress for the evening , the same I have wear 
 for Madame Didier 's party at Cannes ; only , instead of have lily of 
 the valley to ornament it with , I arrange some cluster of the 
 Marechal Niel rose I have gather from the conservatory - lovely 
 blossom , with their dewy pale - gold centre form perfect cup of 
 delicious fragrance . these , relieve by a few delicate spray of the 
 maiden - hair fern , form a become finish to my simple costume . as I 
 array myself , and look at my own reflection in the long mirror , I 
 smile out of sheer gratitude . for health , joyous and vigorous , 
 sparkle in my eye , glow on my cheek , tint my lip , and round 
 my figure . the face that look back at I from the glass be a 
 perfectly happy one , ready to dimple into glad mirth or bright 
 laughter . no shadow of pain or care remain upon it to remind I of 
 past suffering , and I murmur half aloud : " thank God ! " 

 " amen ! " say a soft voice , and , turn round , I see Zara . 

 but how shall I describe she ? no word can adequately paint the 
 glorious beauty in which , that night , she seem to move as in an 
 atmosphere of her own creating . she wear a cling robe of the 
 rich , soft white satin , catch in at the waist by a zone of 
 pearl - pearl which , from their size and purity , must have be 
 priceless . her beautiful neck and arm be bare , and twelve row of 
 pearl be clasp round her slender throat , support in their 
 centre the electric stone , which shine with a soft , subdued radiance , 
 like the light of the young moon . her rich , dark hair be arrange in 
 its usual fashion - that be , hang down in one thick plait , which on 
 this occasion be braid in and out with small pearl . on her bosom 
 she wear a magnificent cluster of natural orange - blossom ; and of 
 these , while I gaze admiringly at she , I first speak : 

 " you look like a bride , Zara ! you have all the outward sign of 
 one - white satin , pearl , and orange - blossom ! " 

 she smile . 

 " they be the first cluster that have come out in our conservatory , " she 
 say ; " and I could not resist they . as to the pearl , they belong to 
 my mother , and be my favourite ornament ; and white satin be now no 
 long exclusively for bride . how soft and pretty that indian crepe 
 be ! your toilette be charming , and suit you to perfection . be you 
 quite ready ? " 

 " quite , " I answer . 

 she hesitate and sigh . then she raise her lovely eye with a sort 
 of wistful tenderness . 

 " before we go down I should like you to kiss I once , " she say . 

 I embrace she fondly , and our lip meet with a linger sisterly 
 caress . 

 " you will never forget I , will you ? " she ask almost anxiously ; 
 " never cease to think of I kindly ? " 

 " how fanciful you be to - night , Zara dear ! " I say . " as if I could 
 forget you ! I shall always think of you as the lovely and sweetest 
 woman in the world . " 

 " and when I be out of the world - what then ? " she pursue . 

 remember her spiritual sympathy , I answer at once : 

 " even then I shall know you to be one of the fairest of the angel . so 
 you see , Zara darling , I shall always love you . " 

 " I think you will , " she say meditatively ; " you be one of we . but 
 come ! I hear voice downstairs . I think our expect guest have 
 arrive , and we must be in the drawing - room to receive they . good - bye , 
 little friend ! " and she again kiss I . 

 " good - bye ! " I repeat in astonishment ; " why ' good - bye ' ? " 

 " because it be my fancy to say the word , " she reply with quiet 
 firmness . " again , dear little friend , good - bye ! " 

 I feel bewildered , but she would not give I time to utter another 
 syllable . she take my hand and hurry I with her downstair , and in 
 another moment we be both in the drawing - room , receive and say 
 polite nothing to the Everards and Challoners , who have all arrive 
 together , resplendent in evening costume . Amy Everard , I think , 
 look a little tired and fag , though she rejoice in a superb 
 " arrangement " by Worth of ruby velvet and salmon - pink . but , though a 
 perfect dress be console to most woman , there be time when even 
 that fail of its effect ; and then Worth cease to loom before the 
 feminine eye as a sort of demi - god , but dwindle insignificantly to the 
 level of a mere tailor , whose price be ruinous . and this , I think , 
 be the state of mind in which Mrs. Everard find herself that evening ; 
 or else she be a trifle jealous of Zara 's harmonious grace and 
 loveliness . be this as it may , she be irritable , and whisperingly 
 find fault with , I for be in such good health . 

 " you will have too much colour if you do not   take care , " she say almost 
 pettishly , " and nothing be so unfashionable . " 

 " I know ! " I reply with due meekness . " it be very bad style to be 
 quite well - it be almost improper . " 

 she look at I , and a glimmering smile light her feature . but she 
 would not permit herself to become good - humour , and she furl and 
 unfurl her fan of pink ostrich feather with some impatience . 

 " where do that child get all those pearl from ? " she next inquire , 
 with a gesture of her head towards Zara . 

 " they belong to her mother , " I answer , smile as I hear Zara 
 call a child , know , as I do , her real age . 

 " she be actually wear a small fortune on her person , " go on Amy ; 
 " I wonder her brother allow she . girl never understand the value of 
 thing of that sort . they should be keep for she till she be old enough 
 to appreciate they . " 

 I make no reply ; I be absorb in watch Heliobas , who at that 
 moment enter the room accompany by Father Paul . he greet his 
 guest with warmth and unaffected heartiness , and all present be , I 
 could see , at once fascinate by the dignity of his presence and the 
 charm of his manner . to an uninstructed eye there be nothing unusual 
 about he ; but to I there be a change in his expression which , as it 
 be , warn and startle I . a deep shadow of anxiety in his eye make 
 they look more sombre and less keen ; his smile be not so sweet as it 
 be stern , and there be an undefinable something in his very bearing 
 that suggest - what ? defiance ? yes , defiance ; and it be this which , 
 when I have realize it , curiously alarm I . for what have he , 
 Heliobas , to do with even the thought of defiance ? do not all his 
 power come from the knowledge of the necessity of obedience to the 
 spiritual power within and without ? quick as light the word speak to 
 I by Aztul regard he come back to my remembrance : " even as he be 
 my Beloved , so let he not fail to hear my voice . " what if he SHOULD 
 fail ? a kind of instinct come upon I that some immediate danger of 
 this threaten he , and I brace myself up to a firm determination , 
 that , if this be so , I , out of my deep gratitude to he , would do my 
 utmost good to warn he in time . while these thought possess I , the 
 hum of gay conversation go on , and Zara 's bright laughter ever and 
 again break like music on the air . Father Paul , too , prove himself to 
 be of quite a festive and jovial disposition , for he make himself 
 agreeable to Mrs. Challoner and her daughter , and entertain they 
 with the ease and bonhomie of an accomplished courtier and man of the 
 world . 

 Dinner be announce in the usual way - that be , with the sound of music 
 play by the electric instrument devote to that purpose , a 
 performance which elicit much admiration from all the guest . 
 Heliobas lead the way into the dining - room with Mrs. Everard ; Colonel 
 Everard follow , with Zara on one arm and the eld Miss Challoner on 
 the other ; Mr. Challoner and myself come next ; and Father Paul , with 
 Mrs. Challoner and her other daughter Effie , bring up the rear . there 
 be a universal murmur of surprise and delight as the dinner - table come 
 in view ; and its arrangement be indeed a triumph of art . in the centre 
 be place a large round of crystal in imitation of a lake , and on this 
 apparently float a beautiful gondola steer by the figure of a 
 gondolier , both exquisitely work in fine venetian glass . the 
 gondolier be pile high with a cargo of rose ; but the wonder of it 
 all be , that the whole design be light up by electricity . electric 
 sparkle , like drop of dew , shine on the leaf of the flower ; the 
 gondola be light from end to end with electric star , which be 
 reflect with prismatic brilliancy in the crystal below ; the 
 gondolier 's long pole glitter with what appear to be drop of water 
 ting by the moonlight , but which be really an electric wire , and in 
 his cap flash an electric diamond . the whole ornament scintillate 
 and glow like a marvellous piece of curiously contrive jewel - work . 
 and this be not all . beside every guest at table a slender vase , 
 shape like a long - stem Nile lily , hold rose and fern , in which 
 be hide tiny electric star , cause the blossom to shine with a 
 transparent and almost fairy - like lustre . 

 four graceful youth , clothe in the armenian costume , stand wait 
 silently round the table till all present be seat , and then they 
 commence the business of serve the viand , with swift and noiseless 
 dexterity . as soon as the soup be hand round , tongue be loosen , 
 and the Challoners , who have be gaze at everything in almost 
 open - mouthed astonishment , begin to relieve their feeling by warm 
 expression of unqualified admiration , in which Colonel and Mrs. 
 Everard be not slow to join . 

 " I do say , and I will say , this beat all I have   ever see , " say good 
 Mrs. Challoner , as she bend to examine the glitter vase of flower 
 near her plate . 

 " and this be real electric light ? and be it perfectly harmless ? " 

 Heliobas smilingly assure she of the safety of his table decoration . 
 " electricity , " he say , " though the most powerful of master , be the 
 most docile of slave . it be capable of the small as well as of the 
 great us . it can give with equal certainty life or death ; in fact , 
 it be the key - note of creation . " 

 " be that your theory , sir ? " ask Colonel Everard . 

 " it be not only my theory , " answer Heliobas , " it be a truth , 
 indisputable and unalterable , to those who have study the mystery 
 of electric science . " 

 " and do you base all your medical treatment on this principle ? " pursue 
 the Colonel . 

 " certainly . your young friend here , who come to I from Cannes , look 
 as if she have but a few month to live , can bear witness to the 
 efficacy of my method . " 

 every eye be now turn upon I , and I look up and laugh . 

 " do you remember , Amy , " I say , address Mrs. Everard , " how you tell 
 I I look like a sick nun at canne ? what do I look like now ? " 

 " you look as if you have never be ill in your life , " she reply . 

 " I be go to say , " remark Mr. Challoner in his deliberate manner , 
 " that you remind I very much of a small painting of Diana that I see 
 in the Louvre the other day . you have the same sort of elasticity in 
 your movement , and the same bright healthy eye . " 

 I bow , still smile . " I do not know you be such a flatterer , Mr. 
 Challoner ! Diana thank you ! " 

 the conversation now become general , and turn , among other subject , 
 upon the grow reputation of Raffaello Cellini . 

 " what surprise I in that young man , " say Colonel Everard , " be his 
 colouring . it be simply marvellous . he be amiable enough to present I 
 with a little landscape scene ; and the effect of light upon it be so 
 powerfully do that you would swear the sun be actually shin 
 through it . " 

 the fine sensitive mouth of Heliobas curve in a somewhat sarcastic 
 smile . 

 " mere trickery , my dear sir - a piece of clap - trap , " he say lightly . 
 " that be what would be say of such picture - in England at least . and 
 it will be say by many oracular , long - establish newspaper , while 
 Cellini live . as soon as he be dead - ah ! c'est autre choose ! - he will 
 then most probably be acknowledge the great master of the age . 
 there may even be a Cellini ' School of Colouring , ' where a select 
 company of dauber will profess to know the secret that have die with 
 he . it be the way of the world ! " 

 Mr. Challoner 's rugged face show sign of satisfaction , and his 
 shrewd eye twinkle . 

 " right you be , sir ! " he say , hold up his glass of wine . " I drink 
 to you ! Sir , I agree with you ! I calculate there be a good many world 
 fly round in space , but a more ridiculous , feeble - minded , contrary 
 sort of world than this one , I defy any archangel to find ! " 

 Heliobas laugh , nod , and after a slight pause resume : 

 " it be astonishing to I that people do not see to what an infinite 
 number of us they could put the little re - discovery they have make of 
 LUMINOUS PAINT . in that simple thing there be a secret , which as yet 
 they do not guess - a wonderful , beautiful , scientific secret , which may 
 perhaps take they a few hundred year to find out . in the meantime they 
 have get hold of one end of the thread ; they can make luminous paint , 
 and with it they can paint light - house , and , what be far more 
 important - ship . vessel in mid - ocean will have no more need of 
 fog - signal and different - coloured lamp ; their own coat of paint will 
 be sufficient to light they safely on their way . even room can be so 
 paint as to be perfectly luminous at night . a friend of mine , 
 reside in Italy , have a luminous ballroom , where the ceiling be 
 decorate with a moon and star in electric light . the effect be 
 exceedingly lovely ; and though people think a great deal of money must 
 have be lay out upon it , it be perhaps the only great ballroom in 
 Italy that have be really cheaply fit up . but , as I say before , 
 there be another secret behind the invention or discovery of luminous 
 paint - a secret which , when once unveil , will revolutionize all the 
 school of art in the world . " 

 " do you know this secret ? " ask Mrs. Challoner . 

 " yes , madame - perfectly . " 

 " then why do not   you disclose it for the benefit of everybody ? " demand 
 Erne Challoner . 

 " because , my dear young lady , no one would believe I if I do . the 
 time be not yet ripe for it . the world must wait till its people be 
 well educate . " 

 " well educate ! " exclaim Mrs. Everard . " why , there be nothing 
 talk of nowadays but education and progress ! the very child be 
 wise than their parent ! " 

 " the child ! " return Heliobas , half inquiringly , half indignantly . 
 " at the rate thing be go , there will soon be no child leave ; 
 they will all be tired little old man and woman before they be in 
 their teen . the very babe will be bear old . many of they be be 
 bring up without any faith in God or religion ; the result will be an 
 increase of vice and crime . the purblind philosopher , miscall wise 
 man , who teach the child by the light of poor human reason only , and 
 do away with faith in spiritual thing , be bring down upon the 
 generation to come an unlooke - for and most terrific curse . childhood , 
 the happy , innocent , sweet , unthinke , almost angelic age , at which 
 Nature would have we believe in fairy and all the delicate aerial 
 fancy of poet , who be , after all , the only true sage - childhood , I 
 say , be be gradually stamp out under the cruel iron heel of the 
 Period - a period not of wisdom , health , or beauty , but one of drunken 
 delirium , in which the world rush feverishly along , its eye fix on 
 one hard , glitter , stony - feature idol - Gold . education ! be it 
 education to teach the young that their chance of happiness depend on 
 be rich than their neighbour ? yet that be what it all tend to . 
 get on ! - be successful ! Trample on other , but push forward yourself ! 
 money , money ! - let its chink be your music ; let its yellow shine be 
 fair than the eye of love or friendship ! let its pile accumulate 
 and ever accumulate ! there be beggar in the street , but they be 
 impostor ! there be poverty in many place , but why seek to relieve it ? 
 why lessen the sparkling heap of gold by so much as a coin ? accumulate 
 and ever accumulate ! live so , and then - die ! and then - who know what 
 then ? " 

 his voice have be full of ring eloquence as he speak , but at these 
 last word it sink into a low , thrill tone of solemnity and 
 earnestness . we all look at he , fascinate by his manner , and be 
 silent . 

 Mr. Challoner be the first to break the impressive pause . 

 " I be not a speaker , sir , " he observe slowly , " but I have   get a good deal 
 of feel somewhere ; and you will allow I to say that I feel your 
 word - I think they be right true . I have   often want to say what you have 
 say , but have not   see my way clear to it . anyhow , I have   have a very 
 general impression about I that what we call Society have of late year 
 be go , per express service , direct to the devil - if the lady 
 will excuse I for plain speaking . and as the journey be be take by 
 choice and free - will , I suppose there be no hindrance or stoppage 
 possible . besides , it be a downward line , and curiously free from 
 obstruction . " 

 " Bravo , John ! " exclaim Mrs. Challoner . " you be actually corn out ! 
 I never hear you indulge in simile before . " 

 " well , my dear , " return her husband , somewhat gratify , " well late 
 than never . a simile be a good thing if it be not   overcrowded . for 
 instance , Mr. Swinburne 's simile be lay on too thick sometimes . 
 there be a verse of his , which , with all my admiration for he , I never 
 could quite fathom . it be where he earnestly desire to be as ' any leaf 
 of any tree ; ' or , fail that , he would not   mind become ' as bone 
 under the deep , sharp sea . ' I try hard to see the point of that , but 
 could not   fix it . " 

 we all laugh . Zara , I think , be especially merry , and look she 
 lovely . she make an excellent hostess , and exert herself to the 
 utmost to charm - an effort in which she easily succeed . 

 the shadow on the face of her brother have not disappear , and once or 
 twice I notice that Father Paul look at he with a certain kindly 
 anxiety . 

 the dinner approach its end . the dessert , with its luxurious dish 
 of rare fruit , such as peach , plantain , hothouse grape , and even 
 strawberry , be serve , and with it a delicious , sparkling , 
 topaz - tint wine of eastern origin call Krula , which be pour out 
 to we in venetian glass goblet , wherein lie diamond - like lump of ice . 
 the air be so exceedingly oppressive that evening that we find this 
 beverage most refreshing . when Zara 's goblet be fill , she hold it up 
 smile , and say : 

 " I have a toast to propose . " 

 " hear , hear ! " murmur the gentleman , Heliobas except . 

 " to our next merry meeting ! " and as she say this she kiss the rim of 
 the cup , and make a sign as though waft it towards her brother . 

 he start as if from a reverie , seize his glass , and drain off its 
 content to the last drop . 

 everyone respond with heartiness to Zara 's toast and then Colonel 
 Everard propose the health of the fair hostess , which be drunk with 
 enthusiasm . 

 after this Zara give the signal , and all the lady rise to adjourn to 
 the drawing - room . as I pass Heliobas on my way out , he look so 
 sombre and almost threaten of aspect , that I venture to whisper : 

 " remember Azul ! " 

 " she have forget ME ! " he mutter . 

 " never - never ! " I say earnestly . " oh , Heliobas ! what be wrong with 
 you ? " 

 he make no answer , and there be no opportunity to say more , as I have 
 to follow Zara . but I feel very anxious , though I scarcely know why , 
 and I linger at the door and glance back at he . as I do so , a low , 
 rumble sound , like chariot - wheel roll afar off , break suddenly on 
 our ear . 

 " Thunder , " remark Mr. Challoner quietly . " I think we should have 
 it . it have be unnaturally warm all day . a good storm will clear the 
 air . " 

 in my brief backward look at Heliobas , I note that when that 
 far - distant thunder sound , he grow very pale . why ? he be certainly 
 not one to have any dread of a storm - he be absolutely destitute of 
 fear . I go into the drawing - room with a hesitate step - my instinct 
 be all awake and begin to warn I , and I murmur softly a prayer 
 to that strong , invisible majestic spirit which I know must be near 
 I - my guardian Angel . I be answer instantly - my foreboding grow 
 into a positive certainty that some danger menace Heliobas , and that 
 if I desire to be his friend , I must be prepare for an emergency . 
 receive this , as all such impression should be receive , as a direct 
 message send I for my guidance , I grow calm , and brace up my 
 energy to oppose something , though I know not what . 

 Zara be show her lady - visitor a large album of italian 
 photograph , and explain they as she turn the leaf . as I enter 
 the room , she say eagerly to I : 

 " play to we , dear ! something soft and plaintive . we all delight in your 
 music , you know . " 

 " do you hear the thunder just now ? " I ask irrelevantly . 

 " it be thunder ? I think so ! " say Mrs. Everard . " oh , I do hope there 
 be not go to be a storm ! I be so afraid of a storm ! " 

 " you be nervous ? " question Zara kindly , as she engage her attention 
 with some very fine specimen among the photograph , consist of 
 view from Venice . 

 " well , I suppose I be , " return Amy , half laugh . " yet I be plucky 
 about most thing , too . still I do not   like to hear the element 
 quarrel together - they be too much in earnest about it - and no 
 person can pacify they . " 

 Zara smile , and gently repeat her request to I for some music - a 
 request in which Mrs. Challoner and her daughter eagerly join . as I 
 go to the piano I think of Edgar Allan Poe 's exquisite poem : 

  " in Heaven a spirit doth dwell , 
  whose heart - string be a lute ; 
  none sing so wildly well 
  as the angel Israfel , 
  and the giddy star , so legend tell , 
  cease their hymn , attend the spell 
  of his voice - all mute . " 

 as I poise my finger above the key of the instrument , another long , 
 low , ominous roll of thunder sweep up from the distance and make the 
 room tremble . 

 " play - play , for goodness ' sake ! " exclaim Mrs. Everard ; " and then we 
 shall not be oblige to fix our attention on the approach storm ! " 

 I play a few soft opening arpeggio passage , while Zara seat 
 herself in an easy - chair near the window , and the other lady arrange 
 themselves on sofas and othman to their satisfaction . the room be 
 exceedingly close : and the scent of the flower that be place about 
 in profusion be almost too sweet and overpower . 

  " and they say   the starry choir 
  and the other listen thing 
  that Israfeli 's fire 
  be owe to that lyre , 
  by which lie sit and sing , - 
  the trembling live wire 
  of those unusual string . " 

 how these verse haunt I ! with they float in my mind , I 
 play - lose myself in maze of melody , and travel harmoniously 
 in and out of the different key with that sense of perfect joy know 
 only to those who can improvise with ease , and catch the unwritten 
 music of nature , which always appeal most strongly to emotion that 
 be unspoilt by contact with the world , and which be quick to respond 
 to what be purely instinctive art . I soon become thoroughly absorb , 
 and forget that there be any person present . in fancy I imagine 
 myself again in view of the glory of the Electric Ring - again I seem 
 to behold the opaline radiance of the Central Sphere : 

  " where Love be a grow - up God , 
  where the Houri glance be 
  imbue with all the beauty 
  which we worship in a star . " 

 by - and - by I find my finger at the work of tenderly unravel a 
 little skein of major melody , as soft and childlike as the innocent 
 babble of a small brooklet flow under fern . I follow this airy 
 suggestion obediently , till it lead I of itself to its fitting end , 
 when I cease play . I be greet by a little burst of applause , and 
 look up , see that all the gentleman have come in from the 
 dining - room , and be stand near I . the stately figure of Heliobas 
 be the most prominent in the group ; he stand erect , one hand rest 
 lightly on the framework of the piano , and his eye meet mine fixedly . 

 " you be inspire , " he say with a grave smile , address I ; " you 
 do not observe our entrance . " 

 I be about to reply , when a loud , appalling crash of thunder rattle 
 above we , as if some huge building have suddenly fall into ruin . it 
 startle we all into silence for a moment , and we look into each 
 other 's face with a certain degree of awe . 

 " that be a good one , " remark Mr. Challoner . " there be nothing 
 undecided about that clap . its mind be make up . " 

 Zara suddenly rise from her seat , and draw aside the window - curtain . 

 " I wonder if it be rain , " she say . 

 Amy Everard utter a little shriek of dismay . 

 " oh , do not   open the blind ! " she exclaim . " it be really dangerous ! " 

 Heliobas glance at she with a little sarcastic smile . 

 " take a seat on the other side of the room , if you be alarmed , 
 madame , " he say quietly , place a chair in the position he suggest , 
 which Amy accept eagerly . 

 she would , I believe , have gladly take refuge in the coal - cellar have 
 he offer it . Zara , in the meantime , who have not hear Mrs. Everard 's 
 exclamation of fear , have draw up one of the blind , and stand silently 
 look out upon the night . instinctively we all join she , with the 
 exception of Amy , and look out also . the sky be very dark ; a 
 faint moaning wind stir the top of the leafless tree ; but there 
 be no rain . a dry volcanic heat pervade the atmosphere - in fact we 
 all feel the air so stifle , that Heliobas throw open the window 
 altogether , say , as he do so : 

 " in a thunderstorm , it be safe to have the window open than shut ; 
 besides , one can not suffocate . " 

 a brilliant glare of light flash suddenly upon our vision . the 
 heaven seem tear open from end to end , and a broad lake of pale blue 
 fire lie quiver in the heart of the mountainous black cloud - for a 
 second only . an on - rushing , ever - increase , rattle roar of thunder 
 ensue , that seem to shake the very earth , and all be again darkness . 

 " this be magnificent ! " cry Mrs. Challoner , who , with her family , have 
 travel a great deal , and be quite accustomed to hurricane and 
 other inconvenience cause by the unaccommodate behaviour of the 
 element . " I do not   think I ever see anything like it , John dear , even 
 that storm we see at Chamounix be not any well than this . " 

 " well , " return her husband meditatively , " you see we have the snow 
 mountain there , and the effect be pretty lively . then there be the 
 echo - those cavernous echo be grand ! what be that passage in 
 Job , Effie , that I use to say they remind I of ? " 

 " ' the pillar of heaven tremble , and be astonish at his reproof ... 
 the thunder of his power , who can understand ? ' " reply Effie Challoner 
 reverently . 

 " that be it ! " he reply . " I opine that Job be pretty correct in his 
 idea - do not   you , reverend sir ? " turn to Father Paul . 

 the priest nod , and hold up his finger warningly . 

 " that lady - Mrs. Everard - be go to sing or play , I think , " he 
 observe . " shall we not keep silence ? " 

 I look towards Amy in some surprise . I know she sing very prettily , 
 but I have think she be render too nervous by the storm to do aught 
 but sit quiet in her chair . however , there she be at the piano , and in 
 another moment her fresh , sweet mezzo - soprano rang softly through the 
 room in Tosti 's plaintive song , " good - bye ! " we listen , but none of we 
 move from the open window where we still inhale what air there be , 
 and watch the lower sky . 

  " Hush ! a voice from the far - away , 
  ' listen and learn , ' it seem to say ; 
  ' all the to - morrow shall be as to - day , ' " 

 sing Amy with pathetic sweetness . Zara suddenly move , as if oppress , 
 from her position among we as we stand cluster together , and step 
 out through the french window into the outside balcony , her head 
 uncover to the night . 

 " you will catch cold ! " Mrs. Challoner and I both call to she 
 simultaneously . she shake her head , smile back at we ; and fold she 
 arm lightly on the stone balustrade , lean there and look up at the 
 cloud . 

  " the link must break , and the lamp must die ; 
  good - bye to Hope ! good - bye - good - bye ! " 

 Amy 's voice be a peculiarly thrilling one , and on this occasion 
 sound with more than its usual tenderness . what with her singing and 
 the invisible presence of the storm , an utter silence possess we - not 
 one of we care to move . 

 Heliobas once step to his sister 's side in the open balcony , and 
 say something , as I think , to warn she against take cold ; but it 
 be a very brief whisper , and he almost immediately return to his 
 place amongst we . Zara look very lovely out there ; the light come 
 from the interior of the room glisten softly on the sheen of her 
 satin dress and its ornament of pearl ; and the electric stone on her 
 bosom shone faintly , like a star on a rainy evening . her beautiful 
 face , turn upwards to the angry sky , be half in light and half in 
 shade ; a smile part her lip , and her eye be bright with a look of 
 interest and expectancy . another sudden glare , and the cloud be 
 again break asunder ; but this time in a jagged and hasty manner , as 
 though a naked sword have be thrust through they and immediately 
 withdraw . 

 " that be a nasty flash , " say Colonel Everard , with an observant 
 glance at the lovely Juliet - like figure on the balcony . " Mademoiselle , 
 have you not well come in ? " 

 " when it begin to rain I will come in , " she say , without change she 
 posture . " I hear the singing so well out here . besides , I love the 
 storm . " 

 a tumultuous crash of thunder , tremendous for its uproar and the length 
 of time it be prolong , make we look at each other again with anxious 
 face . 

  " what be we wait for ? oh , my heart ! 
  kiss I straight on the brow and part ! 
  again ! again , my heart , my heart ! 
  what be we wait for , you and I ? 
  a plead look - a stifle cry ! 
  good - bye for ever - - " 

 Horror ! what be that ? a lithe swift serpent of fire twisting 
 venomously through the dark heaven ! Zara raise her arm , look up , 
 smile , and fall - senseless ! with such appalling suddenness that we have 
 scarcely recover from the blind terror of that fork 
 lightning - flash , when we see she lie prone before we on the balcony 
 where one instant before she have stand erect and smile ! with 
 exclamation of alarm and distress we lift and bear she within the 
 room and lay she tenderly down upon the near sofa . at that moment a 
 deafening , terrific thunder - clap - one only - as if a huge bombshell have 
 burst in the air , shake the ground under our foot ; and then with a 
 swish and swirl of long pen - up and suddenly - release wrath , down come 
 the rain . 

 Amy 's voice die away in a last " good - bye ! " and she rush from the 
 piano , with pale face and tremble lip , gasp out : 

 " what have happen ? what be the matter ? " 

 " she have be stun by a lightning - flash , " I say , try to speak 
 calmly , while I loosen Zara 's dress and sprinkle her forehead with 
 eau - de - cologne from a scent - bottle Mrs. Challoner have hand to I . 
 " she will recover in a few minute . " 

 but my limb tremble under I , and tear , in spite of myself , force 
 their way into my eye . 

 Heliobas meanwhile - his countenance white and set as a marble 
 mask - shut the window fiercely , pull down the blind , and draw the 
 heavy silken curtain close . he then approach his sister 's senseless 
 form , and , take her wrist tenderly , feel for her pulse . we look on 
 in the deep anxiety . the Challoner girl shiver with terror , and 
 begin to cry . Mrs. Everard , with more self - possession , dip a 
 handkerchief in cold water and lay it on Zara 's temple ; but no faint 
 sigh part the set yet smile lip - no sign of life be visible . all 
 this while the rain sweep down in gusty torrent and rattle furiously 
 against the window - pane ; while the wind , no long a moan , have rise 
 into a shriek , as of baffled yet vindictive anger . at last Heliobas 
 speak . 

 " I should be glad of other medical skill than my own , " he say , in low 
 and stifle accent . " this may be a long fainting - fit . " 

 Mr. Challoner at once proffer his service . 

 " I will go for you anywhere you like , " he say cheerily ; " and I think my 
 wife and daughter have well come with I . our carriage be sure to be 
 in wait . it will be necessary for the lady to have perfect quiet 
 when she recover , and visitor be well away . you need not be alarm , 
 I be sure . by her colour it be evident she be only in a swoon . what 
 doctor shall I send ? " 

 Heliobas name one Dr. Morini , 10 , Avenue de l'Alma . 

 " right ! he shall be here straight . come , wife - come , girl ! Mrs. 
 Everard , we will send back our carriage for you and the Colonel . 
 good - night ! we will call to - morrow and inquire after mademoiselle . " 

 Heliobas gratefully press his hand as he withdraw , and his wife and 
 daughter , with whisper farewell , follow he . we who be leave 
 behind all remain near Zara , do everything we could think of to 
 restore animation to that senseless form . 

 some of the servant , too , hear what have happen , gather in a 
 little cluster at the drawing - room door , look with pale and alarmed 
 face at the death - like figure of their beautiful mistress . half an 
 hour or more must have pass in this manner ; within the room there be 
 a dreadful silence - but outside the rain pour down in torrent , and 
 the savage wind howl and tear at the window like a besiege army . 
 suddenly Amy Everard , who have be quietly and skilfully assist I 
 in rub Zara 's hand and bath her forehead , grow faint , 
 stagger , and would have fall have not her husband catch she on his 
 arm . 

 " I be frightened , " she gasp . " I can not bear it - she look so still , 
 and she be grow - rigid , like a corpse ! oh , if she should be dead ! " 
 and she hide her face on her husband 's breast . 

 at that moment we hear the grating of wheel on the gravel outside ; it 
 be the Challoners ' carriage return . the coachman , after deposit 
 his master and family at the Grand Hotel , have drive rapidly back in 
 the tooth of the sting sleet and rain to bring the message that Dr. 
 Morini would be with we as soon as possible . 

 " then , " whisper Colonel Everard gently to I , " I will take Amy home . 
 she be thoroughly upset , and it be no use have she go off into 
 hysteric . I will call with Challoner to - morrow ; " and with a kindly 
 parting nod of encouragement to we all , he slip softly out of the 
 room , half lead , half carry his trembling wife ; and in a couple 
 of minute we hear the carriage again drive away . 

 leave alone at last with Heliobas and Father Paul , I , kneel at the 
 side of my darling Zara , look into their face for comfort , but find 
 none . the dry - eyed despair on the countenance of Heliobas pierce I to 
 the heart ; the pitying , solemn expression of the venerable priest 
 touch I as with icy cold . the lovely , marble - like whiteness and 
 stillness of the figure before I fill I with a vague terror . make 
 a strong effort to control my voice , I call , in a low , clear tone : 

 " Zara ! Zara ! " 

 no sign - not the faint flicker of an eyelash ! only the sound of the 
 fall rain and the moan wind - the thunder have long ago cease . 
 suddenly a something attract my gaze , which first surprised and then 
 horrify I . the jewel - the electric stone on Zara 's bosom no long 
 shone ! it be like a piece of dull unpolished pebble . grasp at the 
 meaning of this , with overwhelming instinctive rapidity , I spring up 
 and catch the arm of Heliobas . 

 " you - you ! " I whisper hurriedly . " you can restore she ! do as you do 
 with Prince Ivan ; you can - you must ! that stone she wear - the light 
 have go out of it . if that mean - and I be sure it do - that life have 
 for a little while go out of she , you can bring it back . 
 Quick - quick ! you have the power ! " 

 he look at I with burn grief - haunted eye ; and a sigh that be 
 almost a groan escape his lip . 

 " I have no power , " he say . " not over she . I tell you she be dominate 
 by a high force than mine . what can I do ? nothing - bad than 
 nothing - I be utterly helpless . " 

 I star at he in a kind of desperate horror . 

 " do you mean to tell I , " I say slowly , " that she be dead - really 
 dead ? " 

 he be about to answer , when one of the watch servant announce in 
 a low tone : " Dr. Morini . " 

 the new - comer be a wiry , keen - eyed little italian ; his movement be 
 quick , decisive , and all to the point of action . the first thing he do 
 be to scatter the little group of servant right and leave , and send 
 they about their business . the next , to close the door of the room 
 against all intrusion . he then come straight up to Heliobas , and 
 press his hand in a friendly manner , say briefly : 

 " how and when do this happen ? " 

 Heliobas tell he in as few word as possible . Dr. Morini then bent 
 over Zara 's lifeless form , and examine her feature attentively . he 
 lay his car against her heart and listen . finally , he catch sight 
 of the round , lustreless pebble hanging at her neck suspend by its 
 string of pearl . very gently he move this aside ; look , and 
 beckon we to come and look also . exactly on the spot where the 
 electric stone have rest , a small circular mark , like a black bruise , 
 taint the fair soft skin - a mark no large than a small finger - ring . 

 " death by electricity , " say Dr. Morini quietly . " must have be 
 instantaneous . the lightning - flash , or downward electric current , 
 lodge itself here , where this mark be , and pass directly through the 
 heart . perfectly painless , but of course fatal . she have be dead some 
 time . " 

 and , replace the stone ornament in its former position , he step 
 back with a suggestive glance at Father Paul . I listen and see - but I 
 be in a state of stupefaction . dead ? my beautiful , gay , strong Zara 
 dead ? impossible ! I kneel beside she ; I call she again and again by 
 every endearing and tender name I could think of ; I kiss her sweet 
 lip . oh , they be cold as ice , and chill my blood ! as one in a 
 dream , I see Heliobas advance ; he kiss her forehead and mouth ; he 
 reverently unclasp the pearl from about her throat , and with they 
 take off the electric stone . then Father Paul step slowly forward , 
 and in place of that once brilliant gem , now so dim and destitute of 
 fire , he lay a crucifix upon the fair and gentle breast , motionless 
 for ever . 

 at sight of this sacred symbol , some tense cord seem to snap in my 
 brain , and I cry out wildly : 

 " oh , no , no ! not that ! that be for the dead ; Zara be not dead ! it be 
 all a mistake - a mistake ! she will be quite well presently ; and she 
 will smile and tell you how foolish you be to think she dead ! dead ? 
 she can not be dead ; it be impossible - quite impossible ! " and I break 
 into a passion of sob and tear . 

 very gently and kindly Dr. Morini draw I away , and by dint of friendly 
 persuasion , in which there be also a good deal of firm determination , 
 lead I into the hall , where he make I swallow a glass of wine . as I 
 could not control my sob , he speak with some sternness : 

 " Mademoiselle , you can do no good by give way in this manner . death 
 be a very beautiful and solemn thing , and it be irreverent to show 
 unseemly passion in such a great presence . you love your friend - let 
 it be a comfort to you that she die painlessly . control yourself , in 
 order to assist in render she the last few gentle service 
 necessary ; and try to console the desolate brother , who look in real 
 need of encouragement . " 

 these last word rouse I . I force back my tear , and dry my eye . 

 " I will , Dr. Morini , " I say , in a trembling voice . " I be ashamed to be 
 so weak . I know what I ought to do , and I will do it . you may trust I . " 

 he look at I approvingly . 

 " that be well , " he say briefly . " and now , as I be of no use here , I 
 will say good - night . remember , excessive grief be mere selfishness ; 
 resignation be heroism . " 

 he be go . I nerve myself to the task I have before I , and within an 
 hour the fair casket of what have be Zara lie on an open bi in the 
 little chapel , light burn round it , and flower strew above it in 
 mournful profusion . 

 we leave her body array in its white satin garb ; the cluster of 
 orange - blossom she have gather still bloom upon the cold breast , 
 where the crucifix lie ; but in the tress of the long dark hair I wove 
 a wreath of lily instead of the pearl we have undo . 

 and now I kneel beside the bier absorb in thought . some of the 
 weeping servant have assemble , and kneel about in little group . the 
 tall candle on the altar be light , and Father Paul , clothe in mourning 
 priestly vestment , pray there in silence . the storm of rain and wind 
 still rag without , and the window of the chapel shake and rattle 
 with the violence of the temp . 

 a distant clock strike ONE ! with a deep clang that echo throughout 
 the house . I shudder . so short a time have elapse since Zara have be 
 alive and well ; now , I could not bear to think that she be go from 
 I for ever . for ever , do I say ? no , not for ever - not so long as love 
 exist - love that shall bring we together again in that far - off Sphere 
 where - - 

 Hush ! what be that ? the sound of the organ ? I look around I in 
 startled wonderment . there be no one seat at the instrument ; it be 
 shut close . the light on the altar and round the bi burn steadily ; 
 the motionless figure of the priest before the tabernacle ; the pray 
 servant of the household - all be unchanged . but certainly a flood of 
 music roll grandly on the ear - music that drown for a moment the 
 howl noise of the batter wind . I rise softly , and touch one of 
 the kneeling domestic on the shoulder . 

 " do you hear the organ ? " I say . 

 the woman look up at I with tearful , alarmed eye . 

 " no , mademoiselle . " 

 I pause , listen . the music grow louder and louder , and surge round 
 I in wave of melody . evidently no one in the chapel hear it but 
 myself . I look about for Heliobas , but he have not enter . he be 
 most probably in his study , whither he have retire to grieve in secret 
 when we have bear Zara 's body to its present couch of dreamless sleep . 

 these sound be mean for I alone , then ? I wait , and the music 
 gradually die away ; and as I resume my kneeling position by the bi 
 all be again silence , save for the unabated raging of the storm . 

 a strange calmness now fall on my spirit . some invisible hand seem 
 to hold I still and tearless . Zara be dead . I realize it now . I 
 begin to consider that she must have know her fate beforehand . this 
 be what she have mean when she say she be go on a journey . the 
 more I think of this the quieter I became , and I hide my face in my 
 hand and pray earnestly . 

 a touch rouse I - an imperative , burn touch . an airy brightness , 
 like a light cloud with sunshine fall through it , hover above 
 Zara 's bi ! I gaze breathlessly ; I could not move my lip to utter a 
 sound . a face look at I - a face angelically beautiful ! it smile . I 
 stretch out my hand ; I struggle for speech , and manage to whisper : 

 " Zara , Zara ! you have come back ! " 

 her voice , so sweetly familiar , answer I : " to life ? ah , never , never 
 again ! I be too happy to return . but save he - save my brother ! go to 
 he ; he be in danger ; to you be give the rescue . save he ; and for I 
 rejoice , and grieve no more ! " 

 the face vanish , the brightness fade , and I spring up from my knee 
 in haste . for one instant I look at the beautiful dead body of the 
 friend I love , with its set mouth and placid feature , and then I 
 smile . this be not Zara - SHE be alive and happy ; this fair clay be 
 but clay doom to perish , but SHE be imperishable . 

 " save he - save my brother ! " these word ring in my ear . I hesitate 
 no long - I determine to seek Heliobas at once . swiftly and 
 noiselessly I slip out of the chapel . as the door swing behind I I 
 hear a sound that first make I stop in sudden alarm , and then hurry 
 on with increase eagerness . there be no mistaking it - it be the 
 clash of steel ! 




 CHAPTER XVI . 

 a struggle for the MASTERY . 


 I rush to the study - door , tear aside the velvet hanging , and face 
 Heliobas and Prince Ivan Petroffsky . they hold draw weapon , which 
 they lower at my sudden entrance , and pause irresolutely . 

 " what be you do ? " I cry , address myself to Heliobas . " with the 
 dead body of your sister in the house you can fight ! you , too ! " and I 
 look reproachfully at Prince Ivan ; " you also can desecrate the 
 sanctity of death , and yet - you love she ! " 

 the Prince speak not , but clench his sword - hilt with a fiercer grasp , 
 and glare wildly on his opponent . his eye have a look of madness in 
 they - his dress be much disorder - his hair wet with drop of 
 rain - his face ghastly white , and his whole demeanour be that of a man 
 distraught with grief and passion . but he utter no word . Heliobas 
 speak ; he be coldly calm , and balance his sword lightly on his open 
 hand as if it be a toy . 

 " this GENTLEMAN , " he say , with deliberate emphasis , " happen , on his 
 way thither , to meet Dr. Morini , who inform he of the fatal 
 catastrophe which have cause my sister 's death . instead of respect 
 the sacredness of my solitude under the circumstance , he thrust 
 himself rudely into my presence , and , before I could address he , 
 strike I violently in the face , and accuse I of be my sister 's 
 murderer . such conduct can only meet with one reply . I give he his 
 choice of weapon : he choose sword . our combat have just begin - we be 
 anxious to resume it ; therefore if you , mademoiselle , will have the 
 goodness to retire - - " 

 I interrupt he . 

 " I shall certainly not retire , " I say firmly . " this behaviour on both 
 your part be positive madness . Prince Ivan , please to listen to I . 
 the circumstance of Zara 's death be plainly witness by I and 
 other - her brother be as innocent of have cause it as I be . " 

 and I recount to he quietly all that have happen during that fatal 
 and eventful evening . he listen moodily , trace out the pattern of 
 the carpet with the point of his sword . when I have finish he look 
 up , and a bitter smile cross his feature . 

 " I wonder , mademoiselle , " he say , " that your residence in this 
 accurse house have not teach you well . I quite believe all you say , 
 that Zara , unfortunate girl that she be , receive her death by a 
 lightning - flash . but answer I this : who make she capable of attract 
 atmospheric electricity ? who charge her beautiful delicate body with a 
 vile compound of electrical fluid , so that she be as a live magnet , 
 bind to draw towards herself electricity in all its form ? who 
 tamper with her fine brain and make her imagine herself ally to a 
 spirit of air ? who but he - HE ! - yonder unscrupulous wretch ! - he who in 
 pursuit of his miserable science , practise his most dangerous 
 experiment on his sister , regardless of her health , her happiness , her 
 life ! I say he be her murderer - her remorseless murderer , and a 
 thrice - damned villain ! " 

 and he spring forward to renew the combat . I step quietly , 
 unflinchingly between he and Heliobas . 

 " stop ! " I exclaim ; " this can not go on . Zara herself forbid it ! " 

 the Prince pause , and look at I in a sort of stupefaction . 

 " Zara forbid it ! " he mutter . " what do you mean ? " 

 " I mean , " I go on , " that I have see Zara since her death ; I have 
 speak to she . she herself send I here . " 

 Prince Ivan star , and then burst into a fit of wild laughter . 

 " little fool ! " he cry to I ; " he have madden you too , then ! you be 
 also a victim ! miserable girl ! out of my path ! revenge - revenge ! while 
 I be yet sane ! " 

 then push I roughly aside , he cast away his sword , and shout to 
 Heliobas : 

 " hand to hand , villain ! no more of these toy - weapon ! hand to hand ! " 

 Heliobas instantly throw down his sword also , and rush forward 
 simultaneously , they close together in savage conflict . Heliobas be 
 the tall and more powerful of the two , but Prince Ivan seem imbue 
 with the spirit of a hundred devil , and spring at his opponent 's 
 throat with the silent breathless ferocity of a tiger . at first 
 Heliobas appear to be simply on the defensive , and his agile , skilful 
 movement be all use to parry and ward off the other 's grappling 
 eagerness . but as I watch the struggle , myself speechless and 
 powerless , I see his face change . instead of its calm and almost 
 indifferent expression , there come a look which be completely foreign 
 to it - a look of savage determination border on positive cruelty . in 
 a moment I see what be take place in his mind . the animal passion 
 of the mere MAN be arouse - the spiritual force be utterly 
 forget . the excitement of the contest be begin to tell , and the 
 desire of victory be dominant in the breast of he whose idea be 
 generally - and should have be now - those of patient endurance and 
 large generosity . the fight grow close , hot , and more terrible . 
 suddenly the Prince swerve aside and fall , and within a second 
 Heliobas hold he down , press one knee firmly against his chest . 
 from my point of observation I note with alarm that little by little 
 Ivan cease his violent effort to rise , and that he keep his eye 
 fix on the overshadow face of his foe with an unnatural and 
 curious pertinacity . I step forward . Heliobas press his whole 
 weight heavily down on the young man 's prostrate body , while with both 
 hand he hold he by the shoulder , and gaze with terrific meaning 
 into his fast - pal countenance . Ivan 's lip turn blue ; his eye 
 appear to start from their socket ; his throat rattle . the spell 
 that hold I silent be break ; a flash of light , a flood of memory 
 sweep over my intelligence . I know that Heliobas be exciting the whole 
 battery of his inner electric force , and that thus employ for the 
 purpose of vengeance , it must infallibly cause death . I find my 
 speech at last . 

 " Heliobas ! " I cry " remember , remember Azul ! when death lie like a 
 gift in your hand , withhold it . withhold it , Heliobas ; and give life 
 instead ! " 

 he start at the sound of my voice , and look up . a strong shudder 
 shake his frame . very slowly , very reluctantly , he relax his 
 position ; he rise from his kneeling posture on the Prince 's breast - he 
 leave he and stand upright . Ivan at the same moment heave a deep sigh , 
 and close his eye , apparently insensible . 

 gradually one by one the hard line fade out of the face of Heliobas , 
 and his old expression of soft and grave beneficence come back to it as 
 graciously as sunlight after rain . he turn to I , and bent his head 
 in a sort of reverential salutation . 

 " I thank and bless you , " he say ; " you remind I in time ! another 
 moment and it would have be too late . you have save I . " 

 " give he his life , " I say , point to Ivan . 

 " he have it , " return Heliobas ; " I have not take it from he , thank 
 God ! he provoke I ; I regret it . I should have be more patient with 
 he . he will revive immediately . I leave he to your care . in deal 
 with he , I ought to have remember that human passion like his , 
 unguided by spiritual knowledge , be to be meet with pity and 
 forbearance . as it be , however , he be safe . for I , I will go and pray 
 for Zara 's pardon , and that of my wrong Azul . " 

 as he utter the last word , he start , look up , and smile . 

 " my beautiful one ! Thou HAST pardon I ? thou wilt love I still ? Thou 
 art with I , Azul , my beloved ? I have not lose thee , oh my good and 
 dear ! wilt thou lead I ? whither ? Nay - no matter whither - I come ! " 

 and as one walk in sleep , he go out of the room , and I hear his 
 footstep echo in the distance on the way to the chapel . 

 leave alone with the Prince , I snatch a glass of cold water from the 
 table , and sprinkle some of it on his forehead and hand . this be 
 quite sufficient to revive he ; and he draw a long breath , open his 
 eye , and star wildly about he . see no one but I he grow 
 bewilder , and ask : 

 " what have happen ? " 

 then catch sight of the draw sword lie still on the ground where 
 they have be throw , he spring to his foot , and cry : 

 " where be the coward and murderer ? " 

 I make he sit down and hear with patience what I have to say . I 
 remind he that Zara 's health and happiness have always be perfect , 
 and that her brother would rather have slay himself than she . I tell 
 he plainly that Zara have expect her death , and have prepare for 
 it - have even bade I good - bye , although then I have not understand the 
 meaning of her word . I recall to his mind the day when Zara have use 
 her power to repulse he . 

 " Disbelieve as you will in electric spiritual force , " I say . " your 
 message to she then through I be - tell she I have see she LOVER . " 

 at these word a sombre shadow flit over the Prince 's face . 

 " I tell you , " he say slowly , " that I believe I be on that occasion 
 the victim of an hallucination . but I will explain to you what I see . a 
 superb figure , like , and yet unlike , a man , but of a much large and 
 grander form , appear to I , as I think , and speak . ' Zara be mine , ' 
 it say - ' mine by choice ; mine by freewill ; mine till death ; mine after 
 death ; mine through eternity . with her thou hast naught in common ; thy 
 way lie elsewhere . follow the path allot to thee , and presume no 
 more upon an angel 's patience . ' then this strange majestic - look 
 creature , whose face , as I remember it , be extraordinarily beautiful , 
 and whose eye be like self - luminous star , vanish . but , after all , 
 what of it ? the whole thing be a dream . " 

 " I be not so sure of that , " I say quietly , " but , Prince Ivan , now that 
 you be calm and more capable of resignation , will you tell I why 
 you love Zara ? " 

 " why ! " he break out impetuously . " why , because it be impossible to 
 help love she . " 

 " that be no answer , " I reply . " think ! you can reason well if you 
 like - I have hear you hold your own in an argument . what make you love 
 Zara ? " 

 he look at I in a sort of impatient surprise , but see I be very 
 much in earnest , he ponder a minute or so before reply . 

 " she be the lovely woman I have ever see ! " he say at last , and in 
 his voice there be a sound of yearning and regret . 

 " be that all ? " I query , with a gesture of contempt . " because her body 
 be beautiful - because she have sweet kissing lip and a soft skin ; 
 because her hand be like a white flower , and her dark hair cluster 
 over her brow remind one of a misty evening cloud hide moonlight ; 
 because the glance of her glorious eye make the blood leap through 
 your vein and ste you with passionate desire - be these the reason 
 of your so - call love ? oh , give it some other and low name ! for the 
 worm shall feed on the fair flesh that win your admiration - their wet 
 and slimy body shall trail across the round white arm and tender 
 bosom - unsightly thing shall crawl among the tress of the glossy 
 hair ; and nothing , nothing shall remain of what you love , but dust . 
 Prince Ivan , you shudder ; but I too love Zara - I love she , not the 
 perishable casket in which , like a jewel , she be for a time enshrine . 
 I love she still - and for the being I love there be no such thing as 
 death . " 

 the Prince be silent , and seem touch . I have speak with real 
 feeling , and tear of emotion stand in my eye . 

 " I love she as a man generally love , " he say , after a little pause . 
 " Nay - more than most man love most woman ! " 

 " Most man be too often selfish in both their love and hatred , " I 
 return . " tell I if there be anything in Zara 's mind and 
 intelligence to attract you ? do you sympathize in her pursuit ; do 
 you admire her taste ; have you any idea in common with she ? " 

 " no , I confess I have not , " he answer readily . " I consider she to be 
 entirely a victim to her brother 's scientific experiment . I think , 
 by make she my wife , to release she from such tyranny and give she 
 rescue and refuge . to this end I find out all I could from - HIM " - he 
 approach the name of Heliobas with reluctance - " and I make up my mind 
 that her delicate imagination have be morbidly excited ; but that 
 marriage and a life like that lead by other woman would bring she to a 
 more healthy state of mind . " 

 I smile with a little scorn . 

 " your presumption be almost great than your folly , Prince , " I say , 
 " that with such idea as these in your mind you could dream of win 
 Zara for a wife . do you think she could have lead a life like that of 
 other woman ? a frivolous round of gaiety , a few fine dress and 
 jewel , small - talk , society scandal , stale compliment - you think such 
 thing would have suit she ? and would she have content herself with 
 a love like your ? come ! come and see how well she have escape you ! " 

 and I beckon he towards the door . he hesitate . 

 " where would you take I ? " he ask . 

 " to the chapel . Zara 's body lie there . " 

 he shudder . 

 " no , no - not there ! I can not bear to look upon she perish 
 loveliness - to see that face , once so animate , white and rigid - death 
 in such a form be too horrible ! " 

 and he cover his eye with his hand - I see tear slowly drop through 
 his finger . I gaze at he , half in wonder , half in pity . 

 " and yet you be a brave man ! " I say . 

 these word rouse he . he meet my gaze with such a haggard look of woe 
 that my heart ache for he . what comfort have he now ? what joy could he 
 ever expect ? all his happiness be centre in the fact of be 
 alive - alive to the pleasure of living , and to the joy the world 
 could offer to a man who be strong , handsome , rich , and 
 accomplish - how could he look upon death as otherwise than a 
 loathsome thing - a thing not to be think of in the heyday of youthful 
 blood and jollity - a doleful spectre , in whose bony hand the rose of 
 love must fall and wither ! with a sense of deep commiseration in I , I 
 speak again with great gentleness . 

 " you need not look upon Zara 's corpse unless you wish it , Prince , " I 
 say . " to you , the mystery of the Hereafter have not be unlocked , 
 because there be something in your nature that can not and will not 
 believe in God . therefore to you , death must be repellent . I know you 
 be one of those for whom the present alone exist - you easily forget 
 the past , and take no trouble for the future . Paris be your heaven , or 
 St. Petersburg , or Vienna , as the fancy take you ; and the modern 
 atheistical doctrine of french demoralization be in your blood . 
 nothing but a heaven - send miracle could make you other than you be , 
 and miracle do not exist for the materialist . but let I say two word 
 more before you go from this house . seek no more to avenge yourself for 
 your love - disappointment on Heliobas - for you have really nothing to 
 avenge . by your own confession you only care for Zara 's body - that 
 body be always perishable , and it have perish by a sudden but natural 
 catastrophe . with her soul , you declare you have nothing in common - that 
 be herself - and she be alive to we who love she as she seek to be 
 love . Heliobas be innocent of have slain her body ; he but help to 
 cultivate and foster that beautiful Spirit which he know to be she - for 
 that he be to be honor and commend . promise I , therefore , Prince 
 Ivan , that you will never approach he again except in 
 friendship - indeed , you owe he an apology for your unjust accusation , 
 as also your gratitude for his spar your life in the recent 
 struggle . " 

 the Prince keep his eye steadily fix upon I all the time I be 
 speak , and as I finish , he sigh and move restlessly . 

 " your word be compelling , mademoiselle , " he say ; " and you have a 
 strange attraction for I . I know I be not wrong in think that you 
 be a disciple of Heliobas , whose science I admit , though I doubt his 
 theory . I promise you willingly what you ask - nay , I will even offer 
 he my hand if he will accept it . " 

 overjoyed at my success , I answer : " he be in the chapel , but I will 
 fetch he here . " 

 over the Prince 's face a shadow of doubt , mingle with dread , pass 
 swiftly , and he seem to be form a resolve in his own mind which 
 be more or less distasteful to he . whatever the feeling be he 
 conquer it by a strong effort , and say with firmness : 

 " no ; I will go to he myself . and I will look again upon - upon the face 
 I love . it be but one pang the more , and why should I not endure it ? " 

 see he thus incline , I make no effort to dissuade he , and without 
 another word I lead the way to the chapel . I enter it reverently , he 
 follow I closely , with slow hush footstep . all be the same as I 
 have leave it , save that the servant of the household have go to take 
 some needful rest before the morning light call they to their daily 
 routine of labour . Father Paul , too , have retire , and Heliobas alone 
 knelt beside all that remain of Zara , his figure as motionless as 
 though carve in bronze , his face hide in his hand . as we 
 approach , he neither stir nor look up , therefore I softly lead 
 the Prince to the opposite side of the bi , that he might look quietly 
 on the perished loveliness that lie there at rest for ever . Ivan 
 tremble , yet steadfastly gaze at the beautiful reposeful form , at the 
 calm feature on which the smile with which death have be receive , 
 still linger - at the fold hand , the fading orange - blossom - at the 
 crucifix that lie on the cold breast like the final seal on the letter 
 of life . impulsively he stoop forward , and with a tender awe press 
 his lip on the pale forehead , but instantly start back with the 
 smother , exclamation : 

 " o god ! how cold ! " 

 at the sound of his voice Heliobas rise up erect , and the two man face 
 each other , Zara 's dead body lie like a barrier betwixt they . 

 a pause follow - a pause in which I hear my own heart beat loudly , 
 so great be my anxiety . Heliobas suffer a few moment to elapse , 
 then stretch his hand across his sister 's bi . 

 " in her name , let there be peace between we , Ivan , " he say in accent 
 that be both gentle and solemn . 

 the Prince , touch to the quick , respond to these kindly word with 
 eager promptness , and they clasp hand over the quiet and lovely form 
 that lie there - a silent , bind witness of their reconciliation . 

 " I have to ask your pardon , Casimir , " then whisper Ivan . " I have also 
 to thank you for my life . " 

 " thank the friend who stand beside you , " return Heliobas , in the 
 same low tone , with a slight gesture towards I . " she remind I of a 
 duty in time . as for pardon , I know of no cause of offence on your part 
 save what be perfectly excusable . say no more ; wisdom come with 
 year , and you be yet young . " 

 a long silence follow . we all remain look wistfully down upon 
 the body of our lost darling , in thought too deep for word or weeping . 
 I then notice that another humble mourner share our watch - a mourner 
 whose very existence I have nearly forget . it be the faithful Leo . 
 he lie couchant on the stone floor at the foot of the bi , almost as 
 silent as a dog of marble ; the only sign of animation he give be a 
 deep sigh which break from his honest heart now and then . I go to he 
 and softly pat his shaggy coat . he look up at I with big brown 
 eye full of tear , lick my hand meekly , and again lay his head down 
 upon his two fore - paw with a resignation that be most pathetic . 

 the dawn begin to peer faintly through the chapel windows - the dawn of 
 a misty , chilly morning . the storm of the past night have leave a sting 
 in the air , and the rain still fall , though gently . the wind have almost 
 entirely sink into silence . I re - arrange the flower that be strew 
 on Zara 's corpse , take away all those that have slightly fade . the 
 orange - blossom be almost dead , but I leave that where it be - where the 
 live Zara have herself place it . as I perform this slight service , 
 I think , half mournfully , half gladly - 

  " yes , Heaven be thine , but this 
  be a world of sweet and sour - 
  our flower be merely flower ; 
  and the shadow of thy perfect bliss 
  be the sunshine of ours . " 

 Prince Ivan at last rouse himself as from a deep and melancholy 
 reverie , and , address himself to Heliobas , say softly : 

 " I will intrude no long on your privacy , Casimir . farewell ! I shall 
 leave Paris to - night . " 

 for all answer Heliobas beckon he and I also out of the chapel . as 
 soon as its door close behind we , and we stand in the centre hall , he 
 speak with affectionate and grave earnestness : 

 " Ivan , something tell I that you and I shall not meet again for many 
 year , if ever . therefore , when you say ' farewell , ' the word fall upon 
 my ear with double meaning . we be friend - our friendship be 
 sanctify by the dead presence of one whom we both love , in different 
 way ; therefore you will take in good part what I now say to you . you 
 know , you can not disguise from yourself that the science I study be 
 fraught with terrible truth and marvellous discovery ; the theory I 
 deduce from it you disbelieve , because you be nearly a materialist . I 
 say NEARLY - not quite . that ' not quite ' make I love you , Ivan : I 
 would save the small bright spark that flicker within you from both 
 escape and extinction . but I can not - at least , not as yet . still , in 
 order that you may know that there be a power in I high than 
 ordinary human reason , before you go from I to - night hear my prophecy 
 of your career . the world wait for you , Ivan - the world , all agape and 
 glitter with a thousand sparkling toy ; it wait greedy for your 
 presence , ready to fawn upon you for a smile , willing to cringe to you 
 for a nod of approval . and why ? because wealth be yours - vast , 
 illimitable wealth . aye - you need not start or look incredulous - you 
 will find it as I say . you , whose fortune up to now have barely reach 
 a poor four thousand per annum - you be at this moment the possessor of 
 million . only last night a relative of your , whose name you scarcely 
 know , expire , leave all his hoard treasure to you . before the 
 close of this present day , on whose threshold we now stand , you will 
 have the news . when you receive it remember I , and acknowledge that at 
 least for once I know and speak the truth . follow the broad road , Ivan , 
 lay out before you - a road wide enough not only for you to walk in , 
 but for the crowd of toady and flatterer also , who will push on 
 swiftly after you and jostle you on all side ; be strong of heart and 
 merry of countenance ! gather the rose ; press the luscious grape into 
 warm , red wine that , as you quaff it , shall make your blood dance a mad 
 waltz in your vein , and fair woman 's face shall seem fair to you 
 than ever , their embrace more tender , their kiss more tempting ! spin 
 the ball of Society like a toy in the palm of your hand ! I see your 
 life stretch before I like a brilliant , thread - like ephemeral ray 
 of light ! but in the far distance across it loom a shadow - a shadow 
 that your power alone can never lift . mark I , Ivan ! when the first 
 dread chill of that shadow make itself feel , come to I - I shall yet 
 be live . come ; for then no wealth can aid you - at that dark hour no 
 boon companion can comfort . come ; and by our friendship so lately 
 swear - by Zara 's pure soul - by God 's existence , I will not die till I 
 have change that darkness over you into light eternal ! - fare you well ! " 

 he catch the Prince 's hand , and wring it hard ; then , without further 
 word , look , or gesture , turn and disappear again within the chapel . 

 his word have evidently make a deep impression on the young nobleman , 
 who gaze after his retreating figure with a certain awe not unmingle 
 with fear . 

 I hold out my hand in silent farewell . Ivan take it gently , and kiss 
 it with graceful courtesy . 

 " Casimir tell I that your intercession save my life , mademoiselle , " 
 he say . " accept my poor thank . if his present prophet - like utterance 
 be true - - " 

 " why should you doubt he ? " I ask , with some impatience . " can you 
 believe in nothing ? " 

 the Prince , still hold my hand , look at I in a sort of grave 
 perplexity . 

 " I think you have hit it , " he observe quietly . " I doubt everything 
 except the fact of my own existence , and there be time when I be not 
 even sure of that . but if , as I say before , the prophecy of my 
 chaldean friend , whom I can not help admire with all my heart , turn 
 out to be correct , then my life be more valuable to I than ever with 
 such wealth to balance it , and I thank you doubly for have save it 
 by a word in time . " 

 I withdraw my hand gently from his . 

 " you think the worth of your life increase by wealth ? " task . 

 " naturally ! money be power . " 

 " and what of the shadow also foretold as inseparable from your fate ? " 

 a faint smile cross his feature . 

 " ah , pardon I ! that be the only portion of Casimir 's fortune - telling 
 that I be inclined to disbelieve thoroughly . " 

 " but , " I say , " if you be willing to accept the pleasant part of his 
 prophecy , why not admit the possibility of the unpleasant occur 
 also ? " 

 he shrug his shoulder . 

 " in these enlighten time , mademoiselle , we only believe what be 
 agreeable to we , and what suit our own wish , taste , and opinion . 
 can va san dire . we can not be force to accept a deity against our 
 reason . that be a grand result of modern education . " 

 " be it ? " and I look at he with pity . " poor human reason ! it will 
 reel into madness sometimes for a mere trifle - an overdose of alcohol 
 will sometimes upset it altogether - what a noble omnipotent thing be 
 human reason ! but let I not detain you . good - bye , and - as the greeting 
 of olden time use to run - God save you ! " 

 he bend his head with a light reverence . 

 " I believe you to be a good , sweet woman , " he say , " therefore I be 
 grateful for your blessing . my mother , " and here his eye grow dreamy 
 and wistful - " poor soul ! she die long ago - my mother would never let 
 I retire to rest without sign the cross on my brow . ah well , that 
 be past ! I should like , mademoiselle , " and his voice sink very low , " to 
 send some flower for - she - you understand ? " 

 I do understand , and readily promise to lay whatever blossom he 
 select tenderly above the sacred remain of that earthly beauty he 
 have love , as he himself say , " more than most man love most woman . " 

 he thank I earnestly , and seem relieved and satisfied . cast a 
 look of farewell around the familiar hall , he waft a parting kiss 
 towards the chapel - an action which , though light , be full of 
 tenderness and regret . then , with a low salute , he leave I . the 
 street - door open and close after he in its usual noiseless manner . 
 he be go . 

 the morning have now fairly dawn , and within the Hotel Mars the work 
 of the great mansion go on in its usual routine ; but a sombre 
 melancholy be in the atmosphere - a melancholy that not all my good 
 effort could dissipate . the domestic look sullen and heavy - eyed ; 
 the only one in their number who preserve their usual equanimity be 
 the armenian man - servant and the little greek page . preparation for 
 Zara 's funeral go on apace ; they be exceedingly simple , and the 
 ceremony be to be quite private in character . Heliobas issue his 
 order , and see to the carrying out of his most minute instruction in 
 his usual calm manner ; but his eye look heavy , and his fine 
 countenance be render even more majestic by the sacred , resign 
 sorrow that lie upon it like a deep shadow . his page serve he with 
 breakfast in his private room : but he leave the light meal untaste . one 
 of the woman bring I coffee ; but the very thought of eat and 
 drinking seem repulsive , and I could not touch anything . my mind be 
 busy with the consideration of the duty I have to perform - namely , to 
 see the destruction of Zara 's colossal statue , as she have request . 
 after think about it for some time , I go to Heliobas and tell he 
 what I have it in charge to do . he listen attentively . 

 " do it at once , " he say decisively . " take my Armenians ; they be 
 discreet , obedient , and they ask no question - with strong hammer they 
 will soon crush the clay . stay ! I will come with you . " then look at 
 I scrutinizingly , he add kindly : " you have eat nothing , my child ? 
 you can not ? but your strength will give way - here , take this . " and lie 
 hold out a small glass of a fluid whose revivifying property I well 
 know to be great than any sustenance provide by an ordinary meal . I 
 swallow it obediently , and as I return the empty glass to he he 
 say : " I also have a commission in charge from Zara . you know , I 
 suppose , that she be prepared for her death ? " 

 " I do not know ; but I think she must have be , " I answer . 

 " she be . we both be . we remain together in the chapel all day , 
 say what parting word we have to say to one another . we know she 
 death , or rather her release , be to occur at some hour that night ; but 
 in what way the end be destine to come , we know not . till I hear the 
 first peal of thunder , I be in suspense ; but after that I be no 
 long uncertain . you be a witness of the whole ensue scene . no 
 death could have be more painless than her . but let I not forget 
 the message she give I for you . " here he take from a secret drawer the 
 electric stone Zara have always wear . " this jewel be your , " he say . 
 " you need not fear to accept it - it contain no harm ! it will bring you 
 no ill - fortune . you see how all the sparkling brilliancy have go out 
 of it ? wear it , and within a few minute it will be as lustrous as 
 ever . the life throb in your vein warm the electricity contain 
 in it ; and with the flowing of your blood , its hue change and glow . it 
 have no power to attract ; it can simply absorb and shine . take it as a 
 remembrance of she who love you and who love you still . " 

 I be still in my evening dress , and my neck be bare . I slip the 
 chain , on which hang the stone , round my throat , and watch the 
 strange gem with some curiosity . in a few second a pale streak of 
 fiery topaz flash through it , which deepen and glow into a warm 
 crimson , like the heart of a red rose ; and by the time it have become 
 thoroughly warm against my flesh , it glitter as brilliantly as ever . 

 " I will always wear it , " I say earnestly . " I believe it will bring I 
 good fortune . " 

 " I believe it will , " return Heliobas simply . " and now let we fulfil 
 Zara 's other command . " 

 on our way across the hall we be stop by the page , who bring we 
 a message of inquiry after Zara 's health from Colonel Everard and his 
 wife , and also from the Challoners . Heliobas hastily write a few brief 
 word in pencil , explain the fatal result of the accident , and 
 return it to the messenger , give order at the same time that all 
 the blind should be pull down at the window of the house , that 
 visitor might understand there be no admittance . we then proceed to 
 the studio , accompany by the Armenians carry heavy hammer . 
 reverently , and with my mind full of recollection of Zara 's living 
 presence , I open the familiar door . the first thing that greet we 
 be a most exquisitely wrought statue in white marble of Zara herself , 
 full length , and array in her customary graceful eastern costume . the 
 head be slightly raise : a look of gladness light up the beautiful 
 feature ; and within the loosely clasp hand be a cluster of rose . 
 bind the pedestal be carve the word , " Omnia vincit Amor , " with 
 Zara 's name and the date of her birth and death . a little slip of 
 paper lie at the foot of the statue , which Heliobas perceive , and 
 take it he read and pass it to I . the line be in Zara 's 
 handwriting , and run as follow : 

 " to my beloved Casimir - my brother , my friend , my guide and teacher , to 
 whom I owe the supreme happiness of my life in this world and the 
 next - let this poor figure of his grateful Zara be a memento of happy 
 day that be go , only to be renew with redouble happiness 
 hereafter . " 

 I hand back the paper silently , with tear in my eye , and we turn 
 our attention to the colossal figure we have come to destroy . it stand 
 at the extreme end of the studio , and be entirely hide by white 
 linen drapery . Heliobas advance , and by a sudden dexterous movement 
 succeed in draw off the covering with a single effort , and then 
 we both fall back and gaze at the clay form disclose in amazement . 
 what do it represent ? a man ? a god ? an angel ? or all three unite in 
 one vast figure ? 

 it be an unfinished work . the feature of the face be undeclared , 
 save the brow and eye ; and these be large , grand , and full of 
 absolute wisdom and tranquil consciousness of power . I could have gaze 
 on this wonderful piece of Zara 's handiwork for hour , but Heliobas 
 call to the armenian servant , who stand near the door await 
 order , and command they to break it down . for once these 
 well - train domestic show sign of surprise , and hesitate . their 
 master frown . snatch a hammer from one of they , he himself 
 attack the great statue as if it be a personal foe . the Armenians , 
 see he be in earnest , return to their usual habit of passive 
 obedience , and aid he in his labour . within a few minute the great 
 and beautiful figure lie in fragment on the floor , and these fragment 
 be soon crush into indistinguishable atom . I have promise to 
 witness this work of destruction , and witness it I do , but it be with 
 pain and regret . when all be finish , Heliobas command his man to 
 carry the statue of Zara 's self down to his own private room , and then 
 to summon all the domestic of the household in a body to the great 
 hall , as he wish to address they . I hear he give this order with 
 some surprise , and he see it . as the Armenians slowly disappear , 
 carry with great care the marble figure of their late mistress , he 
 turn to I , as he lock up the door of the studio , and say quietly : 

 " these ignorant folk , who serve I for money and food - money that they 
 have eagerly take , and food that they have greedily devour - they 
 think that I be the devil or one of the devil 's agent , and I be go 
 to prove their theory entirely to their satisfaction . come and see ! " 

 I follow he , somewhat mystified . on the way downstairs he say : 

 " do you know why Zara wish that statue destroy ? " 

 " no , " I say frankly ; " unless for the reason that it be incomplete . " 

 " it always would have be incomplete , " return Heliobas ; " even have 
 she live to work at it for year . it be a daring attempt , and a 
 fruitless one . she be try to make a clay figure of one who never 
 wear earthly form - the being who be her Twin - Soul , who dominate she 
 entirely , and who be with she now . as well might she have try to 
 represent in white marble the prismatic hue of the rainbow ! " 

 we have now reach the hall , and the servant be assemble by two 
 and three . they glance at their master with look of awe , as he take 
 up a commanding position near the fountain , and face they with a 
 glance of calm scrutiny and attention . I draw a chair behind one of the 
 marble column and seat myself , watch everything with interest . 
 Leo appear from some corner or other , and lay his rough body down 
 close at his master 's foot . 

 in a few minute all the domestic , some twenty in number , be 
 present , and Heliobas , raise his voice , speak with a clear deliberate 
 enunciation : 

 " I have send for you all this morning , because I be perfectly aware 
 that you have all determine to give I notice . " 

 a stir of astonishment and dismay ensue on the part of the small 
 audience , and I hear one voice near I whisper : 

 " he be the devil , or how could he have know it ? " 

 the lip of Heliobas curl in a fine sarcastic smile . he go on : 

 " I spare you this trouble . know your intention , I take upon myself 
 to dismiss you at once . naturally , you can not risk your character by 
 remain in the service of the devil . for my own part , I wonder the 
 devil 's money have not burn your hand , or his food turn to poison in 
 your mouth . my sister , your kind and ever - indulgent mistress , be dead . 
 you know this , and it be your opinion that I summon up the 
 thunderstorm which cause her death . be it so . report it so , if you 
 will , through Paris ; your word do not affect I . you have be 
 excellent machine , and for your service many thank ! as soon as my 
 sister 's funeral be over , your wage , with an additional present , will 
 be send to you . you can then leave my house when you please ; and , 
 contrary to the usual custom of accepted devil , I be able to say , 
 without perish in the effort - God speed you all ! " 

 the face of those he address exhibit various emotion while he 
 speak - fear contend with a good deal of shame . the little greek page 
 step forward timidly . 

 " the master know that I will never leave he , " he murmur , and his 
 large eye be moist with tear . 

 Heliobas lay a gentle hand on the boy 's dark curl , but say nothing . 
 one of the four Armenians advance , and with a graceful rapid gesture 
 of his right hand , touch his head and breast . 

 " my lord will not surely dismiss US who desire to devote ourselves to 
 his service ? we be willing to follow my lord to the death if need be , 
 for the sake of the love and honour we bear he . " 

 Heliobas look at he very kindly . 

 " I be rich in friend than I think myself to be , " he say quietly . 
 " stay then , by all mean , Afra , you and your companion , since you have 
 desire it . and you , my boy , " he go on , address the tearful page , 
 " think you that I would turn adrift an orphan , whom a die mother 
 trust to my care ? Nay , child , I be as much your servant as you be 
 mine , so long as your love turn towards I . " 

 for all answer the page kiss his hand in a sort of rapture , and 
 fling back his cluster hair from his classic brow , survey the 
 domestic , who have take their dismissal in silent acquiescence , with a 
 pretty scorn . 

 " go , all of you , scum of Paris ! " he cry in his clear treble 
 tone - " you who know neither God nor devil ! you will have your 
 money - more than your share - what else seek you ? you have serve one of 
 the noblest of man ; and because he be so great and wise and true , you 
 judge he a fiend ! oh , so like the people of Paris - they who pervert 
 all thing till they think good evil and evil good ! look you ! you have 
 work for your wage ; but I have work for HIM - I would starve with 
 he , I would die for he ! for to I he be not fiend , but Angel ! " 

 overcome by his own feeling the boy again kiss his master 's hand , 
 and Heliobas gently bid he be silent . he himself look round on the 
 still motionless group of servant with an air of calm surprise . 

 " what be you wait for ? " he ask . " consider yourself dismiss , 
 and at liberty to go where you please . any one of you that choose to 
 apply to I for a character shall not lack the suitable recommendation . 
 there be no more to say . " 

 a lively - look woman with quick restless black eye step forward . 

 " I be sure , " she say , with a mince curtsey , " that we be very sorry 
 if we have unintentionally wrong monsieur ; but monsieur , who be aware 
 of so many thing , must know that many report be circulate about 
 monsieur that make one to shudder ; that madame his sister 's death so 
 lamentable have give to all , what one would say , the horror ; and 
 monsieur must consider that poor servant of virtuous reputation - " 

 " so , Jeanne Claudet ! " interrupt Heliobas , in a thrilling low tone . 
 " and what of the child - the little waxen - face helpless babe leave to 
 die on the bank of the Loire ? but it do not die , Jeanne - it be 
 rescue ; and it shall yet live to loathe its mother ! " 

 the woman utter a shriek , and faint . 

 in the feminine confusion and fuss that ensue , Heliobas , accompany 
 by his little page and the dog Leo , leave the hall and enter his own 
 private room , where for some time I leave he undisturbed . 

 in the early part of the afternoon a note be bring to I . it be 
 from Colonel Everard , entreat I to come as soon as possible to his 
 wife , who be very ill . 

 " since she hear of the death of that beautiful young lady , a death so 
 fearfully sudden and unexpected , " write the Colonel , ' she have be 
 quite unlike herself - nervous , hysterical , and thoroughly unstrung . it 
 will be a real kindness to she if you will come as soon as you can - she 
 have such , a strong desire for your company . " 

 I show this note at once to Heliobas . he read it , and say : 

 " of course you must go . wait till our simple funeral ceremony be over , 
 and then - we part . not for ever ; I shall see you often again . for now I 
 have lose Zara , you be my only female disciple , and I shall not 
 willingly lose sight of you . you will correspond with I ? " 

 " gladly and gratefully , " I reply . 

 " you shall not lose by it . I can initiate you into many secret that 
 will be useful to you in your career . as for your friend Mrs. Everard , 
 you will find that your presence will cure she . you have progress 
 greatly in electric force : the mere touch of your hand will soothe she , 
 as you will find . but never be tempt to try any of the fluid of 
 which you have the recipe on she , or on anybody but yourself , unless 
 you write to I first about it , as Cellini do when he try an 
 experiment on you . as for your own bodily and spiritual health , you 
 know thoroughly what to do - keep the secret ; and make a step in advance 
 every day . by - and - by you will have double work . " 

 " how so ? " I ask . 

 " in Zara 's case , her soul become dominate by a Spirit whose destiny 
 be fulfil and perfect , and who never could descend to imprisonment 
 in earthly clay . now , you will not be dominate - you will be simply 
 equalized ; that is , you will find the exact counterpart of your own 
 soul dwell also in human form , and you will have to impart your own 
 force to that other soul , which will , in its turn , impart to yours a 
 corresponding electric impetus . there be no union so lovely as such an 
 one - no harmony so exquisite ; it be like a perfect chord , complete and 
 indissoluble . there be seventh and ninth in music , beautiful and 
 effective in their degree ; but perhaps none of they be so absolutely 
 satisfy to the ear as the perfect chord . and this be your lot in 
 life and in love , my child - be grateful for it night and morning on 
 your bended knee before the Giver of all good . and walk warily - your 
 own soul with that other shall need much thought and humble prayer . aim 
 onward and upward - you know the road - you also know , and you have 
 partly see , what await you at the end . " 

 after this conversation we speak no more in private together . the rest 
 of the afternoon be entirely occupy with the final preparation for 
 Zara 's funeral , which be to take place at Pere - la - Chaise early the 
 next morning . a large and beautiful wreath of white rose , lily , and 
 maiden - hair arrive from Prince Ivan ; and , remember my promise to 
 he , I go myself to lay it in a conspicuous place on Zara 's corpse . 
 that fair body be now lay in its coffin of polished oak , and a 
 delicate veil of filmy lace drape it from head to foot . the placid 
 expression of the feature remain unchanged , save for a little extra 
 rigidity of the flesh ; the hand , fold over the crucifix , be stiff , 
 and look as though they be mould in wax . I place the wreath in 
 position and pause , look wistfully at that still and solemn figure . 
 Father Paul , slowly enter from a side - door , come and stand beside I . 

 " she be happy ! " he say ; and a cheerful expression irradiate his 
 venerable feature . 

 " do you also know she would die that night ? " I ask softly . 

 " her brother send for I , and tell I of her expect dissolution . she 
 herself tell I , and make she last confession and communion . therefore 
 I be prepare . " 

 " but do you not doubt - be you not inclined to think they might be 
 wrong ? " I inquire , with some astonishment . 

 " I know Heliobas as a child , " the priest return . " I know his father 
 and mother before he ; and I have be always perfectly aware of the 
 immense extent of his knowledge , and the value of his discovery . if I 
 be incline to be sceptical on spiritual matter , I should not be of 
 the race I be ; for I be also a Chaldean . " 

 I say no more , and Father Paul trim the taper burn round the 
 coffin in devout silence . again I look at the fair dead form before 
 I ; but somehow I could not feel sad again . all my impulse bid I 
 rejoice . why should I be unhappy on Zara 's account ? - more especially 
 when the glory of the Central Sphere be yet fresh in my memory , and 
 when I know as a positive fact that her happiness be now perfect . I 
 leave the chapel with a light step and light heart , and go to my own 
 room to pack up my thing that all might be in readiness for my 
 departure on the morrow . on my table I find a volume whose quaint 
 bind I at once recognise - " the letter of a Dead Musician . " a card 
 lie beside it , on which be write in pencil : 

 " know of your wish to possess this book , I herewith offer it for 
 your acceptance . it teach you a cheerful devotion to Art , and an 
 indifference to the world 's opinion - both of which be necessary to 
 you in your career . - HELIOBAS . " 

 delight with this gift , I open the book , and find my name write 
 on the fly - leaf , with the date of the month and year , and the word : 

 " La musica e il lamento dell ' amore o la preghiera a gli Dei . "   Music 
 be the lament of love , or a prayer to the Gods . 

 I place this treasure carefully in a corner of my portmanteau , 
 together with the parchment scroll contain " the Electric Principle 
 of Christianity , " and the valuables recipe of Heliobas ; and as I do 
 so , I catch sight of myself in the long mirror that directly face I . 
 I be fascinated , not by my own reflection , but by the glitter of the 
 electric gem I wear . it flash and glow like a star , and be really 
 lovely - far more brilliant than the most brilliant cluster of fine 
 diamond . I may here remark that I have be ask many question 
 concern this curious ornament whenever I have wear it in public , and 
 the general impression have be that it be some new arrangement of 
 ornamental electricity . it be , however , nothing of the kind ; it be 
 simply a clear pebble , common enough on the shore of tropical 
 country , which have the property of absorb a small portion of the 
 electricity in a human body , sufficient to make it shine with prismatic 
 and powerful lustre - a property which have only as yet be discover 
 by Heliobas , who assert that the same capability exist in many other 
 apparently lustreless stone which have be untried , and be therefore 
 unknown . the " heal stone , " or amulet , still in use in the East , 
 and also in the remote part of the Highlands   see note to Archibald 
 Clerk 's translation of ' Ossian ' , be also electric , but in a different 
 way - they have the property of absorb DISEASE and destroy it in 
 certain case ; and these , after be wear a suitable length of time , 
 naturally exhaust what virtue they originally possess , and be no 
 long of any use . stone amulet be consider nowadays as a mere 
 superstition of the vulgar and uneducated ; but it must be remember 
 that superstition itself have always have for it a foundation some grain , 
 however small and remote , of fact . I could give a very curious 
 explanation of the formation of ORCHIDS , those strange plant call 
 sometimes " freak of Nature , " as if Nature ever indulge in a " freak " 
 of any kind ! but I have neither time nor space to enter upon the 
 subject now ; indeed , if I be once to begin to describe the wonderful , 
 amazing and beautiful vista of knowledge that the wise Chaldean , who 
 be still my friend and guide , have open up and continue to extend 
 before my admire vision , a work of twenty volume would scarce 
 contain all I should have to say . but I have write this book merely 
 to tell those who peruse it , about Heliobas , and what I myself 
 experience in his house ; beyond this I may not go . for , as , I observe 
 in my introduction , I be perfectly aware that few , if any , of my 
 reader will accept my narrative as more than a mere visionary 
 romance - or that they will admit the mystery of life , death , 
 eternity , and all the wonder of the Universe to be simply the NATURAL 
 and SCIENTIFIC outcome of a ring of EVERLASTING ELECTRIC HEAT and 
 light ; but whether they agree to it or no , I can say with Galileo , " E 
 pur si muove ! " 




 CHAPTER XVII . 

 CONCLUSION . 


 it be a very simple and quiet procession that move next day from the 
 Hotel Mars to Pere - la - Chaise . Zara 's coffin be carry in an open 
 hearse , and be cover with a pall of rich white velvet , on which lay 
 a royal profusion of flower - Ivan 's wreath , and a magnificent cross of 
 lily send by tender - hearted Mrs. Challoner , be most conspicuous 
 among they . the only thing a little unusual about it be that the 
 funeral car be draw by two stately white horse ; and Heliobas tell I 
 this have be order at Zara 's special request , as she think the 
 solemn pacing through the street of dismal black steed have a 
 depressing effect on the passer - by . 

 " and why , " she have say , ' should anybody be sad , when I in reality be 
 so thoroughly happy ? " 

 Prince Ivan Petroffsky have leave Paris , but his carriage , draw by two 
 prance russian steed , follow the hearse at a respectful distance , 
 as also the carriage of Dr. Morini , and some other private person 
 know to Heliobas . a few people attend it on foot , and these be 
 chiefly from among the very poor , some of whom have benefit by Zara 's 
 charity or her brother 's medical skill , and have hear of the calamity 
 through rumour , or through the column of the Figaro , where it be 
 report with graphic brevity . the weather be still misty , and the 
 fiery sun seem to shine through tear as Father Paul , with his 
 assistant , read in solemn yet cheerful tone the service for the dead 
 accord to the catholic ritual . one of the chief mourner at the 
 grave be the faithful Leo ; who , without obtrude himself in anyone 's 
 way , sit at a little distance , and seem , by the confide look with 
 which he turn his eye upon his master , to thoroughly understand that 
 he must henceforth devote his life entirely to he alone . the coffin 
 be lower , the " Requiem aeternam " speak - all be over . those 
 assemble shake hand quietly with Heliobas , salute each other , and 
 gradually disperse . I enter a carriage and drive back to the Hotel 
 Mars , leave Heliobas in the cemetery to give his final instruction 
 for the ornamentation and decoration of his sister 's grave . 

 the little page serve I with some luncheon in my own apartment , and 
 by the time all be ready for my departure , Heliobas return . I go 
 down to he in his study , and find he sit pensively in his 
 arm - chair , absorb in thought . he look sad and solitary , and my 
 whole heart go out to he in gratitude and sympathy . I kneel beside 
 he as a daughter might have do , and softly kiss his hand . 

 he start as though awaken suddenly from sleep , and see I , his 
 eye soften , and he smile gravely . 

 " be you come to say ' good - bye , ' my child ? " he ask , in a kind tone . 
 " well , your mission here be end ! " 

 " have I any mission at all , " I reply , with a grateful look , ' save the 
 very selfish one which be comprise in the natural desire to be 
 restore to health ? " 

 Heliobas survey I for a few moment in silence . 

 " be I to tell you , " he say at last , " by what mystical authority and 
 influence you be compel to come here , by what a marvellously 
 link chain of circumstance you become know to I long before I see 
 you ; how I be make aware that you be the only woman live to whose 
 companionship I could trust my sister at a time when the society of one 
 of her own sex become absolutely necessary to she ; how you be mark 
 out to I as a small point of light by which possibly I might steer my 
 course clear of the darkness which threaten I - I say , be I to tell 
 you all this , you would no long doubt the urgent need of your 
 presence here . it be , however , enough to tell you that you have 
 fulfil all that be expect of you , even beyond my good hope ; and 
 in return for your service , the worth of which you can not realize , 
 whatever guidance I can give you in the future for your physical and 
 spiritual life , be yours . I have do something for you , but not 
 much - I will do more . only , in communicate with I , I ask you to 
 honour I with your full confidence in all matter pertain to 
 yourself and your surrounding - then I shall not be liable to error of 
 judgment in the opinion I form or the advice I give . " 

 " I promise most readily , " I reply gladly , for it seem to I that I 
 be rich in possess as a friend and counsellor such a man as this 
 student of the lofty science . 

 " and now one thing more , " he resume , open a drawer in the table 
 near which he sit . " here be a pencil for you to write your letter to 
 I with . it will last about ten year , and at the expiration of that 
 time you can have another . write with it on any paper , and the mark 
 will be like those of an ordinary drawing - pencil ; but as fast as they 
 be write they disappear . trouble not about this circumstance - write 
 all you have to say , and when you have finish your letter your 
 closely cover page shall seem blank . therefore , be the eye of a 
 stranger to look at they , nothing could be learn therefrom . but when 
 they reach I , I can make the writing appear and stand out on these 
 apparently unsullie page as distinctly as though your word have be 
 print . my letter to you will also , when you receive they , appear 
 blank ; but you will only have to press they for about ten minute in 
 this " - and he hand I what look like an ordinary 
 blot - book - " and they will be perfectly legible . Cellini have these 
 little writing implement ; he use they whenever the distance be too 
 great for we to amuse ourselves with the sagacity of Leo - in fact the 
 journey of that faithful animal have principally be to keep he in 
 training . " 

 " but , " I say , as I take the pencil and book from his hand , " why do you 
 not make these convenient writing material public property ? they would 
 be so useful . " 

 " why should I build up a fortune for some needy stationer ? " he ask , 
 with a half - smile . " besides , they be not new thing . they be know 
 to the ancient , and many secret letter , law , history , and poem 
 be write with instrument such as these . in an old library , 
 destroy more than two century ago , there be a goodly pile of 
 apparently blank parchment . have I live then and know what I know now , 
 I could have make the white page declare their mystery . " 

 " have this also to do with electricity ? " I ask . 

 " certainly - with what be call vegetable electricity . there be not a 
 plant or herb in existence , but have almost a miracle hide away in its 
 tiny cup or spread leaf - do you doubt it ? " 

 " not I ! " I answer quickly . " I doubt nothing ! " 

 Heliobas smile gravely . 

 " you be right ! " he say . " Doubt be the destroyer of beauty - the poison 
 in the sweet cup of existence - the curse which mankind have bring on 
 themselves . avoid it as you would the plague . believe in anything or 
 everything miraculous and glorious - the utmost reach of your faith can 
 with difficulty grasp the majestic reality and perfection of everything 
 you can see , desire , or imagine . Mistrust that volatile thing call 
 Human Reason , which be merely a name for whatever opinion we happen to 
 adopt for the time - it be a thing which totter on its throne in a fit 
 of rage or despair - there be nothing infinite about it . guide yourself 
 by the delicate Spiritual Instinct within you , which tell you that 
 with God all thing be possible , save that he can not destroy himself 
 or lessen by one spark the fiery brilliancy of his ever - widen circle 
 of productive intelligence . but make no attempt to convert the world to 
 your way of thinking - it would be mere waste of time . " 

 " may I never try to instruct anyone in these thing ? " I ask . 

 " you can try , if you choose ; but you will find most human being like 
 the herd of swine in the Gospel , possess by devil that drive they 
 headlong into the sea . you know , for instance , that angel and aerial 
 spirit actually exist ; but be you to assert your belief in they , 
 philosopher   so - call   would scout your theory as absurd , - though 
 their idea of a LONELY God , who yet be Love , be the very acme of 
 absurdity . for Love must have somewhat to love , and must create the 
 beauty and happiness round itself and the thing belove . but why point 
 out these simple thing to those who have no desire to see ? be content , 
 child , that you have be deem worthy of instruction - it be a high 
 fate for you than if you have be make a queen . " 

 the little page now enter , and tell I that the carriage be at the 
 door in wait . as he disappear again after deliver this message , 
 Heliobas rise from his chair , and take my two hand in his , press 
 they kindly . 

 " one word more , little friend , on the subject of your career . I think 
 the time will come when you will feel that music be almost too sacred a 
 thing to be give away for money to a careless and promiscuous public . 
 however this may be , remember that scarce one of the self - style 
 artist who cater for the crowd deserve to be call MUSICIAN in the 
 high sense of the word . Most of they seek not music , but money and 
 applause ; and therefore the art they profess be degrade by they into a 
 mere trade . but you , when you play in public , must forget that person 
 with little vanity and less opinion exist . think of what you see 
 in your journey with Azul ; and by a strong effort of your will , you 
 can , if you choose , COMPEL certain harmony to sound in your 
 ear - fragment of what be common breathing air to the child of the 
 Ring , some of whom you see - and you will be able to reproduce they in 
 part , if not in entirety . but if you once admit a thought of Self to 
 enter your brain , those aerial sound will be silence instantly . by 
 this mean , too , you can judge who be the true disciple of music in 
 this world - those who , like Schubert and Chopin , suffer the 
 heaven - bear melody to descend through they as though they be mere 
 conductor of sound ; or those who , feebly imitate other composer , 
 measure out crotchet and quaver by rule and line , and flood the world 
 with inane and perishable , and therefore useless , production . and 
 now , - farewell . " 

 " do you remain in Paris ? " I ask . 

 " for a few day only . I shall go to Egypt , and in travel accustom 
 myself to the solitude in which I must dwell , now Zara have leave I . " 

 " you have Azul , " I venture to remark . 

 " ah ! but how often do I see she ? only when my soul for an instant be 
 clear from all earthly and gross obstruction ; and how seldom I can 
 attain to this result while weight with my body ! but she be near 
 I - that I know - faithful as the star to the mariner 's compass ! " 

 he raise his head as he speak , and his eye flash . never have I see 
 he look more noble or kingly . the inspire radiance of his face 
 soften down into his usual expression of gentleness and courtesy , and 
 he say , offer I his arm : 

 " let I see you to the carriage . you know , it be not an actual parting 
 with we - I intend that we shall meet frequently . for instance , the next 
 time we exchange pleasant greeting will be in Italy . " 

 I suppose I look surprised ; I certainly feel so , for nothing be 
 far from my thought than a visit to Italy . 

 Heliobas smile , and say in a tone that be almost gay : 

 " shall I draw the picture for you ? I see a fair city , deep embower in 
 hill and shelter by olive - grove . over it beam a broad sky , deeply 
 blue ; many soft bell caress the summer air . away in the Cascine Woods 
 a gay party of people be seat on the velvety moss ; they have 
 mandolin , and they sing for pure gaiety of heart . one of they , a woman 
 with fair hair , array in white , with a red rise at her bosom , be 
 gather the wild flower that bloom around she , and weave they into 
 posy for her companion . a stranger , pace slowly , book in hand , 
 through the shady avenue , see she - her eye meet his . she spring up 
 to greet he ; he take her hand . the woman be yourself ; the strange no 
 other than your poor friend , who now , for a brief space , take leave of 
 you ! " 

 so rapidly have he draw up this picture , that the impression make on I 
 be as though a sudden vision have be show to I in a magic glass . I 
 look at he earnestly . 

 " then our next meeting will be happy ? " I say inquiringly . 

 " of course . why not ? and the next - and the next after that also ! " he 
 answer . 

 at this reply , so frankly give , I be relieve , and accompany he 
 readily through the hall towards the street - door . Leo meet we here , and 
 intimate , as plainly as a human being could have do , his wish to bid 
 I good - bye . I stoop and kiss his broad head and pat he 
 affectionately , and be reward for these attention by see his 
 plume - like tail wave slowly to and fro - a sign of pleasure the poor 
 animal have not betray since Zara 's departure from the scene of her 
 earthly imprisonment . 

 at the door the pretty greek boy hand I a huge basket of the 
 lovely flower . 

 " the last from the conservatory , " say Heliobas . " I shall need no more 
 of these luxury . " 

 as I enter the carriage he place the flower beside I , and again 
 take my hand . 

 " good - bye , my child ! " he say , in earnest and kindly tone . " I have 
 your address , and will write you all my movement . in any trouble , 
 small or great , of your own , send to I for advice without hesitation . 
 I can tell you already that I foresee the time when you will resign 
 altogether the precarious and unsatisfactory life of a mere 
 professional musician . you think no other career would be possible to 
 you ? well , you will see ! a few month will decide all . good - bye again ; 
 God bless you ! " 

 the carriage move off , and Heliobas stand on the step of his mansion 
 watch it out of sight . to the last I see his stately figure erect in 
 the light of the winter sunshine - a figure destine from henceforth to 
 occupy a prominent position in my life and memory . the regret I feel at 
 parting from he be greatly mitigate by the assurance he give I of 
 our future meeting , a promise which have since be fulfil , and be 
 likely soon to be fulfil again . that I have such a friend be an 
 advantageous circumstance for I , for through his guidance I be able to 
 judge accurately of many thing occur in the course of the daily 
 life around I - thing which , seemingly trivial , be the hint of 
 serious result to come , which , I be thus permit in part to foresee . 
 there be a drawback , of course , and the one bitter drop in the cup of 
 knowledge be , that the more I progress under the tuition of Heliobas , 
 the less be I deceive by graceful appearance . I perceive with almost 
 cruel suddenness the true character of all those whom I meet . no smile 
 of lip or eye can delude I into accept mere surface - matter for real 
 depth , and it be intensely painful for I to be force to behold 
 hypocrisy in the expression of the apparently devout - sensuality in the 
 face of some radiantly beautiful and popular woman - vice under the mask 
 of virtue - self - interest in the guise of friendship , and spite and 
 malice spring up like a poisonous undergrowth beneath the word of 
 elegant flattery or dainty compliment . I often wish I could throw a 
 rise - colour mist of illusion over all these thing and still more 
 earnestly do I wish I could in a single instance find myself mistaken . 
 but alas ! the fatal finger of the electric instinct within I point 
 out unerringly the flaw in every human diamond , and write " SHAM " 
 across many a cunningly contrived imitation of intelligence and 
 goodness . still , the grief I feel at this be counterbalance in part by 
 the joy with which I quickly recognize real virtue , real nobility , real 
 love ; and when these attribute flash out upon I from the face of 
 human being , my own soul warm , and I know I have see a vision as of 
 angel . the capability of Heliobas to foretell future event prove 
 itself in his knowledge of the fate of the famous english hero , Gordon , 
 long before that brave soldier meet his doom . at the time the English 
 Government send he out on his last fatal mission , a letter from 
 Heliobas to I contain the follow passage : 

 " I see Gordon have choose his destiny and the manner of his death . two 
 way of die have be offer he - one that be slow , painful , and 
 inglorious ; the other sudden , and therefore sweet to a man of his 
 temperament . he himself be perfectly aware of the approach end of 
 his career ; he will receive his release at Khartoum . England will 
 lament over he for a little while , and then he will be declare an 
 inspire madman , who rush recklessly on his own doom ; while those who 
 allow he to be slain will be vote the wise , the most just and 
 virtuous in the realm . " 

 this prophecy be carry out to the letter , as I fully believe certain 
 thing of which I be now inform will also be fulfil . but though 
 there be person who pin their faith on " Zadkiel , " I doubt if there 
 be any who will believe in such a thing as ELECTRIC DIVINATION . the 
 one be mere vulgar imposture , the other be perform on a purely 
 scientific basis in accordance with certain exist rule and 
 principle ; yet I think there can be no question as to which of the two 
 the public en masse be likely to prefer . on the whole , people do not 
 mind be deceive ; they hate be instruct , and the trouble of 
 think for themselves be almost too much for they . therefore 
 " Zadkiel " be certain to flourish for many and many a long day , while 
 the lightning instinct of prophecy dormant in every human being remain 
 unused and utterly forget except by the rare few . 

          

 I have little more to say . I feel that those among my reader who idly 
 turn over these page , expect to find a " novel " in the true 
 acceptation of the term , may be disappoint . my narrative be simply an 
 " experience : " but I have no wish to persuade other of the central 
 truth contain in it - namely , the existence of POWERFUL ELECTRIC 
 organ in every human being , which with proper cultivation be capable 
 of marvellous SPIRITUAL force . the time be not yet ripe for this fact 
 to be accept . 

 the person connect with this story may be dismiss in a few word . 
 when I join my friend Mrs. Everard , she be suffer from nervous 
 hysteria . my presence have the soothe effect Heliobas have assure I 
 of , and in a very few day we start from Paris in company for 
 England . she , with her amiable and accomplished husband , go back to 
 the States a few month since to claim an immense fortune , which they 
 be now enjoy as most Americans enjoy wealth . Amy have diamond to 
 her heart 's content , and toilette galore from Worth 's ; but she have no 
 child , and from the tone of her letter to I , I fancy she would 
 part with one at least of her valuable necklace to have a small pair 
 of chubby arm round her neck , and a soft little head nestle against 
 her bosom . 

 Raffaello Cellini still live and work ; his painting be among the 
 marvel of modern Italy for their richness and warmth of colour - colour 
 which , in spite of his envious detractor , be destine to last through 
 age . he be not very rich , for he be one of those who give away their 
 substance to the poor and the distressed ; but where he be know he be 
 universally beloved . none of his picture have yet be exhibit in 
 England , and he be in no hurry to call upon the London critic for 
 their judgment . he have be ask several time to sell his large 
 picture , " lord of our life and death , " but he will not . I have never 
 meet he since our intercourse at Cannes , but I hear of he frequently 
 through Heliobas , who have recently forward I a proof engraving of 
 the picture " L'Improvisatrice , " for which I sit as model . it be a 
 beautiful work of art , but that it be like I I be not vain enough to 
 admit . I keep it , not as a portrait of myself , but as a souvenir of the 
 man through whose introduction I gain the good friend I have . 

 News of Prince Ivan Petroffsky reach I frequently . he be possessor 
 of the immense wealth foretell by Heliobas ; the eye of Society 
 greedily follow his movement ; his name figure conspicuously in the 
 " Fashionable intelligence ; " and the magnificence of his recent marriage 
 festivity be for some time the talk of the continent . he have marry 
 the only daughter of a French Duke - a lovely creature , as soulless and 
 heartless as a dressmaker 's stuff model ; but she carry his jewel 
 well on her white bosom , and receive his guest with as much dignity 
 as a well - train major - domo . these quality suffice to satisfy her 
 husband at present ; how long his satisfaction will last be another 
 matter . he have not quite forget Zara ; for on every recur Jour 
 des Morts , or Feast of the Dead , he send a garland or cross of flower 
 to the simple grave in Pere - la - Chaise . Heliobas watch his career with 
 untiring vigilance ; nor can I myself avoid take a certain interest in 
 the progress of his fate . at the moment I write he be one of the most 
 envy and popular nobleman in all the Royal Courts of Europe ; and no 
 one think of ask he whether he be happy . he must be happy , say 
 the world ; he have everything that be need to make he so . everything ? 
 yes - all except one thing , for which he will long when the shadow of 
 the end draw near . 

 and now what else remain ? a brief farewell to those who have peruse 
 this narrative , or a linger parting word ? 

 in these day of haste and scramble , when there be no time for faith , 
 be there time for sentiment ? I think not . and therefore there shall be 
 none between my reader and I , save this - a friendly warning . 
 Belief - belief in God - belief in all thing noble , unworldly , lofty , 
 and beautiful , be rapidly be crush underfoot by - what ? by mere 
 lust of gain ! be sure , good people , be very sure that you be right in 
 deny God for the sake of man - in abjure the spiritual for the 
 material - before you rush recklessly onward . the end for all of you can 
 be but death ; and be you quite positive after all that there be NO 
 Hereafter ? be it sense to imagine that the immense machinery of the 
 Universe have be set in motion for nothing ? be it even common reason 
 to consider that the Soul of man , with all its high musing , its dream 
 of unseen glory , its longing after the Infinite , be a mere useless 
 vapour , or a set of shift molecule in a perishable brain ? the mere 
 fact of the existence of a DESIRE clearly indicate an equally exist 
 capacity for the GRATIFICATION of that desire ; therefore , I ask , would 
 the WISH for a future state of being , which be secretly feel by every 
 one of we , have be permit to find a place in our nature , if there 
 be no possible means of grant it ? why all this discontent with the 
 present - why all this universal complaint and despair and 
 world - weariness , if there be no HEREAFTER ? for my own part , I have tell 
 you frankly what I have see and what I know ; but I do not ask you to 
 believe I . I only say , if - if you admit to yourself the possibility 
 of a future and eternal state of existence , would it not be well for 
 you to inquire seriously how you be prepare for it in these wild 
 day ? look at society around you , and ask yourself : Whither be our 
 " PROGRESS " tend - Forward or Backward - Upward or Downward ? which way ? 
 fight the problem out . do not glance at it casually , or put it away as 
 an unpleasant thought , or a consideration involve too much 
 trouble - struggle with it bravely till you resolve it , and whatever the 
 answer may be , ABIDE by IT . if it lead you to deny God and the 
 immortal destiny of your own soul , and you find hereafter , when it 
 be too late , that both God and immortality exist , you have only 
 yourself to blame . we be the arbiter of our own fate , and that fact 
 be the most important one of our life . our WILL be positively 
 unfettered ; it be a rudder put freely into our hand , and with it we 
 can steer WHEREVER we CHOOSE . God will not COMPEL our love or 
 obedience . we must ourselves DESIRE to love and obey - DESIRE IT above 
 all thing in the world . 

 as for the Electric Origin of the Universe , a time be come when 
 scientific man will acknowledge it to be the only theory of creation 
 worthy of acceptance . all the wonder of Nature be the result of LIGHT 
 and HEAT alone - i.e. , be the work of the Electric Ring I have 
 endeavour to describe , which must go on produce , absorbing and 
 reproduce world , sun and system for ever and ever . the Ring , in 
 its turn , be merely the outcome of God 's own personality - the 
 atmosphere surround the World in which he have his existence - a world 
 create by Love and for Love alone . I can not force this theory on 
 public attention , which be at present claim by various learn 
 professor , who give ingenious explanation of " atom " and " molecule ; " 
 yet , even regard these same " atom , " the mild question may be put : 
 where do the first " atom " come from ? some may answer : " we call the 
 first atom GOD . " surely it be as well to call he a Spirit of pure 
 light as an atom ? however , the fact of one person 's be convince of 
 a truth will not , I be aware , go very far to convince other . I have 
 relate my " experience " exactly as it happen at the time , and my 
 reader can accept or deny the theory of Heliobas as they please . 
 neither denial , acceptance , criticism , nor incredulity can affect I 
 personally , inasmuch as I be not Heliobas , but simply the narrator of 
 an episode connect with he ; and as such , my task be finish . 




 APPENDIX . 

  in publish these selection from letter receive concern the 
 " Romance , " I be in honour bind not to disclose the name of my 
 correspondent , and this necessary reticence will no doubt induce the 
 incredulous to declare that they be not genuine epistle , but mere 
 invention of my own . I be quite prepared for such a possible 
 aspersion , and in reply , I can but say that I hold the original in my 
 possession , and that some of they have be read by my friend Mr. 
 George Bentley , under whose auspex this book have be successfully 
 launch on the sea of public favour . I may add that my correspondent 
 be all stranger to I personally - not one of they have I ever meet . a 
 few have indeed ask I to accord they interview , but this request I 
 invariably deny , not wish to set myself forward in any way as an 
 exponent of high doctrine in which I be as yet but a beginner and 
 student . - AUTHOR . 



 LETTER I. 

 " DEAR MADAM , 

 " you must receive so many letter that I feel it be almost a shame to 
 add to the number , but I can not resist writing to tell you how very 
 much your book , ' the Romance of Two Worlds , ' have help I . my dear 
 friend Miss F - - , who have write to you lately I believe , first read 
 it to I , and I can not tell you what a want in my life it seem to 
 fill up . I have be always interested in the so - call Supernatural , 
 feel very conscious of depth in my own self and in other that be 
 usually ignore . ... I have be read as many book as I could 
 obtain upon Theosophy , but though thankful for the high thought I 
 find in they , I still feel a great want - that of combine this occult 
 knowledge with my own firm belief in the christian religion . your book 
 seem to give I just what I want - it have DEEPENED and STRENGTHENED 
 MY BELIEF in and love to GOD and have make the new TESTAMENT a new BOOK 
 to I . thing which I could not understand before seem clear in the 
 light which your ' Vision ' have throw upon they , and I can not remain 
 satisfied without express to you my sincere gratitude . may your book 
 be read by all who be ready to receive the high truth that it 
 contain ! with thank , I remain , dear Madam , 

 " your sincerely , 
  M. S. " 



 LETTER II . 

 " MADAM , 

 " I be afraid you will think it very presumptuous of a stranger to 
 address you , but I have lately read your book , ' a Romance of two 
 Worlds , ' and have be much strike with it . it have open my mind to 
 such new impression , and seem to be so much what I have be grope 
 for so long , that I think if you would be kind enough to answer this , 
 I might get a firm hold on those high thing and be at anchor at 
 last . if you have patience to read so far , you will imagine I must be 
 very much in earnest to intrude myself on you like this , but from the 
 tone of your book I do not believe you would withdraw your hand where 
 you could do good . ... I never think of or read of the electric force 
  or spirit   in every human be before , but I do believe in it after 
 read your book , and you have make the next world a living thing to 
 ME , and raise my feeling above the disappointment and trial of this 
 life . ... your book be put into my hand at a time when I be deeply 
 distressed and in trouble about my future ; but you have show I how 
 small a thing this future of our life be . ... would it be ask too 
 much of you to name any book you think might help I in this new vein 
 of thought you have give I ? apologize for have write , believe 
 I yours sincerely , 

 " B. W. L. " 

  I answer to the good of my ability the writer of the above , and 
 later on receive another letter as follow : 

 " forgive my writing to you again on the subject of your ' romance , ' but 
 I read it so often and think of it so much . I can not say the wonderful 
 change your book have work in my life , and though very likely you be 
 constantly hear of the good it have do , yet it can not but be the 
 sweetest thing you can hear - that the seed you have plant be bring 
 forth so much fruit . ... the Bible be a new book to I since your work 
 come into my hand . " 



 LETTER III . 

  the follow terribly pathetic avowal be from a clergyman of the 
 Church of England :  

 " MADAM , 

 " your book , the ' romance of Two Worlds , ' have stop I on the brink of 
 what be doubtless a crime , and yet I have come to think it the only way 
 out of impend madness . I speak of self - destruction - suicide . and 
 while write the word , I beg of you to accept my gratitude for the 
 timely rescue of my soul . once I believe in the goodness of God - but 
 of late year the cry of modern scientific atheism , ' there be no God , ' 
 have ring in my ear till my brain have reel at the desolation and 
 nothingness of the Universe . no good , no hope , no satisfaction in 
 anything - this world only with all its mockery and failure - and 
 afterwards annihilation ! could a God design and create so poor and 
 cruel a jest ? so I think - and the misery of the thought be more than 
 I could bear . I have resolve to make an end . no one know , no one 
 guess my intent , till one Sunday afternoon a friend lend I your 
 book . I begin to read , and never leave it till I have finish the last 
 page - then I know I be save . life smile again upon I in console 
 colour , and I write to tell you that whatever other good your work may 
 do and be no doubt do , you have save both the life and reason of 
 one grateful human being . if you will write to I a few line I shall 
 be still more grateful , for I feel you can help I . I seem to have read 
 Christ 's mission wrong - but with patience and prayer it be possible to 
 redeem my error . once more thank you , I be , 

 " your with more thankfulness than I can write , 

 " L. E. F. " 

  I lose no time in reply to this letter , and since then have 
 frequently correspond with the writer , from whose troubled mind the 
 dark cloud have now entirely depart . and I may here venture to remark 
 that the evil of " modern scientific atheism " be far more widely 
 spread and deeply rooted than the majority of person be aware of , and 
 that many of the apparently inexplicable case of self - slaughter on 
 which the formal verdict , " Suicide during a state of temporary 
 insanity , " be pass , have be cause by long and hopeless brooding on 
 the " nothingness of the Universe " - which , if it be a true theory , 
 would indeed make of creation a bitter , nay , even a senseless jest . the 
 cruel preacher of such a creed have much to answer for . the murderer 
 who destroy human life for wicked passion and wantonness be less 
 criminal than the proudly learn , yet egotistical , and therefore 
 densely ignorant scientist , who , seek to crush the soul by his 
 feeble , narrow - minded argument , and deny its imperishable nature , 
 dare to spread his poisonous and corroding doctrine of despair 
 through the world , drain existence of all its brightness , and 
 strive to erect barrier of distrust between the creature and the 
 Creator . no sin can be great than this ; for it be impossible to 
 estimate the measure of evil that may thus be bring into otherwise 
 innocent and happy life . the attitude of devotion and faith be natural 
 to Humanity , while nothing can be more UNnatural and disastrous to 
 civilization , morality and law , than deliberate and determine 
 Atheism . - AUTHOR . 



 LETTER IV . 

 " DEAR MADAM , 

 " I dare say you have have many letter , but I must add mine to the 
 number to thank you for your book , the ' Romance of Two Worlds . ' I be 
 deeply interested in the wonderful force we possess , all in a great 
 or less degree - call it influence , electricity , or what you will . I 
 have think much on Theosophy and Psychical Research - but what strike 
 I in your book be the glorious selflessness inculcate and the 
 perfect Majesty of the divinity clear throughout - no sweeping away of 
 the Crucified one . I feel a well woman for the reading of it twice : 
 and I know other , too , who be high and well woman for such noble 
 thought and teaching . ... People for the most part dream away their 
 life ; one meet so few who really believe in electrical affinity , and 
 I have feel it so often and for so long . forgive my trouble you with 
 this letter , but I be grateful for your labour of love towards raise 
 man and woman . 

 " sincerely your , 

 " R. H. " 



 LETTER V. 

 " I should like to know if Marie Corelli honestly believe the theory 
 which she enunciate in her book , ' the Romance of two Worlds : ' and also 
 if she have any proof on which to find that same theory ? - if so , the 
 authoress will greatly oblige an earnest seeker after Truth if she will 
 give the information seek to 

 " A. S. " 

  I send a brief affirmative answer to the above note ; the " proof " of 
 the theory set forth in the " Romance " be , as I have already state , 
 easily to be find in the New Testament . but there be those who do not 
 and will not believe the New Testament , and for they there be no 
 " proof " of any exist spirituality in earth or heaven . " have eye 
 they see not , and hear they do not understand . " - AUTHOR . 



 LETTER VI . 

 " DEAR MADAM , 

 " I have lately be read with intense pleasure your ' romance of two 
 Worlds , ' and I must crave your forbearance towards I when I tell you 
 that it have fill I with envy and wonder . I feel sure that many 
 people must have ply you with question on the subject already , but I 
 be certain that you be too earnest and too sympathetic to feel bored 
 by what be in no sense idle curiosity , but rather a deep and genuine 
 longing to know the truth . ... to some mind it would prove such a 
 comfort and such , a relief to have their vague longing and belief 
 confirm and make tangible , and , as you know , at the present day 
 so - call Religion , which be often a mere mixture of dogma and 
 superstition , be scarcely sufficient to do this . ... I might say a 
 great deal more and weary your patience , which have already be try , 
 I fear . but may I venture to hope that you have some word of comfort 
 and assurance out of your own experience to give I ? with your 
 express belief in the good influence which each may exert over the 
 other , not to speak of a high and holy incentive in the example of 
 one   in whom you also believe   who bid we for his sake to ' bear one 
 another 's burden , ' you can not , I think , turn away in impatience from 
 the seeking of a very earnest soul . 

 " your sincerely , 

 " B. D. " 

  I have receive about fifty letter write in precisely the same tone 
 as the above - all more or less complaining of the insufficiency of 
 ' so - call Religion , which be often a mere mixture of dogma and 
 superstition " - and I ask - what be the preacher of Christ 's clear 
 message about that there should be such plaintively eager anxious soul 
 as these , who be evidently ready and willing to live noble life if 
 help and encourage ever so little ? shame on those man who presume to 
 take up the high vocation of the priesthood for the sake of self - love , 
 self - interest , worldly advancement , money or position ! these thing be 
 not among Christ 's teaching . if there be member of the clergy who 
 can neither plant faith , nor consolation , nor proper comprehension of 
 God 's infinite Beauty and Goodness in the heart of their hearer , I 
 say that their continuance in such sacred office be an offence to the 
 Master whom they profess to serve . " it must need be that offence 
 come , but woe to that man by whom the offence cometh ! " to such may be 
 address the word , " hypocrite ! for ye shut up the kingdom of heaven 
 against man ; ye neither go in yourself , neither suffer ye they that 
 be enter to go in . " - AUTHOR . 



 LETTER VII . 

 " MADAM , 

 " I hope you will not think it great presumption my writing to you . my 
 excuse must be that I so much want to believe in he great Spirit that 
 ' make for righteousness , ' and I can not ! your book put it all so 
 clearly that if I can only know it to be a true experience of your own , 
 it will go a long way in disperse the fog that modern writing 
 surround one with . ... 

 " apologize for trouble you , I be faithfully your , 

 " C.M.E. " 



 LETTER VIII . 

 " MADAM , 

 " I trust you will pardon the liberty I take in writing to you . my 
 excuse must be the very deep interest your book , ' a Romance of two 
 Worlds , ' have excite in I . I , of course , understand that the STORY 
 itself be a romance , but in read it carefully it seem to I that it 
 be a book write with a purpose . ... the Electric Creed respect 
 Religion seem to explain so much in scripture which have always seem 
 to I impossible to accept blindly without explanation of any kind ; and 
 the theory that Christ come to die and to suffer for we as an Example 
 and a means of communication with God , and not as a sacrifice , clear 
 up a point which have always be to I personally a stumbling - block . I 
 can not say how grateful I shall be if you can tell I any mean of 
 study this subject far ; and trust you will excuse I for 
 trouble you , I be , Madam , 

 " your truly , 

 " H. B. " 

  once more I may repeat that the idea of a sacrifice to appease God 's 
 anger be purely jewish , and have nothing whatever to do with 
 Christianity accord to Christ . he himself say , " I be the WAY , the 
 Truth , and the life ; no man cometh to the Father but by I . " surely 
 these word be plain enough , and point unmistakably to a means of 
 COMMUNICATION through Christ between the Creator and this world . 
 nowhere do the Divine Master say that God be so furiously angry that 
 he must have the bleed body of his own messenger , Christ , hang up 
 before he as a human sacrifice , as though he could only be pacify by 
 the scent of blood ! horrible and profane idea ! and one utterly at 
 variance with the tenderness and goodness of " our Father " as picture 
 by Christ in these gentle word - " Fear not , little flock ; it be your 
 Father 's good pleasure to give you the Kingdom . " whereas that Christ 
 should come to draw we close to God by the strong force of his own 
 divinity , and by his Resurrection prove to we the reality of the next 
 life , be not at all a strange or ungodlike mission , and ought to make 
 we understand more surely than ever how infinitely pity and 
 forbearing be the all - love one , that he should , as it be , with such 
 extreme affection show we a way by which to travel through darkness 
 unto light . to those who can not see this perfection of goodness 
 depict in Christ 's own word , I would say in the terse oriental maxim : 

  " Diving , and find no pearl in the sea , 
  blame not the ocean , the fault be in THEE . " 
  AUTHOR . 



 LETTER IX . 

 " DEAR MADAM , 

 " I have lately be read your remarkable book , ' a Romance of two 
 Worlds , ' and I feel that I must write to you about it . I have never 
 view Christianity in the broadly transfigure light you throw upon 
 it , and I have since be study carefully the four Gospels and 
 compare they with the theory in your book . the result have be a 
 complete and happy change in my idea of religion , and I feel now as if 
 I have , like a leper of old , touch the robe of Christ and be heal 
 of a long - stand infirmity . will you permit I to ask if you have 
 evolve this new and beneficent lustre from the Gospel yourself ? or 
 whether some experienced student in mystic matter have be your 
 instructor ? I hear from person who have see you that you be quite 
 young , and I can not understand how one of your sex and age seem able 
 so easily to throw light on what to many have be , and be still , 
 impenetrable darkness . I have be a preacher for some year , and I 
 think the Testament be old and familiar to I ; but you have make it 
 a new and marvellous book full of most precious meaning , and I hope I 
 may be able to impart to those whom it be my duty to instruct , 
 something of the great consolation and hope your writing have fill I 
 with . 

 " believe I , 

 " gratefully your , 

 " T.M. " 



 LETTER X. 

 " MADAM , 

 " will you tell I what ground you have for the foundation of the 
 religious theory contain in your book , ' a Romance of Two Worlds ' ? be 
 it a part of your own belief ? I be most anxious to know this , and I be 
 sure you will be kind enough to answer I . till I read your book I 
 think myself an Agnostic , but now I be not quite sure of this . I do 
 not believe in the deity as depict by the church . I cannot . over 
 and over again I have ask myself - if there be a God , why should he be 
 angry ? it would surely be easy for he to destroy this world entirely 
 as one would blow away an offend speck of dust , and it would be much 
 well and BRAVER for he to do this than to torture his creation . for 
 I call life a torture and certainly a useless and cruel torture if it 
 be to end in annihilation . I know I seem to be blasphemous in these 
 remark , yet if you only know what I suffer sometimes ! I desire , I long 
 to believe . you seem so certain of your Creed - a Creed so noble , 
 reasonable and humane - the God you depict so worthy of the adoration of 
 a Universe . I beg of you to tell I - do you feel sure of this 
 beneficent all - pervade Love concern which you write so eloquently ? 
 I do not wish to seem an intruder on your most secret thought . I want 
 to believe that you believe - and if I feel this , the tenor of my whole 
 life might change . help I if you can - I stand in real need of help . 
 you may judge I be very deeply in earnest , or I should not have write 
 to you . 

 " your faithfully , 

 " A. W. L. " 

          

 of such letter as these I have receive enough to make a volume of 
 themselves ; but I think the ten I have select be sufficient to show 
 how ardent and inextinguishable be the desire or strain UPWARD , like 
 a flower to the light , of the human Soul for those divine thing which 
 nourish it . scarcely a day pass without my receive more of these 
 earnest and often pathetic appeal for a little help , a little comfort , 
 a little guidance , enough to make one 's heart ache at the thought of so 
 much doubt and desolation loom cloud - like over the troubled mind of 
 many who would otherwise lead not only happy but noble and useful 
 life . when will the preacher learn to preach Christ simply - Christ 
 without human dogma or difference ? when shall we be able to enter a 
 building set apart for sacred worship - a building of fine 
 architectural beauty , " glorious without and within , " like the " King 's 
 daughter " of David 's psalm - glorious with , light , music , flower , and 
 art of the noble kind   for art be God 's own inspiration to man , and 
 through it he should be serve , there to hear the pure , unselfish 
 doctrine of Christ as he himself preach it ? for such a temple , the 
 time have surely come - a nook sacred to God , and untainted by the breath 
 of Mammon , where we could adore our creator " in spirit and in truth . " 
 the evil of nineteenth - century cynicism and general flippancy of 
 thought - great evil as they be and sure prognostication of bad 
 evil to come - can not altogether crush out the divine flame burn in 
 the " few " that be " choose , " though these few be count as fool and 
 dreamer . yet they shall be prove wise and watchful ere long . the 
 sign of the time be those that indicate an approach great 
 upheaval and change in human destiny . this planet we call our be in 
 some respect like ourselves : it be bear ; it have have its infancy , its 
 youth , its full prime ; and now its age have set in , and with age the 
 first beginning of decay . absorb once more into the Creative Circle 
 it must be ; and when again throw forth among its companion - star , our 
 race will no more inhabit it . we shall have have our day - our little 
 chance - we shall have lose or win . Christ say , " this generation shall 
 not pass away till all my word be fulfil , " the word " generation " 
 thus use meaning simply the human race . we put a very narrow limit to 
 the significance of the Saviour 's utterance when we imagine that the 
 generation he allude to imply merely the people live in his own 
 day . in the depth of his divine wisdom he be acquaint with all the 
 secret of the Past and future ; he have no doubt see this very world 
 people by widely different being to ourselves , and know that what we 
 call the human race be only a pass tribe permit for a time to 
 sojourn here . what a strangely presumptuous idea be that which pervade 
 the mind of the majority of person - namely , that mankind , as we know 
 it , must be the high form of creation , simply because it be the 
 high form we can see ! how absurd it be to be so control by our 
 limited vision , when we can not even perceive the minute wonder that a 
 butterfly behold , or pierce the sunlit air with anything like the 
 facility possess by the undazzled eye of an upward - soar bird ! 
 Nay , we can not examine the wing of a common house - fly without the aid 
 of a microscope - to observe the facial expression of our own actor on 
 the stage we look through opera - glass - to form any idea of the 
 wonder of the star we construct telescope to assist our feeble and 
 easily delude sight ; and yet - yet we continue to parcel out the 
 infinite gradation of creative Force and Beauty entirely to suit our 
 own private opinion , and conclude that we be the final triumph of the 
 Divine Artist 's Supreme Intelligence ! alas ! in very truth we be a 
 sorry spectacle both to our soberly think self and the high 
 Powers , invite , as it be , to spend our life 's brief day in one of 
 God 's garden as his friend and guest , who certainly be not expect 
 to abuse their host 's hospitality , and , ignore he , call themselves 
 the owner and master of the ground ! for we be but wanderer beneath 
 the sun ; a " generation " which must most surely and rapidly " pass away " 
 to make room for another ; and as the work of the Universe be always 
 progressive , that other will be of nobler capacity and large 
 accomplishment . so while we be here , let we think earnestly of the few 
 brief chance remain to we - they grow few every hour . on one side 
 be the endless , glorious heritage of the purely aspiring , Immortal 
 Spirit ; on the other the fleeting Mirage of this our present Existence ; 
 and , midway between the two , the swing pendulum of HUMAN WILL , which 
 decide our fate . God do not choose for we , or compel our love - we 
 be free to fashion out our own future ; but in make our final choice 
 we can not afford to waste one moment of our precious , unreturne time . 

 MARIE CORELLI . 
