INNOCENT 

 her Fancy and his fact 


 by MARIE CORELLI 


 author of " God 's Good Man , " " the Treasure of Heaven , " Etc . 




 BOOK one : her fancy 




 CHAPTER I 

 the old by - road go ramble down into a dell of deep green shadow . it 
 be a reprobate of a road,--a vagrant of the land,--have long ago 
 wander out of straight and even course and take to meander 
 aimlessly into many rut and furrow under arch tree , which in wet 
 weather pour their weight of drip rain upon it and make it little 
 more than a mud pool . between straggle bush of elder and hazel , 
 blackberry and thorn , it make its solitary shambling way , so sink 
 into itself with long disuse that neither to the right nor to the left 
 of it could anything be see of the surround country . hide behind 
 the intervene foliage on either hand be rich pasture and plough 
 field , but with these the old road have nothing in common . there be 
 many thing well suit to its nature , such as the melodious note of 
 the bird which make their home year after year amid its border 
 thicket , or the gathering together in springtime of thousand of 
 primrose , whose pale , small , elfin face peep out from every mossy 
 corner,--or the scent of secret violet in the grass , fill the air 
 with the delicate sweetness of a breathing make warm by the April sun . 
 or when the thrill of summer draw the wild rose run quickly from 
 the earth skyward , twin their stem together in fantastic arch and 
 tuft of deep pink and flush - white blossom , and the briony wreath with 
 their small bright green star swing pendent from over - shadow bough 
 like garland for a sylvan festival . or the thousand of tiny 
 unassuming herb which grow up with the grow speargrass , bring 
 with they pungent odour from the soil as from some deep - lay 
 storehouse of precious spice . these choice delight be the old 
 by - road 's peculiar possession , and through a wild maze of beauty and 
 fragrance it stray on with a careless awkwardness , get more and 
 more involve in tangle of green,--till at last , recoil abruptly as 
 it be upon its own step , it stop short at the entrance to a 
 clear space in front of a farmyard . with this the old by - road have 
 evidently no sort of business whatever , and end altogether , as it 
 be , with a rough shock of surprise at find itself in such open 
 quarter . no arching tree or twining bramble be here,--it be a 
 wide , clean brick - paved place chiefly possess by a goodly company of 
 promise fowl , and a huge cart - horse . the horse be tie to his 
 manger in an open shed , and munch and munch with all the steadiness 
 and goodwill of the sailor 's wife who offend Macbeth 's first witch . 
 beyond the farmyard be the farmhouse itself,--a long , low , timbere 
 building with a broad tile roof support by huge oaken rafter and 
 crown with many gables,--a building proudly declare itself as of 
 the day of Elizabeth 's yeoman , and bear about it the honourable 
 mark of age and long stress of weather . no such farmhouse be build 
 nowadays , for life have become with we less than a temporary thing,--a 
 coin to be spend rapidly as soon as gain , too valueless for any 
 interest upon it to be seek or desire . in olden time it be 
 apparently not consider such cheap currency . man build their home to 
 last not only for their own lifetime , but for the lifetime of their 
 child and their child 's child ; and the idea that their 
 child 's child might possibly fail to appreciate the strenuousness 
 and worth of their labour never enter their simple brain . 

 the farmyard be terminate at its other end by a broad stone archway , 
 which show as in a semi - circular frame the glint of scarlet geranium 
 in the distance , and in the shadow cast by this embrasure be the small 
 unobtrusive figure of a girl . she stand idly watch the hen peck 
 at their food and drive away their offspring from every chance of 
 sharing bit or sup with them,--and as she note the greedy triumph of 
 the strong over the weak , the great over the small , her brow draw 
 together in a slight frown of something like scorn . yet hers be not a 
 face that naturally express any of the unkind or harsh emotion . it 
 be soft and delicately feature , and its rose - white tint be 
 illumine by grave , deeply - set grey eye that be full of wistful and 
 question pathos . in stature she be below the middle height and 
 slight of build , so that she seem a mere child at first sight , with 
 nothing particularly attractive about she except , perhaps , her hand . 
 these be daintily shape and characteristic of inbreed refinement , and 
 as they hang listlessly at her side look scarcely less white than 
 the white cotton frock she wear . she turn presently with a movement 
 of impatience away from the sight of the fussy and quarrelsome fowl , 
 and look up at the quaint gable of the farmhouse utter a low , 
 caressing call . a white dove fly down to she instantly , follow by 
 another and yet another . she smile and extend her arm , and a whole 
 flock of the bird come flutter about she in a whirl of wing , 
 perch on her shoulder and alight at her foot . one that seem to 
 enjoy a position of special favouritism , fly straight against she 
 breast,--she catch it and hold it there . it remain with her quite 
 contentedly , while she stroke its velvety neck . 

 " Poor Cupid ! " she murmur . " you love I , do not you ? oh yes , ever so 
 much ! only you can not tell I so ! I be glad ! you would not be half so 
 sweet if you could ! " 

 she kiss the bird 's soft head , and still stroke it scatter all 
 the other around she by a slight gesture , and go , follow by a 
 snowy cloud of they , through the archway into the garden beyond . here 
 there be flower - bed formally cut and arrange in the old - fashioned 
 dutch manner , full of sweet - smell old - fashioned thing , such as 
 stock and lupin , verbena and mignonette,--there be box - border and 
 clump of saxifrage , fuchsia , and geraniums,--and rose that grow in 
 every possible way that rose have ever grow , or can ever grow . the 
 farmhouse front fully on this garden , and a magnificent " glory " rise 
 cover it from its deep black oaken porch to its high gable , 
 wreathe it with hundred of pale golden ball of perfume . a real 
 " old " rise it be , without any doubt of its own intrinsic worth and 
 sweetness,--a rise before which the most highly train hybrid might 
 hang their head for shame or wither away with envy , for the air around 
 it be wholly perfume with its honey - scented nectar , distil from 
 peaceful year upon year of sunbeam and stainless dew . the girl , 
 still carry her pet dove , walk slowly along the narrow gravel 
 path that encircle the flower - bed and box - border , till , reach a 
 low green door at the further end of the garden , she open it and 
 pass through into a newly mow field , where several lad and man be 
 about busily employ in rake together the last swath of a full crop 
 of hay and add they to the last waggon which stand in the centre of 
 the ground , horseless , and pile to an almost topple height . one 
 young fellow , with a crimson silk tie knot about his open 
 shirt - collar , stand on top of the lofty fragrant load , fork in hand , 
 toss the additional heap together as they be throw up to he . 
 the afternoon sun blaze burningly down on his uncovered head and bare 
 brown arm , and as he shake and turn the hay with untire energy , 
 his movement be full of the easy grace and picturesqueness which be 
 often the unconscious endowment of those whose labour keep they daily 
 in the fresh air . occasional burst of laughter and scrap of rough 
 song come from the other at work , and there be only one absolutely 
 quiet figure among they , that of an old man sit on an upturned 
 barrel which have be but recently empty of its home - brew beer , 
 meditatively smoke a long clay pipe . he wear a smock frock and straw 
 hat , and under the brim of the straw hat , which be well pull down 
 over his forehead , his filmy eye gleam with an alert watchfulness . 
 he seem to be count every morsel of hay that be be add to 
 the load and price it in his mind , but there be no actual expression 
 of either pleasure or interest on his feature . as the girl enter the 
 field , and her gown make a gleam of white on the grass , he turn his 
 head and look at she , puff hard at his pipe and watch she 
 approach only a little less narrowly than he watch the piling up of 
 the hay . when she draw sufficiently near he he speak . 

 " come to ride home on last load ? " 

 she hesitate . 

 " I do not know . I be not sure , " she answer . 

 " it will please Robin if you do , " he say . 

 a little smile tremble on her lip . she bend her head over the dove 
 she hold against her bosom . 

 " why should I please Robin ? " she ask . 

 his dull eye sparkle with a gleam of anger . 

 " please Robin , please I , " he say , sharply--"please yourself , please 
 nobody . " 

 " I do my good to please you , Dad ! " she say , gently , yet with emphasis . 

 he be silent , suck at his pipe - stem . just then a whistle strike the 
 air like the near note of a thrush . it come from the man on top of the 
 haywaggon . he have pause in his labour , and his face be turn towards 
 the old man and the girl . it be a handsome face , light by a smile 
 which seem to have catch a reflex of the sun . 

 " all ready , Uncle ! " he shouted--"Ready and wait ! " 

 the old man draw his pipe from his mouth . 

 " there you be ! " he say , address the girl in a soft tone,--"He 's 
 want you . " 

 she move away at once . as she go , the man who be rake in the 
 last sweeping of the hay stand aside for she to pass . one of they put 
 a ladder against the wheel of the waggon . 

 " go up , miss ? " he ask , with a cheerful grin . 

 she smile a response , but say nothing . 

 the young fellow on top of the load look down . his blue eye sparkle 
 merrily as he see she . 

 " be you come ? " he call . 

 she glance up . 

 " if you like , " she answer . 

 " if I like ! " he echo , half - mockingly , half - tenderly ; " you know I 
 like ! why , you have get that wretched bird with you ! " 

 " he be not a wretched bird , " she said,--"He 's a darling ! " 

 " well , you can not climb up here hug he like that ! let he go,--and 
 then I will help you . " 

 for all answer she ascend the ladder lightly without assistance , 
 still hold the dove , and in another minute be seat beside he . 

 " there ! " she say , as she settle herself comfortably down in the soft , 
 sweet - smell hay . " now you have get your wish , and I hope Dad be happy . " 

 " do he tell you to come , or do you come of your own accord ? " ask 
 the young man , with a touch of curiosity . 

 " he tell I , of course , " she answer ; " I should never have come of my 
 own accord . " 

 he bite his lip vexedly . turn away from she he call to the 
 haymaker : 

 " that will do , boy ! Fetch Roger , and haul in ! " 

 the sun be near the western horizon and a deep apricot glow warm 
 the mown field and the undulating foliage in the far distance . the man 
 begin to scatter here and there , put aside their long wooden rake , 
 and two of they go off to bring Roger , the cart - horse , from his shed . 

 " Uncle Hugo ! " 

 the old man , who still sit impassively on the beer - barrel , look up . 

 " ay ! what be it ? " 

 " be you come along with we ? " 

 Uncle Hugo shake his head despondently . 

 " why not ? it be the last load this year ! " 

 " ay ! " he lift his straw hat and wave it in a kind of farewell salute 
 towards the waggon , repeat mechanically : " the last load ! the very 
 last ! " 

 then there come a cessation of movement everywhere for the moment . it 
 be a kind of breathing pause in Nature 's everlaste chorus,--a sudden 
 rest , as it seem , in the very space of the air . the young man throw 
 himself down on the hay - load so that he face the girl , who sit quiet , 
 caress the dove she hold . he be undeniably good - look , with an 
 open nobility of feature which be uncommon enough among well - bear and 
 carefully - nurture specimen of the human race , and be perhaps still 
 more rarely to be find among those whose lot in life be one of 
 continuous hard manual labour . just now he look singularly 
 attractive , the more so , perhaps , because he be unconscious of it . he 
 stretch out one hand towards the girl and touch the hem of her 
 white frock . 

 " be you feel kind ? " 

 her eye lighten with a gleam of merriment . 

 " I be always kind . " 

 " not to I ! not as kind as you be to that bird . " 

 " oh , poor Cupid ! you be jealous of he ! " 

 he move a little near to she . 

 " perhaps I be ! " and he speak in a low tone . " perhaps I be , Innocent ! 
 I grudge he the privilege of lie there on your dear little white 
 breast ! I be envious when you kiss he ! I want you to kiss I ! " 

 his voice be tremulous,--he turn up his face audaciously . 

 she look at he with a smile . 

 " I will if you like ! " she say . " I should think no more of kiss you 
 than of kiss Cupid ! " 

 he draw back with a gesture of annoyance . 

 " I would not be kiss at all that way , " he say , hotly . 

 " why not ? " 

 " because it be not the right way . a bird be not a man ! " 

 she laugh merrily . 

 " nor a man a bird , though he may have a bird 's name ! " she say . " oh , 
 Robin , how clever you be ! " 

 he lean close . 

 " let Cupid go ! " he pleaded,--"i want to ride home on the last load with 
 you alone . " 

 another little peal of laughter escape she . 

 " I declare you think Cupid an actual person ! " she say . " if he will go , 
 he shall . but I think he will stay . " 

 she loosen her hold of the dove , which , release , gravely hop up 
 to her shoulder and sit there prune its wing . she glance round at it . 

 " I tell you so ! " she said,--"He 's a fixture . " 

 " I do not mind he so much up there , " say Robin , and he venture to 
 take one of her hand in his own,--"but he always have so much of you ; 
 he nestle under your chin and be caress by your sweet lips,--he have 
 all , and I have,--nothing ! " 

 " you have one hand , " say Innocent , with demure gravity . 

 " but no heart with it ! " he say , wistfully . " innocent , can you never 
 love I ? " 

 she be silent , look at he critically,--then she give a little sigh . 

 " I be afraid not ! but I have often think about it . " 

 " you have?"--and his eye grow very tender . 

 " oh yes , often ! you see , it be not your fault at all . you 
 be -- well!"--here she survey he with a whimsical air of 
 admiration,--"you be quite a beautiful man ! you have a splendid figure 
 and a good face , and kind eye and well - shape foot and hands,--and I 
 like the look of you just now with that open collar and that gleam of 
 sunlight in your curly hair -- and your throat be almost white , except 
 for a touch of sunburn , which be rather becoming!--especially with 
 that crimson silk tie ! I suppose you put that tie on for effect , do not 
 you ? " 

 he flush , and laugh lightly . 

 " naturally ! to please you ! " 

 " really ? how thoughtful of you ! well , you be charming,--and I 
 should not mind kiss you at all . but it would not be for love . " 

 " would not it ? what would it be for , then ? " 

 her face lighten up with the illumination of an inward mirth and 
 mischief . 

 " only because you look pretty ! " she answer . 

 he throw aside her hand with an angry gesture of impatience . 

 " you want to make a fool of I ! " he say , petulantly . 

 " I be sure I do not ! you be just lovely , and I tell you so . that be not 
 make a fool of you ! " 

 " yes , it be ! a man be never lovely . a woman may be . " 

 " well , I be not , " say Innocent , placidly . " that be why I admire the 
 loveliness of other . " 

 " you be lovely to I , " he declare , passionately . 

 she smile . there be a touch of compassion in the smile . 

 " Poor Robin ! " she say . 

 at that moment the hide goddess in her soul arise and assert she 
 claim to beauty . a rare indefinable charm of exquisite tenderness and 
 fascination seem to environ her small and delicate personality with 
 an atmosphere of resistless attraction . the man beside she feel it , and 
 his heart beat quickly with a thrilling hope of conquest . 

 " so you pity I ! " he said,--"pity be akin to love . " 

 " but kinsfolk seldom agree , " she reply . " I only pity you because you 
 be foolish . no one but a very foolish fellow would think I lovely . " 

 he raise himself a little and peer over the edge of the hay - load to 
 see if there be any sign of the man return with Roger , but there 
 be no one in the field now except the venerable personage he call 
 Uncle Hugo , who be still smoke away his thought , as it be , in a 
 dream of tobacco . and he once more catch the hand he have just let go 
 and cover it with kiss . 

 " there ! " he say , lift his head and show an eager face light by 
 amorous eye . " now you know how lovely you be to I ! I should like to 
 kiss your mouth like that,--for you have the sweetest mouth in the 
 world ! and you have the prettiest hair,--not raw gold which I 
 hate,--but soft brown , with delicious little sunbeam lose in it,--and 
 such a lot of it ! I have see it all down , remember ! and your eye would 
 draw the heart out of any man and send he anywhere,--yes , 
 innocent!--anywhere,--to Heaven or to Hell ! " 

 she colour a little . 

 " that be beautiful talk ! " she said,--"It 's like poetry , but it be not 
 true ! " 

 " it be true ! " he say , with fond insistence . " and I will make you love 
 I ! " 

 " ah , no ! " a look of the cold scorn suddenly pass over she 
 features--"that be not possible . you could never make I do anything ! 
 and -- it be rude of you to speak in such a way . please let go my hand ! " 

 he drop it instantly , and spring erect . 

 " all right ! I will leave you to yourself,--and Cupid ! " here he laugh 
 rather bitterly . " what make you give that bird such a name ? " 

 " I find it in a book , " she answered,--"it be a name that be give to 
 the god of Love when he be a little boy . " 

 " I know that ! please do not teach I my A.B.C. , " say Robin , 
 half - sulkily . 

 she lean back laughing , and sing softly : 

      " love be once a little boy , 
         Heigh - ho , Heigh - ho ! 
       then ' twa sweet with he to toy , 
         Heigh - ho , Heigh - ho ! " 

 her eye sparkle in the sun,--a tress of her hair , ruffle by the hay , 
 escape and fly like a little web of sunbeam against her cheek . he 
 look at her moodily . 

 " you might go on with the song , " he said,--"'love be now a little 
 man-- ' " 

 " ' and a very naughty one ! ' " she hum , with a mischievous upward 
 glance . 

 despite his inward vexation , he smile . 

 " say what you like , Cupid be a ridiculous name for a dove , " he say . 

 " it rhyme to stupid , " she reply , demurely,--"And the rhyme express 
 the nature of the bird and -- the god ! " 

 " Pooh ! you think that clever ! " 

 " I do not ! I never say a clever thing in my life . I should not know how . 
 everything clever have be write over and over again by people in 
 book . " 

 " Hang book ! " he exclaim . " it be always book with you ! I wish we have 
 never find that old chest of musty volume in the panel room . " 

 " do you ? then you be silly than I think you be . the book teach 
 I all I know,--about love ! " 

 " about love ! you do not know what love mean ! " he declare , trample 
 the hay he stand upon with impatience . " you read and read , and you get 
 the queer idea into your head , and all the time the world go on 
 in way that be quite different from what you be think about,--and 
 lover walk through the field and lane everywhere near we every year , 
 and you never appear to see they or to envy them-- " 

 " envy they ! " the girl open her eye wide . " envy they ! oh , Cupid , 
 hear ! envy they ! why should I envy they ? who could envy Mr. and Mrs. 
 Pettigrew ? " 

 " what nonsense you talk ! " he exclaimed,--"mr . and Mrs. Pettigrew be 
 married folk , not lover ! " 

 " but they be lover once , " she said,--"and only three year ago . I 
 remember they , walk through the lane and field as you say , with 
 arm round each other,--and Mrs. Pettigrew 's hand be always 
 dreadfully red , and Mr. Pettigrew 's finger be always dirty,--and 
 they marry very quickly,--and now they have get two dreadful baby 
 that scream all day and all night , and Mrs. Pettigrew 's hair be never 
 tidy and Pettigrew himself -- well , you know what he does!-- " 

 " get drunk every night , " interrupt Robin , crossly,--"i know ! and I 
 suppose you think I be another Pettigrew ? " 

 " oh dear , no ! " and she laugh with the heartiest merriment . " you never 
 could , you never would be a Pettigrew ! but it all come to the same 
 thing -- love end in marriage , do not it ? " 

 " it ought to , " say Robin , sententiously . 

 " and marriage end -- in Pettigrews ! " 

 " innocent ! " 

 " do not say ' Innocent ' in that reproachful way ! it make I feel quite 
 guilty ! now,--if you talk of names,--THERE 's a name to give a poor 
 girl,--innocent ! nobody ever hear of such a name-- " 

 " you be wrong . there be thirteen pope name Innocent between the 
 year 402 and 1724 , " say Robin , promptly,--"and one of they , Innocent 
 the Eleventh , be a character in Browning 's ' Ring and the Book . ' " 

 " dear I ! " and her eye flash provocatively . " you astound I with 
 your wisdom , Robin ! but all the same , I do not believe any girl ever have 
 such a name as Innocent , in spite of thirteen pope . and perhaps the 
 Thirteen have other name ? " 

 " they have other baptismal name , " he explain , with a learn air . 
 " for instance , Pope Innocent the Third be Cardinal Lothario before he 
 become Pope , and he write a book call ' De Contemptu Mundi sive de 
 Miseria Humanae Conditionis ! ' " 

 she look at he as he utter the sonorous sound Latin , with a 
 comically respectful air of attention , and then laugh like a 
 child,--laughe till the tear come into her eye . 

 " oh Robin , Robin ! " she cried--"you be simply delicious ! the most 
 enchanting boy ! that crimson tie and that Latin ! no wonder the village 
 girl adore you ! ' de,'--what be it ? ' Contemptu Mundi , ' and Misery Human 
 Conditions ! poor Pope ! he never sit on top of a hay - load in his life 
 I be sure ! but you see his name be Lothario,--not innocent . " 

 " his baptismal name be Lothario , " say Robin , severely . 

 she be suddenly silent . 

 " well ! I suppose _ i _ be baptise ? " she query , after a pause . 

 " I suppose so . " 

 " I wonder if I have any other name ? I must ask Dad . " 

 Robin look at her curiously;--then his thought be divert by the 
 sight of a squat stout woman in a brown spot print gown and white 
 sunbonnet , who just then trot briskly into the hay - field , call at 
 the top of her voice : 

 " Mister Jocelyn ! Mister Jocelyn ! you be want ! " 

 " there be Priscilla call Uncle in , " he say , and make a hollow of 
 his hand he shout : 

 " Hullo , Priscilla ! what be it ? " 

 the sunbonnet give an upward jerk in his direction and the wearer 
 shrill out : 

 " Doctor 's come ! Wantin ' yer Uncle ! " 

 the old man , who have be so long quietly seat on the upturned 
 barrel , now rise stiffly , and knock out the ash of his pipe turn 
 towards the farmhouse . but before he go he raise his straw hat again 
 and stand for a moment bareheade in the roseate glory of the sinking 
 sun . Innocent spring upright on the load of hay , and stand almost at 
 the very edge of it , shade her eye with one hand from the strong 
 light , and look at he . 

 " Dad ! " she called--"Dad , shall I come ? " 

 he turn his head towards she . 

 " no , lass , no ! stay where you be , with Robin . " 

 he walk slowly , and with evident feebleness , across the length of the 
 field which divide he from the farmhouse garden , and open the 
 green gate lead thereto , disappear . the sun - bonnet individual 
 call Priscilla walk or rather waddle towards the hay - waggon , and 
 set her arm akimbo on her broad hip , look up with a grin at the 
 young people on top . 

 " well ! ye're a fine couple up there ! what be ye a - do of ? " 

 " never mind what we be do , " say Robin , impatiently . " I say , 
 Priscilla , do you think Uncle Hugo be really ill ? " 

 Priscilla 's face , which be the colour of an ancient nutmeg , and almost 
 as deeply mark with contrast line of brown and yellow , show no 
 emotion . 

 " he be not hisself , " she say , bluntly . 

 " no , " say Innocent , seriously,--"I'm sure he be not . " Priscilla jerk 
 her sunbonnet a little far back , show some tag of dusty grey 
 hair . 

 " he be not be hisself for this past year , " she go on--"Mr . Slowton , 
 bein ' only a kind of village physic - bottle , do not know much , an ' yer 
 uncle be not bin satisfied . now there be another doctor from London 
 stay up ' ere for ' be own poor ' elth , and yer Uncle say he would like to 
 ' ave ' be opinion,--so Mr. Slowton , bein ' obligin ' though ignorant , ' as 
 get ' I m in to see yer Uncle , and there they both be , in the good 
 parlour , with special wine an ' seedie on the table . " 

 " oh , it will be all right ! " say Robin , cheerfully,--"uncle Hugo be 
 get old , of course , and he be a bit fanciful . " 

 Priscilla sniff the air . 

 " Mebbe -- and mebbe not ! what be you two waitin ' for now ? " 

 " for the man to come back with Roger . then we will haul home . " 

 " you will ' ave to wait a bit long , I be thinkin ' , " say 
 priscilla--"they be all drinkin ' beer in the yard now an ' tappin ' 
 another barrel to drink at when the waggon come in . there be no animal 
 on earth as ever thirsty as man ! well , good luck t'ye ! I must go , or 
 there will be a smell of burnin ' supper - cakes . " 

 she settle her sunbonnet anew and trot away,--looking rather like a 
 large spot mushroom mysteriously set in motion and rolling , rather 
 than walk , off the field . 

 when she be go , Innocent sit down again upon the hay , this time 
 without Cupid . he have fly off to join his mate on the farmhouse 
 gable . 

 " Dad be really not well , " she say , thoughtfully ; " I feel anxious about 
 he . if he be to die,-- " at the mere think her eye fill with 
 tear . " he must die some day , " answer Robin , gently,--"and he be 
 old,--nigh on eighty . " 

 " oh , I do not want to remember that , " she murmur . " it be the cruell 
 part of life -- that people should grow old , and die , and pass away from 
 we . what should I do without Dad ? I should be all alone , with no one in 
 the world to care what become of I . " 

 " _ I _ care ! " he say , softly . 

 " yes , you care -- just now"--she answer , with a sigh ; " and it be very 
 kind of you . I wish I could care -- in the way you want I to -- but-- " 

 " will you try ? " he plead . 

 " I do try -- really I do try hard , " she say , with quite a piteous 
 earnestness,--"but I can not feel what be not HERE,"--and she press both 
 hand on her breast--"i care more for Roger the horse , and Cupid the 
 dove , than I do for you ! it be quite awful of I -- but there it be ! I 
 love -- I simply adore"--and she throw out her arm with an embrace 
 gesture--"all the tree and plant and birds!--and everything about the 
 farm and the farmhouse itself -- it be just the sweet home in the 
 world ! there be not a brick or a stone in it that I would not want to 
 kiss if I have to leave it -- but I never feel that way for you ! and yet I 
 like you very , very much , Robin!--I wish I could see you married to 
 some nice girl , only I do not know one really nice enough . " 

 " nor do I ! " he answer , with a laugh , " except yourself ! but never 
 mind , dear!--we will not talk of it any more , just now at any rate . I be a 
 patient sort of chap . I can wait ! " 

 " how long ? " she query , with a wonder glance . 

 " all my life ! " he answer , simply . 

 a silence fall between they . some inward touch of embarrassment 
 trouble the girl , for the colour come and go flatteringly in her 
 soft cheek and her eye droop under his fervent gaze . the glowing 
 light of the sky deepen , and the sun begin to sink in a mist of 
 bright orange , which be reflect over all the visible landscape with 
 a warm and vivid glory . that strange sense of beauty and mystery which 
 thrill the air with the approach of evening , make all the simple 
 pastoral scene a dream of incommunicable loveliness,--and the two 
 youthful figure , throne on their high dais of golden - green hay , might 
 have pass for the rustic Adam and Eve of some newly create Eden . 
 they be both very quiet,--with the tense quietness of heart that be 
 too full for speech . a joy in the present be shadow with a dim 
 unconscious fear of the future in both their thoughts,--though neither 
 of they would have express their feeling in this regard one to the 
 other . a thrush warble in a hedge close by , and the dove on the 
 farmhouse gable spread their white wing to the late sunlight , coo 
 amorously . and again the man speak , with a gentle firmness : 

 " all my life I shall love you , Innocent ! whatever happen , remember 
 that ! all my life ! " 




 CHAPTER II 

 the swinging open of a great gate at the further end of the field 
 disturb the momentary silence which follow his word . the return 
 haymaker appear on the scene , lead Roger at their head , and 
 Innocent jump up eagerly , glad of the interruption . 

 " here come old Roger ! " she cried,--"bles his heart ! now , Robin , you 
 must try to look very stately ! be you go to ride home standing or 
 sit ? " 

 he be visibly annoyed at her light indifference . 

 " unless I may sit beside you with my arm round your waist , in the 
 Pettigrew fashion , I would rather stand ! " he retort . " you say 
 Pettigrew 's hand be always dirty -- so be mine . I would well keep my 
 distance from you . one can not make hay and remain altogether as clean as 
 a new pin ! " 

 she give an impatient gesture . 

 " you always take thing up in the wrong way , " she said--"i never 
 think you a bit like Pettigrew ! your hand be not really dirty ! " 

 " they be ! " he answer , obstinately . " besides , you do not want my arm 
 round your waist , do you ? " 

 " certainly not ! " she reply , quickly . 

 " then I will stand , " he said;--"you shall be enthrone like a queen and 
 I will be your bodyguard . here , wait a minute ! " 

 he pile up the hay in the middle of the load till it make a high 
 cushion where , in obedience to his gesture , Innocent seat herself . 
 the man lead the horse be now close about the waggon , and one of 
 they , grin sheepishly at the girl , offer she a daintily - make 
 wreath of wild rose , from which all the thorn have be carefully 
 remove . 

 " look prutty , do not it ? " he say . 

 she accept it with a smile . 

 " be it for I ? oh , Larry , how nice of you ! be I to wear it ? " 

 " if ye loike ! " this with another grin . 

 she set it on her uncovered head and become at once a model for a 
 Romney ; the wild rose with their delicate pink and white against her 
 brown hair suit the hue of her complexion and the tender grey of she 
 eyes;--and when , thus adorn , she look up at her companion , he be 
 fain to turn away quickly lest his admiration should be too plainly 
 make manifest before profane witness . 

 Roger , meanwhile , be be harness to the waggon . he be a handsome 
 creature of his kind , and he know it . as he turn his bright soft 
 glance from side to side with a conscious pride in himself and his 
 surrounding , he seem to be perfectly aware that the knot of bright 
 red ribbon tie in his long and heavy mane mean some sort of festival . 
 when all be do the haymaker gather round . 

 " good luck to the last load , Mr. Clifford ! " they shout . 

 " good luck to you all ! " answer Robin , cheerily . 

 " good luck t'ye , Miss ! " and they raise their sun - brown face to the 
 girl as she look down upon they . " as fine a crop and as fair a load 
 next year ! " 

 " good luck to you ! " she respond -- then suddenly bend a little 
 forward she say almost breathlessly : " please wish luck to Dad ! he be 
 not well -- and he be not here ! oh , please do not forget he ! " 

 they all star at she for a moment , as if startled or surprised , then 
 they all join in a stentorian shout . 

 " that be right , Miss ! good luck to the master ! many good year of life 
 to he , and well crop every year ! " 

 she draw back , smile she thank , but there be tear in her eye . 
 and then they all start in a pretty procession -- the man lead 
 Roger , who pace along the meadow with equine dignity , shake his 
 ribbon now and again as if he be fully conscious of carry 
 something more valuable than mere hay,--and above they all smile the 
 girl 's young face , frame in its soft brown hair and crown with the 
 wild rose , while at her side stand the very type of a model 
 Englishman , with all the promise of splendid life and vigour in the 
 build of his form , the set of his shoulder and the poise of his 
 handsome head . it be a picture of youth and beauty and lovely nature 
 set against the warm evening tint of the sky,--one of those picture 
 which , though draw for the moment only on the mind of those who see 
 it , be yet never forget . 

 arrive presently at a vast enclosure , in which already two load of 
 hay be be stack , they be hail with a cheery shout by several 
 other labourer at work , and very soon a strong smell of beer begin to 
 mingle with the odour of the hay and the dewy scent of the eld 
 flower and sweet briar in the hedge close by . 

 " have a drop , Mr. Clifford ! " say one tall , powerful - look man who 
 seem to be a leader among the other , hold out a pewter tankard 
 full and froth over . 

 Robin Clifford smile and put his lip to it . 

 " just to your health , Landon ! " he said--"i'm not a drinking man . " 

 " haymake 's thirsty work , " comment the other . " will Miss Jocelyn do 
 we the honour ? " 

 the girl make a wry little face . 

 " I do not like beer , Mr. Landon , " she said--"It 's horrid stuff , even 
 when it be home - brew ! I help to make it , you see ! " 

 she laugh gaily -- they all laugh with she , and then there be a 
 little altercation which end in she put her lip to the tankard 
 just offer to Robin and sip the mere fleck of its foam . Landon 
 watch her,--and as she return the cup , put his own mouth to the 
 place hers have touch and drank the whole draught off greedily . Robin 
 do not see his action , but the girl do , and a deep blush of offence 
 suffuse her cheek . she rise , a little nervously . 

 " I will go in now , " she said--"Dad must be alone by this time . " 

 " all right ! " and Robin jump lightly from the top of the load to the 
 ground and put the ladder up for she to descend . she come down 
 daintily , turn she back to he so that the hem of her neat white 
 skirt fall like a little snowflake over each rung of the ladder , 
 veil not only her slim ankle but the very heel of her shoe . when 
 she be nearly at the bottom , he catch she up and set she lightly on 
 the ground . 

 " there you be ! " he say , with a laugh--"when you get into the house 
 you can tell Uncle that you be a Rose Queen , a Hay Queen , and Queen of 
 everything and everyone on Briar Farm , include your very humble 
 servant , Robin Clifford ! " 

 " and your humblest of slave , Ned Landon ! " add Landon , with a quick 
 glance , doff his cap . " Mr. Clifford must not expect to have it all 
 his own way ! " 

 " what the devil be you talk about ? " demand Robin , turn upon 
 he with a sudden fierceness . 

 Innocent give he an appeal look . 

 " Don't!--Oh , do not quarrel ! " she whispered,--and with a parting nod to 
 the whole party of worker she hurry away . 

 with her disappearance come a brief pause among the man . then Robin , 
 turn away from Landon , proceed to give various order . he be a 
 person in authority , and as everyone know , be likely to be the owner 
 of the farm when his uncle be dead . Landon go close up to he . 

 " Mr. Clifford , " he say , somewhat thickly , " you hear what I say just 
 now ? you must not expect to have it all your own way ! there be other man 
 after the girl as well as you ! " 

 Clifford glance he up and down . 

 " Yourself , I suppose ? " he retort . 

 " and why not ? " sneer Landon . 

 " only because there be two side to every question , " say Clifford , 
 carelessly , with a laugh . " and no decision can be arrive at till both 
 be hear ! " 

 he climb up among the other man and set to work , stack steadily , 
 and sing in a fine soft baritone the old fifteenth - century song : 

    " yonder come a courteous knight , 
       lustily rake over the hay , 
    he be well aware of a bonny lass , 
       as she come wander over the way . 
    then she sing Downe a downe , hey downe derry ! 

    " Jove you speed , fair ladye , he say , 
       among the leaf that be so greene , 
    if I be a king and wear a crown , 
       full soon faire Ladye shouldst thou be queene . 
    then she sing Downe a downe , hey downe derry ! " 

 Landon look up at he with a dark smile . 

 " those laugh well who laugh last ! " he mutter , " and a whistle 
 throstle have have its neck wrung before now ! " 

 meanwhile Innocent have enter the farmhouse . pass through the hall , 
 which,--unaltere since the day of its original building,--wa vault 
 high and heavily timbere , she go first into the kitchen to see 
 Priscilla , who , assist by a couple of strong rosy - cheeked girl , do 
 all the housework and cooking of the farm . she find that personage 
 roll out pastry and talk volubly as she roll : 

 " ah ! YOU'LL never come to much good , Jenny Spinner , " she cry . " what 
 with a muck of dirty dish in one corner and a muddle of ragged clout 
 in another , you be the very model of a wife for a farm hand ! can not sew 
 a gown for yerself neither , but bind to send it into town to be make 
 for ye , and could not put a button on a pair of breech for fear of 
 ' urtin ' yer delicate finger ! well ! God ' elp ye when the man come as 
 ye're lookin ' for ! he will be a fool anyhow , for all man be that,--but 
 he will be twice a fool if he take you for a life - satchel on his 
 shoulder ! " 

 Jenny Spinner endure this tirade patiently , and go on with the 
 washing - up in which she be engage , only turn her head to look at 
 Innocent as she appear suddenly in the kitchen doorway , with her hair 
 slightly dishevel and the wreath of wild rose crown her brow . 

 " Priscilla , where be Dad ? " she ask . 

 " Lord save we , lovey ! you give I a real scare come in like that with 
 they rose on yer head like a pixie out of the wood ! the master ? he be 
 just where the doctor leave ' I m , sittin ' in his easy - chair and look 
 out o ' window . " 

 " be it -- be it all right , do you think ? " ask the girl , hesitatingly . 

 " now , lovey , do not ask I about doctor , 'cos I do not know nothing and 
 want to know nothing , for they be close - tongue folk who never sez 
 what they think lest they get their bless self into hot water . and 
 whether it be all right or all wrong , I could not tell ye , for the two o ' 
 they go out together , and Mr. Slowton sez ' good - arternoon , Miss 
 Friday ! ' quite perlite like , and the other gentleman he lift ' be ' at 
 quite civil , so I should say ' twas all wrong . for if you mark I , 
 lovey , man 's allus extra perlite when they think there be go to be 
 trouble , hopin ' they will get something for theirselve out of it . " 

 Innocent hardly wait to hear her last word . 

 " I be go to Dad , " she say , quickly , and disappear . 

 Priscilla Friday stop for a minute in the rolling - cut of her pastry . 
 some great stress of thought appear to be work behind she wrinkle 
 brow , for she shake her head , purse her lip and roll up her eye a 
 great many time . then she give a short sigh and go on with her work . 

 the farmhouse be a rambling old place , full of quaint corner , arch 
 and odd little step up and down lead to cupboard , mysterious 
 recess and devious winding way which turn into dark narrow 
 passage , branch right and leave through the whole breadth of the 
 house . it be along one of these that Innocent run swiftly on leave 
 the kitchen , till she reach a closed door , where pausing , she 
 listen a moment - then , hear no sound , open it and go softly in . 
 the room she enter be fill with soft shadow of the gradually 
 fall dusk , yet partially light by a golden flame of the after - glow 
 which shine through the open lattice window from the western sky . 
 close to the wan light sit the master of the farm , still clothe in his 
 smock frock , with his straw hat on the table beside he and his stick 
 lean against the arm of his chair . he be very quiet,--so quiet , 
 that a late beam of the sun , touch the rough silver white of his 
 hair , seem almost obtrusive , as suggest an interruption to the 
 moveless peace of his attitude . Innocent stop short , with a tremor 
 of nervous fear . 

 " Dad ! " she say , softly . 

 he turn towards she . 

 " ay , lass ! what be it ? " 

 she do not answer , but come up and knelt down beside he , take one 
 of his brown wrinkle hand in her own and caress it . the silence 
 between they be unbroken for quite two or three minute ; then he say : 

 " last load in all safe ? " 

 " yes , Dad ! " 

 " not a drop of rain to wet it , and no hard word to toughen it , eh ? " 

 " no , Dad . " 

 she give the answer a little hesitatingly . she be think of Ned 
 Landon . he catch the slight falter in her voice and look at she 
 suspiciously . 

 " be quarrel with Robin ? " 

 " Dear Dad , no ! we be the good of friend . " 

 he loosen his hand from her clasp and pat her head with it . 

 " that be right ! that be as it should be ! be friend with Robin , child ! be 
 friends!--be lover ! " 

 she be silent . the after - glow warm the tint of her hair to 
 russet - gold and turn to a deeply pink the petal of the rose in the 
 wreath she wear . he touch the blossom and speak with great 
 gentleness . 

 " do Robin crown thee ? " 

 she look up , smile . 

 " no , it be Larry 's wreath . " 

 " Larry ! ay , poor Larry ! a good lad -- but he can eat for two and only 
 work for one . ' tis the way of man nowadays ! " 

 another pause ensue , and the western gold of the sky begin to fade 
 into misty grey . 

 " Dad , " say the girl then , in a low tone--"do tell I -- what do the 
 London doctor say ? " 

 he lift his head quickly , and his old eye for a moment flash as 
 though suddenly illumine by a flame from within . 

 " say ! what should he say , lass , but that I be old and must expect to 
 die ? it be natural enough -- only I have not think about it . it be just 
 that -- I have not think about it ! " 

 " why should you think about it ? " she ask , with quick tenderness--"you 
 will not die yet -- not for many year . you be not so very old . 
 and you be strong . " 

 he pat her head again . 

 " poor little wilding ! " he said--"If you have your way I should live for 
 ever , no doubt ! but an ' you be wise with modern wisdom , you would say 
 I have already live too long ! " 

 for answer , she draw down his hand and kiss it . 

 " I do not want any modern wisdom , " she said--"i be your little girl and 
 I love you ! " 

 a shadow flit across his face and he move uneasily . she look up 
 at he . 

 " you will not tell I ? " 

 " tell you what ? " 

 " all that the London doctor say . " 

 he be silent for a minute 's space -- then he answer . 

 " yes , I will tell you , but not now . to - night after supper will be time 
 enough . and then-- " 

 " yes -- then ? " she repeat , anxiously . 

 " then you shall know -- you will have to know-- " here he break off 
 abruptly . " innocent ! " 

 " yes , Dad ? " 

 " how old be you now ? " 

 " Eighteen . " 

 " ay , so you be ! " and he look at her searchingly . " quite a woman ! 
 Time fly ! you be old enough to learn-- " 

 " I have always try to learn , " she said--"and I like study thing 
 out of books-- " 

 " ay ! but there be bad thing in life than ever be write in 
 book , " he answer , wearily--"things that people hide away and be 
 ashamed to speak of ! ay , poor wilding ! thing that I have try to keep 
 from you as long as possible -- but -- time press , and , I shall have to 
 speak-- " 

 she look at he earnestly . her face pal and her eye grow dark and 
 wonder . 

 " have I do anything wrong ? " she ask . 

 " you ? no ! not you ! you be not to blame , child ! but you have hear the 
 law set out in church on Sundays that ' the sin of the father shall be 
 visit on the child even unto the third and fourth generation . ' 
 you have hear that ? " 

 " yes , Dad ! " 

 " ay!--and who dare say the fourth generation be to blame ! yet , though 
 they be guiltless , they suffer most ! no just God ever make such a law , 
 though they say ' tis God speak . _ I _ say ' tis the devil ! " 

 his voice grow harsh and loud , and find his stick near his chair , he 
 take hold of it and strike it against the ground to emphasise his word . 

 " I say ' tis the devil ! " 

 the girl rise from her kneeling attitude and put her arm gently round 
 his shoulder . 

 " there , Dad ! " she say soothingly,--"Don't worry ! church and church 
 thing seem to rub you up all the wrong way ! do not think about they ! 
 supper will be ready in a little while and after supper we will have a 
 long talk . and then you will tell I what the doctor say . " 

 his angry excitement subside suddenly and his head sink on his breast . 

 " ay ! after supper . then -- then I will tell you what the doctor say . " 

 his speech falter . he turn and look out on the garden , full of 
 luxuriant blossom , the colour of which be gradually merge into 
 indistinguishable mass under the darken grey of the dusk . 

 she move softly about the room , set thing straight , and lighting 
 two candle in a pair of tall brass candlestick which stand one on 
 either side of a carve oak press . the room thus illumine show 
 itself to be a roughly - timbere apartment in the style of the early 
 Tudor time , and all the furniture in it be of the same period . the 
 thick gate - legged table -- the curious chair , picturesque , but 
 uncomfortable -- the two old dower chest -- the quaint three - legged stool 
 and upright settle , be a collection that would have be precious to 
 the art dealer and curio hunter , as would the massive eight - day clock 
 with its grotesquely paint face , delineate not only the hour and 
 day but the lunar month , and possess a sonorous chime which just 
 now strike eight with a boom as deep as that of a cathedral bell . the 
 sound appear to startle the old farmer with a kind of shock , for he 
 rise from his chair and grasp his stick , look about he as though 
 for the moment uncertain of his bearing . 

 " how fast the hour go by ! " he mutter , dreamily . " when we be young 
 they do not count -- but when we be old we know that every hour bring we 
 near to the end - the end , the end of all ! another night closing 
 in -- and the last load clear from the field -- innocent ! " 

 the name break from his lip like a cry of suffering , and she run to 
 he tremble . 

 " Dad , dear , what be it ? " 

 he catch her outstretche hand and hold they close . 

 " nothing -- nothing ! " he answer , draw his breath quick and 
 hard--"Nothing , lass ! no pain -- no -- not that ! I be only frightened ! 
 frightened!--think of it!--me frighten who never know fear ! and I -- I 
 would not tell it to anyone but you -- I'm afraid of what be come -- of 
 what be bind to come ! ' twould always have come , I know -- but I never 
 think about it -- it never seem real ! it never seem real-- " 

 here the door open , admit a flood of cheerful light from the 
 outside passage , and Robin Clifford enter . 

 " Hullo , Uncle ! supper 's ready ! " 

 the old man 's face change instantly . its worn and scared expression 
 smooth into a smile , and , loosen his hold of Innocent , he 
 straighten himself and stand erect . 

 " all right , my lad ! you have work pretty late ! " 

 " yes , and we have not do yet . but we shall finish stack tomorrow , " 
 answer clifford--"just now we be all tired and hungry . " 

 " do not say you be thirsty ! " say the old farmer , his smile broaden . 
 " how many barrel have be tap to - day ? " 

 " oh , well ! you would well ask Landon,"--and Clifford 's light laugh have a 
 touch of scorn in it,--"he 's the man for the beer ! I hardly ever touch 
 it -- Innocent know that . " 

 " More work be do on water after all , " say Jocelyn . " the horse that 
 draw for we and the cattle that make food for we prove that . but we 
 think we be a bit high than the beast , and some of we get drunk to 
 prove it ! that be one of our strange way as man ! come along , lad ! and 
 you , child,"--here he turn to innocent--"run and tell Priscilla we be 
 wait in the Great Hall . " 

 he seem to have suddenly lose all feebleness , and walk with a firm 
 step into what he call the Great Hall , which be distinguish by 
 this name from the less or entrance hall of the house . it be a nobly 
 proportion , very lofty apartment , richly timbere , the roof be 
 support by huge arched beam curiously and intricately carve . long 
 narrow board on stout old trestle occupy the centre , and these be 
 spread with cloth of coarse but spotlessly clean linen and furnish 
 with antique plate , tankard and other vessel of pewter which would 
 have sell for a far large sum in the market than solid silver . a tall 
 carve chair be set at the head of the large table , and in this 
 Farmer Jocelyn seat himself . the man now begin to come in from the 
 field in their work - a - day clothe , escort by Ned Landon , their only 
 attempt at a toilet have be a wash and brush up in the outhouse ; 
 and soon the hall present a scene of lively bustle and activity . 
 Priscilla , enter it from the kitchen with her two assistant , 
 bring in three huge smoking joint on enormous pewter dishes,--then 
 follow other good thing of all sorts,--vegetables , pudding , 
 pasty , cake and fruit , which Innocent help to set out all along 
 the board in tempting array . it be a generous supper fit for a 
 " Harvest Home"--yet it be only Farmer Jocelyn 's ordinary way of 
 celebrate the end of the haymaking,--the real harvest home be 
 another and big festival yet to come . Robin Clifford begin to carve 
 a sirloin of beef,--Ned Landon , who be nearly opposite he , actively 
 apportion slice of roast pork , the delicacy most favour by the 
 majority , and when all the knife and fork be go and voice begin 
 to be loud and tongue discursive , Innocent slip into a chair by 
 Farmer Jocelyn and sit between he and Priscilla . for not only the farm 
 hand but all the servant on the place be at table , this haymaking 
 supper be the annual order of the household . the girl 's small 
 delicate head , with its coronal of wild rose , look strange and 
 incongruous among the rough specimen of manhood about she , and 
 sometimes as the laughter become boisterous , or some bucolic witticism 
 catch her ear , a faint flush colour the paleness of her cheek and a 
 little nervous tremor run through her frame . she draw as closely as she 
 could to the old farmer , who sit rigidly upright and quiet , eat 
 nothing but a morsel of bread with a bowl of hot salt milk Priscilla 
 have put before he . Beer be serve freely , and be pass from man to 
 man in leather " blackjack " such as be commonly use in olden time , 
 but which be now consider mere curiosity . they be , however , 
 ordinary wear at Briar Farm , and have be so since very early day . the 
 Great Hall be light by tall window reach almost to the roof and 
 traverse with shaft of solid stonework ; the one immediately opposite 
 Farmer Jocelyn 's chair show the very last parting glow of the sunset 
 like a dull red gleam on a dark sea . for the rest , thick home - make 
 candle of a torch shape fix into iron sconce round the wall 
 illumine the room , and burn with unsteady flare , give rise to 
 curious light and shadow as though ghostly figure be pass to 
 and fro , ruffle the air with their unseen presence . Priscilla 
 Priday , she wizene yellow face just now redden to the tint of a 
 winter apple by her recent exertion in the kitchen , be not so much 
 engage in eat her supper as in watch her master . her beady brown 
 eye rove from he to the slight delicate girl beside he with 
 inquisitive alertness . she feel and see that the old man 's thought 
 be far away , and that something of an unusual nature be troubling 
 his mind . Priscilla be an odd - look creature but faithful;--h 
 attachment be strong , and her dislike only a shade more 
 violent,--and just now she entertain very uncomplimentary sentiment 
 towards " they doctor " who have , as she surmise , put her master out of 
 sort with himself , and cause anxiety to the " darling child , " as she 
 invariably call Innocent when recommend she to the guidance of the 
 Almighty in her daily and nightly prayer . meanwhile the noise at the 
 supper table grow louder and more incessant , and sundry deep potation 
 of home - brew ale begin to do their work . one man , seat near Ned 
 Landon , be hold forth in very slow thick accent on the subject of 
 education : 

 " be eddicate ! " he say , articulate his word with 
 difficulty,--"that be what I say , boy ! be eddicate ! then everything 's 
 right for we ! we can kick all the rich out into the mud and take their 
 good and enjoy them for ourselves . Eddication do it ! make we all we 
 want to be,--member o ' parli'ment and what not ! I have only one 
 boy,--but he will be eddicate as his father never was-- " 

 " and learn to despise his father ! " say Robin , suddenly , his clear 
 voice ring out above the other 's husky loquacity . " you be right ! 
 that be the good way to train a boy in the way he should go ! " 

 there be a brief silence . then come a fresh murmur of voice and Ned 
 Landon 's voice rise above they . 

 " I do not agree with you , Mr. Clifford , " he said--"There be no reason why 
 a well - educate lad should despise his father . " 

 " but he often do , " say Robin--"reason or no reason . " 

 " well , you be educate yourself , " retort Landon , with a touch of 
 envy,--"You win a scholarship at your grammar school , and you have be 
 to a University . " 

 " what be that do for I ? " demand Robin , carelessly,--"where have it 
 put I ? just nowhere , but exactly where I might have stand all the 
 time . I do not learn farming at Oxford ! " 

 " but you do not learn to despise your father either , do you , sir ? " 
 query one of the farm hand , respectfully . 

 " my father 's dead , " answer Robin , curtly,--"and I honour his memory . " 

 " so your own argument go to the wall ! " say Landon . " education have 
 not make you think less of he . " 

 " in my case , no , " say robin,--"but in dozen of other case it work 
 out differently . besides , you have get to decide what education be . the 
 man who know how to plough a field rightly be as usefully educate as 
 the man who know how to read a book , in my opinion . " 

 " education , " interpose a strong voice , " be first to learn one 's place 
 in the world and then know how to keep it ! " 

 all eye turn towards the head of the table . it be Farmer Jocelyn 
 who speak , and he go on speak : 

 " what be call education nowadays , " he say , " be a mere smattering and 
 do no good . the child be teach , especially in small village 
 like ours , by man and woman who often know less than the child 
 themselves . what do you make of Danvers , for example , boy ? " 

 a roar of laughter go round the table . 

 " danver ! " exclaim a huge red - faced fellow at the other end of the 
 board,--"Why he talk yer ' ead off about what he be pick up here and 
 there like , and when I ask he to tell I where my son be as go to 
 Mexico , blow if he do not say it be a town somewhere near New York ! " 

 another roar go round the table . Farmer Jocelyn smile and hold up 
 his hand to enjoin silence . 

 " Mr. Danvers be a teacher select by the government , " he then 
 observe , with mock gravity . " and if he teach we that Mexico be a 
 town near New York , we poor ignorant farm - folk be bind to believe 
 he ! " 

 they all laugh again , and he continue : 

 " I be old enough , boy , to have see many change , and I tell you , all 
 thing consider , that the bad change be the education business , so 
 far as the strength and the health of the country go . that , and 
 machine work . when I be a youngster , nearly every field - hand know how 
 to mow,--now we have trouble enough to find an extra man who can use a 
 scythe . and you may put a machine on the grass as much as you like , 
 you will never get the quality that you will get with a well - curve blade 
 and a man 's arm and hand wield it . long work maybe , and risk of 
 rain -- but , take the odd for and against , man be well than 
 machine . forty year we have scythe the grass on Briar Farm , and 
 have not we have the fine crop of hay in the county ? " 

 a chorus of gruff voice answer he : 

 " ay , Mister Jocelyn ! " 

 " that be right ! " 

 " I never ' member more'n two wet season and then we get last load in 
 ' tween shower , " observe one man , thoughtfully . 

 " there be not never be nothing wrong with Briar Farm hay crop 
 anyway -- all the buyer know that for thirty mile round , " say another . 

 " and the wheat and the corn and the barley and the oats the same , " 
 strike in the old farmer again--"all the seed sow by hand and the 
 harvest reap by hand , and every man and boy in the village or near it 
 have find work enough to keep he in his native place , spring , summer , 
 autumn and winter , be not that so ? " 

 " ay , ay ! " 

 " never a day out o ' work ! " 

 " talk of unemployed trouble , " go on Jocelyn , " if the old way be 
 keep up and work do in the old fashion , there would be plenty for all 
 England 's man to do , and to feed fair and hearty ! but the idea nowadays 
 be to rush everything just to get finish with it , and then to play 
 card or football , and get drunk till the leg do not know whether it be 
 land or water they be stand on ! it be the wrong way about , boy ! it be 
 the wrong way about ! you may hurry and scurry along as fast as you 
 please , but you miss most good thing by the way ; and there be only one 
 end to your racing -- the grave ! there be no such haste to drop into that , 
 boy ! it will wait ! it be always wait ! and the quick you go the 
 quick you will get to it ! take time while you be young ! that time for 
 I be past ! " 

 he lift his head and look round upon they all . there be a strange 
 wild look in his old eyes,--and a sudden sense of awe fall on the rest 
 of the company . Farmer Jocelyn seem all at once remove from they to 
 a height of dignity above his ordinary bearing . Innocent 's rose - crown 
 head droop , and tear spring involuntarily to her eye . she try to 
 hide they , not so well , however , but that Priscilla Priday see they . 

 " now , lovey child ! " she whispered,--"don't take on ! it be only the 
 doctor that be make he low like and feelin ' blue , and he be not takin ' 
 sup or morsel , but we will make he have a bite in his own room 
 afterwards . do not you swell your pretty eye and make them red , for that 
 will not suit I nor Mr. Robin neither , come , come!--that it will not ! " 

 Innocent put one of her little hand furtively under the board and 
 press Priscilla 's rough knuckle tenderly , but she say nothing . the 
 silence be break by one of the old man present , who rise , tankard 
 in hand . 

 " the time for good farming be never past ! " he say , in a hearty 
 voice--"and no one will ever beat Farmer Jocelyn at that ! full cup , 
 boy ! and the master 's health ! long life to he ! " 

 the response be immediate , every man rise to his foot . none of they 
 be particularly unsteady except Ned Landon , who nearly fall over the 
 table as he get up , though he manage to straighten himself in time . 

 " Farmer Jocelyn ! " 

 " to Briar Farm and the master ! " 

 " Health and good luck ! " 

 these salutation be roar loudly round the table , and then the 
 whole company give vent to a hearty ' hip - hip - hurrah ! ' that rouse 
 echo from the vaulted roof and make its flaring light tremble . 

 " one more ! " shout Landon , suddenly , turn his flushed face from 
 side to side upon those immediately near him--"Miss Jocelyn ! " 

 there follow a deafening volley of cheering,--tankards clink 
 together and shine in the flickering light and every eye look towards 
 the girl , who , colour deeply , shrank from the tumult around she like 
 a leaf shivering in a storm - wind . Robin glance at she with a 
 half - jealous , half - anxious look , but her face be turn away from he . 
 he lift his tankard and , bow towards she , drink the content . when 
 the toast be fully pledge , Farmer Jocelyn get up , amid much clapping 
 of hand , stamp of foot and thump on the board . he wait till 
 quiet be restore , and then , speak in strong resonant accent , say : 

 " boy , I thank you ! you be all boy to I , young and old , for you have 
 work on the farm so long that I seem to know your face as well as I 
 know the shape of the land and the tree on the ridge . you have wish 
 I health and long life -- and I take it that your wish be honest -- but 
 I have have a long life already and must not expect much more of it . 
 however , the farm will go on just the same whether I be here or 
 elsewhere,--and no man that work well on it will be turn away from 
 it,--that I can promise you ! and the advice I have always give to you I 
 give to you again,--stick to the land and the work of the land ! there be 
 nothing fine in the world than the fresh air and the scent of the good 
 brown earth that give you the reward of your labour , always provide 
 it be labour and not ' scamp ' service . when I be go you will perhaps 
 remember what I say,--and think it not so badly say either . I thank 
 you for your good wish and"--here he hesitated--"my little girl here 
 thank you too . next time you make the hay -- if I be not with you -- I ask 
 you to be as merry as you be to - night and to drink to my memory ! for 
 whenever one master of Briar Farm have go there be always be another 
 in his place!--and there always will be ! " he paused,--then lift a 
 full tankard which have be put beside he , he drink a few drop of its 
 contents--"god bless you all ! may you long have the will to work and 
 the health to enjoy the fruit of honest labour ! " 

 there be another outburst of noisy cheering , follow by a new kind of 
 clamour , 

 " a song ! " 

 " a song ! " 

 " who will begin ? " 

 " where 's steevy ? " 

 " Little steevy ! " 

 " Steevy ! Wheer be ye get to ? " roar one old fellow with very white 
 hair and a very red face--"ye're not so small as ye can hide in yer 
 mother 's thimble ! " 

 a young giant of a man stand up in response to this adjuration , 
 blush and smile bashfully . 

 " here I be ! " 

 " sing away , lad , sing away ! " 

 " wet yer pipe , and whistle ! " 

 " tune up , my blackbird ! " 

 Steevy , thus adjure , straighten himself to his full stature of over 
 six foot and drink off a cupful of ale . then he begin in a remarkably 
 fine and mellow tenor : 

     " would you choose a wife 
     for a happy life , 
       leave the town and the country take ; 
     where Susan and Doll , 
     and Jenny and Moll , 
     follow Harry and John , 
     while harvest go on , 
       and merrily , merrily rake ! " 

     " the lass give I here , 
     as brown as my beer , 
       that know how to govern a farm ; 
     that can milk a cow , 
     or farrow a sow , 
     make butter and cheese , 
     and gather green pea , 
       and guard the poultry from harm . " 


     " this , this be the girl , 
     worth ruby and pearl , 
       the wife that a home will make ! 
     we farmer need 
     no quality breed , 
     but a woman that be win 
     while harvest go on , 
       and we merrily , merrily rake ! " 

 [ footnote : Old Song 1740 . ] 

 a dozen or more stentorian voice join in the refrain : 

   " a woman that be win 
    while harvest go on , 
     and we merrily , merrily rake . " 

 " Bravo ! " 

 " good for you , Steevy ! " 

 " first - class ! " 

 " here be to you , my lad ! " 

 the shout , laughter and applause continue for many minute , then 
 come more singing of song from various rival to the tuneful Steevy . 
 and presently all join together in a boisterous chorus which run thus : 

   " a glass be good and a lass be good , 
     and a pipe be good in cold weather , 
   the world be good and the people be good , 
     and we be all good fellow together ! " 

 in the middle of this performance Farmer Jocelyn rise from his place 
 and leave the hall , Innocent accompany he . once he look back on 
 the gay scene present to he -- the disorder supper - table , the easy 
 lounge attitude of the well - feed man , the flare of the light which 
 cast a ruddy glow on old and young face and sparkle over the 
 burnish pewter,--then with a strange yearn pain in his eye he 
 turn slowly away , lean on the arm of the girl beside he , and 
 went,--leave the merry - maker to themselves . 




 CHAPTER III 

 return to the room where he have sit alone before supper , he sink 
 heavily into the armchair he have previously occupy . the window be 
 still open , and the scent of rose steal in with every breath of 
 air,--a few star sparkle in the sky , and a faint line of silver in 
 the east show where the moon would shortly rise . he look out in 
 dreamy silence , and for some minute seem too much absorb in 
 think to notice the presence of Innocent , who have seat herself at a 
 small table near he , on which she have set a light candle , and be 
 quietly sewing . she have forget that she still wear the wreath of 
 wild roses,--the fragile flower be droop and die in her hair , 
 and as she bent over her work and the candlelight illumine she 
 delicate profile , there be something almost sculptural in the shape of 
 the leaf as they encircle her brow , make she look like a young 
 greek nymph or goddess bring to life out of the poetic dream of the 
 elder world . she be troubled and anxious , but she try not to let 
 this seem apparent . she know from her life 's experience of his way and 
 whim that it be good to wait till the old man choose to speak , rather 
 than urge he into talk before he be ready or willing . she glance up 
 from her sewing now and again and see that he look very pale and 
 wear , and she feel that he suffer . her tender young heart ache with 
 longing to comfort he , yet she know not what she should say . so she 
 sit quiet , as full of love thought as a Madonna lily may be full of 
 the dew of Heaven , yet mute as the angelic blossom itself . presently he 
 move restlessly , and turn in his chair look at she intently . the 
 fixity of his gaze draw she like a magnet from her work and she put 
 down her sewing . 

 " do you want anything , Dad ? " 

 he rise , and begin to fumble with the button of his smock . 

 " ay -- just help I to get this off . the work day be over,--the 
 work clothe can go ! " 

 she be at his side instantly and with her light deft finger soon 
 disembarrass he of the homely garment . when it be take off a 
 noticeable transformation be effect in his appearance . clothe in plain 
 dark homespun , which be fashion into a suit somewhat resemble the 
 doublet and hose of olden time , his tall thin figure have a distinctly 
 aristocratic look and bear which be lack when clothe in the 
 labourer 's garb . Old as he be , there be trace of intellect and even 
 beauty in his features,--his head , on which the thin white hair shine 
 like spin silver , be proudly set on his shoulder in that unmistakable 
 line which indicate the power and the will to command ; and as he 
 unconsciously draw himself upright he look more like some old hero of 
 a hundred battle than a farmer whose chief pride be the excellence of 
 his crop and the prosperity of his farm manage by hand work only . for 
 despite the jeer of his neighbour , who be never tired of 
 remonstrate with he for not " go with the time , " Jocelyn have one 
 fix rule of farming , and this be that no modern machinery should be 
 use on his land . he be the good employer of labour for many and many 
 a mile round , and the most generous as well as the most exact 
 paymaster , and though people assert that there be no reasonable 
 explanation for it , nevertheless it annually happen that the 
 hand - sown , hand - reap crop of Briar Farm be fine and rich in 
 grain and quality , and of much well value than the machine - sown , 
 machine - reap crop of any other farm in the county or for that matter 
 in the three county adjoining . he stand now for a minute or two 
 watch Innocent as she look carefully over his smock frock to see 
 if there be any button miss or anything to be do require the 
 service of her quick needle and thread,--then as she fold it and put 
 it aside on a chair he say with a thrill of compassion in his voice : 

 " poor little child , thou hast eat no supper ! I see thee play with 
 the bread and touch no morsel . art not well ? " 

 she look up at he and try to smile , but tear come into her eye 
 despite her effort to keep they back . 

 " Dear Dad , I be only anxious , " she murmur , tremulously . " you , too , 
 have have nothing . shall I fetch you a glass of the old wine ? it will do 
 you good . " 

 he still bent his brow thoughtfully upon she . 

 " presently -- presently -- not now , " he answer . " come and sit by I at 
 the window and I will tell you -- i'll tell you what you must know . but see 
 you , child , if you be go to cry or fret , you will be no help to I 
 and I will just hold my peace ! " 

 she draw a quick breath , and her face pal . 

 " I will not cry , " she said,--"i will not fret . I promise you , Dad ! " 

 she come close up to he as she speak . he take she gently in his arm 
 and kiss she . 

 " that be a brave girl ! " and hold she by the hand he draw she towards 
 the open window--"look out there ! see how the star shine ! always the 
 same , no matter what happen to we poor folk down here,--they twinkle 
 as merrily over our graf as over our gardens,--and yet if we be to 
 believe what we be teach nowadays , they be all world more or less 
 like our own , full of live creature that suffer and die like 
 ourselves . it be a queer plan of the Almighty , to keep on make 
 wonderful and beautiful thing just to destroy they ! there seem no 
 sense in it ! " 

 he sit down again in his chair , and she , obey his gesture , bring a 
 low stool to his foot and settle herself upon it , lean against his 
 knee . her face be upturned to his and the flicker light of the tall 
 candle quiver over it show the wistful tender watchfulness of its 
 expression -- a look which seem to trouble he , for he avoid her eye . 

 " you want to know what the London doctor say , " he begin . " well , child , 
 you will not be any the well for know , but it be as I think . I have 
 get my death - warrant . Slowton be not sure about me,--but this man , ill 
 as he be himself , have have too much experience to make mistake . there be 
 no cure for I . I may last out another twelve month -- perhaps not so 
 long -- certainly not long . " 

 he see her cheek grow white with the ashy whiteness of a sudden shock . 
 her eye dilate with pain and fear , and a quick sigh escape she , then 
 she set her lip hard . 

 " I do not believe it , " she say , add with strong emphasis--"i won't 
 believe it ! " 

 he pat the small hand that rest on his knee . 

 " you will not ? poor little girl , you must believe it!--and more than that , 
 you must be prepare for it . even a year 's none too much for all that 
 have to be done,--'twill almost take I that time to look the thing 
 square in the face and give up the farm for good . "--Here he pause with 
 a kind of horror at his own words--"give up the farm!--my God ! and for 
 ever ! how strange it seem ! " 

 the tumult in her mind find sudden speech . 

 " Dad , dear ! Dad ! it be not true ! do not think it ! do not mind what the 
 doctor say . he be wrong -- i'm sure he be wrong ! you will live for many and 
 many a happy year yet -- oh yes , Dad , you will ! I be sure of it ! you will not 
 die , darle Dad ! why should you ? " 

 she break off with a half - smother sob . 

 " why should I ? " he say , with a perplexed frown ; " Ah!--that be more than 
 I can tell you ! there be neither rhyme nor reason in it that I can see . 
 but it be the rule of life that it should end in death . for some the end 
 be swift -- for some it be slow -- some know when it be come -- some 
 don't,--the last be the happy . I have be tell , you see,--and it be 
 no use my fighting against the fact,--a year at the most , perhaps less , 
 be the long term I have of Briar Farm . your eye be wet -- you 
 promise you would not cry . " 

 she furtively dash away the drop that be shin on her lash . 
 then she force a faint quivering smile . 

 " I be not cry , Dad , " she say . " there be nothing to cry for , " and she 
 fondle his hand in her own--"the doctor be wrong . you be only a 
 little weak and run down -- you'll be all right with rest and 
 care -- and -- and you shall not die ! you shall not die ! I will not let you . " 

 he draw a long breath and pass his hand across his forehead as though 
 he be puzzle or in pain . 

 " that be foolish talk , " he say , with some harshness ; " you have get 
 trouble to meet , and you must meet it . I be bind to show you 
 trouble -- but I can show you a way out of it as well . " 

 he pause a moment,--a light wind outside the lattice sway a branch 
 of rose to and fro , shake out their perfume as from a swung censer . 

 " the first thing I must tell you , " he go on , " be about yourself . it be 
 time you should know who you be . " 

 she look up at he startle . 

 " who I be ? " she repeated,--then as she see the stern expression on his 
 face a sudden sense of fear run through her nerve like the chill of an 
 icy wind and she wait dumbly for his next word . he grip her hand 
 hard in his own . 

 " now hear I out , child ! " he said--"Let I speak on without 
 interruption , or I shall never get through the tale . perhaps I ought to 
 have tell you before , but I have put it off and put it off , think 
 ' twould be time enough when you and Robin be we d. you and Robin -- you 
 and robin!--your marriage bell have ring through my brain many and 
 many a night for the past two year and never a bit near be you to 
 the end of your wooing , such fanciful child as you both be ! and 
 you be so long about it and I have so short a time before I that I have 
 make up my mind it be good to let you have all the truth about yourself 
 before anything happen to I . all the truth about yourself -- as far as 
 I know it . " 

 he pause again . she be perfectly silent . she tremble a 
 little -- wonder what she be go to hear . it must be something 
 dreadful , she thought,--something for which she be 
 unprepared,--something that might , perhaps , like a sudden change in the 
 current of the air , create darkness where there have be sunshine , 
 storm instead of calm . his grip on her hand be strong enough to hurt 
 she , but she be not conscious of it . she only wish he would tell she 
 the bad at once and quickly . the worst,--for she instinctively feel 
 there be no good . 

 " it be eighteen year ago this very haymake time , " he go on , with 
 a dreamy retrospective air as though he be talk to himself,--"The 
 last load have be take in . supper be over . the man have go 
 home,--Priscilla be clear the great hall , when there come on a 
 sudden storm -- just a flash of lightning -- I can see it now , strike a 
 blue fork across the window -- a clap of thunder -- and then a regular 
 downpour of rain . heavy rain , too,--buckets - full -- for it wash the 
 yard out and almost swamp the garden . I do not think much about 
 it,--the hay be haul in dry , and that be all my concern . I stand 
 under a shed in the yard and watch the rain fall in straight 
 sheet out of a sky black as pitch -- I could scarcely see my own hand if 
 I stretch it out before I , the night be so dark . all at once I 
 hear the quick gallop of a horse 's hoof some way off,--then the sound 
 seem to die away,--but presently I hear the hoof come at a slow 
 steady pace down our muddy old by - road -- no one can gallop that , in any 
 weather . and almost before I know how it come there , the horse be 
 stand at the farmyard gate , with a man in the saddle carry a 
 bundle in front of he . he be the handsome fellow I ever see , and 
 when he dismount and come towards I , and take off his cap in the 
 pour rain and smile at I , I be fairly take with his look . I 
 think he must be something of a king or other great personage by his 
 very manner . ' will you do I a kindness ? ' he say , as gently as you 
 please . ' this be a farm , I believe . I want to leave my little child 
 here in safe keeping for a night . she be such a baby,--i can not carry 
 she any far through this storm . ' and he put aside the wrapping of 
 the bundle he carry and show I a small pale infant asleep . ' she be 
 motherless , ' he add , ' and I be take she to my relative . but I have 
 to ride some distance from here on very urgent business , and if you 
 will look after she for to - night I will call for she to - morrow . poor 
 little innocent ! she be hungry and fretful . I have not anything to give 
 she and the storm look like continue . will you let she stay with 
 you ? ' ' certainly ! ' say I , without think a bit far about it . 
 ' leave she here by all mean . we will see she get all she want . ' he 
 give I the child at once and say in a very soft voice : ' you be most 
 generous!--"verily I have not find so great a faith , no not in 
 Israel ! " you be sure you do not mind ? ' ' not at all ! ' I answer 
 him,--'You'll come back for she to - morrow , of course . ' he smile and 
 said--'oh yes , of course ! to - morrow ! I be really very much oblige to 
 you ! ' then he seem to think for a moment and put his hand in his 
 pocket , but I stop him--'No , sir , ' I say , ' excuse I , but I do not 
 want any pay for give a babe a night 's shelter . ' he look at I very 
 straight with his big clear hazel eye , and then shake hand with I . 
 ' you be an honest fellow , ' he said,--and he stoop and kiss the 
 child he have put into my arm . ' I be extremely sorry to trouble you , but 
 the storm be too much for this helpless little creature . ' ' you yourself 
 be wet through , ' I interrupt . ' that do not matter , ' he 
 answered,--'for I nothing matter . thank you a thousand time ! 
 good - night ! ' the rain be come down fast than ever and I step 
 back into the shed , cover the child up so that the drift wet 
 should not beat upon it . he come after I and kiss it again , say 
 ' good - night , poor little innocent , good - night ! ' three or four time . 
 then he go off quickly and spring into his saddle and in the blur of 
 rain I see horse and man turn away . he wave his hand once and his 
 handsome pale face gleam upon I like that of a ghost in the storm . 
 ' till to - morrow ! ' he call , and be go . I take the child into the 
 house and call Priscilla . she be always a rough one as you know , 
 even in her young day , and she at once lay her tongue to with a 
 will and as far as she dare call I a fool for my pain . and so I 
 be , for when I come to think of it the man be a stranger to I , and I 
 have never ask he his name . it be just his handsome face and the way 
 he have with he that have throw I off my guard as it be ; so I stand 
 and look silly enough , I suppose , while Priscilla fuss about with 
 the baby , for it have waken and be cry . well!"--and Jocelyn heave 
 a short sigh--"That be about all ! we never see the man again , and the 
 child be never claim ; but every six month I receive a couple of 
 bank - note in an envelope bear a different postmark each time , with 
 the word : ' for Innocent ' write inside-- " 

 she utter a quick , almost terrified exclamation , and draw her hand 
 away from his . 

 " every six month for a steady twelve year on end , " he go on,--"then 
 the money suddenly stop . now you understand , do not you ? you be the 
 babe that be leave with I that stormy night ; and you have be with I 
 ever since . but you be not MY child . I do not know whose child you be ! " 

 he stop , look at she . 

 she have rise from her seat beside he and be stand up . she be 
 tremble violently , and her face seem change from the round and 
 mobile softness of youth to the worn pallor and thinness of age . her 
 eye be luminous with a hard and feverish brilliancy . 

 " you -- you do not know whose child I be ! " she repeated,--"I be not 
 your -- and you do not know -- you do not know who I belong to ! oh , it hurt 
 me!--it hurt I , Dad ! I can not realise it ! I think you be my own 
 dear father!--and I love you!--oh , how much I love you!--yet you have 
 deceive I all along ! " 

 " I have not deceive you , " he answer , impatiently . " I have do all for 
 the good -- I mean to tell you when you marry robin-- " 

 a flush of indignation fly over her cheek . 

 " Marry Robin ! " she exclaimed--"How could I marry Robin ? I be nothing ! 
 I be nobody ! I have not even a name ! " 

 she cover her face with her hand and an uncontrollable sob break 
 from she . 

 " not even a name ! " she murmured--"not even a name ! " 

 with a sudden impulsive movement she kneel down in front of he like a 
 child about to say its prayer . 

 " oh , help I , Dad ! " she say , piteously--"comfort I ! say 
 something -- anything ! I feel so lost -- so astray ! all my life seem 
 gone!--I can not realise it ! yes , I know ! you have be very kind,--all 
 kindness , just as if I have be your own little girl . oh , why do you 
 tell I I be your own?--i be so proud to be your daughter -- and 
 now -- it be so hard -- so hard ! only a few moment ago I be a happy girl 
 with a love father as I think -- now I know I be only a poor nameless 
 creature,--deserte by my parent and leave on your hand . oh , Dad dear ! 
 I have give you year of trouble!--i hope I have be good to you ! it be 
 not my fault that I be what I be ! " 

 he lay his wrinkle hand on her bow head . 

 " dear child , of course it be not your fault ! that be what I have say all 
 along . you be innocent , like your name,--and you have be a blessing to 
 I all your days,--the farm have be bright for your live on 
 it,--so you have no cause to worry I or yourself about what be past long 
 ago and can not be help . no one know your story but Priscilla,--no one 
 need ever know . " 

 she spring up from her kneeling attitude . 

 " Priscilla ! " she echoed--"she know , and she never say a word ! " 

 " if she have , she would have get the sack , " answer Jocelyn , bluntly . " you 
 be bring up always as MY child . " 

 he break off , startle by the tragic intensity of her look . 

 " I want to know how that be , " she say , slowly . " you tell I my mother 
 die when I be bear . " 

 he avoid her eye . 

 " well , that be true , or so I suppose , " he say . " the man who bring 
 you say you be motherless . but I -- I have never marry . " 

 " then how could you tell Robin -- and everyone else about here that I be 
 your daughter ? " 

 he grow suddenly angry . 

 " child , do not stare at I like that ! " he exclaim , with all an old 
 man 's petulance . " it do not matter what I say -- I have to let the 
 neighbour think you be mine-- " 

 a light flash in upon she , and she give vent to a shudder cry . 

 " Dad ! oh , Dad ! " 

 grip both arm of his chair he raise himself into an upright 
 posture . 

 " what now ? " he demand , almost fiercely--"what trouble be you go 
 to make of it ? " 

 " oh , if it be only trouble , " she exclaim , forlornly . " it be far 
 bad ! you have brand I with shame ! oh , I understand now ! I understand 
 at last why the girl about here never make friend with I ! I 
 understand why Robin seem to pity I so much ! oh , how shall I ever 
 look people in the face again ! " 

 his fuzzy brow meet in a heavy frown . 

 " little fool ! " he say , roughly,--"What shame be you talk of ? I see 
 no shame in lay claim to a child of my own , even though the claim 
 have no reality . look at the thing squarely ! here come a strange man 
 with a baby and leave it on my hand . you know what a scandalous , 
 gossip little place this is,--and it be well to say at once the 
 baby be mine than leave it to the neighbour to say the same thing and 
 that I would not acknowledge it . not a soul about here would have 
 believe the true story if I have tell it to they . I have do everything 
 for the good -- I know I have . and there will never be a word say if you 
 marry Robin . " 

 her face have grow very white . she put up her hand to her head and her 
 finger touch the fade wreath of wild rose . she draw it off and let 
 it drop to the ground . 

 " I shall never marry Robin ! " she say , with quiet firmness--"and I will 
 not be consider your illegitimate child any long . it be cruel of you 
 to have make I live on a lie!--yes , cruel!--though you have be so kind 
 in other thing . you do not know who my parent be -- you've no right to 
 think they be not honest ! " 

 he star at she amazed . for the first time in eighteen year he begin 
 to see the folly of what he have think his own special wisdom . this 
 girl , with her pale sad face and steadfast eye , confront he with 
 the calm reproachful air of an accuse angel . 

 " what right have you ? " she go on . " the man who bring I to 
 you,--poor wretche me!--if he be my father , may have be good and 
 true . he say I be motherless ; and he , or someone else , send you money 
 for I till I be twelve . that do not look as if I be forget . now 
 you say the money have stop -- well!--my father may be dead . " her lip 
 quiver and a few tear roll down her cheek . " but there be nothing 
 in all this that should make you think I basely born,--nothe that 
 should have persuade you to put shame upon I ! " 

 he be take aback for a minute by her word and attitude -- then he 
 burst out angrily : 

 " it be the old story , I see ! do a good action and it turn out a curse ! 
 Basely bear ! of course you be basely bear , if that be the way you put 
 it ! what man alive would leave his own lawful child at a strange farm 
 off the high - road and never claim it again ? you be a fool , I tell you ! 
 this man who bring you to I be by his look and bear some fine 
 gentleman or other who have just the one idea in his head -- to get rid of 
 an encumbrance . and so he get rid of you-- " 

 " do not go over the whole thing again ! " she interrupt , with weary 
 patience-"-I be an encumbrance to he -- I've be an encumbrance to 
 you . I be sorry ! but in no case have you the right to set a stigma on I 
 which perhaps do not exist . that be wrong ! " 

 she pause a moment , then go on slowly : 

 " I have be a burden on you for six year now,--it 's six year , you say , 
 since the money stop . I wish I could do something in return for what 
 I have cost you all those six years,--I've try to be useful . " 

 the pathos in her voice touch he to the quick . 

 " innocent ! " he exclaim , and hold out his arm . 

 she look at he with a very pitiful smile and shake her head . 

 " no ! I can not do that ! not just yet ! you see , it be all so 
 unexpected -- thing have change altogether in a moment . I can not feel 
 quite the same -- my heart seem so sore and cold . " 

 he lean back in his chair again . 

 " ah , well , it be as I think ! " he say , irritably . " you be more 
 concerned about yourself than about I . a few minute ago you only 
 care to know what the doctor think of my illness , but now it be 
 nothing to you that I shall be dead in a year . your mind be set on your 
 own trouble , or what you choose to consider a trouble . " 

 she hear he like one in a dream . it seem very strange to she that 
 he should have deal she a blow and yet reproach she for feel the 
 force of it . 

 " I be sorry ! " she say , patiently . " but this be the first time I have 
 know real trouble -- you forget that!--and you must forgive I if I be 
 stupid about it . and if the doctor really believe you be to die in a 
 year I wish I could take your place , Dad!--I would rather be dead than 
 live sham . and there be nothing leave for I now,--not even a name-- " 

 here she pause and seem to reflect . 

 " why be I call Innocent ? " 

 " why ? because that be the name that be write on every slip of paper 
 that come with each six month ' money , " he answer , testily . " that be 
 the only reason I know . " 

 " be I baptise by that name ? " she ask . 

 he move uneasily . 

 " you be never baptise . " 

 " never baptise ! " she echo the word despairingly,--and then be 
 silent for a minute 's space . " could you not have do that much for 
 I ? " she ask , plaintively , at last--"Would it have be impossible ? " 

 he be vaguely ashamed . her eye , pure as a young child 's , be fix 
 upon he in appeal sorrow . he begin to feel that he have do she a 
 grievous wrong , though he have never entirely realise it till now . he 
 answer she with some hesitation and an effort at excuse . 

 " not impossible -- no,--maybe I could have baptise you myself if I have 
 think about it . ' tis but a sprinkle of water and ' in the name of the 
 Father , Son , and Holy Ghost . ' but somehow I never worry my head -- for 
 as long as you be a baby I look for the man who bring you day 
 after day , and in my own mind leave all that sort of business for he to 
 attend to -- and when he do not come and you grow old , it fairly 
 slip my remembrance altogether . I be not fond of the Church or its 
 ways,--and you have do as well without baptism as with it , surely . 
 Innocent be a good name for you , and fit your case . for you be 
 innocent of the fault of your parent whatever they be , and you be 
 innocent of my blunder . you be free to make your own life pleasant if 
 you will only put a bright face on it and make the good of an awkward 
 business . " 

 she be silent , stand before he like a little statuesque figure of 
 desolation . 

 " as for the tale I tell the neighbour , " he go on--"it be the good 
 thing I could think of . if I have say you be a child I have take in 
 to adopt , not one of they would have believe I ; ' twas a case of 
 tell one lie or t'other , the real truth be so queer and out of 
 the common , so I choose the easy . and it be be all right with you , 
 my girl , whichever way you put it . there may be a few stick - up young 
 huzzie in the village that be not friendly to you , but you may take it 
 that it be more out of jealousy of Robin 's like for you than anything 
 else . Robin love you -- you know he do ; and all you have get to do be to 
 make he happy . marry he , for the farm will be his when I be dead , and 
 it will give I a bit of comfort to feel that you be settle down with 
 he in the old home . for then I know it will go on just the same -- just 
 the same-- " 

 his word trail off brokenly . his head sink on his chest , and some 
 slow tear make their difficult way out of his eye and drop on his 
 silver beard . 

 she watch he with a certain grave compassion , but she do not at 
 once go , as she would usually have do , to put her arm round his neck 
 and console he . she seem to herself remove mile away from he and 
 from everything she have ever know . just then there be a noise of 
 rough but cheery voice outside shout " good - night " to each other , 
 and she say in a quiet tone : 

 " the man be away now . be there anything you want before I go to bed ? " 

 with a sudden access of energy , which contrast strangely with his 
 former feebleness , he rise and confront she . 

 " no , there be nothing I want ! " he say , in vehement tones--"nothing but 
 peace and quietness ! I have tell you your story , and you take it ill . but 
 recollect , girl , that if you consider any shame have be put on you , 
 I have put equal shame on myself for your sake -- I , Hugo Jocelyn,--against 
 whom never a word have be say but this,--which be a lie -- that my 
 child , mine!--was bear out of wedlock ! I suffer this against myself 
 solely for your sake -- I , who never wrong a woman in my life!--i , who 
 never love but one woman , who die before I have the chance to marry 
 her!--and I say and I swear I have sacrifice something of my name and 
 reputation to you ! so that you need not make trouble because you also 
 share in the sacrifice . Robin think you be my child , and therefore his 
 cousin,--and he count nothing against you , for he know that what the 
 world would count against you must be my fault and would be my fault , 
 if the lie I start against myself be true . Marry Robin , I tell 
 you!--and if you care to make I happy , marry he before I die . then 
 you be safe out of all harm 's way . if you don't marry him-- " 

 her breath come and go quickly -- she fold her hand across her 
 bosom , try to still the loud and rapid beating of her heart , but her 
 eye be very bright and steadfast . 

 " yes ? what then ? " she ask , calmly . 

 " then you must take the consequence , " he say . " the farm and all I 
 have be leave to Robin,--he 's my dead sister 's son and my near living 
 kin-- " 

 " I know that , " she say , simply , " and I be glad he have everything . it be 
 right that it should be so . I shall not be in his way . you may be quite 
 sure of that . but I shall not marry he . " 

 " you will not marry he ? " he repeat , and seem about to give vent to a 
 torrent of invective when she extend her hand clasp together 
 appealingly . 

 " Dad , do not be angry!--it only hurt you and it do no good ! just 
 before supper you remind I of what they say in Church that ' the sin 
 of the father should be visit on the child , even unto the third 
 and fourth generation . ' I will not visit the sin of my father and 
 mother on anyone . if you will give I a little time I shall be able to 
 understand everything more clearly , and perhaps bear it well . I want 
 to be quite by myself . I must try to see myself as I am,--unbaptise , 
 nameless , forsake ! and if there be anything to be do with this 
 wretched little self of mine , it be I that must do it . with God 's 
 help ! " she sigh , and her lip move softly again in the last word , 
 " with God 's help ! " 

 he say nothing , and she wait a moment as if expect he to speak . 
 then she move to the table where she have be sit and fold up 
 her needlework . 

 " shall I get you some wine , Dad ? " she ask presently in a quiet voice . 

 " no ! " he reply , curtly--"priscilla can get it . " 

 " then good - night ! " 

 still stand erect he turn his head and look at she . 

 " be you go ? " he say . " without your usual kiss?--your usual 
 tenderness ? why should you change to I ? your own father -- if he be 
 your father -- desert you,--and I have be , a father to you in his 
 place , wrong my own honourable name for your sake ; be I to blame for 
 this ? be reasonable ! the law of man be one thing and the law of God 
 be another,--and we have to make the good we can of ourselves between 
 the two . there be many a piece of wicked injustice in the world , but 
 nothing more wicked than to set shame or blame on a child that be bear 
 without permit of law or blessing of priest . for it be not the child 's 
 fault,--it 's bring into the world without its own consent,--and yet 
 the world fasten a slur upon it ! that be downright brutal and 
 senseless!--for if there be any blame attach to the matter it should 
 be fasten on the parent , and not on the child . and that be what I 
 think when you be leave on my hand -- I take the blame of you on 
 myself , and I be careful that you should be treat with every 
 kindness and respect -- mind you that ! respect ! there be not a man on the 
 place that do not doff his cap to you ; and you have be as my own 
 daughter always . you can not deny it ! and more than that"--here his 
 strong voice faltered--"i've love you!--yes - I've love you , little 
 innocent-- " 

 she look up in his face and see it quiver with suppress emotion , 
 and the strange cold sense of aloofness that have numb her sens 
 suddenly give way like snow melt in the spring . in a moment she be 
 in his arm , weep out her pen - up tear on his breast , and he , 
 stroke her soft hair , soothe she with every tender and gentle word 
 he could think of . 

 " there , there ! " he murmur , fondly . " Thou must look at it in this way , 
 dear child ! that if God deprive thee of one father he give thee 
 another in his place ! make the good of that gift before it be take 
 from thee ! " 




 CHAPTER IV 

 there be still a few old house leave in rural England which be as yet 
 happily unmoleste by the destroy ravage of modern improvement , and 
 Briar Farm be one of these . history and romance alike have their share 
 in its annal , and its title - deed go back to the autumnal day of 
 1581 , when the Duke of Anjou come over from France to England with a 
 royal train of nobleman and gentleman in the hope to espouse the 
 great monarch of all time , " the most renowned and victorious " Queen 
 Elizabeth , whose reign have clearly demonstrate to the world how much 
 more ably a clever woman can rule a country than a clever man , if she 
 be leave to her own instinctive wisdom and prescience . no king have ever 
 be wise or more diplomatic than Elizabeth , and no king have leave a 
 more brilliant renown . as the cold of male historian be bind to 
 admit , " her singular power of government be found equally on her 
 temper and on her capacity . endow with a great command over herself , 
 she soon obtain an uncontrolled ascendant over her people . few 
 sovereign of England succeed to the throne under more difficult 
 circumstance , and none ever conduct the government with such uniform 
 success and felicity . " have Elizabeth be weak , the Duke of Anjou might 
 have realise his ambitious dream , with the unhappy result for 
 England ; and that he fortunately fail be entirely due to her 
 sagacity and her quick perception of his irresolute and feeble 
 character . in the sumptuous train attendant upon this " Petit 
 Grenouille , " as he style himself in one of his babyish epistle to 
 England 's sovereign majesty , there be a certain knight more inclined 
 to the study of letter than to the breaking of lances,--the Sieur 
 Amadis de Jocelin , who be much about the court in the wake of his 
 somewhat capricious and hot - temper master , come , unfortunately for 
 his own peace of mind , into occasional personal contact with one of the 
 most bewitch young woman of her time , the Lady Penelope Devereux , 
 afterwards Lady Rich , she in whom , accord to a contemporary writer , 
 " lodge all attractive grace and beauty , wit and sweetness of 
 behaviour which might render she the mistress of all eye and heart . " 
 surround as she be by many suitor , his passion be hopeless from 
 the first , and that he find it so be evident from the fact that he 
 suddenly disappear from the court and from his master 's retinue , and 
 be never hear of by the great world again . yet he be not far away . 
 he have not the resolution to leave England , the land which enshrine 
 the lady of his love,--and he have lose all inclination to return to 
 France . he therefore retire into the depth of the sweet English 
 country , among the then unspoilt forest and woodland , and there 
 happen to find a small manor - house for immediate sale , surround by 
 a considerable quantity of land , he purchase it for the ready cash he 
 have about he and settle down in it for the remainder of his life . 
 little by little , such social ambition as he have ever possess left 
 he , and with every pass year he grow more and more attach to the 
 simplicity and seclusion of his surrounding . he have leisure for the 
 indulgence of his delight in book , and he be able to give the rein to 
 his passion for poetry , though it be nowhere record that he ever 
 publish the numerous essay , sonnet and rhyme piece which , write 
 in the picturesque caligraphy of the period , and roughly bind by 
 himself in sheepskin , occupy a couple of shelf in his library . he 
 enter with animation and interest into the pleasure of farming and 
 other agricultural pursuit , and by - and - bye as time go on and the 
 former idol of his dream descend from her fair estate of virtue and 
 scandalise the world by her liaison with Lord Mountjoy , he appear to 
 have gradually resign the illusion of his first love , for he marry 
 a simple village girl , remarkable , so it be say , for her beauty , but 
 more so for her skill in make butter and cheese . she could neither 
 read nor write , however , and the tradition concern the Sieur Amadis 
 relate that he take a singular pleasure in teach she these 
 accomplishment , as well as in train she to sing and to accompany 
 herself upon the lute in a very pretty manner . she make he an 
 excellent wife , and give he no less than six child , three boy and 
 three girl , all of whom be bring up at home under the supervision 
 of their father and mother , and encourage to excel in country pursuit 
 and to understand the art of profitable farming . it be in their day 
 that Briar Farm enter upon its long career of prosperity , which still 
 continue . the Sieur Amadis die in his seventieth year , and by his own 
 wish , express in his " last Will and Testament , " be bury in a 
 sequester spot on his own land , under a stone slab which he have 
 himself fashion , carve upon it his recumbent figure in the costume 
 of a knight , a cross upon his breast and a broken sword at his side . 
 his wife , though several year young than himself , only live a 
 twelve - month after he and be inter by his side . their 
 resting - place be now wall off , plant thickly with flower , and 
 hold sacred by every succeed heir to the farm as the burial - place of 
 the first Jocelyns . steadily and in order , the family spring from 
 the parent tree of the french knight Amadis have occupy Briar Farm in 
 unbroken succession , and through three century the property have be 
 keep intact , none of its possession be disperse and none of its 
 land be sell . the house be practically in the same sound condition 
 as when the Sieur Amadis fit and furnish it for his own 
 occupation,--there be the same pewter , the same solid furniture , the 
 same fine tapestry , preserve by the careful mending of many hundred 
 of needle work by hand long ago mingle with the dust of the grave , 
 and , strange as it may seem to those who be only acquaint with the 
 flimsy manufacture of to - day , the same stout hand - wrought linen , 
 which , mend and replenish each year , last so long because never 
 wash by modern method , but always by hand in clear cold running 
 water . there be press full of this linen , deliriously scented with 
 lavender , and there be also the spinning - wheel that have spin the 
 flax and the hand - loom on which the thread have be weave . these be 
 witness to the day when woman , instead of gad abroad , be happy 
 to be at home -- when the winter evening seem short and bright because 
 as they sit spin by the blaze log fire they be cheerful in 
 their occupation , sing song and tell story and have so much 
 to do that there be no time to indulge in the morbid analysis of life 
 and the thing of life which in our present shiftless day perplex and 
 confuse idle and unhealthy brain . 

 and now after more than three century , the direct male line of Amadis 
 de Jocelin have culminate in Hugo , commonly call Farmer Jocelyn , who , 
 on account of some secret love disappointment , the detail of which he 
 have never tell to anyone , have remain unmarried . till the appearance 
 on the scene of the child , Innocent , who be by the village folk 
 accept and believe to be the illegitimate offspring of this 
 ill - star love , it be tacitly understand that Robin Clifford , his 
 nephew , and the only son of his twin sister , would be the heir to Briar 
 Farm ; but when it be see how much the old man seem to cling to 
 Innocent , and to rely upon her ever tender care of he , the question 
 arise as to whether there might not be an heiress after all , instead of 
 an heir . and the rustic wiseacre gossip , as be their will not , watch 
 with no small degree of interest the turn of event which have lately 
 take place in the frank and open admiration and affection display by 
 Robin for his illegitimate cousin , as it be think she be , and as 
 Farmer Jocelyn have tacitly allow it to be understand . if the two 
 young people marry , everybody agree it would be the right thing , and 
 the good possible outlook for the continue prosperity of Briar Farm . 
 for after all , it be the farm that have to be chiefly consider , so 
 they opined,--the farm be an historic and valuable property as well as 
 an excellent pay concern . the great point to be attain be that it 
 should go on as it have always go on from the day of the Sieur 
 Amadis,--and that it should be keep in the possession of the same 
 family . this at any rate be know to be the cherished wish of old Hugo 
 Jocelyn , though he be not give to any very free expression of his 
 feeling . he know that his neighbour envy he , watch he and 
 comment on his actions,--he know also that the tale he have tell they 
 concern Innocent have to a great extent whisper away his own good 
 name and fasten a social slur upon the girl,--yet he could not , 
 accord to his own view , have see any other way out of the 
 difficulty . the human world be always wicked - tongue ; and it be common 
 knowledge that any man or woman introduce an " adopted " child into a 
 family be at once accuse , whether he or she be conscious of the 
 accusation or not , of pass off his own bastard under the " adoption " 
 pretext . Hugo Jocelyn be fairly certain that none of his neighbour 
 would credit the romantic episode of the man on horseback arrive in a 
 storm and leave a nameless child on his hand . the story be quite 
 true,--but truth be always precisely what people refuse to believe . 

 the night on which Innocent have learn her own history for the first 
 time be a night of consummate beauty in the natural world . when all 
 the gate and door of the farm and its outbuilding have be bolt 
 and bar for the night , the moon , almost full , rise in a cloudless 
 heaven and shed pearl - white shower of radiance all over the newly - mow 
 and clean - sweep field , outline the point of the old house gable 
 and touch with luminous silver the rose that clamber up the 
 wall . one wide latticed window be open to the full inflowing of the 
 scented air , and within its embrasure sit a lonely little figure in a 
 loose white garment with hair tumble carelessly over its shoulder 
 and eye that be wet with tear . the clang chime of the old clock 
 below stair have strike eleven some ten minute since , and after the 
 echo of its bell have die away there have follow a heavy and intense 
 silence . the window look not upon the garden , but out upon the field 
 and a suggestive line of dark foliage edge they softly in the 
 distance,--away down there , under a huge myriad - branch oak , sleep the 
 old knight Sieur Amadis de Jocelin and his english rustic wife , the 
 founder of the Briar Farm family . the little figure in the dark 
 embrasure of the window clasp its white hand and turn its weeping 
 eye towards that ancient burial - place , and the moon - ray shine upon 
 its fair face with a silvery glimmer , give it an almost spectral 
 pallor . " why be I ever bear ? " sigh a tremble voice--"oh , dear God ! 
 why do you let it be ? " 

 the vacant air , the vacant field look blankly irresponsive . they have 
 no sympathy to give,--they never have . to great Mother Nature it be not 
 important how or why a child be bear , though she occasionally decide 
 that it shall be of the great importance how and why the child shall 
 live . what do it matter to the force of creative life whether it be 
 bring into the world " basely , " as the phrase go , or honourably ? the 
 child exists,--it be a human entity -- a being full of potential good or 
 evil,--and after a certain period of growth it stand alone , and its 
 parent have less to do with it than they imagine . it make its own 
 circumstance and shape its own career , and in many case the less it 
 be interfere with the well . but Innocent could not reason out her 
 position in any cold - blooded or logical way . she be too young and too 
 unhappy . everything that she have take pride in be sweep from she at 
 once . only that very morning she have make one of her many pilgrimage 
 down to the venerable oak beneath whose trailing branch the Sieur 
 Amadis de Jocelin lay , cover by the broad stone slab on which he have 
 carve his own likeness , and she have put a little knot of the " Glory " 
 rose between his mail hand which be fold over the cross on his 
 breast , and she have say to the silent effigy : 

 " it be the last day of the haymaking , Sieur Amadis ! you would be glad 
 to see the big crop go in if you be here ! " 

 she be accustom to talk to the old stone knight in this fanciful 
 way,--she have do so all her life ever since she could remember . she 
 have take an intense pride in thinking of he as her ancestor ; she have 
 be glad to trace her lineage back over three century to the 
 love - lorn french noble who have come to England in the train of the Due 
 d'Anjou -- and now -- now she know she have no connection at all with 
 him,--that she be an unnamed , unbaptised nobody -- an unclaimed waif of 
 humanity whom no one want ! no one in all the world -- except Robin ! he 
 want her;--but perhaps when he know her true history his love would 
 grow cold . she wonder whether it would be so . if it be she would 
 not mind very much . indeed it would be good , for she feel she could 
 never marry he . 

 " no , not if I love he with all my heart ! " she say , 
 passionately--"not without a name!--not till I have make a name for 
 myself , if only that be possible ! " 

 she leave the window and walk restlessly about her room , a room that 
 she love very greatly because it have be the study of the Sieur 
 Amadis . it be a wonderful room , oak - panel from floor to ceiling , 
 and there be no doubt about its history,--the Sieur Amadis himself have 
 take care of that . for on every panel he have carve with his own hand 
 a verse , a prayer , or an aphorism , so that the wall be a kind of 
 open notebook inscribe with his own personal memoranda . over the wide 
 chimney his coat - of - arm be paint , the colour have fade into 
 tender hue like those of autumn leaf , and the motto underneath be 
 " Mon coeur I soutien . " then follow the inscription : 

                     " Amadis de Jocelin , 
                      Knight of France , 
      who here seekynge Forgetfulness do here fynde peace . " 

 every night of her life since she could read Innocent have stand in 
 front of these armorial bearing in her little white night - gown and have 
 con over these word . she have take the memory and tradition of 
 Amadis to her heart and soul . he be her ancestor,--hers , she have 
 always said;--she have almost learn her letter from the inscription 
 he have carve , and through these she could read old English and a 
 considerable amount of old French beside . when she be about twelve 
 year old she and Robin Clifford , play about together in this room , 
 happen to knock against one panel that give forth a hollow 
 reverberant sound , and move by curiosity they try whether they could 
 open it . after some abortive effort Robin 's finger close by chance 
 on a hidden spring , which be thus press cause the panel to fly 
 open , disclose a narrow secret stair . full of burn excitement the 
 two child run up it , and to their delight find themselves in a 
 small square musty chamber in which be two enormous old dower - chest , 
 lock . their lock be no bar to the agility of Robin , who , fetch 
 a hammer , force the old hasp asunder and throw back the lid . the 
 coffer be full of book and manuscript write on vellum , a 
 veritable sixteenth - century treasure - trove . they hasten to report the 
 find to Farmer Jocelyn , who , though never greatly take with book or 
 anything concern they , be sufficiently interested to go with the 
 eager child and look at the discovery they have make . but as he could 
 make nothing of either book or manuscript himself , he give over the 
 whole collection to Innocent , say that as they be find in her 
 part of the house she might keep they . no one -- not even Robin -- know how 
 much she have love and study these old book , or how patiently she 
 have spell out the manuscript ; and no one could have guess what a 
 wide knowledge of literature she have gain or what fine taste she have 
 develop from her silent communication with the part spirit of the 
 Sieur Amadis and his poetical remain . she have even arrange her room 
 as she think he might have like it , in severe yet perfect taste . it 
 be now her study as it have be his,--the heavy oak table have a great 
 pewter inkstand upon it and a few loose sheet of paper with two or 
 three quill pen ready to hand,--some quaint old vellum - bind volume 
 and a brown earthenware bowl full of " glory " rose be set just where 
 they could catch the morning sunshine through the lattice window . one 
 side of the room be line with loaded bookshelf , and at its furth 
 end a wide arch of roughly hewn oak disclose a small apartment where 
 she sleep . here there be a quaint little four - poster bedstead , hung 
 with quite priceless jacobean tapestry , and a still more rare and 
 beautiful work of art -- an early italian mirror , full length and frame 
 in silver , a curio worth many hundred of pound . in this mirror 
 Innocent have survey herself with more or less disfavour since her 
 infancy . it be a mirror that have always be there -- a mirror in which 
 the wife of the Sieur Amadis must have often gaze upon her own 
 reflection , and in which , after she , all the wife and daughter of the 
 succeed Jocelyns have see their charm present to their own 
 admiration . the two old dower - chest which have be find in the upper 
 chamber be place on either side of the mirror , and hold all the 
 simple home - make garment which be Innocent 's only wear . a special 
 joy of her lie in the fact that she know the management of the secret 
 slide panel , and that she could at her own pleasure slip up the 
 mysterious stairway with a book and be thus remove from all the 
 household in a solitude which to she be ideal . to - night as she 
 wander up and down her room like a little distraught ghost , all the 
 happy and romantic association of the home she have love and cherish 
 for so many year seem cut down like a sheaf of fair blossom by a 
 careless reaper,--a sordid and miserable taint be on her life , and she 
 shudder with mingled fear and grief as she realise that she have not 
 even the simple privilege of ordinary baptism . she be a nameless waif , 
 dependent on the charity of Farmer Jocelyn . true , the old man have grow 
 to love she and she have love he -- ah!--let the many tender prayer 
 offer up for he in this very room bear witness before the throne of 
 God to her devotion to her " father " as she have think he ! and now -- if 
 what the doctor say be true -- if he be soon to die -- what would 
 become of she ? she wring she little hand in unconscious agony . 

 " what shall I do ? " she murmur , sobbingly--"i have no claim on he , or 
 on anyone in the world ! dear God , what shall I do ? " 

 her restless walk up and down take she into her sleeping - chamber , and 
 there she light a candle and look at herself in the old italian mirror . 
 a little woe - begone creature gaze sorrowfully back at she from its 
 shin surface , with brim eye and quiver lip , and hair all 
 toss loosely away from a small sad face as pale as a watery moon , and 
 she draw back from her own reflection with a gesture of repugnance . 

 " I be no use to anybody in any way , " she say , despairingly--"I be not 
 even good - looking . and Robin -- poor foolish robin!--calle I ' lovely ' 
 this afternoon ! he have no eye ! " 

 then a sudden thought fly across her brain of Ned Landon . the tall 
 powerful - look brute love she , she know . every look of his tell she 
 that his very soul pursue she with a reckless and relentless passion . 
 she hat him,--she tremble even now as she picture his dark face and 
 burn eyes;--he have annoy and worry she in a thousand way -- way 
 that be not sufficiently open in their offence to be openly 
 complain of , though have Farmer Jocelyn 's state of health give she 
 less cause for anxiety she might have say something to he which would 
 perhaps have open his eye to the situation . but not now,--not now 
 could she appeal to anyone for protection from amorous insult . for who 
 be she -- what be she that she should resent it ? she be nothing!--a 
 mere stray child whose parent nobody knew,--without any lawful 
 guardian to uphold her right or assert her position . no wonder old 
 Jocelyn have call she " wilding"--she be indeed a " wilding " or 
 weed,--growe up unwanted in the garden of the world , destine to be 
 pull out of the soil where she have nourish and throw 
 contemptuously aside . a wretched sense of utter helplessness stole over 
 her,--of incapacity , weakness and loneliness . she try to think,--to 
 see her way through the strange fog of untoward circumstance that have 
 so suddenly enshroud she . what would happen when Farmer Jocelyn die ? 
 for one thing she would have to quit Briar Farm . she could not stay in 
 it when Robin Clifford be its master . he would marry , of course ; he 
 would be sure to marry ; and there would be no place for she in his 
 home . she would have to earn her bread ; and the only way to do that 
 would be to go out to service . she have a good store of useful domestic 
 knowledge,--she could bake and brew , and wash and scour ; she know how 
 to rear poultry and keep bee ; she could spin and knit and embroider ; 
 indeed her list of household accomplishment would have startle any 
 girl fresh out of a modern Government school , where thing that be 
 useful in life be frequently forget , and thing that be not by any 
 mean necessary be teach as though they be imperative . one other 
 accomplishment she had,--one that she hardly whisper to herself -- she 
 could write,--write what she herself call " nonsense . " score of 
 little poem and essay and story be lock away in a small old 
 bureau in a corner of the room,--confessions and expression of pen - up 
 feeling which , but for this outlet , would have trouble her brain and 
 hinder her rest . they be mostly , as she frankly admit to her own 
 conscience , in the " style " of the Sieur Amadis , and be inspire by 
 his poetic suggestion . she have no fond or exaggerated idea of their 
 merit,--they be the result of solitary hour and long silence in 
 which she have feel she must speak to someone,--exchange thought with 
 someone,--or suffer an almost intolerable restraint . that " someone " be 
 for she the long dead knight who have come to England in the train of 
 the Duc d'Anjou . to he she spoke,--to he she tell all her 
 trouble -- but to no one else do she ever breathe her thought , or 
 disclose a line of what she have write . she have often wonder 
 whether , if she send these struggle literary effort to a magazine or 
 newspaper , they would be accept and print . but she never make the 
 trial , for the reason that such newspaper literature as find its way 
 into Briar Farm fill she with amazement , repulsion and disgust . there 
 be nothing in any modern magazine that at all resemble the delicate , 
 pointed and picturesque phraseology of the Sieur Amadis ! strange , 
 coarse slang - word be used,--and the news of the day be slung 
 together in loose ungrammatical sentence and chop - up paragraph of 
 clumsy construction , lack all pith and eloquence . so , repel by 
 the horror of twentieth - century " style , " she have hide her manuscript 
 deep than ever in the old bureau , under little silk sachet of dry 
 rose - leaf and lavender , as though they be love - letter or old lace . 
 and when sometimes she shut herself up and read they over she feel like 
 one of Hamlet 's " guilty creature sit at a play . " her literary 
 attempt seem to reproach she for their inadequacy , and when she make 
 some fresh addition to her store of write thought , her crime seem 
 to herself double and weight . she would often sit musing , with a 
 little frown pucker her brow , wonder why she should be move to 
 write at all , yet wholly unable to resist the impulse . 

 to - night , however , she scarcely remember these outbreak of she 
 dream fancy,--the sordid , hard , matter - of - fact side of life alone 
 present itself to her depressed imagination . she picture herself 
 go into service -- as what ? kitchen - maid , probably,--she be not tall 
 enough for a house - parlourmaid . House - parlourmaid be bind to be 
 effective,--even dignified,--in height and appearance . she have see one 
 of these superior being in church on Sundays -- a slim , stately young 
 woman with waved hair and a hat as fashionable as that wear by her 
 mistress , the squire 's lady . with a deepening sense of humiliation , 
 Innocent feel that her very limitation of inch be against she . could 
 she be a nursery - governess ? hardly ; for though she like good - temper , 
 well - behave child , she could not even pretend to endure they when 
 they be otherwise . scream , spiteful , quarrelsome child be to 
 she less interesting than bark puppy or squeal pigs;--beside , 
 she know she could not be an efficient teacher of so much as one 
 accomplishment . music , for instance ; what have she learn of music ? she 
 could play on an ancient spinet which be one of the chief treasure of 
 the " good parlour " of Briar Farm , and she could sing old ballad very 
 sweetly and plaintively,--but of " technique " and " style " and all the 
 latter - day method of musical acquirement and proficiency she be 
 absolutely ignorant . foreign language be a dead letter to 
 she -- except old French . she could understand that ; and Villon 's famous 
 verse , " Ou sont les neige d'antan ? " be as familiar to she as 
 Herrick 's " Come , my Corinna , let we go a - maying . " but , on the whole , 
 she be strangely and poorly equip for the battle of life . her 
 knowledge of bake , brewing , and general housewifery would have stand 
 she in good stead on some Colonial settlement,--but she have scarcely 
 hear of these far - away refuge for the destitute , as she so seldom 
 read the newspaper . old Hugo Jocelyn look upon the cheap daily press 
 as " the curse of the country , " and never willingly allow a newspaper 
 to come into the living - room of Briar Farm . they be relegate 
 entirely to the kitchen and outhouse , where the farm labourer smoke 
 over they and discuss they to their heart ' content , seldom 
 venturing , however , to bring any item of so - call " news " to their 
 master 's consideration . if they ever chance to do so , he would 
 generally turn round upon they with a few cutting observation , such 
 as,-- 

 " how do you know it be true ? who give the news ? where be the authority ? 
 and what do I care if some human brute have murder his wife and blow 
 out his own brain ? be I go to be any the well for read such a 
 tale ? and if one government be in or t'other out , what do it matter 
 to I , or to any of you , so long as you can work and pay your way ? the 
 newspaper be always try to persuade we to meddle in other folk 's 
 business;--i say , take care of your own affairs!--serve God and obey 
 the law of the country , and there will not be much go wrong with you ! 
 if you must read , read a decent book -- something that will last -- not a 
 print sheet full of advertisement that be fresh one day and tear up 
 for waste paper the next ! " 

 under the sway of these prejudiced and arbitrary opinion , it be not 
 possible for Innocent to have much knowledge of the world that lay 
 outside Briar Farm . sometimes she find Priscilla read an old 
 magazine or look at a picture - paper , and she would borrow these and 
 take they up to her own room surreptitiously for an hour or so , but she 
 be always more or less pained and puzzle by their content . it seem 
 to she that there be an extraordinary number of picture of woman 
 with scarcely any clothe on , and she could not understand how they 
 manage to be picture at all in such scanty attire . 

 " who be they ? " she ask of Priscilla on one occasion--"and how be it 
 that they be photograph like this ? it must be so shameful for they ! " 

 Priscilla explain as good she could that they be " dancer and the 
 like . " 

 " they live by their leg , lovey ! " she say soothingly--"It 's only 
 their leg that git they their bread and butter , and I s'pose they be 
 bind to show them off . do not you worry ' ow they git do ! you will never 
 come across any of them ! " 

 Innocent shut her sensitive mouth in a firm , proud line . 

 " I hope not ! " she say . 

 and she feel as if she have almost wrong the sanctity of the little 
 study which have formerly belong to the Sieur Amadis by allow such 
 picture to enter it . of course she know that dancer and actor , both 
 male and female , existed,--a whole troupe of they come every year to 
 the small theatre of the country town which , by break out into an 
 eruption of new slate - roof house among the few remain picturesque 
 gable and tile of an early period , boast of its " advancement " 
 some eight or ten mile away ; but her " father , " as she have think he , 
 have an insurmountable objection to what he term " gad abroad , " and 
 would not allow she to be see even at the annual fair in the town , 
 much less at the theatre . moreover , it happen once that a girl in the 
 village have run away with a stroll player and have go on the 
 stage,--an incident which have cause a great sensation in the tiny 
 wood - encircled hamlet , and have bring all the old woman of the place 
 out to their doorstep to croak and chatter , and prognosticate terrible 
 thing in the future for the eloping damsel . Innocent alone have 
 venture to defend she . 

 " if she love the man she be right to go with he , " she say . 

 " oh , do not talk to I about love ! " retort Priscilla , shake she 
 head--"That 's fancy rubbish ! you know naught about it , dearie ! on the 
 stage indeed ! poor little hussy ! she will be on the street in a year or 
 two , God help she ! " 

 " what be that ? " ask Innocent . " be it to be a beggar ? " 

 Priscilla make no reply beyond her usual sniff , which express volume . 

 " if she have find someone who really care for she , she will never 
 want , " Innocent go on , gently . " no man could be so cruel as to take 
 away a girl from her home for his own pleasure and then leave she alone 
 in the world . it would be impossible ! you must not think such hard 
 thing , Priscilla ! " 

 and , smile , she have go her way,--while Priscilla , shake her head 
 again , have look after she , dimly wonder how long she would keep 
 her faith in man . 

 on this still moonlight night , when the sadness of her soul seem 
 heavy than she could bear , her mind suddenly revert to this 
 episode . she think of the girl who have run away ; and remember that 
 no one in the village have ever see or hear of she again , not even her 
 patient hard - work parent to whom she have be a pride and joy . 

 " now she have a real father and mother ! " she muse , wistfully--"they 
 love she and would have do anything for she -- yet she run away from 
 they with a stranger ! I could never have do that ! but I have no 
 father and no mother -- no one but dad!--ah!--how I have love dad!--and 
 yet I do not belong to he -- and when he be dead-- " 

 here an overpowering sense of calamity sweep over she , and drop on 
 her knee by the open window she lay her head on her fold arm and 
 weep bitterly . 

 a voice call she in subdue accent once or twice , " innocent ! 
 innocent!"--but she do not hear . 

 presently a rose fling through the window fall on her bent head . she 
 start up , alarm . 

 " innocent ! " 

 timidly she lean out over the window - sill , look down into the 
 dusky green of clamber foliage , and see a familiar face smile up 
 at she . she utter a soft cry . 

 " Robin ! " 

 " yes -- it be Robin ! " he reply . " Innocent , what be the matter ? I hear 
 you cry ! " 

 " no -- no ! " she answer , whisperingly--"It 's nothing ! oh , Robin!--why 
 be you here at this time of night ? do go away ! " 

 " not I ! " and Robin place one foot firmly on the tough and gnarl 
 branch of a giant wistaria that be train thickly all over that side 
 of the house--"I'm come up ! " 

 " oh , Robin ! " and straightway Innocent run back into her room , there to 
 throw on a dark cloak which envelop she so completely that only her 
 small fair head show above its enshroud folds,--then return 
 slowly she watch with mingled interest and trepidation the gradual 
 ascent of her lover , as , like another Romeo , he ascend the natural 
 ladder form by the thick rope - like twisted stem of the ancient 
 creeper , grow sturdy with year and capable of bear a much great 
 weight than that of the light and agile young man , who , with a smile of 
 amuse triumph , at last bring himself on a level with the window - sill 
 and seat himself on its project ledge . 

 " I will not come in , " he say , mischievously--"though I might!--if I 
 dare ! but I must not break into my lady 's bower without her sovereign 
 permission ! I say , Innocent , how pretty you look ! do not be 
 frightened!--dear , dear little girl,--you know I would not touch so much 
 as a hair of your sweet little head ! I be not a brute -- and though I be 
 longing to kiss you I promise I will not even try ! " 

 she move away from he into the deep shadow , but a ray of the moon 
 show he her face , very pale , with a deep sadness upon it which be 
 strange and new to he . 

 " tell I what be wrong ? " he ask . " I have be too wide - awake and 
 restless to go to bed,--so I come out in the garden just to breathe the 
 air and look up at your window -- and I hear a sound of sob like 
 that of a little child who be badly hurt -- innocent ! " 

 for she have suddenly stretch out her hand to he in impulsive appeal . 

 " oh yes -- that be true!--i be badly hurt , Robin ! " she say , in low 
 tremble accents--"so badly hurt that I think I shall never get over 
 it ! " 

 surprise , he take her hand in his own with a gentle reverence , though 
 to be able to draw she nearer to he thus , set his heart beat 
 quickly . 

 " what be it ? " he question she , anxiously , as all unconsciously she 
 lean close towards he and he see her soft eye , wet with tear , 
 shin upon he like star in the gloom . " be it bad news of Uncle 
 Hugo ? " 

 " bad news of he , but bad of I ! " she answer , sighingly . " oh , 
 Robin , shall I tell you ? " 

 he look at her tenderly . the dark cloak about she have fall a little 
 aside , and show a gleam of white neck emerge from snowy drapery 
 underneath -- it be , to his fancy , as though a white rose - petal have be 
 suddenly and delicately unfurled . he long to kiss that virginal 
 whiteness , and tremble at the audacity of his own desire . 

 " yes , dear , tell I ! " he murmur , abstractedly , scarcely think of 
 what he be say , and only conscious of the thrill and ecstasy of 
 love which seem to he the one thing necessary for existence in earth 
 or heaven . 

 and so , with her hand still warmly hold in his , she tell he all . in a 
 sad voice , with lowered eye and quivering lip , she relate she 
 plaintive little history , disclose her unbaptised shame,--her unowne 
 parentage,--her desperately forlorn and lonely condition . and Robin 
 listen -- amazed and perplexed . 

 " it seem to be all my fault , " conclude Innocent , sorrowfully--"and 
 yet it be not really so ! of course I ought never to have be bear -- but 
 I could not help it , could I ? and now it seem quite wrong for I to 
 even live!--I be not want -- and ever since I be twelve year old your 
 Uncle have only keep I out of charity-- " 

 but at this Robin start as though some one have strike he . 

 " innocent ! " he exclaimed--"Do not say such a thing!--do not think it ! 
 Uncle Hugo have love you!--and you -- you have love he ! " 

 she draw her hand away from his and cover her face . 

 " I know!--I know ! " and her tear fall fast again--"but I be not his , 
 and he be not mine ! " 

 Robin be silent . the position be so unexpected and bewilder that 
 he hardly know what to say . but chiefly he feel that he must try and 
 comfort this little weep angel , who , so far as he be concern , 
 hold his life subservient to her charm . he begin talk softly and 
 cheerily : 

 " why should it matter so much ? " he say . " if you do not know who you 
 be -- if none of we know -- it may be more fortunate for you than you can 
 imagine ! we can not tell ! your own father may claim you -- your own 
 mother -- such thing be quite possible ! you may be like the princess of 
 a fairy - tale -- rich people may come and take you away from Briar Farm 
 and from I -- and you will be too grand to think of we any more , and I 
 shall only be the poor farmer in your eye -- you will wonder how you 
 could ever have speak to me-- " 

 " Robin ! " her hand drop from her face and she look at he in 
 reproachful sadness . " why do you say this ? you know it could never be 
 true!--never ! if I have a father who care for I , he would not have 
 forget -- and my mother , if she be a true mother , would have try 
 to find I long ago ! no , Robin!--I ought to have die when I be a 
 baby . no one want I -- I be a deserted child--'base - bear , ' as your 
 Uncle Hugo says,--and of course he be right -- but the sin of it be not 
 mine ! " 

 she have such a pitiful , fragile and fair appearance , stand half in 
 shadow and half in the mystic radiance of the moon , that Robin 
 Clifford 's heart ache with love and longing for she . 

 " sin ! " he echoed--"sin and you have never meet each other ! you be like 
 your name , innocent of all evil ! oh , Innocent ! if you could only care 
 for I as I care for you ! " 

 she give a shiver sigh . 

 " do you -- can you care?--NOW ? " she ask . 

 " of course ! what be there in all this story that can change my love for 
 you ? that you be not my cousin?--that my uncle be not your own father ? 
 what do that matter to I ? you be someone else 's child , and if we 
 never know who that someone be , why should we vex ourselves about it ? 
 you be you!--you be Innocent!--the sweetest , dearest little girl that 
 ever live , and I adore you ! what difference do it make that you be 
 not Uncle Hugo 's daughter ? " 

 " it make a great difference to I , " she answer , sadly--"i do not 
 belong any more to the Sieur Amadis de Jocelin ! " 

 Robin star , amazed -- then smile . 

 " why , Innocent ! " he exclaimed--"surely you be not worry your mind 
 over that old knight , dead and go more than three hundred year ago ! 
 dear little goose ! how on earth do he come into this trouble of 
 your ? " 

 " he come in everywhere ! " she reply , clasp and unclasp her 
 hand nervously as she speak . " you do not know , Robin!--you would never 
 understand ! but I have love the Sieur Amadis ever since I can 
 remember;--i have talk to he and study with him!--I have read his 
 old book , and all the poem he write -- and he seem to be my friend ! I 
 think I be bear of his kindred -- and I be proud of it -- and I feel it 
 would be my duty to live at Briar Farm always because he would wish his 
 line quite unbroken -- and I think -- perhaps -- yes , I think I might have 
 marry you and be a good wife to you just for his sake!--and now it 
 be all spoiled!--because though you will be the master of Briar Farm , 
 you will not be the lineal descendant of the Sieur Amadis ! No,--it be 
 finished!--all finish with your Uncle Hugo!--and the doctor say he 
 can only live a year ! " 

 her grief be so touching and pathetic that Robin could not find it in 
 his heart to make a jest of the romance she have weave round the old 
 french knight whose history have almost pass into a legend . after all , 
 what she say be true -- the line of the Jocelyn family have be keep 
 intact through three century till now -- and a direct heir have always 
 inherit Briar Farm . he himself have take a certain pride in think 
 that Uncle Hugo 's " love - child , " as he have believe she to be , be at 
 any rate , love - child or no , bear of the Jocelyn blood -- and that when he 
 marry she , as he hop and fully purpose to do , he would discard his 
 own name of Clifford and take that of Jocelyn , in order to keep the 
 continuity of association unbroken as far as possible . all these idea 
 be put to flight by Innocent 's story , and , as the position become 
 more evident to he , the smile expression on his face change to one 
 of gravity . 

 " Dear Innocent , " he say , at last--"don't cry ! it cut I to the heart ! 
 I would give my very life to save you from a sorrow -- you know I would ! 
 if you ever think , as you say , that you could or would marry I for 
 the sake of the Sieur Amadis , you might just as well marry I now , even 
 though the Sieur Amadis be out of it . I would make you so happy ! I 
 would indeed ! and no one need ever know that you be not really the 
 lineal descendant of the knight-- " 

 she interrupt he . 

 " Priscilla know , " she said--"and , no matter how you look at it , I be 
 ' base - bear . ' your Uncle Hugo have let all the village folk think I be 
 his illegitimate child -- and that be ' base - bear ' of itself . oh , it be 
 cruel ! even you think so , do not you ? " 

 Robin hesitate . 

 " I do not know , dear , " he answer , gently--"I fancied-- " 

 " do not deny it , Robin ! " she say , mournfully . " you do think so ! well , 
 it be true enough , I suppose!--i be ' base - born'--but your uncle be not 
 my father . he be a good , upright man -- you can always be proud of he ! 
 he have not sinned,--though he have burden I with the shame of sin ! I 
 think that be unfair,--but I must bear it somehow , and I will try to be 
 brave . I be glad I have tell you all about it,--and you be very kind to 
 have take it so well -- and to care for I still -- but I shall never 
 marry you , robin!--never ! I shall never bring my ' base - bear ' blood into 
 the family of Jocelyn ! " 

 his heart sink as he hear she -- and involuntarily he stretch out his 
 arm in appeal . 

 " innocent ! " he murmured--"don't be hard upon I ! think a little long 
 before you leave I without any hope ! it mean so much to my life ! 
 surely you can not be cruel ? do you care for I less than you care for 
 that old knight bury under his own effigy in the garden ? will you not 
 think kindly of a live man?--a man who love you beyond all thing ? 
 oh , innocent!--be gentle , be merciful ! " 

 she come to he and take his hand in her own . 

 " it be just because I be kind and gentle and merciful , " she say , in 
 her sweet , grave accent , " that I will not marry you , dear ! I know I be 
 right,--and you will think so too , in time . for the moment you imagine 
 I to be much well and pretty than I be -- and that there be no one 
 like me!--poor Robin!--you be blind!--there be so many sweet and 
 lovely girl , well bear , with father and mother to care for they -- and 
 you , with your good look and kind way , could marry any one of 
 they -- and you will , some day ! good - night , dear ! you have stay here a 
 long time talk to me!--just suppose you be see sit on this 
 window - ledge so late!--it be past midnight!--what would be say of I ! " 

 " what could be say ? " demand Robin , defiantly . " I come up here of my 
 own accord,--the blame would be mine ! " 

 she shake her head sadly , smile a little . 

 " ah , Robin ! the man be never blame ! it be always the woman 's fault ! " 

 " where be your fault to - night ? " he ask . 

 " oh , most plain ! " she answer . " when I see you come , I ought to have 
 shut the window , draw the curtain , and leave you to clamber down the 
 wall again as fast as you clamber up ! but I want to tell you what 
 have happen -- and how everything have change for I -- and now -- now that 
 you know all -- good - night ! " 

 he look at her longingly . if she would only show some little sign of 
 tenderness!--if he might just kiss her hand , he think ! but she 
 withdraw into the shadow , and he have no excuse for linger . 

 " good - night ! " he say , softly . " good - night , my angel Innocent ! 
 good - night , my little love ! " 

 she make no response and move slowly backward into the room . but as he 
 reluctantly leave his point of vantage and begin to descend , step 
 lightly from branch to branch of the accommodate wistaria , he see the 
 shadowy outline of her figure once more as she stretch out a hand and 
 close the lattice window , draw a curtain across it . with the 
 drawing of that curtain the beauty of the summer night be over for 
 he , and poise himself lightly on a tough stem which be twist 
 strongly enough to give he adequate support and which project some 
 four foot above the smooth grass below , he spring down . Scarcely have he 
 touch the ground when a man , leap suddenly out of a thick clump of 
 bush near that side of the house , catch he in a savage grip and 
 shake he with all the fury of an enraged mastiff shake a rat . take 
 thus unawares , and render almost breathless by the swiftness of the 
 attack , Clifford struggle in the grasp of his assailant and fight 
 with he desperately for a moment without any idea of his 
 identity,--then as by a dexterous twist of body he manage to partially 
 extricate himself , he look up and see the face of Ned Landon , livid 
 and convulse with passion . 

 " Landon ! " he gasped--"what be the matter with you ? be you mad ? " 

 " yes ! " answer Landon , hoarsely--"and enough to make I so ! you devil ! 
 you have ruin the girl ! " 

 with a rapid movement , unexpected by his antagonist , Clifford 
 disengage himself and stand free . 

 " you lie ! " he said--"and you shall pay for it ! come away from the house 
 and fight like a man ! come into the grass meadow yonder , where no one 
 can see or hear we . come ! " 

 Landon pause , draw his breath thickly , and look like a snarling 
 beast baulk of its prey . 

 " that be a trick ! " he say , scornfully--"you'll run away ! " 

 " come ! " repeat Clifford , vehemently--"You're more likely to run away 
 than I be ! come ! " 

 Landon glance he over from head to foot -- the moonbeam fall brightly 
 on his athletic figure and handsome face -- then turn on his heel . 

 " no , I will not ! " he say , curtly--"i've do all I want to do for 
 to - night . I have shake you like the puppy you be ! to - morrow we will 
 settle our difference . " 

 for all answer Clifford spring at he and strike he smartly across the 
 face . in another moment both man be engage in a fierce tussle , none 
 the less deadly because so silent . a practised boxer and wrestler , 
 Clifford grapple more and more closely with the big but clumsier 
 man , drag he steadily inch by inch far away from the house as 
 they fight . more desperate , more determined become the struggle , till 
 by two or three adroit manoeuvre Clifford get his opponent under he 
 and bear he gradually to the ground , where , kneel on his chest , he 
 pin he down . 

 " let I go ! " mutter Landon--"You're kill I ! " 

 " serve you right ! " answer Clifford--"You scoundrel ! my uncle shall 
 know of this ! " 

 " tell he what you like ! " retort Landon , faintly--"i do not care ! get 
 off my chest!--you're suffocate I ! " 

 Clifford slightly relax the pressure of his hand and knee . 

 " will you apologise ? " he demand . 

 " Apologise?--for what ? " 

 " for your insolence to I and my cousin . " 

 " Cousin be hang ! " snarl Landon--"She 's no more your cousin than I 
 be -- she be only a nameless bastard ! I hear she tell you so ! and fine 
 air she give herself on nothing ! " 

 " you miserable spy ! " and Clifford again hold he down as in a 
 vise--"Whatever you hear be none of your business ! will you apologise ? " 

 " oh , I will apologise , if you like!--anythe to get your weight off 
 me!"--and Landon make an abortive effort to rise . " but I keep my own 
 opinion all the same ! " 

 slowly Robin release he , and watch he as he pick himself up , 
 with an air of mingle scorn and pity . Landon laugh forcedly , pass 
 one hand across his forehead and star in a daze fashion at the 
 shadow cast on the ground by the moon . 

 " yes -- I keep my own opinion ! " he repeat , stupidly . " you have get the 
 well of I just now -- but you will not always , my pert Cock Robin ! you 
 will not always . do not you think it ! Briar Farm and I may part 
 company -- but there be a big place than Briar Farm -- there be the 
 world!--that be a wide field and plenty of crop grow on it ! and the 
 man that sow those kind of crop and reap they and bring they in , be 
 well farmer than you will ever be ! as for your girl!"--here his face 
 darken and he shake his fist towards the lattice window behind which 
 sleep the unconscious cause of the quarrel--"You can keep she ! a nice 
 ' Innocent ' SHE is!--talke with a man in her bedroom after 
 midnight!--why , I would not have she as a gift -- not now ! " 

 choke with rage , Clifford spring towards he again -- Landon step 
 back . 

 " hand off ! " he said--"don't touch I ! I be in a kill mood ! I have a 
 knife on I -- you have not . you be the master -- I'm the man -- and I will play 
 fair ! I have my future to think of , and I do not want to start with a 
 murder ! " 

 with this , he turn his back and stride off , walk somewhat 
 unsteadily like a blind man feel his way . 

 Clifford stand for a moment , inert . the angry blood burn in his 
 face,--his hand be involuntarily clenched,--he be impatient with 
 himself for have , as he think , let Landon off too easily . he see at 
 once the possibility of mischief brewing , and hastily consider how it 
 could well be circumvent . 

 " the simple way out of it be to make a clean breast of everything , " 
 he decide , at last . " tomorrow I will see Uncle Hugo early in the morning 
 and tell he just what have happen . " 

 under the influence of this resolve , he gradually calm down and 
 re - enter the house . and the moonlight , widen and then wan over 
 the smooth and peaceful meadow of Briar Farm , have it all its own way 
 for the rest of the night , and as it filter through the leafy 
 branch of the elm and beech which embower the old tomb of the 
 Sieur Amadis de Jocelin it touch with a pale glitter the stone hand 
 of his sculptured effigy,--hand that be fold prayerfully above the 
 motto,--"Mon coeur I soutien ! " 




 CHAPTER v 

 as early as six o'clock the next morning Innocent be up and dress , 
 and , hasten down to the kitchen , busy herself , as be her usual 
 daily custom , in assist Priscilla with the housework and the 
 preparation for breakfast . there be always plenty to do , and as she 
 move quickly to and fro , fulfil the various duty she have take 
 upon herself and which she perform with unobtrusive care and 
 exactitude , the melancholy foreboding of the past night partially 
 clear away from her mind . yet there be a new expression on her 
 face -- one of sadness and seriousness unfamiliar to its almost 
 child - like feature , and it be not easy for she to smile in her 
 ordinary bright way at the round of scold which Priscilla 
 administer every morning to the maid who sweep and scrub and 
 dust and scour the kitchen till no speck of dirt be anywhere 
 visible , till the copper shine like mirror , and the table be nearly 
 as smooth as polished silver or ivory . go into the dairy where pan 
 of new milk stand ready for skim , and look out for a moment 
 through the lattice window , she see old Hugo Jocelyn and Robin Clifford 
 walk together across the garden , engage in close and earnest 
 conversation . a little sigh escape she as she think : " they be 
 talk about me!"--then , on a sudden impulse , she go back into the 
 kitchen where Priscilla be for the moment alone , the other servant 
 have disperse into various quarter of the house , and go straight 
 up to she say , simply-- 

 " Priscilla dear , why do you never tell I that I be not Dad 's own 
 daughter ? " 

 Priscilla start violently , and her always red face turn 
 redder,--then , with an effort to recover herself , she answered-- 

 " Lord , lovey ! how you frighten I ! why do not I tell you ? well , in 
 the first place , ' twasn't none of my business , and in the second , 
 ' twouldn't have do any good if I have . " 

 Innocent be silent , look at she with a piteous intensity . 

 " and who be it that be tell you now ? " go on Priscilla , 
 nervously--"some meddlin ' old fool-- " 

 Innocent raise her hand , warningly . 

 " Hush , Priscilla ! Dad himself tell me-- " 

 " well , he might just as well have keep a still tongue in his head , " 
 retort Priscilla , sharply . " he be keep it for eighteen year , an ' why 
 he should let it go wag loose now , the Lord only know ! there be no 
 make out the way of men,--they first play the wise and silent game 
 like barn - door owls,--then all on a suddint - like they start caw 
 gossip for all they be worth , like crow . and what be the good of 
 tellin ' ye , anyway ? " 

 " no good , perhaps , " answer Innocent , sorrowfully--"but it be right I 
 should know . you see , I be not a child any more -- I'm eighteen -- that be a 
 woman -- and a woman ought to know what she must expect more or less in 
 her life-- " 

 Priscilla lean on the newly scrub kitchen table and look across 
 at the girl with a compassionate expression . 

 " what a woman must expect in life be good ' ard knock and blow , " she 
 said--"unless she can get a man to look arter she what be not of the 
 general kicking spirit . take my advice , dearie ! you marry Mr. 
 Robin!--as good a boy as ever breathe -- he'll be a kind fond ' usband to 
 ye , and arter all that be what a woman thrive well on -- kindness -- an ' 
 you have ' ad it all your life up to now-- " 

 " Priscilla , " interrupt Innocent , decidedly--"i can not marry Robin ! 
 you know I can not ! a poor nameless girl like me!--why , it would be a 
 shame to he in after - year . besides , I do not love he -- and it be 
 wicked to marry a man you do not love . " 

 Priscilla smother a sound between a grunt and a sigh . 

 " you talk a lot about love , child , " she said--"but I be thinkin ' you 
 do not know much about it . they old book an ' paper you find up in the 
 secret room be full of nonsense , I be pretty sure -- an ' if you believe 
 that man be always sighin ' an ' dyin ' for a woman , you be 
 mistaken -- yes , you be , lovey ! they go where they can be make most 
 comfortable -- an ' it do not matter what sort o ' woman give the comfort 
 so long as they git it . " 

 Innocent smile , faintly . 

 " you do not know anything about it , Priscilla , " she answered--"you be 
 never marry . " 

 " thank the Lord and his goodness , no ! " say Priscilla , with an emphatic 
 sniff--"i've never be trouble with the whimsy of a man , which be 
 bad than all the megrim of a woman any day . I have look arter Mr. 
 Jocelyn in a way -- but he be no sort of a man to worry about -- he just 
 go reglar to the farmin'--an ' that be all -- a decent creature always , 
 an ' steady as his own oxen what pull the plough . an ' when he be go , 
 if go he must , I will look arter you an ' Mr. Robin , an ' please God , I will 
 dance your baby on my old knees-- " here she break off and turn she 
 head away . Innocent run to she , surprised . 

 " why , Priscilla , you be cry ! " she exclaimed--"don't do that ! why 
 should you cry ? " 

 " why indeed ! " blubber priscilla--"except that I be a doiterin ' fool ! I 
 can not abear the thought of you turnin ' yer back on the good that God 
 give ye , an ' floutin ' Mr. Robin , who be the good sort o ' man that ever 
 could fall to the lot of a little tender maid like you -- why , lovey , you 
 do not know the wickedness o ' this world , nor the way of it -- an ' you 
 talk about love as if it be something wonderful an ' far away , when 
 here it be at yer very foot for the pickin ' up ! what be the good of all 
 they book ye've bin readin ' if they do not teach ye that the old knight 
 you be fond of get so weary of the world that arter tryin ' everythin ' 
 in turn he find nothing well than to marry a plain , straight country 
 wench and settle down in Briar Farm for all his day ? ai not that the 
 lesson he be teach ye ? " 

 she pause , look hopefully at the girl through her tear -- but 
 Innocent 's small fair face be pale and calm , though her eye shine 
 with a brilliancy as of suppressed excitement . 

 " no , " she said--"He have not teach I that at all . he come here to 
 ' seek forgetfulness'--so it be say in the word he carve on the panel 
 in his study,--but we do not know that he ever really forget . he only 
 ' find peace , ' and peace be not happiness -- except for the very old . " 

 " peace be not happiness ! " re - echo Priscilla , staring--"That be a queer 
 thing to say , lovey ! what do you call be happy ? " 

 " it be difficult to explain"--and a swift warm colour fly over the 
 girl 's cheek , express some wave of hide feeling--"your idea of 
 happiness and mine must be so different ! " she smiled--"dear , good 
 Priscilla ! you be so much more easily content than I be ! " 

 Priscilla look at she with a great tenderness in her dim old grey 
 eye . 

 " see here , lovey ! " she said--"you're just like a young bird on the edge 
 of a nest ready to fly . you do not know the world nor the way of it . 
 oh , my dear , it be not all gold harvest and apple ripen rosy in the 
 sun ! you have live all your life in the open country , and so you have 
 always have the good God near you,--but there be place where the house 
 stand so close together that the sky can hardly make a patch of blue 
 between the smoking chimney -- like London , for instance -- ah!--that be 
 where you would find what the world 's like , lovey!--where you feel so 
 lonesome that you wonder why you ever be born-- " 

 " I wonder that already , " interrupt the girl , quickly . " do not worry 
 I , dear ! I have so much to think about -- my life seem so altered and 
 strange -- I hardly understand myself -- and I do not know what I shall do 
 with my future -- but I cannot -- I will not marry Robin ! " 

 she turn away quickly then , to avoid further discussion . 

 a little later she go into the quaint oak - panel room where the 
 fateful disclosure of the past night have be reveal to she . here 
 breakfast be lay , and the latticed window be set wide open , 
 admit the sweet scent of stock and mignonette with every breath of 
 the morning air . she stand awhile look out on the gay beauty of the 
 garden , and her eye unconsciously fill with tear . 

 " dear home ! " she murmured--"Home that be not mine -- that never will be 
 mine ! how I have love you!--how I shall always love you ! " 

 a slow step behind she interrupt her meditation -- and she look 
 around with a smile as timid as it be tender . there be her " dad"--the 
 same as ever,--yet now to her mind so far removed from she that she 
 hesitate a moment before give he her customary good - morning 
 greeting . a pained contraction of his brow show she that he feel this 
 little difference , and she hasten to make instant amend . 

 " Dear Dad ! " she say , softly,--and she put her soft arm about he and 
 kiss his cheek--"how be you this morning ? do you sleep well ? " 

 he take her arm from his shoulder , and hold she for a moment , look 
 at she scrutinisingly from under his shaggy brow . 

 " I do not sleep at all , " he answer her--"i lie broad awake , think 
 of you . think of you , my little innocent , fatherless , motherless 
 lamb ! and you , child!--you do not sleep so well as you should have 
 do , talk with Robin half the night out of window ! " 

 she colour deeply . he smile and pinch her crimsoning cheek , 
 apparently well pleased . 

 " no harm , no harm ! " he said--"Just two young dove coo among the 
 leaf at mating time ! Robin have tell I all about it . now listen , 
 child!--i'm away to - day to the market town -- there be seed to buy and 
 crop to sell -- i'll take Ned Landon with me-- " he pause , and an odd 
 expression of sternness and resolve cloud his features--"Yes!--I'll 
 take Ned Landon with I -- he be shrewd enough when he be sober -- and he be 
 cunning enough , too , for that matter!--yes , I will take he with I . 
 we will be off in the dog - cart as soon as breakfast be do . my time 's 
 get short , but I will attend to my own business as long as I 
 can -- i'll look after Briar Farm till I die -- and I will die in harness . 
 there be plenty of work to do yet -- plenty of work ; and while I be away 
 you can settle up things-- " 

 here he break off , and his eye grow fix in a sudden vacant stare . 
 Innocent , frighten at his unnatural look , lay her hand caressingly 
 on his arm . 

 " yes , dear Dad ! " she say , soothingly--"what be it you wish I to do ? " 

 the stare fade from his eyeball , and his face soften . 

 " settle up thing , " he repeat , slowly , and with emphasis--"settle up 
 thing with Robin . no more beat about the bush ! you talk to he 
 long enough out of window last night , and mind you!--somebody be 
 listen ! that mean mischief ! _ I _ do not blame you , poor wilding!--but 
 remember , SOMEBODY be listen ! now think of that and of your good 
 name , child!--settle with Robin and we will have the bann put up next 
 Sunday . " 

 while he thus speak the warm rose of her cheek fade to an extreme 
 pallor,--her very lip grow white and set . her hurrying thought 
 clamour for utterance,--she could have express in passionate term 
 her own bitter sense of wrong and unmerited shame , but pity for the old 
 man 's worn and haggard look of pain hold her silent . she see and feel 
 that he be not strong enough to bear any argument or opposition in his 
 present mood , so she make no sort of reply , not even by a look or a 
 smile . quietly she go to the breakfast table , and busy herself in 
 prepare his morning meal . he follow she and sit heavily down in his 
 usual chair , watch she furtively as she pour out the tea . 

 " such little white hand , be not they ? " he say , coaxingly , touch 
 her small finger when she give he his cup--"Eh , wilde ? the 
 prettiest lily flower I ever see ! and one of they will look all the 
 pretty for a gold wedding - ring upon it ! ay , ay ! we will have the bann 
 put up on Sunday . " 

 still she do not speak ; once she turn away her head to hide the 
 tear that involuntarily rise to her eye . Old Hugo , meanwhile , begin 
 to eat his breakfast with the nervous haste of a man who take his food 
 more out of custom than necessity . presently he become irritated at she 
 continue silence . 

 " you hear what I say , do not you ? " he demanded--"and you understand ? " 

 she look full at he with sorrowful , earnest eye . 

 " yes , Dad . I hear . and I understand . " 

 he nod and smile , and appear to take it for grant that she have 
 receive an order which it be her bounden duty to obey . the sun shine 
 brilliantly in upon the beautiful old room , and through the open window 
 come a pleasant murmuring of bee among the mignonette , and the whistle 
 of a thrush in an elm - tree sound with clear and cheerful persistence . 
 Hugo Jocelyn look at the fair view of the flower garden and draw 
 his breath hard in a quick sigh . 

 " it be a fine day , " he said--"and it be a fine world ! ay , that it be ! I be 
 not sure there be a well anywhere ! and it be a bit difficult to think 
 of go down for ever into the dark and the cold , away from the 
 sunshine and the sky -- but it be get to be done!"--here he clench his 
 fist and bring it down on the table with a defiant blow--"It 's get to 
 be do , and I have get to do it ! but not yet -- not quite yet!--i've 
 plenty of time and chance to stop mischief ! " 

 he rise , and draw himself up to his full height look for the 
 moment strong and resolute . take one or two slow turn up and down 
 the room , he suddenly stop in front of Innocent . 

 " we shall be away all day , " he said--"i and Ned Landon . do you hear ? " 

 there be something not quite natural in the tone of his voice , and she 
 glance up at he in a little surprise . 

 " well , what be you wonder at ? " he demand , a trifle testily--"you 
 need not open your eye at I like that ! " 

 she smile faintly . 

 " do I open my eye , Dad ? " she said--"i do not mean to be curious . I 
 only thought-- " 

 " you only think what ? " he ask , with sudden heat--"what do you 
 think ? " 

 " oh , just about your be away all day in the town -- you will be so 
 tired-- " 

 " tired ? not i!--not when there be work to do and business to settle ! " he 
 rub his hand together with a kind of energetic expectancy . " work to 
 do and business to settle ! " he repeated--"ye , little girl ! there be not 
 much time before I , and I must leave everything in good order for you 
 and Robin . " 

 she drop her head , and the expression of her face be hide from 
 he . 

 " you and Robin ! " he say , again . " ay , ay ! Briar Farm will be in the 
 good of care when I be dead , and it will thrive well with young love and 
 hope to keep it go ! " he come up to she and take one of her little 
 hand in his own . " there , there ! " he go on , pat it gently--"we'll 
 think no more of trouble and folly and mistake in life ; it will be all 
 joy and peace for you , child ! take God 's good blessing of an honest 
 lad 's love and be happy with it ! and when I come home to - night,"--he 
 pause and appear to think for a moment--"yes!--when I come home , let 
 I hear that it be all clear and straight between you -- and we will have 
 the bann put up on Sunday ! " 

 she say not a word in answer . her hand slide passively from his 
 hold,--and she never look up . he hesitate for a moment -- then walk 
 towards the door . 

 " you will have all the day to yourself with Robin , " he add , glance 
 back at her--"there'll be no spy about the place , and no one 
 listening , as there be last night ! " 

 she spring up from her chair , move at last by an impulse of 
 indignation . 

 " who be it ? " she asked--"i say nothing wrong -- and I do not care!--but 
 who be it ? " 

 a curious strained look come into old Hugo 's eye as he answered-- 

 " Ned Landon . " 

 she look amazed,--then scared . 

 " Ned Landon ? " 

 " ay ! Ned Landon . he have not the sweetest of temper and he be not always 
 sober . he be a bit in the way sometimes,--ay , ay!--a bit in the way ! but 
 he be a good farm hand for all that,--and his word stand for something ! 
 I would rather he have not hear you and Robin talk last night -- but what be 
 do be do , and it be a mischief easy mended-- " 

 " why , what mischief can there be ? " the girl demand , her colour come 
 and go quickly--"And why should he have listen ? it be a mean trick 
 to spy upon other ! " 

 he smile indulgently . 

 " of course it be a mean trick , child!--but there be a good many man -- and 
 woman too -- who be just make up of mean trick and nothing more . they 
 spend their life in spy upon their neighbour and interfere in 
 everybody 's business . you would soon find that out , my girl , if you live 
 in the big world that lie outside Briar Farm ! ay!--and that remind 
 me-- " here he come from the door back into the room again , and go to 
 a quaint old upright oaken press that stand in one corner , he unlock 
 it and take out a roll of bank - note . these he count carefully over 
 to himself , and fold they up put they away in his breast pocket . 
 " now I be ready ! " he said--"ready for all I have get to do ! good - bye , my 
 wilding ! " he approach she , and lift her small face between his 
 hand , kiss it tenderly . " bless thee ! no child of my own could be 
 dear than thou art ! all I want now be to leave thee in safe and 
 gentle keeping when I die . think of this and be good to Robin ! " 

 she tremble under his caress , and her heart be full of speechless 
 sorrow . she long to yield to his wishes,--she know that if she do so 
 she would give he happiness and great resignation to the death which 
 confront he ; and she also know that if she could make up her mind to 
 marry Robin Clifford she would have the good and the tender of 
 husband . and Briar farm,--the belove old home -- would be hers!--her 
 very own ! her child would inherit it and play about the fair and 
 fruitful field as she have do -- they , too , could be teach to love the 
 memory of the old knight , the Sieur Amadis de Jocelin -- ah!--but surely 
 it be the spirit of the Sieur Amadis himself that hold she back and 
 prevent she from do his name and memory grievous wrong ! she be 
 not of his blood or race -- she be nameless and illegitimate,--no good 
 could come of her engraft herself like a weed upon a branch of the 
 old noble stock -- the farm would cease to prosper . 

 so she think and so she feel , in her dreamy imaginative way , and 
 though she allow old Hugo to leave she without vex he by any 
 decide opposition to his plan , she be more than ever firmly resolve 
 to abide by her own interior sense of what be right and fitting . she 
 hear the wheel of the dog - cart grating the gravel outside the garden 
 gate , and an affectionate impulse move she to go and see she " Dad " 
 off . as she make her appearance under the rose - cover porch of the 
 farm - house door , she perceive Landon , who at once pull off his cap 
 with an elaborate and exaggerated show of respect . 

 " good - morning , Miss Jocelyn ! " 

 he emphasize the surname with a touch of malice . she colour , but 
 reply " good - morning " with a sweet composure . he eye her askance , but 
 have no opportunity for more word , as old Hugo just then clamber up 
 into the dog - cart , and take the rein of the rather skittish young mare 
 which be harness to it . 

 " come on , Landon ! " he shout , impatiently--"No time for farewell ! " 
 then , as Landon jump up beside he , he smile , see the soft , 
 wistful face of the girl watch he from beneath a canopy of rose . 

 " take care of the house while I be go ! " he call to her;--"You'll 
 find Robin in the orchard . " 

 he lay the light flick of the whip on the mare 's ear , and she 
 trot rapidly away . 

 Innocent stand a moment gaze after the retreating vehicle till it 
 disappeared,--then she go slowly into the house . Robin be in the 
 orchard , be he ? Well!--he have plenty of work to do there , and she 
 would not disturb he . she turn away from the sunshine and flower 
 and make her way upstairs to her own room . how quiet and reposeful it 
 look ! it be a beloved shrine , full of sweet memory and 
 dreams,--there would never be any room like it in the world for she , 
 she well know . listlessly she sit down at the table , and turn over 
 the page of an old book she have be read , but her eye be not 
 upon it . 

 " I wonder ! " she say , half aloud -- then pause . 

 the thought in her mind be too daring for utterance . she be picture 
 the possibility of go quietly away from Briar Farm all alone , and 
 try to make a name and career for herself through the one natural 
 gift she fancy she might possess , a gift which nowadays be consider 
 almost as common as it be once admired and rare . to be a poet and 
 romancist,--a weaver of wonderful thought into musical language,--this 
 seem to she the high of all attainment ; the proud emperor of 
 the most powerful nation on earth be , to her mind , far less than 
 Shakespeare,--and inferior to the simple french lyrist of old time 
 that ever write a " chanson d'amour . " but the doubt in her mind be 
 whether she , personally , have any thought worth expressing,--any idea 
 which the world might be the happy or the well for know and 
 sharing ? she draw a long breath,--the warm colour flush her cheek 
 and then fade , leave she very pale,--the whole outlook of her life 
 be so barren of hope or promise that she dare not indulge in any 
 dream of bright day . on the face of it , there seem no possible 
 chance of leave Briar Farm without some outside assistance -- she have 
 no money , and no mean of obtain any . then,--even suppose she 
 could get to London , she know no one there,--she have no friend . 
 sigh wearily , she open a deep drawer in the table at which she 
 sit , and take out a manuscript -- every page of it so neatly write as 
 to be almost like copper - plate -- and set herself to read it steadily . 
 there be enough write sheet to make a good - sized print 
 volume -- and she read on for more than an hour . when she lift her eye 
 at last they be eager and luminous . 

 " perhaps , " she half whispered--"perhaps there be something in it after 
 all!--somethe just a little new and out of the ordinary -- but -- how 
 shall I ever know ! " 

 put the manuscript by with a linger care , she go to the window 
 and look out . the peaceful scene be dear and familiar -- and she 
 already feel a premonition of the pain she would have to endure in 
 leave so sweet and safe a home . her thought gradually recur to 
 the old trouble -- Robin , and Robin 's love for her,--Robin , who , if she 
 marry he , would spend his life gladly in the effort to make she 
 happy,--where in the wide world would she find a well , truer - hearte 
 man ? and yet -- a curious reluctance have hold she back from he , even 
 when she have believe herself to be the actual daughter of Hugo 
 Jocelyn,--and now -- now , when she know she be nothing but a stray 
 foundling , desert by her own parent and leave to the care of 
 stranger , she consider it would be nothing short of shame and 
 disgrace to he , be she to become his wife . 

 " I can always be his friend , " she say to herself--"and if I once make 
 he understand clearly how much well it be for we to be like brother 
 and sister , he will see thing in the right way . and when he marry I 
 be sure to be fond of his wife and child -- and -- and -- it will be ever 
 so much happy for we all ! I will go and talk to he now . " 

 she run downstairs and out across the garden , and presently make a 
 sudden appearance in the orchard -- a little vision of white among the 
 russet - colour tree with their burden of redden apple . Robin be 
 there alone -- he be busy in put up a sturdy prop under one of the 
 long branch of a tree heavily laden with fruit . he see she and 
 smile -- but go on with his work . 

 " be you very busy ? " she ask , approach he almost timidly . 

 " just now , yes ! in a moment , no ! we shall lose this big bough in the 
 next high wind if I do not take care . " 

 she wait -- watch the strength and dexterity of his hand and arm , 
 and the movement of his light muscular figure . in a little while he 
 have finish all he have to do -- and turn to she say , laughingly-- 

 " now I be at your service ! you look very serious!--grave as a little 
 judge , and quite reproachful ! what have I done?--or what have anybody 
 do that you should almost frown at I on this bright sun - shiny 
 morning ? " 

 she smile in response to his gay , question look . 

 " I be sorry I have such a depressing aspect , " she said--"i do not feel 
 very happy , and I suppose my face show it . " 

 he be silent for a minute or two , watch she with a grave tenderness 
 in his eye . 

 by and by he speak , gently-- 

 " come and stroll about a bit with I through the orchard,--it will 
 cheer you to see the apple hang in such rosy cluster among the 
 grey - green leaf . nothing pretty in all the world , I think!--and 
 they be just ripen enough to be fragrant . come , dear ! let we talk 
 our trouble out ! " 

 she walk by his side , mutely -- and they move slowly together under 
 the warm scented bough , through which the sunlight fall in broad 
 stream of gold , make the interlace shadow dark by contrast . 
 there be a painful throbbing in her throat,--the tension of struggle 
 tear which strove for an outlet,--but gradually the sweet influence 
 of the air and sunshine do good work in calm her nerve , and she 
 be quite compose when Robin speak again . 

 " you see , dear , I know quite well what be worry you . I be worried 
 myself -- and I would well tell you all about it . last night-- " he pause . 

 she look up at he , quickly . 

 " last night?--well ? " 

 " well -- Ned Landon be in hiding in the bush under your window -- and he 
 must have be there all the time we be talk together . how or why 
 he come there I can not imagine . but he hear a good deal -- and when you 
 shut your window he be wait for I . directly I get down he pounce 
 on I like a tramp - thief , and -- now there!--don't look so 
 frightened!--he say something that I could not stand , so we have a jolly 
 good fight . he get the bad of it , I can tell you ! he be stiff and 
 unfit to work to - day -- that be why Uncle Hugo have take he to the town . 
 I tell the whole story to Uncle Hugo this morning -- and he say I do 
 quite right . but it be a bore to have to go on ' boss ' Landon -- he 
 bear I a grudge , of course -- and I foresee it will be difficult to 
 manage he . he can hardly be dismiss -- the other hand would want to 
 know why ; no man have ever be dismiss from Briar Farm without good 
 and fully explain reason . this time no reason could be give , 
 because your name might come in , and I will not have that-- " 

 " oh , Robin , it be all my fault ! " she exclaim . " if you would only let 
 I go away ! help I -- do help I to go away ! " 

 he star at she , amazed . 

 " go away ! " he echoed--"You ! why , Innocent , how can you think of such a 
 thing ! you be the very life and soul of the place -- how can you talk of 
 go away ! no , no!--not unless"--here he draw near and look at she 
 steadily and tenderly in the eyes--"not unless you will let I take you 
 away!--just for a little while!--as a bridegroom take a bride -- on a 
 honeymoon of love and sunshine and roses-- " 

 he stop , deter by her look of sadness . 

 " Dear Robin , " she say , very gently--"would you marry a girl who can not 
 love you as a wife should love ? will not you understand that if I could 
 and do love you I should be happy than I am?--though now , even if I 
 love you with all my heart , I would not marry you . how could I ? I be 
 nothing -- I have no name -- no family -- and can you think that I would 
 bring shame upon you ? no , robin!--never ! I know what your Uncle Hugo 
 wish -- and oh!--if I could only make he happy I would do it!--but I 
 cannot -- it would be wrong of I -- and you would regret it-- " 

 " I should never regret it , " he interrupt she , quickly . " if you would 
 be my wife , Innocent , I should be the proud , glad man alive ! ah , 
 dear!--do put all your fancy aside and try to realise what good you 
 would be do to the old man if he feel quite certain that you would 
 be the little mistress of the old farm he love so much -- I will not 
 speak of myself -- you do not care for me!--but for him-- " 

 she look up at he with a sudden light in her eye . 

 " could we not pretend ? " she ask . 

 " what do you mean ? " 

 " why , pretend that we be engage -- just to satisfy he . could not you 
 make thing easy for I that way ? " 

 " I do not quite understand , " he say , with a puzzled air--"how would it 
 make thing easy ? " 

 " why , do not you see ? " and she speak with hurried eagerness--"When he 
 come home to - night let he think it be all right -- and then -- then I will 
 run away by myself -- and it will be my fault-- " 

 " innocent ! what be you talk about?"--and he flush with vexation . 
 " my dear girl , if you dislike I so much that you would rather run away 
 than marry I , I will not say another word about it . I will manage to smooth 
 thing over with my uncle for the present -- just to prevent his fret 
 himself -- and you shall not be worried-- " 

 " you must not be worried either , " she say . " you will not understand , 
 and you do not think!--but just suppose it possible that , after all , my 
 own parent do remember I at last and come to look after I -- and that 
 they be perhaps dreadful wicked people-- " 

 Robin smile . 

 " the man who bring you here be a gentleman , " he said--"Uncle Hugo 
 tell I so this morning , and say he be the fine - look man he have 
 ever see . " 

 Innocent be silent a moment . 

 " you think he be a ' gentleman ' to desert his own child ? " she ask . 

 Robin hesitate . 

 " dear , you do not know the world , " he said--"there may have be all 
 sort of danger and difficulty -- anyhow , _ i _ do not bear he any 
 grudge ! he give you to Briar Farm ! " 

 she sigh , and make no response . inadvertently they have walk beyond 
 the orchard and be now on the very edge of the little thicket where 
 the tomb of the Sieur Amadis de Jocelin glimmer pallidly through the 
 shadow of the leaf . Innocent quicken her step . 

 " come ! " she say . 

 he follow she reluctantly . almost he hat the old stone knight which 
 serve she as a subject for so many fancy and feeling , and when she 
 beckon he to the spot where she stand beside the recumbent effigy , 
 he show a certain irritation of manner which do not escape she . 

 " you be cross with he ! " she say , reproachfully . " you must not be so . 
 he be the founder of your family-- " 

 " and the finish of it , I suppose ! " he answer , abruptly . " he stand 
 between we two , innocent!--a cold stone creature with no heart -- and you 
 prefer he to I ! oh , the folly of it all ! how can you be so cruel ! " 

 she look at he wistfully -- almost her resolution fail she . he see 
 her momentary hesitation and come close up to she . 

 " you do not know what love be ! " he say , catch her hand in his 
 own--"innocent , you do not know ! if you did!--if I might teach you-- ! " 

 she draw her hand away very quickly and decidedly . 

 " love do not want teaching , " she said--"it come -- when it will , and 
 where it will ! it have not come to I , and you can not force it , Robin ! 
 if I be your wife -- your wife without any wife 's love for you -- I 
 should grow to hate briar farm!--ye , I should!--i should pine and die 
 in the very place where I have be so happy!--and I should feel that 
 he"--here she point to the sculptured Sieur amadis--"would almost 
 rise from this tomb and curse I ! " 

 she speak with sudden , almost dramatic vehemence , and he gaze at she 
 in mute amazement . her eye flash , and her face be light up by a glow 
 of inspiration and resolve . 

 " you take I just for the ordinary sort of girl , " she go on--"a girl 
 to caress and fondle and marry and make the mother of your 
 children,--now for that you might choose among the girl about here , 
 any of whom would be glad to have you for a husband . but , Robin , do you 
 think I be really fit for that sort of life always?--can't you believe 
 in anything else but marriage for a woman ? " 

 as she thus speak , she unconsciously create a new impression on his 
 mind,--a veil seem to be suddenly lift , and he see she as he have 
 never before see she -- a creature remove , isolated and unattainable 
 through the force of some inceptive intellectual quality which he have 
 not previously suspect . he answer she , very gently-- 

 " dear , I can not believe in anything else but love for a woman , " he 
 said--"She be create and intend for love , and without love she must 
 surely be unhappy . " 

 " Love!--ah yes ! " she respond , quickly--"but marriage be not love ! " 

 his brow contract . 

 " you must not speak in that way , Innocent , " he say , seriously--"It be 
 wrong -- people would misunderstand you-- " 

 her eye lighten , and she smile . 

 " Yes!--I'm sure ' people ' would ! " she answered--"but ' people ' do not 
 matter -- to I . it be truth that matters,--truth,--and love ! " 

 he look at she , perplexed . 

 " why should you think marriage be not love ? " he asked--"It be the one 
 thing all lover wish for -- to be marry and to live together always-- " 

 " oh , they wish for it , yes , poor thing ! " she say , with a little 
 uplifting of her brows--"and when their wish be gratify , they 
 often wish they have not wish ! " she laugh . " Robin , this talk of ours 
 be make I feel quite merry ! I be amuse ! " 

 " I be not ! " he reply , irritably--"you be much too young a girl to 
 think these things-- " 

 she nod , gravely . 

 " I know ! and I ought to get marry while young , before I learn too 
 many of ' these thing , ' " she said--"isn't that so ? do not frown , Robin ! 
 look at the Sieur Amadis ! how peacefully he sleep ! he know all about 
 love ! " 

 " of course he do ! " retort Robin--"He be a perfectly sensible 
 man -- he marry and have six child . " 

 Innocent nod again , and a little smile make two fascinating dimple 
 in her soft cheek . 

 " yes ! but he say good - bye to love first ! " 

 he look at she in visible annoyance . 

 " how can you tell?--what do you know about it ? " he demand . 

 she lift her eye to the glimpse of blue sky that show in deep 
 clear purity between the over - arch boughs,--a shaft of sunlight 
 strike on her fair hair and illumine its pale brown to gold , so that 
 for a moment she look like the picture of a young rapt saint , lose in 
 heavenly musing . 

 then a smile , wonderfully sweet and provocative , part her lip , and 
 she beckon he to a grassy slope beneath one of the old tree , 
 where little tuft of wild thyme grow thickly , fill the air with 
 fragrance . 

 " come and sit beside I here , " she said--"we have the day to 
 ourselves -- Dad say so,--and we can talk as long as we like . you ask I 
 what I know?--not much indeed ! but I will tell you what the Sieur Amadis 
 have tell me!--if you care to hear it ! " 

 " I be not sure that I do , " he answer , dubiously . 

 she laugh . 

 " oh , robin!--how ungrateful you be ! you ought to be so pleased ! if you 
 really love I as much as you say , the mere sound of my voice ought to 
 fill you with ecstasy ! yes , really ! come , be good ! " and she sit down on 
 the grass , glance up at he invitingly . he fling himself beside she , 
 and she extend her little white hand to he with a pretty 
 condescension . 

 " There!--you may hold it ! " she say , as he eagerly clasp it--"Yes , 
 you may ! now , if the Sieur Amadis have be allow to hold the hand of 
 the lady he love he would have go mad with joy ! " 

 " much good he would have do by go mad ! " growl Robin , with an 
 affectation of ill - humour--"i'd rather be sane,--sane and normal . " 

 she bend her smile eye upon he . 

 " would you ? poor Robin ! well , you will be -- when you settle down-- " 

 " settle down ? " he echoed--"how ? what do you mean ? " 

 " why , when you settle down with a wife , and -- shall we say six 
 child ? " she query , merrily--"Yes , I think it must be six ! like the 
 Sieur Amadis ! and when you forget that you ever sit with I under the 
 tree , hold my hand -- so ! " 

 the lovely , half - laugh compassion of her look nearly upset his 
 self - possession . he draw close to her side . 

 " innocent ! " he exclaim , passionately--"if you would only listen to 
 reason-- " 

 she shake her head . 

 " I never could ! " she declare , with an odd little air of penitent 
 self - depreciation--"people who ask you to listen to reason be always 
 so desperately dull ! even Priscilla!--when she ask you to ' listen to 
 reason , ' she be in the bad of temper ! besides , Robin , dear , we shall 
 have plenty of chance to ' listen to reason ' when we grow older,--we're 
 both young just now , and a little folly will not hurt we . have patience 
 with me!--I want to tell you some quite unreasonable -- quite abnormal 
 thing about love ! may I ? " 

 " yes -- if _ I _ may too ! " he answer , kiss the hand he hold , with 
 linger tenderness . 

 the soft colour fly over her cheeks,--she smile . 

 " Poor Robin ! " she said--"you deserve to be happy and you will be!--not 
 with I , but with some one much well , and ever so much pretty ! I 
 can see you as the master of Briar Farm -- such a sweet home for you and 
 your wife , and all your little child run about in the field 
 among the buttercup and daisy -- a pretty sight , Robin!--I shall think 
 of it often when -- when I be far away ! " 

 he be about to utter a protest,--she stop he by a gesture . 

 " hush ! " she say . 

 and there be a moment 's silence . 




 CHAPTER VI 

 " when I think about love , " she begin presently , in a soft dreamy 
 voice--"i'm quite sure that very few people ever really feel it or 
 understand it . it must be the rare thing in all the world ! this poor 
 Sieur Amadis , asleep so long in his grave , be a true lover,--and I 
 will tell you how I know he have say good - bye to love when he marry . 
 all those book we find in the old dower - chest , that day when we be 
 play about together as child , belong to he -- some be his own 
 composition , write by his own hand,--the other , as you know , be 
 print book which must have be difficult to get in his day , and be 
 now , I suppose , quite out of date and almost unknown . I have read they 
 all!--my head be a little library full of odd volume ! but there be 
 one -- a manuscript book -- which I never tire of reading,--it be a sort of 
 journal in which the Sieur Amadis write down many of his own 
 feeling -- sometimes in prose , sometimes in verse -- and by follow they 
 carefully and piece they together , it be quite easy to find out his 
 sadness and secret -- how he love once and never love again-- " 

 " you can not tell that , " interrupt robin--"man often say they can only 
 love once -- but they love ever so many times-- " 

 she smile -- and her eye show he what a stupid blunder he have make . 

 " do they ? " she query , softly--"i be so glad , Robin ! for you will find 
 it easy then to love somebody else instead of I ! " 

 he flush , vexedly . 

 " I do not mean that-- " he begin . 

 " no ? I think you did!--but of course if you have think twice you 
 would not have say it ! it be utter quite truly and naturally , 
 Robin!--don't regret it ! only I want to explain to you that the Sieur 
 Amadis be not like that -- he love just once -- and the lady he love 
 must have be a very beautiful woman who have plenty of admirer and 
 do not care for he at all . all he write prove that . he be always 
 grieve to the heart about it . still he love she -- and he seem glad to 
 have love she , though it be all no use . and he keep a little 
 chronicle of his dream and fancy -- all that he feel and think 
 about,--it be beautifully and tenderly write all in quaint old 
 French . I have some trouble to make it out -- but I do at last -- every 
 word -- and when he make up his mind to marry , he finish the little 
 book and never write another word in it . shall I tell you what be the 
 last line he write ? " 

 " it would not be any use , " he answer , kiss again the hand he 
 held--"i do not understand French . I have never even try to learn it . " 

 she laugh . 

 " I know you have not ! but you have miss a great deal , Robin!--you have 
 really ! when I make up my mind to find out all the Sieur Amadis have 
 write , I get Priscilla to buy I a french dictionary and grammar and 
 some other french lesson - book besides -- then I spelt all the word 
 carefully and look they all up in the dictionary , and learn the 
 pronunciation from one of the lesson - book -- and by - and - bye it get quite 
 easy . for two year at least it be dreadfully hard work -- but 
 now -- well!--I think I could almost speak French if I have the chance ! " 

 " I be sure you could ! " say Robin , look at she , admiringly--"you're a 
 clever little girl and could do anything you want to . " 

 her brow contract a little,--the easy lightness of his compliment 
 have that air of masculine indifference which be more provoking to an 
 intelligent woman than downright contradiction . the smile linger in 
 her eye , however,--a smile of mingle amusement and compassion . 

 " well , I want to understand the writing of the Sieur Amadis , " she 
 go on , quietly--"and when I could understand they I translate they . 
 so I can tell you the last word he write in his journal -- just before 
 he married,--in fact on the very eve of his marriage - day-- " she pause 
 abruptly , and look for a moment at the worn and battered tomb of the 
 old knight , green with moss and make picturesque by a trail branch 
 of wild rose that have throw itself across the stone effigy in an 
 attempt to reach some of its neighbour on the opposite side . Robin 
 follow her gaze with his own , and for a moment be more than usually 
 impressed by the calm , almost stern dignity of the recumbent figure . 

 " go on , " he said--"what be the word ? " 

 " These"--and Innocent speak they in a hushed voice , with sweet 
 reverence and feeling--"'tonight I pull down and put away for ever the 
 golden banner of my life 's ideal . it have be hold aloft too long in 
 the sunshine of a dream , and the lily broider on its web be but a 
 wither flower . my life be no long of use to myself , but as a man 
 and faithful knight I will make it serve another 's pleasure and 
 another be good . and because this good and simple girl doth truly love 
 I , though her love be none of my seeking , I will give she her heart 's 
 desire , though mine own heart 's desire shall never be accomplished,--i 
 will make she my wife , and will be to she a true and loyal husband , so 
 that she may receive from I all she crave of happiness and peace . for 
 though I fain would die rather than we d , I know that life be not give 
 to a man to live selfishly , nor be God satisfied to have it waste by 
 any one who hath swear to be his knight and servant . therefore even so 
 let it be!--I give all my unvalued existence to she who doth consider 
 it valuable , and with all my soul I pray that I may make so gentle and 
 trustful a creature happy . but to Love -- oh , to love a long 
 farewell!--farewell my dreams!--farewell ambition!--farewell the glory 
 of the vision unattainable!--farewell bright splendour of an earthly 
 Paradise!--for now I enter that prison which shall hold I fast till 
 death release I ! close , doors!--fasten , locks!--be patient in thy 
 silent solitude , my Soul ! ' " 

 Innocent 's voice falter here -- then she said--"that be the end . he 
 sign it ' Amadis . ' " 

 Robin be very quiet for a minute or two . 

 " it be pretty -- very pretty and touching -- and all that sort of thing , " he 
 say at last--"but it be like some old sonnet or mediaeval bit of 
 romance . no one would go on like that nowadays . " 

 Innocent lift her eyebrow , quizzically . 

 " go on like what ? " 

 he move impatiently . 

 " oh , about be patient in solitude with one 's soul , and say 
 farewell to love . " he give a short laugh . " innocent dear , I wish you 
 would see the world as it really is!--not through the old - style 
 spectacle of the Sieur Amadis ! in his day people be altogether 
 different from what they be now . " 

 " I be sure they be ! " she answer , quietly--"but love be the same 
 to - day as it be then . " 

 he consider a moment , then smile . 

 " no , dear , I be not sure that it be , " he say . " those knight and poet 
 and curious people of that kind live in a sort of imaginary 
 ecstasy -- they exaggerate their emotion and live at the top - height of 
 their fancy . we in our time be much more sane and level - head . and 
 it be much well for we in the long run . " 

 she make no reply . only very gently she withdraw her hand from his . 

 " I be not a knight of old , " he go on , turn his handsome , 
 sun - brown face towards her,--"but I be sure I love you as much as ever 
 the Sieur Amadis could have love his unknown lady . so much indeed do I 
 love you that I could not write about it to save my life!--though I do 
 write verse at Oxford once -- very bad one ! " he laugh . " but I can do 
 one thing the Sieur Amadis do not do -- I can keep faithful to my vision 
 of the glory unattainable'--and if I do not marry you I will marry 
 no - body -- so there ! " 

 she look at he curiously and wistfully . 

 " you will not be so foolish , " she said--"you will not put I into the 
 position of the Sieur Amadis , who marry some one who love he , 
 merely out of pity ! " 

 he spring up from the grass beside she . 

 " no , no ! I will not do that , Innocent ! I be not a coward ! if you can not love 
 I , you shall not marry I , just because you be sorry for I ! that 
 would be intolerable ! I would not have you for a wife at all under such 
 circumstance . I shall be perfectly happy as a bachelor -- perhaps 
 happy than if I marry . " 

 " and what about Briar Farm ? " she ask . 

 " Briar Farm can get on as good it may ! " he reply , cheerily--"I'll 
 work on it as long as I live and hand it down to some one worthy of it , 
 never fear ! so there , innocent!--be happy , and do not worry yourself ! 
 keep to your old knight and your strange fancy about he -- you may be 
 right in your idea of love , or you may be wrong ; but the great point 
 with I be that you should be happy -- and if you can not be happy in my 
 way , why you must just be happy in your own ! " 

 she look at he with a new interest , as he stand upright , face she 
 in all the vigour and beauty of his young manhood . a little smile crept 
 round the corner of her mouth . 

 " you be really a very handsome boy ! " she said--"quite a picture in 
 your way ! some girl will be very proud of you ! " 

 he give a movement of impatience . 

 " I must go back to the orchard , " he said--"There 's plenty to do . and 
 after all , work be the fine thing in the world -- quite as fine as 
 love -- perhaps fine ! " 

 a faint sense of compunction move she at his word -- she be conscious 
 of a lurking admiration for his cool , strong , healthy attitude towards 
 life and the thing of life . and yet she be resentful that he should 
 be capable of consider anything in the world " finer " than love . 
 work ? what work ? pruning tree and gather apple ? surely there be 
 great ambition than these ? she watch he thoughtfully under the 
 fringe of her long eyelash , as he move off . 

 " go to the orchard ? " she ask . 

 " yes . " 

 she smile a little . 

 " that be right ! " 

 he glance back at she . have she know how bravely he restrain himself 
 she might have make as much a hero of he as of the knight Amadis . for 
 he be wound to the heart -- his bright hope be frustrate , and 
 at the very instant he walk away from she he would have give his 
 life to have hold she for a moment in his arms,--to have kiss she 
 lip , and whisper to she the pretty , caress love - nonsense which to 
 warm and tender heart be the sweetest language in the world . and with 
 all his restrained passion he be irritated with what , from a man 's 
 point of view , he consider folly on her part,--he feel that she 
 despise his love and himself for no other reason than a mere romantic 
 idea , breed of loneliness and too much reading of a literature alien to 
 the custom and manner of the immediate time , and an uncomfortable 
 premonition of fear for her future trouble his mind . 

 " poor little girl ! " he thought--"she do not know the world!--and when 
 she do come to know it -- ah , my poor Innocent!--I would rather she 
 never know ! " 

 meanwhile she , leave to herself , be not without a certain feeling of 
 regret . she be not sure of her own mind -- and she have no control over 
 her own fancy . every now and then a wave of conviction come over she 
 that after all tender - hearted old Priscilla might be right -- that it 
 would be good to marry Robin and help he to hold and keep Briar Farm 
 as it have ever be keep and hold since the day of the Sieur Amadis . 
 perhaps , have she never hear the story of her actual condition , as tell 
 she by Farmer Jocelyn on the previous night , she might have consent 
 to what seem so easy and pleasant a lot in life ; but now it seem to 
 she more than impossible . she no long have any link with the far - away 
 ancestor who have serve she so long as a sort of ideal -- she be a mere 
 foundling without any name save the unbaptised appellation of Innocent . 
 and she regard herself as a sort of castaway . 

 she go into the house soon after Robin have leave she , and busy 
 herself with sort the linen and look over what have to be mend . 
 " for when I go , " she say to herself , " they must find everything in 
 order . " she din alone with Priscilla -- Robin send word that he be too 
 busy to come in . she be a little pique at this -- and almost cross when 
 he send the same message at tea - time,--but she be proud in her way 
 and would not go out to see if she could persuade he to leave his work 
 for half - an - hour . the sun be slowly decline when she suddenly put 
 down her sewing , strike by a thought which have not previously occur 
 to she -- and run fleetly across the garden to the orchard , where she 
 find Robin lie on his back under the tree with closed eye . he 
 open they , hear the light movement of her foot and the soft 
 flutter of her gown -- but he do not rise . she stop -- look at he . 

 " be you asleep ? " 

 he stretch his arm above his head , lazily . 

 " I believe I be ! " he answer , smile . 

 " and you would not come in to tea ! " this with a touch of annoyance . 

 " oh yes , I would , if I have want tea , " he replied--"but I do not want 
 it . " 

 " nor my company , I suppose , " she add , with a little shrug of her 
 shoulder . his eye flash mischievously . 

 " oh , I daresay that have something to do with it ! " he agree . 

 a curious vexation fret she . she wish he would not look so 
 handsome -- and -- yes!--so indifferent . an impression of loneliness and 
 desertion come over she -- he , Robin , be not the same to she now -- so she 
 fancy -- no doubt he have be think hard all the day while do his 
 work , and at last have come to the conclusion that it be wise after 
 all to let she go and cease to care for she as he have do . a little 
 throb pulse struggle in her throat -- a threat of rise tears,--but 
 she conquer the emotion and speak in a voice which , though it 
 tremble , be sweet and gentle . 

 " Robin , " she said--"don't you think -- wouldn't it be well -- perhaps-- " 

 he look up at she wonderingly -- she seem nervous or frightened . 

 " what be it ? " he asked--"anythe you want I to do ? " 

 " yes"--and her eye drooped--"but I hardly like to say it . you see , Dad 
 make up his mind this morning that we be to settle thing 
 together -- and he will be angry and disappointed-- " 

 Robin half - raise himself on one arm . 

 " he will be angry and disappointed if we do not settle it , you mean , " he 
 said--"and we certainly have not settle it . well ? " 

 a faint colour flush her face . 

 " could not we pretend it be all right for the moment ? " she 
 suggested--"just to give he a little peace of mind ? " 

 he look at she steadily . 

 " you mean , could not we deceive he ? " 

 " yes!--for his good ! he have deceive I all my life,--i suppose for my 
 good -- though it have turn out badly-- " 

 " have it ? why ? " 

 " it have leave I nameless , " she answered,--"and friendless . " 

 a sudden rush of tear blind her eye -- she put her hand over they . 
 he spring up and , take hold of her slender wrist , try to draw 
 those hand down . he succeed at last , and look wistfully into her 
 face , quiver with restrained grief . 

 " dear , I will do what you like ! " he say . " tell I -- what be your wish ? " 

 she wait a moment , till she have control herself a little . 

 " I thought"--she say , then--"that we might tell Dad just for to - night 
 that we be engage -- it would make he happy -- and perhaps in a week or 
 two we might get up a quarrel together and break it off-- " 

 Robin smile . 

 " dear little girl!--I'm afraid the plan would not work ! he want the 
 bann put up on Sunday -- and this be Wednesday . " 

 her brow knit perplexedly . 

 " something can be manage before then , " she say . " Robin , I can not bear 
 to disappoint he ! he be old -- and he be so ill too!--it would not hurt we 
 for one night to say we be engage ! " 

 " all right!"--and Robin throw back his head and laugh joyously--"i 
 do not mind ! the sensation of even imagine I be engaged to you be quite 
 agreeable ! for one evening , at least , I can assume a sort of 
 proprietorship over you ! innocent ! I -- I-- " 

 he look so mirthful and mischievous that she smile , though the 
 teardrop still sparkle on her lash . 

 " well ? what be you think of now ? " she ask . 

 " I think -- I really think -- under the circumstance I ought to kiss you ! " 
 he said--"don't you feel it would be right and proper ? even on the 
 stage the hero and heroine ACT a kiss when they be engaged ! " 

 she meet his laugh glance with quiet steadfastness . 

 " I can not act a kiss , " she said--"You can , if you like ! I do not mind . " 

 " you do not mind ? " 

 " no . " 

 he look from right to leave -- the apple - bough , load with rosy fruit , 
 be intertwine above they like a canopy -- the sink sun make mellow 
 gold of all the air , and touch the girl 's small figure with a 
 delicate luminance -- his heart beat , and for a second his sens swam in 
 a giddy whirl of longing and ecstasy -- then he suddenly pull himself 
 together . 

 " Dear Innocent , I would not kiss you for the world ! " he say , 
 gently--"It would be take a mean advantage of you . I only speak in 
 fun . there!--dry your pretty eyes!--you sweet , strange , romantic little 
 soul ! you shall have it all your own way ! " 

 she draw a long breath of evident relief . 

 " then you will tell your uncle-- " 

 " anything you like ! " he answer . " by - the - bye , ought not he to be home 
 by this time ? " 

 " he may have be keep by some business , " she said--"He will not be long 
 now . you will say we be engaged ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " and perhaps"--went on Innocent--"you might ask he not to have the 
 bann put up yet as we do not want it know quite so soon-- " 

 " I will do all I can , " he reply , cheerily--"all I can to keep he 
 quiet , and to make you happy ! there ! I can not say more ! " 

 her eye shine upon he with a grateful tenderness . 

 " you be very good , Robin ! " 

 he laugh . 

 " good ! not I ! but I can not bear to see you fret -- if I have my way you 
 should never know a moment 's trouble that I could keep from you . but I 
 know I be not a patch on your old stone knight who write such a lot 
 about his ' ideal'--and yet go and marry a country wench and have six 
 child . do not frown , dear ! nothing will make I say he be romantic ! 
 not a bit of it ! he write a lot of romantic thing , of course -- but he 
 do not mean half of them!--I'm sure he do not ! " 

 she colour indignantly . 

 " you say that because you know nothing about it , " she said--"you have 
 not read his writing . " 

 " no -- and I be not sure that I want to , " he answer , gaily . " dear 
 Innocent , you must remember that I be at Oxford -- my dear old father 
 and mother scrap and screw every penny they could get to send I 
 there -- and I believe I acquit myself pretty well -- but one of the 
 good thing I learn be the general uselessness and vanity of the 
 fellow that call themselves ' literary . ' they chiefly go in for 
 disparaging and despise everyone who do not agree with they and 
 think just as they do . mulish prig , most of they ! " and Robin laugh 
 his gay and buoyant laugh once more--"they do not know that I be all 
 the time compare they with the honest type of farmer -- the man who 
 live an outdoor life with God 's air blow upon he , and the soil 
 turn freshly beneath him!--I love book , too , in my way , but I love 
 nature well . " 

 " and do not poet help you to understand Nature ? " ask Innocent . 

 " the good of they do -- such as Shakespeare and Keats and Tennyson,--but 
 they be of the past . the modern man make you almost despise 
 Nature,--more be the pity ! they be always study themselves , and 
 analyse themselves , and pity themselves -- now _ I _ always say , the 
 less of one 's self the well , in order to understand other people . " 

 Innocent 's eye regard he with quiet admiration . 

 " yes , you be a thoroughly good boy , " she said--"i have tell you so 
 often . but -- i'm not sure that I should always get on with anyone as 
 good as you be ! " 

 she turn away then , and move towards the house . as she go , she 
 suddenly stop and clap her hand , call : 

 " Cupid ! Cupid ! Cu - COO - pid ! " 

 a flash of white wing glimmer in the sunset - light , and her pet dove 
 fly to she , circle round and round till it drop on her 
 outstretche arm . she catch it to her bosom , kiss its soft head 
 tenderly , and murmur playful word to it . Robin watch she , as with 
 this favourite bird - playmate she disappear across the garden and into 
 the house . then he give a gesture half of despair , half of 
 resignation -- and leave the orchard . 

 the sun sink , and the evening shadow begin to steal slowly in their 
 long darken line over the quiet field , and yet Farmer Jocelyn have 
 not yet return . the woman of the household grow anxious -- Priscilla 
 go to the door many time , look up the tortuous by - road for the 
 first glimpse of the expected return vehicle -- and Innocent stand in 
 the garden near the porch , as watchful as a sentinel and as silent . at 
 last the sound of trotting hoof be hear in the far distance , and 
 Robin , suddenly make his appearance from the stable - yard where he too 
 have be wait , call cheerily,-- 

 " Uncle at last ! here he come ! " 

 another few minute and the mare 's head turn the corner -- then the 
 whole dog - cart come into view with Farmer Jocelyn drive it . but he 
 be quite alone . 

 Robin and Innocent exchange surprised glance , but have no time to make 
 any comment as old Hugo just then drive up and , throw the rein to 
 his nephew , alight . 

 " be not you very late , Dad ? " say Innocent then , go to meet him--"i 
 be begin to be quite anxious ! " 

 " be you ? poor little one ! I be all right ! I have business -- I be keep 
 long than I expected-- " here he turn quickly to robin--"unharness , 
 boy!--unharness!--and come in to supper ! " 

 " where be Landon ? " ask Robin . 

 " Landon ? oh , I have leave he in the town . " 

 he pull off his driving - glove , and unbutton his overcoat -- then 
 stride into the house . Innocent follow he -- she be puzzle by his 
 look and manner , and her heart beat with a vague sense of fear . there 
 be something about the old man that be new and strange to she . she 
 could not define it , but it fill her mind with a curious and 
 inexplicable uneasiness . Priscilla , who be set the dish on the 
 table in the room where the cloth be lay for supper , have the same 
 uncomfortable impression when she see he enter . his face be unusually 
 pale and draw , and the slight stoop of age in his otherwise upright 
 figure seem more pronounced than usual . he draw up his chair to the 
 table and sit down,--then ruffle his fine white hair over his brow 
 with one hand , look round he with an evidently force smile . 

 " anxious about I , be you , child ? " he say , as Innocent take she 
 place beside he . " well , well ! you need not have give I a thought ! 
 I -- I be all right -- all right ! I make a bit of a bargain in the 
 town -- but the price be high -- and Landon-- " 

 he break off suddenly and star in front of he with strange fix 
 eyeball . 

 Innocent and Priscilla look at one another in alarm . there be a 
 moment 's tense stillness,--then Innocent say in rather a trembling 
 voice-- 

 " yes , Dad ? you be say something about Landon-- " 

 the stony glare fade from his eye and he look at she with a more 
 natural expression . 

 " Landon ? do I speak of he ? oh yes!--Landon meet with some fellow he 
 know and decide to spend the evening with they -- he ask I for a 
 night off -- and I give it to he . yes -- I -- I give it to he . " 

 just then Robin enter . 

 " Hullo ! " he exclaim , gaily--"at supper ? do not begin without I ! I 
 say , Uncle , be Landon come back to - night ? " 

 Jocelyn turn upon he sharply . 

 " no ! " he answer , in so fierce a tone that Robin stand amazed--"Why do 
 you all keep on ask I about Landon ? he love drink more than life , 
 and he be have all he want to - night . I have let he off work to - morrow . " 

 Robin be silent for a moment out of sheer surprise . 

 " oh well , that be all right , if you do not mind , " he say , at 
 last--"we're pretty busy -- but I daresay we can manage without he . " 

 " I should think so ! " and Hugo give a short laugh of scorn--"Briar Farm 
 would have come to a pretty pass if it could not get on without a man 
 like Landon ! " 

 there be another silent pause . 

 Priscilla give an anxious side - glance at Innocent 's troubled face , and 
 decide to relieve the tension by useful commonplace talk . 

 " well , Landon or no Landon , supper 's ready ! " she say , briskly--"and 
 it be be wait an hour at least . say grace , Mister Jocelyn , and I will 
 carve ! " 

 Jocelyn look at she bewilderedly . 

 " say grace ? " he queried--"what for ? " 

 Priscilla laugh loudly to cover the surprise she feel . 

 " what for ? Lor , Mister Jocelyn , if you do not know I be sure I do not ! for 
 the beef and potato , I suppose , an ' all the stuff we eats--'for what 
 we be go to receive-- ' " 

 " ah , yes ! I remember--'May the Lord make we truly thankful ! ' " respond 
 Jocelyn , close his eye for a second and then open they 
 again--"and I will tell you what , Priscilla!--there be a deal more to be 
 thankful for to - night than beef and potatoes!--a great deal more ! " 




 CHAPTER VII 

 the supper be a very silent meal . Old Hugo be evidently not inclined 
 to converse,--he eat his food quickly , almost ravenously , without 
 seem to be conscious that he be eat . Robin Clifford glance at 
 he now and again watchfully , and with some anxiety,--an uncomfortable 
 idea that there be something wrong somewhere worry him,--moreover he 
 be trouble by the latent feeling that presently his uncle would be 
 sure to ask if all be " settle " between himself and Innocent . 
 strangely enough , however , the old man make no allusion to the subject . 
 he seem to have forget it , though it have be the chief matter on 
 which he have lay so much stress that morning . each minute Innocent 
 expect he to turn upon she with the dreaded question -- to which she 
 would have have to reply untruly , accord to the plan make between 
 herself and Robin . but to her great surprise and relief he say nothing 
 that convey the least hint of the wish he have so long cherish . he 
 be irritable and drowsy,--now and again his head fall a little forward 
 on his chest and his eye close as though in utter weariness . see 
 this , the practical Priscilla make haste to get the supper finish and 
 clear away . 

 " you be off to bed , Mister Jocelyn , " she said,--"The soon the well , 
 for you look as tired as a lame dog that ' as limp ' ome twenty mile . 
 you be not fit to be racket about market an ' drivin ' bargain . " 

 " who say I be not ? " he interrupt , sit bolt upright and glare 
 fiercely at her--"i tell you I be ! I can do business as well as any 
 man -- and drive a bargain - ah ! I should think so indeed!--a hard - and - fast 
 bargain!--not easy to get out of , I can tell you!--not easy to get out 
 of ! and it have cost I a pretty penny , too ! " 

 Robin Clifford glance at he enquiringly . 

 " how be that ? " he asked--"you generally make rather than spend ! " 

 Jocelyn give a sudden loud laugh . 

 " so I do , boy , so I do ! but sometimes one have to spend to make ! I have 
 do both to - day -- I've make and I have spend . and what I have spend be 
 well than keep it -- and what I have make -- ay!--what I have 
 make -- well!--it 's a bargain , and no one can say it be not a fair one ! " 

 he get up from the supper table and push away his chair . 

 " I will go , " he said--"Priscilla 's right -- I'm dog - tired and bed be the 
 good place for I . " he pass his hand over his forehead . " there be a 
 sort of buzz in my brain like the noise of a cart - wheel -- I want 
 rest . " as he speak Innocent come softly beside he and take his arm 
 caressingly . he look down upon she with a smile . " yes , wilding , I 
 want rest ! we will have a long talk out tomorrow -- you and I and Robin . 
 Bless thee , child ! good - night ! " 

 he kiss she tenderly and hold out one hand to Clifford , who cordially 
 grasp it . 

 " good boy ! " he said-"be up early , for there be much to do -- and Landon 
 will not be home till late -- no -- not till late ! get on with the field 
 work -- for if the cloud mean anything we shall have rain . " he pause a 
 moment and seem to reflect , then repeat slowly--"Yes , lad ! we shall 
 have rain!--and wind , and storm ! be ready!--the fine weather 's 
 breaking ! " 

 with that he go , walk slowly , and they hear he stumble once or 
 twice as he go up the broad oak staircase to his bedroom . Priscilla 
 put her head on one side , like a meditative crow , and listen . then 
 she heave a sigh , smooth down her apron and roll up her eye . 

 " well , if Mister Jocelyn worn't as sober a man as any judge an ' jury , " 
 she observed--"i should say ' e'd bin drinkin ' ! but that be not it . Mr. 
 Robin , there be something go wrong with ' im -- an ' I do not like it . " 

 " nor I , " say Innocent , in a trembling voice , suggestive of tear . " oh , 
 Robin , you surely notice how strange he look ! I be so afraid ! I feel 
 as if something dreadful be go to happen-- " 

 " nonsense ! " and Robin assume an air of indifference which he be far 
 from feeling--"uncle Hugo be tired -- I think he have be put out -- you 
 know he be quick - temper and easily irritated -- he may have have some 
 annoyance in the town-- " 

 " ah ! and where be Landon ? " put in Priscilla , with a dark nod--"that do 
 beat I ! why ever the master should ' ave let a man like that go on the 
 loose for a night an ' a day be more than I can make out ! it be sort of 
 tempting Providence -- that it be ! " 

 Clifford flush and turn aside . his fight with Landon be fresh in 
 his mind -- and he begin to wonder whether he have do rightly in tell 
 his uncle how it come about . but meet Innocent 's anxious eye , which 
 mutely ask he for comfort , he answered-- 

 " oh , well , there be nothing very much in that , Priscilla ! I daresay 
 Landon want a holiday -- he do not ask for one often , and he be keep 
 fairly sober lately . had not we well be off to bed ? thing will 
 straighten out with the morning . " 

 " do you really think so ? " Innocent sigh as she put the question . 

 " of course I think so ! " answer Robin , cheerily . " we be all tired , and 
 can not look on the bright side ! sound sleep be the good cure for the 
 blue ! good - night , Innocent ! " 

 " good - night ! " she say , gently . 

 " good - night , Priscilla ! " 

 " good - night , Mr. Robin . God bless ye ! " 

 he smile , nod kindly to they both , and leave the room . 

 " there be a man for ye ! " murmur Priscilla , admiringly , as he 
 disappeared--"a tower of strength for a ' usband , which the Lord know 
 be rare ! lovey , you will never do well ! " 

 but Innocent seem not to hear . her face be very pale , and her eye 
 have a strained wistful expression . 

 " Dad look very ill , " she say , slowly--"Priscilla , surely you 
 noticed-- " 

 " now , child , do not you worry--'tain't no use"--and Priscilla light two 
 bedroom candle , give Innocent one--"You just go up to bed and think 
 of nothing till the morning . Mister Jocelyn be dead beat and put out 
 about something -- precious ' ungry too , for he eat his food as though he 
 have not ' ad any all day . you could not expect he to be pleasant if he 
 be wear out . " 

 Innocent say nothing more . she give a parting glance round the room to 
 assure herself that everything be tidy , windows bolt and all safe 
 for the night , and for a fleeting moment the impression come over she 
 that she would never see it look quite the same again . a faint cold 
 tremor run through her delicate little body -- she feel lonely and 
 afraid . silently she follow Priscilla up the beautiful Tudor 
 staircase to the first landing , where , move by a tender , cling 
 impulse , she kiss she . 

 " good - night , you dear , kind Priscilla ! " she said--"you've always be 
 good to I ! " 

 " bless you , my lovey ! " answer Priscilla , with emotion--"go and sleep 
 with the angel , like the little angel you be yourself ! and mind you 
 think twice , and more than twice , before you say ' no ' to Mr. Robin ! " 

 with a deprecatory shake of her head , and a faint smile , Innocent 
 turn away , and pass through the curious tortuous little corridor 
 that lead to her own room . once safely inside that quiet sanctum where 
 the Sieur Amadis of long ago have " find peace , " she set her candle down 
 on the oak table and remain stand by it for some moment , lose in 
 thought . the pale glimmer of the single light be scarcely sufficient 
 to disperse the shadow around she , but the lattice window be open and 
 admit a shaft of moonlight which shed a pearly radiance on her 
 little figure , clothe in its simple white gown . have any artist see 
 she thus , alone and absorb in sorrowful musing , he might have take 
 she as a model of psyche after her god have fly . she be weary and 
 anxious -- life have suddenly assume for she a tragic aspect . Old 
 Jocelyn 's manner have puzzle she -- he be unlike himself , and she 
 instinctively feel that he have some secret trouble on his mind . what 
 could it be ? she wonder . not about herself and Robin -- for be he as 
 keen on " put up the bann " as he have be in the morning he would 
 not have allow the matter to rest . he would have ask straight 
 question , and he would have expect plain answers,--and they would , 
 in accordance with the secret understanding they have make with each 
 other , have deceive he . now there be no deception necessary -- he 
 seem to have forget -- at least for the present -- his own dearest 
 desire . with a sigh , half of pain , half of relief , she seat herself 
 at the table , and open its one deep drawer with a little key which 
 she always wear round her neck , she begin to turn over her beloved pile 
 of manuscript , and this occupy she for several minute . presently she 
 look up , her eye grow brilliant with thought , and a smile on her 
 lip . 

 " I really think it might do ! " she say , aloud--"i should not be afraid 
 to try ! who know what might happen ? I can but fail -- or succeed . if I 
 fail , I shall have have my lesson -- if I succeed-- " 

 she lean her head on her two hand , ruffle up her pretty hair into 
 soft golden - brown ring . 

 " if I succeed!--ah!--if I do ! then I will pay back everything I owe to 
 Dad and Briar farm!--oh , no ! I can never pay back my debt to briar 
 Farm!--that would be impossible ! why , the very field and tree and 
 flower and bird have make I happy!--happi than I shall ever be 
 after I have say good - bye to they all!--good - bye even to the Sieur 
 Amadis ! " 

 quick tear spring to her eye -- and the taper light of the candle 
 look blurred and dim . 

 " yes , after all , " she go on , still talk to the air , " it be well 
 and braver to try to do something in the world , rather than throw 
 myself upon Robin , and be cowardly enough to take he for a husband 
 when I do not love he . just for comfort and shelter and Briar Farm ! it 
 would be shameful . and I could not marry a man unless I love he quite 
 desperately!--i could not ! I be not sure that I like the idea of 
 marriage at all,--it fasten a man and woman together for life , and the 
 time might come when they would grow tired of each other . how cruel and 
 wicked it would be to force they to endure each other 's company when 
 they perhaps wish the width of the world between they ! no -- I do not 
 think I should care to be marry -- certainly not to Robin . " 

 she put her manuscript by , and shut and lock the drawer contain 
 it . then she go to the open lattice window and look out -- and 
 thought of the previous night , when Robin have swing himself up on the 
 sill to talk to she , and they have be all unaware that Ned Landon be 
 listen down below . a flush of anger heat her cheek as she 
 recall this and all that Robin have tell she of the unprepared attack 
 Landon have make upon he and the ensue fight between they . but now ? 
 be it not very strange that Landon should apparently be in such high 
 favour with Hugo Jocelyn that he have actually be allow to stay in 
 the market - town and enjoy a holiday , which for he only mean a bout of 
 drunkenness ? she could not understand it , and her perplexity increase 
 the more she think of it . lean far out over the window - sill , she 
 gaze long and lovingly across the quiet stretch of meadowland , 
 shin white in the showered splendour of the moon -- the tall 
 tree -- the infinite and harmonious peace of the whole scene,--then , 
 shut the lattice , she pull the curtain across it , and take she 
 light candle , go to she seclude inner sleeping - chamber , where , in the 
 small , quaintly carve four - poster bed , furnish with ancient tapestry 
 and lavendere linen , and cover up under a quilt embroider three 
 century back by the useful finger of the wife of Sieur Amadis de 
 Jocelin , she soon fall into a sound and dreamless slumber . 

 the hour move on , bear with they different destiny to million 
 of different human life , and the tall old clock in the great hall of 
 Briar Farm tell they off with a sonorous chime and clangour worthy of 
 Westminster itself . it be a quiet night ; there be not a breath of 
 wind to whistle through crack or key - hole , or swing open an unbolted 
 door,--and Hero , the huge mastiff that always sleep " on guard " just 
 within the hall entrance , have surely no cause to sit up suddenly on his 
 great haunch and listen with uplifted ear to sound which be to 
 any other creature inaudible . yet listen he do -- sharply and intently . 
 raise his massive head he snuff the air -- then suddenly begin to 
 tremble as with cold , and give vent to a long , low , dismal moan . it be 
 a weird noise -- bad than positive howling , and the dog himself seem 
 distressfully conscious that he be express something strange and 
 unnatural . two or three time he repeat this eerie muffle cry -- then , 
 lie down again , he put his nose between his great paw , and , with a 
 deep shivering sigh , appear to resign himself to the inevitable . 
 there follow several moment of tense silence . then come a sudden 
 dull thud overhead , as of a heavy load fall or be throw down , 
 and a curious inexplicable murmur like smother choking or groaning . 
 instantly the great dog spring erect and race up the staircase like a 
 mad creature , bark furiously . the house be arouse -- door be 
 fling open -- Priscilla rush from her room half dress -- and Innocent 
 run along the corridor in her little white nightgown , her foot bare , 
 and her hair fall dishevel over her shoulder . 

 " what be it ? " she cry piteously--"oh , do tell I ! what be it ? " 

 Robin Clifford , hear the dog 's persistent barking , have hastily 
 don coat and trouser and now appear on the scene . 

 " Hero , Hero ! " he called--"Quiet , Hero ! " 

 but Hero have bound to his master Jocelyn 's door and be pound 
 against it with all the force of his big muscular body , apparently 
 seek to push or break it open . Robin lay one hand on the animal 's 
 collar and pull he back -- then try the door himself -- it be lock . 

 " Uncle Hugo ! " 

 there be no answer . 

 he turn to one of the frightened servant who be stand near . his 
 face be very pale . 

 " fetch I a hammer , " he said--"somethe -- anything that will force the 
 lock . innocent!"--and with deep tenderness he take her little cold 
 hand in his own--"i wish you would go away ! " 

 " why ? " and she look at he with eye full of terror . " oh no , no ! let 
 I be with you -- let I call him!"--and she kneel outside the closed 
 door--"Dad ! Dear Dad ! I want to speak to you ! may not I come in ? I be so 
 frightened -- do let I come in . Dad ! " 

 but the silence remain unbroken . 

 " priscilla!"--and Robin beckon to her--"keep Innocent beside you -- I'm 
 afraid-- " 

 Priscilla nod , turn her head aside a moment to wipe away the 
 tear that be gather in her eyes,--then she put an arm round 
 Innocent 's waist . 

 " do not kneel there , lovey , " she whispered--"It 's no good and you be in 
 the way when they open the door . come with me!--there be a dear!"--and 
 she draw the trembling little figure tenderly into her arm . 
 " there!--that'll be a bit warm ! " and she sign to one of the farm 
 maid near she to fetch a cloak which she carefully wrap round the 
 girl 's shoulder . just then the hammer be bring with other tool , 
 and Robin , to save any needless clamour , take a chisel and insert it 
 in such a manner as should most easily force the catch of the door -- but 
 the lock be an ancient and a strong one , and would not yield for some 
 time . at last , with an extra powerful and dexterous movement of his 
 hand , it suddenly give way -- and he see what he would have give world 
 that Innocent should not have see -- old Hugo lie face forward on the 
 floor , motionless . there be a rush and a wild cry-- 

 " Dad ! Dad ! " 

 she be beside he in a moment , try with all her slight strength to 
 lift his head and turn his face . 

 " help I -- oh , help I ! " she wail . " he have faint -- we must lift 
 he -- get some one to lift he on the bed . it be only a faint -- he will 
 recover -- get some brandy and send for the doctor . do not lose time!--for 
 Heaven 's sake be quick ! Robin , make they hurry ! " 

 Robin have already whisper his orders,--and two of the farm lad , 
 rouse from sleep and hastily summon , be ready to do what he tell 
 they . with awed , hush movement they lift the heavy fall body of 
 their master between they and lay it gently down on the bed . as the 
 helpless head drop back on the pillow they see that all be 
 over,--the pinched ashen grey of the feature and the fast glazing eye 
 tell their own fatal story -- there be no hope . but Innocent hold the 
 cold hand of the dead man to her warm young bosom , endeavour to take 
 from it its cureless chill . 

 " he will be well soon , " she said,--"priscilla , bring I that 
 brandy -- just a little will revive he , I be sure . why do you stand there 
 cry ? you surely do not think he be dead?--No , no , that be not possible ! 
 it be not possible , be it , Robin ? he will come to himself in a few 
 minute -- a fainting fit may last quite a long time . I wish he have not 
 lock his door -- we could have be with he soon . " 

 so she speak , tremblingly nurse the dead hand in her bosom . no one 
 present have the heart to contradict she -- and Priscilla , with the tear 
 run down her face , bring the brandy she ask for and hold it 
 while she tenderly moisten the lip of the corpse and try to force 
 a few drop between the clench tooth -- in vain . this futile attempt 
 frighten she , and she look at Robin Clifford with a wild air . 

 " I can not make he swallow it , " she said--"can you , Robin ? he look so 
 grey and cold!--but his lip be quite warm . " 

 Robin , restrain the emotion that half choke he and threaten to 
 overflow in womanish weeping , go up to she and try to coax she away 
 from the bedside . 

 " dear , if you could leave he for a little it would perhaps be well , " 
 he say . " he might -- he might recover soon . we have send for the 
 doctor -- he will be here directly-- " 

 " I will stay here till he come , " reply the girl , quietly . " how can 
 you think I would leave Dad when he be ill ? if we could only rouse he a 
 little-- " 

 ah , that " if " ! if we could only rouse our beloved one who fall into 
 that eternal sleep , would not all the rich and glory of the world 
 seem tame in comparison with such joy ! Innocent have never see 
 death -- she could not realise that this calm irresponsiveness , this cold 
 and stiffen rigidity , mean an end to the love and care she have 
 know all her life -- love and care which would never be replace in 
 quite the same way ! 

 the first peep of a silver dawn begin to peer through the lattice 
 window , and as she see this suggestion of waken life , a sudden dread 
 clutched at her heart and make it cold . 

 " it will be morning soon , " she said--"Priscilla , when will the doctor 
 come ? " 

 Scarcely have she say the word when the doctor enter . he take a 
 comprehensive glance round the room,--at the still form on the bed -- at 
 the little crouch girl -- figure beside it -- at Priscilla , tremble 
 and tearful -- at Robin , deadly pale and self - restrained -- at the 
 farm - lad and servant . 

 " when do this happen ? " he say . 

 Robin tell he . 

 " I see ! " he say . " he must have fall forward on get out of bed . I 
 rather expect a sudden seizure of this kind . " he make his brief 
 examination . the eye of the dead man be open and glassily star 
 upward -- he gently close the lid over they and press they down . 

 " nothing to be do , " he go on , gently--"His end be painless . " 

 Innocent have rise -- she have lay the cold hand of the corpse back on 
 its breast -- and she stand gaze vacantly before she in utter misery . 

 " nothing to be do ? " she faltered--"Do you mean that you can not rouse 
 he ? will he never speak to I again ? " 

 the doctor look at she gravely and kindly . 

 " not in this world , my dear , " he said--"in the next -- perhaps ! let we 
 hope so ! " 

 she put her hand up to her forehead with a bewildered gesture . 

 " he be dead ! " she cried--"dead ! oh , Robin , Robin ! I can not believe 
 it!--it be not true ! Dad , dear Dad ! my only friend ! good - bye -- good - bye , 
 dad!--good - bye , Briar Farm -- good - bye to everything -- oh , Dad ! " 

 her voice quaver and break in a passion of tear . 

 " I love he as if he be my own father , " she sob . " and he love I 
 as if I be his own child ! oh , Dad , darle Dad ! we can never love 
 each other again ! " 




 CHAPTER VIII 

 the news of Farmer Jocelyn 's sudden death be as though a cloud - burst 
 have break over the village , deal utter and hopeless destruction . to 
 the little community of simple workaday folk live round Briar Farm it 
 be a great catastrophe than the death of any king . nothing else be 
 talk of . nothing be do . man stand idly about , look at each 
 other in a kind of stupefied consternation,--women chatter and 
 whisper at their cottage door , shake their head with all that 
 melancholy profundity of wisdom which be not wise till after the 
 event,--the child be less noisy in their play , check by the 
 grave face of their parent -- the very dog seem to know that 
 something have occur which alter the aspect of ordinary daily 
 thing . the last of the famous Jocelyns be no more ! it seem 
 incredible . and Briar Farm ? what would become of Briar Farm ? 

 " there be not none o ' th ' owd folk leave now " say one man , light his 
 pipe slowly--"It 's all over an ' do wi ' . Mister Clifford , he be good 
 enow -- but he be not a Jocelyn , though a Jocelyn be his mother . ' Tis 
 the male side as tell . an ' he be young , an ' he will want change an ' 
 rovin ' about like all young man nowadays , an ' the place'll be break up , 
 an ' the timber fell , an ' th ' owd oak'll be sell to a dealer , an ' 
 Merrikans'll come an ' buy the pewter an ' the glass an ' the linen , an ' 
 by - an'-bye we will not know there ever be such a farm at all-- " 

 " that be your style o ' thinkin ' , be it ? " put in another man stand by , 
 with a round straw hat set back upon his head in a fashion which give 
 he the appearance of a village idiot--"Well , it be not mine ! no , by no 
 mean ! there will be a Will,--an ' Mister Robin he will find a way ! Briar 
 Farm'll allus be Briar Farm accordin ' to MY mind ! " 

 " your mind be not much , " growl the first speaker--"so do not ye go 
 settin ' store by it . Lord , Lord ! to think o ' Farmer Jocelyn bein ' gone ! 
 seem as if a right ' and ' ad bin cut off ! Onny yesterday I meet ' i m 
 drivin ' along the road at a tearin ' pace , with Ned Landon sittin ' 
 beside ' im -- an ' drivin ' fine too , for the mare 's a tricky one with a 
 mouth as ' ard as iron -- but ' e hold ' er firm -- that ' e did!--no weakness 
 about ' im -- an ' ' e be talkin ' away to Landon while ' e drove , ' ardly 
 lookin ' right or leave , ' e be that sure of hisself . an ' now ' e 's cold 
 as stone -- who would a ' thort it ! " 

 " where be Landon ? " ask the other man . 

 " I dunno . he be nowhere about this mornin ' that I have see . " 

 at that moment a figure come into view , turn the corner of a lane at 
 the end of the scatter thatched cottage call " the village,"--a 
 portly , consequential - look figure , which both man recognise as that 
 of the parson of the parish , and they touch their cap accordingly . 
 the Reverend William Medwin , M.A. , be a great personage,--and his 
 " cure of soul " extend to three other village outlye the one of 
 which Briar Farm be the acknowledge centre . 

 " good - morning ! " he say , with affable condescension--"i hear that 
 Farmer Jocelyn die suddenly last night . be it true ? " 

 both man nod gravely . 

 " yes , sir , it be true -- more be the pity ! it be take we all aback . " 

 " ay , ay ! " and Mr. Medwin nod blandly--"No doubt - no doubt ! but I 
 suppose the farm will go on just the same?--there will be no lack of 
 employment ? " 

 the man who be smoke look doubtful . 

 " Nobuddy can tell -- m'appen the place will be sell -- m'appen it will not . 
 the hand may be keep , or they may be give the sack . there be only Mr. 
 Clifford leave now , an ' ' e be not a Jocelyn . " 

 " do that matter ? " and the reverend gentleman smile with the superior 
 air of one far above all thing of mere traditional sentiment . " there 
 be the girl-- " 

 " ah , yes ! there be the girl ! " 

 the speaker look at one another . 

 " her position , " continue Mr. Medwin , meditatively trace a pattern on 
 the ground with the end of his walking - stick , " seem to I to be a 
 little unfortunate . but I presume she be really the daughter of our 
 deceased friend ? " 

 the man who be smoking take the pipe from his mouth and star for a 
 moment . 

 " daughter she may be , " he say , " but bear out o ' wedlock anyhow -- an ' 
 she be not get no right to Briar Farm unless th ' owd man ' as make ' er 
 legal . an ' if ' e be do that it do not alter the muddle , ' cept in the 
 eye o ' the law which can twist ye any way -- for she be bear bastard , 
 an ' there be never be a bastard Jocelyn on Briar Farm all the hundred 
 o ' year it be be standin ' ! " 

 Mr. Medwin again interest himself in a dust pattern . 

 " ah , dear , dear ! " he sighed--"very sad , very sad ! our folly always 
 find we out , if not while we live , then when we die ! I be sorry ! farmer 
 Jocelyn be not a Churchman -- no!--a regrettable circumstance!--still , 
 I be sorry ! he be a useful person in the parish -- quite honest , I 
 believe , and a very fair and good master-- " 

 " none well ! " chorusse his listener . 

 " true ! none well . well , well ! I will just go up to the house and see if 
 I can be of any service , or -- or comfort--- " 

 one of the man smile darkly . 

 " sartin sure Farmer Jocelyn 's as dead as door - nail . if so be you be 
 a - go to Briar Farm , Mr. Medwin ! " he said--"why , you never set foot 
 in the place while ' e be a livin ' man ! " 

 " quite correct ! " and Mr. Medwin nod pleasantly--"i make it a rule 
 never to go where I be not want . " he pause , impressively,--conscious 
 that he have " score . " " but now that trouble have visit the house I 
 consider it my duty to approach the fatherless and the afflict . 
 good - day ! " 

 he walk off then , tread ponderously and wear a composed and 
 serious demeanour . the man who have speak with he be quickly join 
 by two or three other . 

 " parson go to the Farm ? " they enquire . 

 " ay ! " 

 " we will ' ave gooseberry growin ' on hayrick next ! " declare a young , 
 rough - feature fellow in a smock--"anythin ' can ' appen now we have lose 
 the last o ' the Jocelyns ! " 

 and such be the general impression throughout the district . man meet in 
 the small public - house and over their mug of beer discuss the 
 possibility of emigrate to Canada or New Zealand , for--"there'll be 
 no more farm work worth do round ' ere"--they all declared--"Mister 
 Jocelyn want MEN , an ' pay them well for workin ' like men!--but it will 
 all be machine now . " 

 meanwhile , the Reverend Mr. Medwin , M.A. , have arrive at Briar Farm . 
 everything be curiously silent . all the blind be down -- the 
 stable - door be close , and the stable - yard be empty . the sunlight 
 sweep in broad slanting ray over the brilliant flower - bed which be 
 now at their gayest and best,--the dove lie sleep on the roof of 
 shed and barn as though mesmerise and forbid to fly . a marked 
 loneliness cloud the peaceful beauty of the place -- a loneliness that 
 make itself see and feel by even the most casual visitor . 

 with a somewhat hesitate hand Mr. Medwin pull the door - bell . in a 
 minute or two a maid answer the summon -- her eye be red with 
 weeping . at sight of the clergyman she look surprised and a little 
 frightened . 

 " how be Miss -- Miss Jocelyn ? " he enquire , softly--"i have only just 
 hear the sad news-- " 

 " she be not able to see anyone , sir , " reply the maid , tremulously--"at 
 least I do not think so -- i'll ask . she be very upset-- " 

 " of course , of course ! " say Mr. Medwin , soothingly--"i quite 
 understand ! please say I call ! Mr. Clifford-- " 

 a figure step out from the interior darkness of the shadowed hall 
 towards he . 

 " I be here , " say Robin , gently--"Did you wish to speak to I ? this be 
 a house of heavy mourning to - day ! " 

 the young man 's voice shook,--he be deadly pale , and there be a 
 strained look in his eye of unshed tear . Mr. Medwin be conscious of 
 nervous embarrassment . 

 " indeed , indeed I know it be ! " he murmured--"i feel for you most 
 profoundly ! so sudden a shock too!--i -- I think that perhaps Miss 
 Jocelyn -- a young girl strike by her first great loss and sorrow , might 
 like to see me-- " 

 Robin Clifford look at he in silence for a moment . the consolation 
 of the Church ! would they mean anything to Innocent ? he wonder . 

 " I will ask she , " he say at last , abruptly--"Will you step inside ? " 

 Mr. Medwin accept the suggestion , take off his hat as he cross 
 the threshold , and soon find himself in the quaint sitting - room where , 
 but two day since , Hugo Jocelyn have tell Innocent all her true 
 history . he could not help be impress by its old - world peace and 
 beauty , furnish as it be in perfect taste , with its window - outlook 
 on a paradise of happy flower rejoice in the sunlight . the fragrance 
 of sweet lavender scent the air , and a big china bowl of rose in the 
 centre of the table give a touch of tender brightness to the old oak 
 panelling on the wall . 

 " there be thing in this room that be priceless ! " soliloquise the 
 clergyman , who be something of a collector--"if the place come under 
 the hammer I shall try to pick up a few piece . " 

 he smile , with the pleased air of one who feel that all thing must 
 have an end -- either by the " hammer " or otherwise,--even a fine old 
 house , the pride and joy of a long line of its owner during three 
 hundred year . and then he start , as the door open slowly and 
 softly and a girl stand before he , look more like a spirit than a 
 mortal , clothe in a plain white gown , with a black ribbon thread 
 through her wave fair hair . she be pale to the very lip , and her 
 eye be swollen and heavy with weeping . timidly she hold out her hand . 

 " it be kind of you to come , " she said,--and pause . 

 he , have take her hand and let it go again , stand awkwardly mute . it 
 be the first time he have see Innocent in her home surrounding , and 
 he have hardly notice she at all when he have by chance meet she in her 
 rare walk through the village and neighbourhood , so that he be 
 altogether unprepared for the refined delicacy and grace of her 
 appearance . 

 " I be very sorry to hear of your sad bereavement , " he begin , at last , 
 in a conventional tone--"very sorry indeed-- " 

 she look at he curiously . 

 " be you ? I do not think you can be sorry , because you do not know 
 he -- if you have know he , you would have be really grieve -- yes , I 
 be sure you would . he be such a good man!--one of the good in all the 
 world ! I be glad you have come to see I , because I have often want to 
 speak to you -- and perhaps now be the right time . will not you sit down ? " 

 he obey her gesture , surprise more or less by her quiet air of sad 
 self - possession . he have expect to offer the usual form of religious 
 consolation to a sort of uneducated child or farm - girl , nervous , 
 trembling and tearful,--instead of this he find a woman whose grief 
 be too deep and sincere to be relieve by mere talk , and whose 
 pathetic composure and patience be the evident result of a highly 
 sensitive mental organisation . 

 " I have never see death before , " she say , in hush tones--"except in 
 bird and flower and animal -- and I have cry over the poor thing 
 for sorrow that they should be take away out of this beautiful world . 
 but with Dad it be different . he be afraid -- afraid of suffer and 
 weakness -- and he be take so quickly that he could hardly have feel 
 anything -- so that his fear be all useless . and I can hardly believe 
 he be dead -- actually dead -- can you ? but of course you do not believe in 
 death at all -- the religion you teach be one of eternal life -- eternal 
 life and happiness . " 

 Mr. Medwin 's lip move -- he murmur something about " live again in 
 the Lord . " 

 Innocent do not hear,--she be absorb in her own mental problem and 
 anxious to put it before he . 

 " listen ! " she said--"When Priscilla tell I Dad be really dead -- that 
 he would never get off the bed where he lie so cold and white and 
 peaceful,--that he would never speak to I again , I say she be 
 wrong -- that it could not be . I tell she he would wake presently and 
 laugh at we all for be so foolish as to think he dead . even Hero , 
 our mastiff , do not believe it , for he have stay all morning by the 
 bedside and no one dare touch he to take he away . and just now 
 Priscilla have be with I , cry very much -- and she say I must not 
 grieve,--because Dad be go to a well world . then surely he must be 
 alive if he be able to go anywhere , must he not ? I ask she what she 
 know about this well world , and she cry again and say indeed she 
 know nothing except what she have be teach in her Catechism . I have 
 read the Catechism and it seem to I very stupid and 
 unnatural -- perhaps because I do not understand it . can you tell I 
 about this well world ? " 

 Mr. Medwin 's lip move again . he clear his throat . 

 " I be afraid , " he observed--"I'm very much afraid , my poor child , that 
 you have be bring up in a sad state of ignorance . " 

 Innocent do not like be call a " poor child"--and she give a 
 little gesture of annoyance . 

 " please do not pity I , " she say , with a touch of hauteur--"i do not 
 wish that ! I know it be difficult for I to explain thing to you as I 
 see they , because I have never be teach religion from a Church . I 
 have read about the Virgin and Christ and the Saints and all those 
 pretty legend in the book that belong to the Sieur Amadis -- but he 
 live three hundred year ago and he be a roman Catholic , as all those 
 french nobleman be at that time . " 

 Mr. Medwin star at she in blank bewilderment . who be the Sieur 
 Amadis ? she go on , heedless of his perplexity . 

 " Dad believe in a God who govern all thing rightly,--i have hear 
 he say that God manage the farm and make it what it be . but he never 
 speak much about it -- and he hat the church-- " 

 the reverend gentleman interrupt she with a grave uplifted hand . 

 " I know ! " he sighed--"Ah yes , I know ! a dreadful thing!--a shocking 
 attitude of mind ! ' I fear he be not save ! " 

 she look straightly at he . 

 " I do not see what you mean , " she said--"He be quite a good man-- " 

 " be you sure of that ? " and Mr. Medwin fix his shallow brown eye 
 searchingly upon she . " our affection be often very deceptive-- " 

 a flush of colour overspread her pale cheek . 

 " indeed I be very sure ! " she answer , steadily--"He be a good man . 
 there be never a stain on his character -- though he allow people to 
 think wrong thing of he for my sake . that be his only fault . " 

 he be silent , wait for her next word . 

 " I think perhaps I ought to tell you , " she continued--"because then you 
 will be able to judge he well and spare his memory from foolish and 
 wicked scandal . he be not my father -- I be only his adopt daughter . " 

 Mr. Medwin give a slight cough -- a cough of incredulity . " adopt " be a 
 phrase often use to cover the brand of illegitimacy . 

 " I never know my own history till the other day , " she say , slowly and 
 sadly . " the doctor come to see Dad , with a London specialist , a friend 
 of his -- and they tell he he have not long to live . after that Dad make 
 up his mind that I must learn all the truth of myself -- oh!--what a 
 terrible truth it was!--I think my heart would break ! it be so 
 strange -- so cruel ! I have grow up believe myself to be Dad 's own , 
 very own daughter!--and I have be deceive all my life!--for he tell 
 I I be nothing but a nameless child , leave on his hand by a stranger ! " 

 Mr. Medwin open his small eye in amazement,--he be completely take 
 aback . he try to grasp the bearing of this new aspect of the 
 situation thus present to he , but could not realise anything save 
 what in his own mind be he pleased to call a " cock - and - bull " story . 

 " most extraordinary ! " he ejaculate , at last--"Did he give you no clue 
 at all as to your actual parentage ? " 

 Innocent shake her head . 

 " how could he ? a man on horseback arrive here suddenly one very stormy 
 night , carry I in his arm -- I be just a little baby -- and ask 
 shelter for I , promise to come and fetch I in the morning -- but he 
 never come -- and Dad never know who he be . I be keep here out of pity 
 at first -- then Dad begin to love me-- " 

 the suppress tear rise to her eye and begin to fall . 

 " Priscilla can tell you all about it , " she continue , tremulously--"if 
 you wish to know more . I be only explain thing a little because I 
 do want you to understand that Dad be really a good man though he do 
 not go to Church -- and he must have be ' save , ' as you put it , for he 
 never do anything unworthy of the name of Jocelyn ! " 

 the clergyman think a moment . 

 " you be not Miss Jocelyn , then ? " he say . 

 she meet his gaze with a sorrowful calmness . 

 " no . I be nobody . I have not even be baptise . " 

 he spring up from his chair , horrify . 

 " not baptise ! " he exclaimed--"not baptise ! do you mean to tell I 
 that Farmer Jocelyn never attend to this imperative and sacred duty 
 on your behalf?--that he allow you to grow up as a heathen ? " 

 she remain unmove by his outburst . 

 " I be not a heathen , " she say , gently--"I believe in God -- as Dad 
 believe . I be sorry I have not be baptise -- but it have make no 
 difference to I that I know of-- " 

 " no difference ! " and the clergyman roll up his eye and shake his 
 head ponderously--"you poor unfortunate girl , it have make all the 
 difference in the world ! you be unregenerate -- your soul be not wash 
 clean -- all your sin be upon you , and you be not redeem ! " 

 she look at he tranquilly . 

 " that be all very sad for I if it be true , " she said--"but it be not 
 my fault . I could not help it . Dad could not help it either -- he do not 
 know what to do . he expect that I might be claim and take away any 
 day -- and he have no idea what name to give I -- except Innocent -- which be 
 a name I suppose no girl ever have before . he use to get money from 
 time to time in registered envelope , bear different foreign 
 postmark -- and there be always a slip of paper inside with the word 
 ' for Innocent ' write on it . so that name have be my only name . you 
 see , it be very difficult for he -- poor dad!--beside , he do not 
 believe in baptism-- " 

 " then he be an infidel ! " declare Mr. Medwin , hotly . 

 her serious blue eye regard he reproachfully . 

 " I do not think you should say that -- it be not quite kind on your part , " 
 she replied--"he always thank God for prosperity , and never 
 complain when thing go wrong -- that be not be an infidel ! even 
 when he know he be hopelessly ill , he never worry anyone about 
 it -- he be only just a little afraid - and that be perfectly natural . 
 we be all a little afraid , you know -- though we pretend we be not -- none 
 of we like the idea of leave this lovely world and the sunshine for 
 ever . even Hamlet be afraid,--shakespeare make he say so . and when 
 one have live all one 's life on Briar Farm -- such a sweet peaceful 
 home!--one can hardly fancy anything well , even in a next world ! 
 no -- Dad be not an infidel -- please do not think such a thing!--he only 
 die last night -- and I feel as if it would hurt he . " 

 Mr. Medwin be exceedingly embarrassed and annoyed -- there be something 
 in the girl 's quiet demeanour that suggest a certain intellectual 
 superiority to himself . he hum and hawed , lurk various unpleasant 
 throaty noise . 

 " well -- to I , of course , it be a very shocking state of affair , " he 
 say , irritably--"I hardly think I can be of any use -- or consolation to 
 you in the matter you have speak of , which be quite outside my scope 
 altogether . if you have anything to say about the funeral 
 arrangement -- but I presume Mr. Clifford-- " 

 " Mr. Clifford be master here now , " she answered--"He will give his own 
 order , and will do all that be good and wisest . as I have tell you , I 
 be a name - less nobody , and have no right in this house at all . I be 
 sorry if I have vex or troubled you -- but as you call I think it 
 be right to tell you how I be situate . you see , when poor Dad be 
 bury I shall be go away at once -- and I have an idea you might 
 perhaps help I -- you be God 's minister . " 

 he wrinkle up his brow and look frowningly at she . 

 " you be leave Briar Farm ? " he ask . 

 " I must . I have no right to stay . " 

 " be Mr. Clifford turn you out ? " 

 a faint , sad smile creep round the girl 's pretty , sensitive mouth . 

 " ah , no ! no , indeed ! he would not turn a dog out that have once take 
 food from his hand , " she say . " it be my own wish entirely . when Dad 
 be alive there be something for I to do in take care of he -- but 
 now!--there be no need for I -- I should feel in the way -- besides , I 
 must try to earn my own living . " 

 " what do you propose to do ? " ask Mr. Medwin , whose manner to she have 
 completely change from the politely patronise to the sharply 
 aggressive--"do you want a situation ? " 

 she lift her eye to his fat , unpromising face . 

 " yes -- I should like one very much -- I could be a lady 's maid , I think , I 
 can sew very well . but -- perhaps you would baptise I first ? " 

 he give a sound between a cough and a grunt . 

 " eh ? baptise you ? " 

 " yes,--because if I be unregenerate , and my soul be not clean , as you 
 say , no one would take I -- not even as a lady 's maid . " 

 her quaint , perfectly simple way of put the case make he angry . 

 " I be afraid you be not sufficiently aware of the importance of the 
 sacred rite,"--he say , severely--"at your age you would need to be 
 instruct for some week before you could be consider fit and 
 worthy . then,--you tell I you have no name!--innocent be not a name at 
 all for a woman -- I do not know who you be -- you be ignorant of your 
 parentage -- you may have be bear out of wedlock-- " 

 she colour deeply . 

 " I be not sure of that , " she say , in a low tone . 

 " no -- of course you be not sure,--but I should say the probability be 
 that you be illegitimate"--and the reverend gentleman take up his hat 
 to go . " the whole business be very perplexing and difficult . however , I 
 will see what can be do for you -- but you be in a very awkward 
 corner!--very awkward indeed ! life will not be very easy for you , I 
 fear ! " 

 " I do not expect ease , " she replied--"i have be very happy till 
 now -- and I be grateful for the past . I must make my own future . " 

 her eye fill with tear as she look out through the open window at 
 the fair garden which she herself have tend for so long -- and she see 
 the clergyman 's portly form through a mist of sorrow as in half - hearte 
 fashion he bid her good - day . 

 " I hope -- I fervently trust -- that God will support you in your 
 bereavement , " he say , unctuously--"i have intend before leave to 
 offer up a prayer with you for the soul of the depart and for your 
 own soul -- but the sad fact of your be unbaptised place I in a 
 difficulty . but I shall not fail personally to ask our Lord to prepare 
 you for the unfortunate change in your lot ! " 

 " thank you ! " she reply , quietly -- and without further salute he leave 
 she . 

 she stand for a moment consider -- then sit down by the window , 
 look at the radiant flowerbed , with all their profusion of blossom . 
 she wonder dreamily how they could show such brave , gay colouring 
 when death be in the house , and the aching sense of loss and sorrow 
 weight the air as with darkness . a glitter of white wing flash 
 before her eye , and her dove alight on the window - sill,--she 
 stretch out her hand and the pet bird step on her little rosy 
 palm with all its accustomed familiarity and confidence . she caress 
 it tenderly . 

 " Poor Cupid ! " she murmured--"you be like I -- you be 
 unregenerate!--you have never be baptised!--your soul have not be 
 wash clean!--and all your sin be on your head ! yes , Cupid!--we be 
 very much alike!--for I do not suppose you know your own father and 
 mother any more than I know mine ! and yet God make you -- and he have 
 take care of you -- so far ! " 

 she stroke the dove 's satiny plumage gently -- and then draw back a 
 little into shadow as she see Robin Clifford step out from the porch 
 into the garden and hurriedly interrupt the advance of a woman who just 
 then push open the outer gate -- a slatternly - look creature with 
 dark dishevel hair and a face which might have be handsome , but 
 for its unmistakable impress of drink and dissipation . 

 " eh , Mr. Clifford -- it be you , be it ? " she exclaim , in shrill tone . 
 " An ' Farmer Jocelyn 's dead!--who'd a ' think it ! but I would ' ave ' ad a 
 bone to pick with ' I m this mornin ' , if he have be livin'--that I 
 would!--givin ' sack to Ned Landon without a warning to I ! " 

 Innocent lean forward , listen eagerly , with an uncomfortably 
 beat heart . through all the miserable , slow , and ache hour that 
 have elapse since Hugo Jocelyn 's death , there have be a secret anxiety 
 in her mind concern Ned Landon and the various possibility 
 involve in his return to the farm , when he should learn that his 
 employer be no more , and that Robin be sole master . 

 " I have come up to speak with ye , " continue the woman,--"It 's pretty 
 ' ard on I to be leave in the ditch , with a man tumble ye off his 
 horse an ' ridin ' away where ye can not get at ' I m ! " she laugh harshly . 
 " Ned be go to ' Merriker ! " 

 " go to America!"--Robin 's voice ring out in sharp accent of 
 surprise--"Ned Landon ? why , when do you hear that ? " 

 " just now -- his own letter come with the carrier 's cart -- he leave the 
 town last night and take ship from Southampton to - day . and why ? 
 because Farmer Jocelyn give he five hundred pound to do it ! so 
 there be some real news for ye ! " 

 " five hundred pound ! " echo Clifford--"My Uncle Hugo give he five 
 hundred pound ! " 

 " ay , ye may stare!"--and the woman laugh again--"and the devil have 
 take it all,--except a five - pun ' note which he send to I to ' keep I 
 go , ' he say . like his cheek ! I be not his wife , that be true!--but 
 I be as much as any wife -- an ' there be the kid-- " 

 Robin glance round apprehensively at the open window . 

 " hush ! " he said--"don't talk so loud-- " 

 " the dead can not hear , " she say , scornfully--"an ' Ned say in his 
 letter that he be be send off all on account of you an ' your light o ' 
 love -- Innocent , she be call -- a precious ' innocent ' SHE is!--an ' that 
 the old man have pay ' I m to go away an ' ' old his tongue ! so it be all 
 your fault , after all , that I be leave with the kid to rub along 
 anyhow;--he might ave marry I in a while , if he have stay . I be only 
 jenny o ' mill - dyke now -- just as I have always be -- the toss an ' catch 
 of every man!--but I ' ad a grip on Ned with the kid , an ' he would a ' do 
 I right in the end if you an ' your precious ' innocent ' ' adn't be in 
 the way-- " 

 Robin make a quick stride towards she . 

 " go out of this place ! " he say , fiercely--"How dare you come here with 
 such lie ! " 

 he stop , half choke with rage . 

 Jenny look at he and laugh -- then snap her finger in his face . 

 " Lies , be it ? " she said--"Well , lie make good crop , an ' Farmer 
 Jocelyn 's money'll ' elp they to grow ! lie , indeed ! an ' how dare I come 
 here ? why , because your old uncle be stiff an ' cold an ' can not speak no 
 more -- an ' no one would know what ' ad become o ' Ned Landon if I be not 
 here to tell they an ' show his own letter ! I will tell they all , right 
 enough!--you bet your life I will ! " 

 she turn she back on he and begin to walk , or rather slouch , out of 
 the garden . he go up close to she , his face white with passion . 

 " if you say one word about Miss Jocelyn-- " he begin . 

 " Miss Jocelyn ! " she exclaim , shrilly--"that 's good!--we ARE 
 grand!"--and she drop he a mock curtsey--"Miss Jocelyn ! there be not 
 no ' Miss Jocelyn , ' an ' you know it as well as I do ! so do not try to 
 fool ME ! look here , Mr. Robin Clifford"--and she confront he , with 
 arm akimbo--"you're not a Jocelyn neither!--there be not a Jocelyn leave 
 o ' the old stock -- they're all finish with the one lyin ' dead upstairs 
 yonder -- and I will tell ye what!--you an ' your ' innocent ' be too ' igh 
 an ' mighty altogether for the like o ' we poor villager -- seein ' ye 
 be not get nothing to boast of , neither of ye ! you have lose I my 
 man -- an ' I will let everyone know how an ' why ! " 

 with that she go , bang the gate after she -- and Clifford stand 
 inert , furious within himself , yet powerless to do anything save 
 silently endure the taunt she have fling at he . he could have curse 
 himself for the folly he have be guilty of in tell his uncle about 
 the fight between he and Landon -- for he see now that the old man have 
 secretly worried over the possible harm that might be do to Innocent 
 through Landon 's knowledge of her real story , which he have learn 
 through his spying and listening . whatever that harm could be , be now 
 intensify -- and scandal , begin as a mere whisper suggestion , 
 would increase to loud and positive assertion ere long . 

 " Poor Uncle Hugo ! " and the young man look up sorrowfully at the 
 darken window of the room where lay in still and stern repose all 
 that be mortal of the last of the jocelyns--"what a mistake you have 
 make ! you mean so well!--you think you be do a wise thing in 
 send Landon away -- and at such a cost!--but you do not know what he 
 have leave behind he -- Jenny of the Mill - Dykes , whose wicked tongue would 
 blacken an angel 's reputation ! " 

 a hand touch he lightly on the arm from behind . he turn swiftly 
 round and confront Innocent -- she stand like a little figure of white 
 porcelain , hold she dove against her breast . 

 " Poor Robin ! " she say , softly--"don't worry ! I hear everything . " 

 he star down upon she . 

 " you heard-- ? " 

 " yes . I be at the open window there -- I could not help hear . it be 
 Jenny of the Mill - Dykes -- I know she by sight , but not to speak 
 to -- Priscilla tell I something about she . she be not a nice woman , be 
 she ? " 

 " nice ? " Robin gasped--"No , indeed ! she be -- Well!--I must not tell you 
 what she be ! " 

 " No!--you must not -- I do not want to hear . but she ought to be Ned 
 Landon 's wife -- I understand that!--and she have a little child . I 
 understand that too . and she know everything about I -- and about that 
 night when you climb up on my window - sill and sit there so long . it 
 be a pity you do that , be not it ? " 

 " Yes!--when there be a dirty spy in hiding ! " say Robin , hotly . 

 " Ah!--we never imagine such a thing could be on Briar farm!"--and she 
 sighed--"but it can not be help now . poor darling Dad ! he part with 
 all that money to get rid of the man he think would do I wrong . oh 
 Robin , he love I ! " 

 the tear gather in her eye and fall slowly like bright raindrop on 
 the downy feather of the dove she hold . 

 " he love you , and I love you ! " murmur Robin , tenderly . " dear little 
 girl , come indoor and do not cry any more ! your sweet eye will be 
 spoilt , and Uncle Hugo could never bear to see you weep . all the 
 tear in the world will not bring he back to we here,--but we can do our 
 good to please he still , so that if his spirit have ever be trouble , 
 it can be at peace . come in and let we talk quietly together -- we must 
 look at thing squarely and straightly , and we must try to do all the 
 thing he would have wished-- " 

 " all except one thing , " she say , as they go together side by side 
 into the house--"the one thing that can never be ! " 

 " the one thing -- the chief thing that shall be ! " answer Robin , 
 fiercely--"innocent , you must be my wife ! " 

 she lift her tear - wet eye to his with a grave and piteous appeal 
 which smite he to the heart by its intense helplessness and sorrow . 

 " Robin,--dear Robin ! " she said--"don't make it hard for I than it 
 be ! think for a moment ! I be nameless -- a poor , unbaptise , deserted 
 creature who be fling on your uncle 's charity eighteen year ago -- I be 
 a stranger and intruder in this old historic place -- I have no right to 
 be here at all -- only through your uncle 's kindness and your . and now 
 thing have happen so cruelly for I that I be suppose to be to 
 you -- what I be not,"--and the deep colour flush her cheek and brow . 
 " I have somehow -- through no fault of my own -- lose my name!--though I 
 have no name to lose -- except innocent!--which , as the clergyman tell I , 
 be no name for a woman . do you not see that if I marry you , people 
 would say it be because you be compel to marry me?--that you have 
 go too far to escape from me?--that , in fact , we be a sort of copy 
 of Ned Landon and Jenny of the Mill - Dykes ? " 

 " innocent ! " 

 he utter the name in a tone of indignant and despairing protest . they 
 be in the oak parlour together , and she go slowly to the window and 
 let her pet dove fly . 

 " ah , yes ! innocent ! " she repeat , sadly--"but you must let I go , 
 robin!--just as I have let my dove fly , so you must let I fly 
 also -- far , far away ! " 




 CHAPTER ix 

 no more impressive scene be ever witness in a country village than 
 the funeral of " the last of the Jocelyns,"--impressive in its 
 solemnity , simplicity and lack of needless ceremonial . the coffin , 
 contain all that be mortal of the sturdy , straightforward farmer , 
 whose " old - world " way of work and upright deal with his man have for 
 so long be the wonder and envy of the district , be place in a low 
 waggon and cover with a curiously wrought , handwoven purple cloth 
 embroider with the arm of the french knight " Amadis de Jocelin , " 
 tradition assert that this cloth have serve as a pall for every male 
 Jocelyn since his time . the waggon be draw by four glossy dark brown 
 cart - horse , each animal have know its master as a friend whose call 
 it be accustom to obey , follow he wherever he go . on the 
 coffin itself be lay a simple wreath of the " glory " rose gather 
 from the porch and wall of Briar Farm , and offer , as pencil 
 faintly on a little scroll--"With a life 's love and sorrow from 
 Innocent . " a long train of mourner , include labourer , farm - lad , 
 shepherd , cowherd , stable - man and villager generally , follow the 
 corpse to the grave,--Robin Clifford , as chief mourner and next - of - kin 
 to the dead man , walk behind the waggon with head down - bent and a 
 face on which intense grief have stamp such an impress as to make it 
 look far old than his year warrant . group of woman stand about , 
 watch the procession with hard eager eye , and tongue hold in check 
 for a while , only to wag more vigorously than ever when the ceremony 
 should be over . innocent , dress in deep black for the first time in 
 her life , go by herself to the churchyard , avoid the crowd -- and , 
 hide away among conceal shadow , she hear the service and watch 
 all the proceeding dry - eyed and heart - stricken . she could not weep any 
 more -- there seem no tear leave to relieve the weight of her burning 
 brain . Robin have tenderly urge she to walk with he in the funeral 
 procession , but she refuse . 

 " how can i!--how dare I ! " she said--"i be not his daughter -- I be 
 nothing ! the cruel people here know it!--and they would only say my 
 presence be an insult to the dead . yes!--they would -- now ! he love 
 me!--and I love him!--but nobody outside ourselves think about that , 
 or care . you would hardly believe it , but I have already be tell how 
 wicked it be of I to be dress in white when the clergyman call to 
 see I the morning after Dad 's death -- well , I have no other colour to 
 wear till Priscilla get I this sad black gown -- it make I shudder to 
 put it on -- it be like the darkness itself!--you know Dad always make I 
 wear white -- and I feel as if I be vex he somehow by wear 
 black . oh , Robin , be kind!--you always are!--let I go by myself and 
 watch Dad put to rest where nobody can see I . for after they have lay 
 he down and leave he , they will be talk ! " 

 she be right enough in this surmise . not one who see Farmer Jocelyn 's 
 coffin lower into the grave fail to notice the wreath of " glory " 
 rose that go with it--"from innocent";--and her name be whisper 
 from mouth to mouth with mean look and suggestive nod . and when 
 Robin , with tear thick in his eye , fling the first handfuls of earth 
 rattle down on the coffin lid , his heart ache to see the lovely 
 fragrant blossom crush under the heavy scatter mould , for it 
 seem to his foreboding mind that they be like the delicate thought 
 and fancy of the girl he love be cover by the soil mud of 
 the world 's cruelty and slander , and kill in the cold and darkness of 
 a sunless solitude . 

 all be over at last,--the final prayer be say -- the final benediction 
 be speak , and the mourner gradually disperse . the Reverend Mr. 
 Medwin , assist by his young curate , have perform the ceremony , and 
 before retire to the vestry to take off his surplice , he pause by 
 the newly - make grave to offer his hand and utter suitable condolence 
 to Robin Clifford . 

 " it be a great and try change for you , " he say . " I suppose"--this 
 tentatively--"i suppose you will go on with the farm ? " 

 " as long as I live , " answer Clifford , look he steadily in the 
 face , " Briar Farm will be what it have always be . " 

 Mr. Medwin give he a little appreciative bow . 

 " we be very glad of that -- very glad indeed ! " he said--"Briar Farm be a 
 great feature -- a very great feature!--indeed , one may say it be an 
 historical possession . something would be lack in the neighbourhood 
 if it be not keep up to its old tradition and -- er -- reputation . I 
 think we feel that -- I think we feel it , do we not , Mr. Forwood ? " here 
 turn to his curate with affable condescension . 

 Mark Forwood , a clever - look young man with kind eye and intelligent 
 feature , look at Robin sympathetically . 

 " I be quite sure , " he say , " that Mr. Clifford will take as much pride 
 in the fine old place as his uncle do -- but be there not Miss 
 jocelyn?--the daughter will probably inherit the farm , will she not , as 
 near of kin ? " 

 Mr. Medwin cough obtrusively -- and Clifford feel the warm blood 
 rush to his brow . yet he resolve that the truth should be tell , 
 for the honour of the dead man 's name . 

 " she be not my uncle 's daughter , " he say , quietly--"My uncle never 
 marry . he adopt she when she be an infant -- and she be as dear to 
 he as if she have be his own child . of course she will be amply 
 provide for -- there can be no doubt of that . " 

 Mr. Forwood raise his eye and eyebrow together . 

 " you surprise I ! " he murmur . " then -- there be no Miss Jocelyn ? " 

 again Robin colour . but he answer , composedly-- 

 " there be no Miss Jocelyn . " 

 Mr. Medwin 's cough here trouble he considerably , and though it be a 
 fine day , he express a mild fear that he be stand too long by the 
 open grave in his surplice -- he , therefore , retire , his curate 
 follow him,--whereupon the sexton , a well - know character in the 
 village , approach to finish the sad task of commit " ash to 
 ash , dust to dust . " 

 " eh , Mr. Clifford , " remark this worthy , as he stick his spade down in 
 the heap - up earth and lean upon it,--"it 's a black day , forbye the 
 summer sun ! I never thort I would a ' throw the moul on the last Jocelyn . 
 for last he be , an ' there will never be another like ' I m ! " 

 " you be right there , Wixton , " say Robin , sadly--"i know the place can 
 never be the same without he . I shall do my good -- but-- " 

 " ay , ye'll do your good , " agree Wixton , with a foreboding shake of his 
 grizzle head--"but you be not a Jocelyn , an ' your best'll be but a bad 
 crutch , though there be Jocelyn blood in ye by ye'r mother 's side . 
 Howsomever it be not the same as the male line , do what we will an ' say 
 what we like ! it be not your fault , no , lad!"--this with a pitying 
 look--"an ' no one 's blamin ' ye for what can not be ' elpe -- but it be not a 
 thing to be get over . " 

 Robin 's grave nod of acquiescence be more eloquent than speech . 

 Wixton dig his spade a little deep into the pile of earth . 

 " if Farmer Jocelyn ' ad be a marryin ' man , why , that would a ' be the 
 right thing , " he go on--"He might a ' have a fine strappin ' son to come 
 arter ' I m , a real bear - an'-bre Jocelyn-- " 

 Robin listen with acute interest . why do not Wixton mention 
 Innocent ? do he know she be not a Jocelyn ? he wait , and Wixton go 
 on-- 

 " but , ye see , ' e would not have none o ' that . an ' he take the little gel 
 as be leave with ' I m the night o ' the great storm nigh eighteen year 
 ago that blow down three of our big elm in the church - yard-- " 

 " do you know ? " exclaim Clifford , eagerly--"Did you see-- ? " 

 " I see a man on ' orseback ride up to Briar Farm , ' oldin ' a baby in 
 front o ' he with one hand , and the rein in t'other -- an ' he come out 
 from the farm without the baby . then one mornin ' when Farmer Jocelyn 
 be a - walkin ' with the baby in the field I say to ' I m , 
 secret - like--'that be not your child ! ' an ' he sez--'Ow do you know it 
 be not ? ' an ' I sez-- ' because I see it come with a stranger'--an ' he 
 laugh an ' said--'it may be mine for all that ! ' but I know it worn't ! 
 a nice little girl she be too,--Miss Innocent -- poor soul ! I be downright 
 sorry for ' er , for she be not get many friend in this village . " 

 " why ? " Robin ask , half mechanically . 

 " why ? well , she be a bit too dainty -- like in ' er way for one 
 thing -- then there be gel who be arter you , Mister Clifford!--ay , ay , 
 ye know they are!--sharp ' ussie , all of ' em!--an ' they can not abide 
 ' ER , for they think you be a - go to marry ' er!--lord forgive I that 
 I should be chitterin ' ' ere about marryin ' over a buryin'!--but that be 
 the trouble -- an ' it be the trouble all the world over , wimmin wantin ' a 
 man , an ' mad for their life when they think another woman 's arter 
 ' I m ! eh , eh ! we should all get along well if there worn't no wimmin 
 jealousy , but bein ' man we have get to put up with them . be ye go 
 now , Mister?--Well , the Lord love ye an ' comfort ye!--ye'll never meet 
 a fine man this side the next world than the one I be puttin ' a cold 
 quilt on ! " 

 Silently Clifford turn away , heavy - hearted and lose in perplexed 
 thought . what be good to be do for Innocent ? this be the chief 
 question that present itself to his mind . he could no long deny the 
 fact that her position be difficult -- almost untenable . nameless , and 
 seemingly desert by she kindre , if any such kindre still exist , 
 she be absolutely alone in life , now that Hugo Jocelyn be no more . as 
 he realise this to its full intensity , the deep and more 
 passionate grow his love for she . 

 " if she would only marry I ! " he say under his breath , as he walk 
 home slowly from the church - yard--"It be Uncle Hugo 's last wish ! " 

 then across his brain flash the memory of Ned Landon and his 
 malignant intention -- bear of baffle desire and fierce jealousy -- to 
 tarnish the fair name of the girl he coveted,--then , his uncle 's 
 quixotic and costly way of rid himself of such an enemy at any 
 price . he understand now old Jocelyn 's talk of his " bargain " on the 
 last night of his life,-and what a futile bargain it be , after 
 all!--for be not Jenny of the Mill - dyke fully inform of the reason 
 why the bargain be made?--and she , the vilest - tongue woman in the 
 whole neighbourhood , would take delight in spread the story far and 
 wide . five Hundred Pounds pay down as " hush - money"!--so she would 
 report it -- thus , even if he marry Innocent it would be under the 
 shadow of a slur and slander . what be wisest to do under the 
 circumstance he could not decide -- and he enter the smile garden of 
 Briar Farm with the sad expression on his face that anyone have ever 
 see there . Priscilla meet he as he come towards the house . 

 " I think ye'd never git here , Mister Robin , " she say , anxiously--"ye 
 have not forget there be folk in the hall ' avin ' their ' wake ' feed an ' 
 they will be wantin ' to speak wi ' ye presently . Mister Bayliss , which be 
 ye'r uncle 's lawyer , ' e want to see ye mighty partikler , an ' there 
 be not no one to say nothing to them , for the dear little Innocent , she be 
 come back from the cold churchyard like a little image o ' marble , an ' 
 she be go an ' shut ' erself up in ' er own room , sayin ' ' ask Mister 
 Robin to excuse me'--poor child!--she 's fair wear out , that she be ! an ' 
 you come into the big ' all where there be the meat and the wine lay 
 out , for funeral folk eat more than weddin ' folk , bein ' long about 
 it an ' a bit solemner in gettin ' of it down . " 

 Robin look at she with strained , haggard eye . 

 " Priscilla , " he say , huskily--"Death be a horrible thing ! " 

 " ay , that it be ! " and Priscilla wipe the teardrop off her cheek with 
 a corner of her apron--"an ' I have often think it seem a silly kind o ' 
 business to bring we into the world at all for no special reason ' cept 
 to take we out of it again just as folk ' ave learn to know we a bit 
 and find we useful . Howsomever , there be no arguin ' wi ' the Almighty , 
 an ' p'raps it be we as make the bad o ' death instead o ' the good of 
 it . now you go into the great hall , Mr. Robin -- you're want there . " 

 he go , as desired,--and be receive with a murmur of sympathy by 
 those assemble -- a gathering make up of the head man about the farm , 
 and a few other personage less familiar to the village , but fairly 
 well know to he , such as corn and cattle dealer from the 
 neighbouring town who have for many year do business with Jocelyn in 
 preference to any other farmer . these come forward and cordially shake 
 hand with Robin , enter at once into conversation with he 
 concern his future intention . 

 " we should like thing to go on the same as if th ' old man be alive , " 
 say one , a miller,--"we do not like change after all these year . but 
 whether you be up to it , my lad , or not , we do not know -- and time'll 
 prove-- " 

 " time will prove , " answer Clifford , steadily . " you may rely upon it 
 that Briar Farm will be work on the same method which my uncle 
 practise and approve -- and there will be no change , except -- the 
 inevitable one"--and he sighed,--"the want of the true master 's brain 
 and hand . " 

 " eh well ! you will do your good , lad!--i'm sure of that ! " and the miller 
 grasp his hand warmly--"and we will all stick by you ! there be no farm 
 like Briar Farm in the whole country -- that be my opinion!--it give the 
 fine soil and the sound crop to be get anywhere -- you just manage 
 it as Farmer Jocelyn manage it , with man 's work , and you will come to no 
 harm ! and , as I say , we will all stick by you ! " 

 Robin thank he , and then move slowly in and out among the other 
 funeral guest , say kindly thing , and in his quiet , manly way 
 create a good impression among they , and make more friend than he 
 himself be aware of . presently Mr. Bayliss , a mild - look man with 
 round spectacle fix very closely up against his eye , approach 
 he , beckon he with one finger . 

 " when you be ready , Mr. Clifford , " he say , " I should like to see you 
 in the good parlour -- and the young lady -- I believe she be call 
 innocent?--ye , yes!--and the young lady also . oh , there be no hurry -- no 
 hurry!--better wait till the guest have go , as what I have to say 
 concern only yourself -- and -- er -- yes -- er , the young lady before 
 mention . and also a -- a"--here he pull out a note - book from his 
 pocket and study it through his owl - like glasses--"yes!--er , yes!--a 
 Miss Priscilla Priday -- she must be present , if she can be find -- I 
 believe she be on the premise ? " 

 " Priscilla be our housekeeper , " say Robin--"and a faithful friend . " 

 " yes -- I -- er -- think so -- a devoted friend , " murmur Mr. Bayliss , 
 meditatively--"and what a thing it be to have a devoted friend , Mr. 
 Clifford ! your uncle be a careful man!--very careful!--he know whom to 
 trust -- he thoroughly know ! yes -- we do not all know -- but he do ! " 

 Robin make no comment . the murmur talk of the funeral party go on , 
 buzz in his ear like the noise of an enormous swarm of bee -- he 
 watch man eat and drink the good thing Priscilla have provide 
 for the " honour of the farm"--and then , on a sudden impulse he slip 
 out of the hall and upstairs to Innocent 's room , where he knock 
 softly at the door . she open it at once , and stand before he -- she 
 face white as a snowdrop , and her eye heavy and strain with the 
 weight of unshed tear . 

 " dear , " he say , gently--"you will be want downstairs in a few 
 minute -- Mr. Bayliss wish you to be present when he read Uncle 
 Hugo 's will . " 

 she make a little gesture of pain and dissent . 

 " I do not want to hear it , " she said--"but I will come . " 

 he look at she with anxiety and tenderness . 

 " you have eat nothing since early morning ; you look so pale and 
 weak -- let I get you something -- a glass of wine . " 

 " no , thank you , " she answered--"i could not touch a morsel -- not just 
 yet . oh , Robin , it hurt I to hear all those voice in the great 
 hall!--man eat and drink there , as if he be still alive!--and 
 they have only just lay he down in the cold earth -- so cold and dark ! " 

 she shudder violently . 

 " I do not think it be right , " she go on--"to allow people to love 
 each other at all if death must separate they for ever . it seem only a 
 cruelty and wickedness . now that I have see what death can do , I will 
 never love anyone again ! " 

 " no -- I suppose you will not , " he say , somewhat bitterly--"yet , you 
 have never know what love be -- you do not understand it . " 

 she sigh , deeply . 

 " perhaps not ! " she said--"and I be not sure that I want to understand 
 it -- not now . what love I have in my heart be all bury -- with Dad and 
 the rose . I be not the same girl any more -- I feel a different 
 creature -- grow quite old ! " 

 " you can not feel old than I do , " he replied--"but you do not think of 
 I at all,--why should you ? I never use to think you selfish , 
 Innocent!--you have always be so careful and considerate of the 
 feeling of other -- yet now!--well!--are you not so much absorb in 
 your own grief as to be forgetful of mine ? for mine be a double 
 grief -- a double loss -- I have lose my uncle and good friend -- and I shall 
 lose you because you will not love I , though I love you with all my 
 heart and only want to make you happy ! " 

 her sad eye meet his with a direct , half - reproachful gaze . 

 " you think I selfish ? " 

 " No!--no , Innocent!--but-- " 

 " I see ! " she said--"you think I ought to sacrifice myself to you , and 
 to Dad 's last wish . you would expect I to spoil your life by marry 
 you unwillingly and without love-- " 

 " I tell you you know nothing about love ! " he interrupt she , 
 impatiently . 

 " so you imagine , " she answer quietly--"but I do know one thing -- and 
 it be that no one who really love a person wish to see that person , 
 unhappy . to love anybody mean that above all thing in the world you 
 desire to see the beloved one well and prosperous and full of gladness . 
 you can not love I or you would not wish I to do a thing that would 
 make I miserable . if I love you , I would marry you and devote my life 
 to your -- but I do not love you , and , therefore , I should only make you 
 wretched if I become your wife . do not let we talk of this any more -- it 
 tire I out ! " 

 she pass her hand over her forehead with a weary gesture . 

 " it be wrong to talk of ourselves at all when Dad be only just bury , " 
 she continue . " you say Mr. Bayliss want to see I -- very well!--in a 
 few minute I will come . " 

 she step back inside her little room and shut the door . Clifford 
 walk away , resentful and despairing . there be something in her 
 manner that strike he as new and foreign to her usual sweet and 
 equable nature,--a grave composure , a kind of intellectual hardness 
 that he have never before see in she . and he wonder what such a 
 change might portend . 

 Downstairs , the funeral party have break up -- many of the mourner have 
 go , and other be go . some linger to the last possible moment 
 that their intimacy or friendship with the deceased would allow , 
 curious to hear something of the will -- what the amount of the net cash 
 be that have be leave , and how it have be dispose . but Mr. Bayliss , 
 the lawyer , be a cautious man , and never give himself away at any 
 point . to all suggestive hint and speculative theory he maintain a 
 dignified reserve -- and it be not until the last of the guest have 
 depart that he make his way to the vacant " well parlour , " and sit 
 there with his chair pull well up to the table and one or two 
 legal - look document in front of he . Robin Clifford join he 
 there , take a seat opposite to he -- and both man wait in more or 
 less silence till the door open softly to admit Innocent , who come in 
 with Priscilla . 

 Mr. Bayliss rise . 

 " I be sorry to have to disturb you , Miss -- er -- Miss Innocent , " he say , 
 with some awkwardness--"on this sad occasion-- " 

 " it be no trouble , " she answer , gently--"if I can be of any use-- " 

 Mr. Bayliss wait till she sit down,--then again seat himself . 

 " well , there be really no occasion to go over legal formality , " he 
 say , open one of the document before him--"your uncle , Mr. 
 Clifford , be a business man , and make his will in a business - like way . 
 Briefly , I may tell you that Briar Farm , its land , building , and all 
 its content be leave to you -- who be identify thus--'to my nephew , 
 Robin Clifford , only son of my only sister , the late Elizabeth Jocelyn , 
 widow of John Clifford , wholesale trader in french wine , and formerly 
 resident in the City of London , on condition that the say Robin 
 Clifford shall keep and maintain the farm and house as they have always 
 be keep and maintain . he shall not sell any part of the land for 
 building purpose , nor shall he dispose of any of the furniture , 
 pewter , plate , china , glass , or other effect belong to Briar Farm 
 House,--but shall carefully preserve the same and hand they down to his 
 lawful heir in succession on the same term as heretofore'--etc . , 
 etc . ,--yes!--well!--that be the gist of the business , and we need not 
 go over the detail . with the farm and land aforesaid he leave the 
 sum of Twenty Thousand Pounds-- " 

 " Twenty Thousand Pounds ! " ejaculate Robin , amazed--"surely my uncle 
 be never so rich-- ! " 

 " he be a save man and a careful one , " say Mr. Bayliss , 
 calmly,--"You may take it for grant , Mr. Clifford , that his money be 
 make through the course of his long life , in a thoroughly honest and 
 straightforward manner ! " 

 " oh -- that , of course!--but -- Twenty Thousand Pounds ! " 

 " it be a nice little fortune , " say Mr. Bayliss--"and you come into it 
 at a time of life when you will be able to make good use of it . 
 especially if you should be incline to marry-- " 

 his eye twinkle meaningly as they glance from Clifford 's face to 
 that of Innocent -- the young man 's expression be absorb and earnest , 
 but the girl look lost and far away in a dream of her own . 

 " I shall not marry , " say Robin , slowly--"i shall use the money 
 entirely for the good of the farm and the work - people-- " 

 " then , if you do not marry , you allow the tradition of heritage to 
 lapse ? " suggest Mr. Bayliss . 

 " it have lapse already , " he replied--"i be not a real descendant of the 
 Jocelyns-- " 

 " by the mother 's side you be , " say Mr. Bayliss--"and your mother 
 be dead , it be open to you to take the name of Jocelyn by law , and 
 continue the lineage . it would be entirely fair and reasonable . " 

 Robin make no answer . Mr. Bayliss settle his glass more firmly on 
 his nose , and go on with his document . 

 " Mr. Jocelyn speak in his last will and testament of the ' great love ' 
 he entertain for his adopt child , know as ' innocent'--and he give 
 to she all that be contain in the small oak chest in the good 
 parlour -- this be the good parlour , I presume?"--looke round--"can you 
 point out the oak chest mention ? " 

 Innocent rise , and move to a corner , where she lift out of a recess 
 a small quaintly make oaken casket , brass - bind , with a heavy lock . 

 Mr. Bayliss look at it with a certain amount of curiosity . 

 " the key ? " he suggested--"i believe the late Mr. Jocelyn always wear it 
 on his watch - chain . " 

 Robin get up and go to the mantelpiece . 

 " here be my uncle 's watch and chain , " he say , in a hush voice--"The 
 watch have stop . I do not intend that it shall ever go again -- I shall 
 keep it put by with the precious treasure of the house . " 

 Mr. Bayliss make no remark on this utterance , which to he be one of 
 mere sentiment -- and take the watch and chain in his hand , detach 
 therefrom a small key . with this he open the oak casket -- and look 
 carefully inside . take out a seal packet , he hand it to Innocent . 

 " this be for you , " he said--"and this also"--here he lift from the 
 bottom of the casket a flat jewel - case of antique leather emboss in 
 gold . 

 " this , " he continue , " Mr. Jocelyn explain to I , be a necklet of 
 pearl -- traditionally believe to have be give by the founder of the 
 house , Amadis de Jocelin , to his wife on their wedding - day . it have be 
 wear by every bride of the house since . I hope -- yes -- I very much 
 hope -- it will be wear by the young lady who now inherit it . " 

 and he pass the jewel - case over the table to Innocent , who sit 
 silent , with the sealed packet she have just receive lie before she . 
 she take it passively , and open it -- a beautiful row of pearl , not 
 very large , but wonderfully perfect , lie within -- clasp by a small , 
 curiously design diamond snap . she look at they with 
 half - wonder , half - indifferent eye -- then close the case and give it 
 to Robin Clifford . 

 " they be for your wife when you marry , " she said--"Please keep they . " 

 Mr. Bayliss cough -- a cough of remonstrance . 

 " pardon I , my dear young lady , but Mr. Jocelyn be particularly 
 anxious the pearl should be yours-- " 

 she look at he , gravely . 

 " yes -- I be sure he be , " she said--"He be always good -- too good and 
 generous -- but if they be mine , I give they to Mr. Clifford . there be 
 nothing more to be say about they . " 

 Mr. Bayliss cough again . 

 " well -- that be all that be contain in this casket , with the exception 
 of a paper unseal -- shall I read it ? " 

 she bend her head . 

 " the paper be write in Mr. Jocelyn 's own hand , and be as follow , " 
 continue the lawyer : " I desire that my adopt child , know as 
 ' innocent , ' shall receive into her own possession the Jocelyn pearl , 
 value by expert at L2,500 , and that she shall wear the same on her 
 marriage - morning . the sealed packet , place in this casket with the 
 pearl afore - say , contain a letter for her own personal and private 
 perusal , and other matter which concern herself alone . " 

 Mr. Bayliss here look up , and address she . 

 " from these word it be evident that the sealed packet you have there 
 be an affair of confidence . " 

 she lay her hand upon it . 

 " I quite understand ! " 

 he adjust his glass , and turn over his document once more . 

 " then I think there be nothing more we need trouble you with -- oh 
 yes!--one thing -- Miss -- er -- Miss priday-- ? " 

 Priscilla , who during the whole conversation have sit bolt upright on a 
 chair in the corner of the room , neither move nor speak , here rise 
 and curtsy . 

 the lawyer look at she attentively . 

 " Priday - Miss Priscilla Priday ? " 

 " yes , sir -- that be I , " say Priscilla , briefly . 

 " Mr. Jocelyn think very highly of you , Miss Friday , " he said--"he 
 mention you in the following paragraph of his will--'I give and 
 bequeath to my faithful housekeeper and good friend , Priscilla Priday , 
 the sum of Two hundred Pounds for her own personal use , and I desire 
 that she shall remain at Briar Farm for the rest of her life . and that , 
 if she shall find it necessary to resign her duty in the farm house , 
 she shall possess that cottage on my estate know as Rose Cottage , free 
 of all charge , and be allow to live there and be suitably and 
 comfortably maintain till the end of her day . And,--er -- pray do not 
 distress yourself , Miss Priday ! " 

 for Priscilla be cry , and make no effort to hide her emotion . 

 " Bless ' be old ' art ! " she sobbed--"he thort of everybody , ' e do ! an ' 
 what shall I ever want o ' Rose Cottage , as be the sweetest o ' little 
 place , when I have get the kitchen o ' Briar farm!--an ' there I will ' ope 
 to do my work plain an ' true till I drops!--so there!--an ' I be much 
 oblige to ye , Mr. Bayliss , an ' mebbe ye'll tell I where to put the 
 two ' underd pound so as I do not lose it , for I never ' ad so much money 
 in my life , an ' if any one get to ' ear of it I will ' ave all the ' alt 
 an ' lame an ' blind round I in a jiffy . an ' as for keepin ' money , I 
 never could -- an ' p'raps it ' ud be good for Mr. Robin to look arter 
 it--- " here she stop , out of breath with talk and tear . 

 " it will be all right , " say Mr. Bayliss , soothingly , " quite all right , 
 I assure you ! Mr. Clifford will no doubt see to any little business 
 matter for you with great pleasure-- " 

 " dear priscilla!"--and Innocent go to her side and put an arm round 
 her neck--"don't cry!--you will be so happy , live always in this dear 
 old place!--and Robin will be so glad to have you with he . " 

 Priscilla take the little hand that caress she , and kiss it . 

 " ah , my lovey ! " she half whispered--"i should be ' appy enough if I 
 think you be a - go to be ' appy too!--but you be flyin ' in the face 
 o ' fortune , lovey!--that be what you be a - do ! " 

 Innocent silence she with a gesture , and stand beside she , patiently 
 listen till Mr. Bayliss have conclude his business . 

 " I think , Mr. Clifford , " he then say , at last--"there be no occasion 
 to trouble you far . everything be in perfect order -- you be the 
 inheritor of Briar Farm and all its content , with all its adjoining 
 land -- and the only condition attach to your inheritance be that you 
 keep it maintain on the same working method by which it have always 
 be maintain . you will find no difficulty in do this -- and you 
 have plenty of money to do it on . there be a few minor detail 
 respect farm stock , etc . , which we can go over together at any time . 
 you be sole executor , of course -- and -- and -- er -- yes!--I think that be 
 all . " 

 " may I go now ? " ask Innocent , lift her serious blue - grey eye to 
 his face--"do you want I any more ? " 

 Mr. Bayliss survey she curiously . 

 " no -- I -- er -- I think not , " he replied--"of course the pearl should be 
 in your possession-- " 

 " I have give they away , " she say , quickly--"to Robin . " 

 " but I have not accept they , " he answered--"i will keep they if you 
 like -- for you . " 

 she give a slight , scarcely perceptible movement of vexation , and then , 
 take up the seal packet which be address to she personally , she 
 leave the room . 

 the lawyer look after she in a little perplexity . 

 " I be afraid she take her loss rather badly , " he said--"or -- perhaps -- be 
 she a little absent - minded ? " 

 Robin Clifford smile , sadly . 

 " I think not , " he answer . " of course she feel the death of my uncle 
 deeply -- she adore he -- and then - I - suppose you know -- my uncle may have 
 tell you-- " 

 " that he hop and expect you to marry she ? " say Mr. Bayliss , 
 nod his head , sagaciously--"Yes -- I be aware that such be his 
 dearest wish . in fact he lead I to believe that the matter be as good 
 as settle . " 

 " she will not have I , " say Clifford , gently--"and I can not compel she 
 to marry I against her will -- indeed I would not if I could . " 

 the lawyer be so surprised that he be oblige to take off his glass 
 and polish they . 

 " she will not have you ! " he exclaim . " dear I ! that be indeed most 
 unexpected and distressing ! there be -- there be nothing against you , 
 surely?--you be quite a personable young man-- " 

 Robin shrug his shoulder , disdainfully . 

 " whatever I be do not matter to she , " he said--"Let we talk no more 
 about it . " 

 Priscilla look from one to the other . 

 " eh well ! " she said--"if any one know ' er at all ' tis I as ' ave ' ad 
 ' er with I night an ' day when she be a baby -- and ' as watch ' er grow 
 into the little beauty she is,--an ' ' er ' ed 's just fair full o ' strange 
 fancy that she be get out o ' the book she find in the old knight 's 
 chest year ago -- we must give ' er time to think a bit an ' settle . ' tis 
 an awful blow to ' er to lose ' er Dad , as she allus call Farmer 
 Jocelyn -- she be like a little bird fall out o ' the nest with no 
 strength to use ' er wing an ' not knowin ' where to go . let ' er settle a 
 bit!--that be what I sez -- an ' you will see I be right . you leave ' er alone , 
 Mister Robin , an ' all'll come right , never fear ! she be get the queer 
 notion about love -- she pick them out o ' they old book -- an ' she will 
 ' ave to find out they be more lie than truth . Love 's a poor ' oldin ' for 
 most folk -- it do not last long enough . " 

 Mr. Bayliss permit himself to smile , as he take his hat , and 
 prepare to go . 

 " I be sure you be quite right , Miss Priday ! " he said--"you 
 speak -- er -- most sensibly ! I be sure I hope , for the young lady 's sake , 
 that she will ' settle down'--if she do not-- " 

 " ay , if she do not ! " echo Clifford . 

 " well ! if she do not , life may be difficult for her"--and the lawyer 
 shake his head forebodingly--"a girl alone in the world -- with no 
 relatives!--ah , dear , dear I ! a sad look - out!--a very sad look - out ! 
 but we must trust to her good sense that she will be wise in time ! " 




 CHAPTER x 

 Upstairs , shut in her own little room with the door lock , Innocent 
 open the seal packet . she find within it a letter and some 
 bank - note . with a sensitive pain which thrill every nerve in her 
 body she unfold the letter , write in Hugo Jocelyn 's firm clear 
 writing -- a writing she know so well , and which bear no trace of 
 weakness or fail in the hand that guide the pen . how strange it 
 be , she think , that the write word should look so living and 
 distinct when the writer be dead ! her head swam.--h eye be 
 dim -- for a moment she could scarcely see -- then the mist before she 
 slowly disperse and she read the first word , which make her heart 
 swell and the tear rise in her aching throat . 

 " my LITTLE wilding!--when you read this I shall be go to that 
 wonderful world which all the clergyman tell we about , but which none 
 of they be in any great hurry to see for themselves . I hope -- and I 
 sometimes believe -- such a world exist -- and that perhaps it be a place 
 where a man may sow seed and raise crop as well and as prosperously as 
 on Briar Farm -- however , I be pray I may not be take till I have see 
 you safely we d to Robin -- and yet , something tell I this will not be ; 
 and that be the something that make I write this letter and put it 
 with the pearl that be , by my will , destine for you on your 
 marriage - morning . I be write it , remember , on the same night I have tell 
 you all about yourself -- the night of the day the doctor give I my 
 death - warrant . I may live a year,--I may live but a week,--it will be 
 hard if I may not live to see you married!--but God 's will must be 
 do . the bank - note fold in this letter make up four hundred 
 pound -- and this money you can spend as you like -- on your clothe for 
 the bridal , or on anything you fancy -- I place no restriction on you as 
 to its use . when a maid wed there be many prettie she need to buy , 
 and the pretty they be for you the well shall I be pleased . 
 whether I live or whether I die , you need say nothing of this money to 
 Robin , or to anyone . it be your own absolutely -- to do as you like with . 
 I be thankful to feel that you will be safe in Robin 's love care -- for 
 the world be hard on a woman leave alone as you would be , be it not 
 for he . I give you my word that if I have any clue , however small , to 
 your real parentage , I would write down here for you all I know -- but I 
 know nothing more than I have tell you . I have love you as my own 
 child and you have be the joy of my old day . may God bless you and 
 give you joy and peace in Briar Farm!--you and your child , and your 
 child 's child ! amen ! 

 " your ' dad ' 

 " HUGO JOCELYN . " 

 she read this to the end , and then some tension in her brain seem to 
 relax , and she weep long and bitterly , her head bend down on the letter 
 and her bright hair fall over it . presently , check her sob , she 
 rise , and look about she in a kind of dream -- the familiar little room 
 seem to have suddenly become strange to she , and she think she see 
 stand in one corner a figure clothe in armour,--it vizor be up , 
 show a sad pale face and melancholy eye -- the lip move -- and a 
 sigh murmur float past her ears--"mon coeur I soutien ! " a cold 
 terror seize she , and she tremble from head to foot -- then the vision 
 or hallucination vanish as swiftly and mysteriously as it have 
 appear . rally her force , she gradually master the overpowering 
 fear which for a moment have possess her,--and fold up Hugo 
 Jocelyn 's last letter , she kiss it , and place it in her bosom . the 
 bank - note be four in number -- each for one hundred pounds;--these she 
 put in an envelope , and shut they in the drawer contain her secret 
 manuscript . 

 " now the way be clear ! " she said--"i can do what I like -- I have my 
 wing , and I can fly away ! oh Dad , dear dad!--you would be so unhappy 
 if you know what I mean to do!--it would break your heart , dad!--but 
 you have no heart to break now , poor Dad!--it be cold as stone!--it 
 will never beat any more ! mine be the heart that beats!--the heart that 
 burn , and ache , and hurt me!--ah!--how it hurt ! and no one can 
 understand -- no one will ever care to understand ! " 

 she lock her manuscript - drawer -- then go and bath her eye , which 
 smart with the tear she have shed . look at herself in the mirror 
 she see a pale plaintive little creature , without any freshness of 
 beauty -- all the vitality seem go out of she . smooth her ruffle 
 hair , she twist it up in a loose coil at the back of her head , and 
 study with melancholy dislike and pain the heavy effect of her dense 
 black drapery against her delicate skin . 

 " I shall do for anything now , " she said--"No one will look at I , and I 
 shall pass quite unnoticed in a crowd . I be glad I be not a pretty 
 girl -- it might be more difficult to get on . and Robin call I 
 ' lovely ' the other day!--poor , foolish Robin ! " 

 she go downstairs then to see if she could help Priscilla -- but 
 Priscilla would not allow she to do anything in the way of what she 
 call " chore . " 

 " no , lovey , " she said--"you just keep quiet , an ' by - an'-bye you an ' 
 me'll ' ave a quiet tea together , for Mister Robin he be go off for the 
 rest o ' the day an ' night with Mr. Bayliss , as there be lot o ' thing 
 to see to , an ' ' e leave you this little note"--here Priscilla produce a 
 small neatly fold paper from her apron pocke - t-"an ' sez ' e--'give 
 this to Miss innocent ` ' ' e sez , ' an ' she will not mind my bein ' out o ' the 
 way -- it'll be well for ' er to be quiet a bit with you'--an ' so it 
 will , lovey , for sometimes a man about the ' ouse be a worrit an ' a 
 burden , say what we will , an ' good though ' e be . " 

 Innocent take the note and read-- 

 " I have make up my mind to go with Bayliss into the town and stay at 
 his house for the night -- there be many business matter we have to go 
 into together , and it be important for I to thoroughly understand the 
 position of my uncle 's affair . if I can not manage to get back 
 to - morrow , I will let you know . Robin . " 

 she heave a sigh of intense relief . for twenty - four hour at least she 
 be free from love 's importunity -- she could be alone to think , and to 
 plan . she turn to Priscilla with a gentle look and smile . 

 " I will go into the garden , " she said--"and when it be tea - time you will 
 come and fetch I , will not you ? I shall be near the old stone knight , 
 Sieur amadis-- " 

 " oh , bother ' I m , " mutter Priscilla , irrelevantly--"you do think too 
 much o ' that there bless old figure!--why , what be ' e get to do with 
 you , my pretty ? " 

 " nothing ! " and the colour come to her pale cheek for a moment , and 
 then flee back again--"he never have anything to do with I , really ! but 
 I seem to know he . " 

 Priscilla give a kind of melancholy snort -- and the girl move slowly 
 away through the open door and beyond it , out among the radiant 
 flower . her little figure in deep black be soon lose to sight , and 
 after watch she for a minute , Priscilla turn to her home - work with 
 tear blind her eye so thickly that she could scarcely see . 

 " if she winnot take Mister Robin , the Lord know what will become of 
 ' er ! " sigh the worthy woman--"for she be as lone I ' the world as a 
 thrush fall out o ' the nest before it be grow strong enough to fly ! 
 eh , we thort we do a good deed , Mister Jocelyn an ' i , when we kep ' ' er 
 as a baby , ' opin ' agin ' ope as ' er parent ' ud turn up an ' be sorry for 
 the loss of ' er -- but never a sign of a soul!--an ' now she be grow'd up 
 she be thort in ' er ' ed which be not easy to unnerstand -- for since 
 Mister Jocelyn tell ' er the tale of ' erself she be not be the same 
 like -- she be get suddin old ! " 

 the afternoon be very peaceful and beautiful -- the sun shine warmly 
 over the smooth meadow of Briar Farm , and redden the apple in the 
 orchard yet a little more tenderly , flash in fleck of gold on the 
 " glory " rose , and touch the wing of flutter dove with arrowy 
 silver gleam . no one look at the fine old house , with its 
 picturesque gable and lattice window , would have think that its 
 last master of lawful lineage be dead and bury , and that the funeral 
 have take place that morning . Briar Farm , though more than three 
 century old , seem full of youthful life and promise -- a vital fact , 
 destine to outlast many more human life than those which in the 
 passing of three hundred year have already leave their mark upon it , and 
 it be strange and incredible to realise that the long chain of 
 lineally descend male ancestor have break at last , and that no 
 remain link survive to carry on the old tradition . sadly and slowly 
 Innocent walk across the stretch of warm clover - scented grass to 
 the ancient tomb of the " Sieur Amadis"--and sit down beside it , not far 
 from the place where so lately she have sit with Robin -- what a change 
 have come over her life since then ! she watch the sun sink towards 
 the horizon in a mellow mist of orange - colour radiance,--the day be 
 draw to an end -- the fateful , wretched day which have see the good 
 friend she have ever know , and whom for year she have adore and 
 revere as her own " father , " lay in the dust to perish among 
 perishable thing . 

 " I wish I have die instead of he , " she say , half aloud--"or else that 
 I have never be bear ! oh , dear ' Sieur amadis'!--you know how hard it 
 be to live in the world unless some one want you -- unless some one 
 love you!--and no one want I -- no one love I -- except Robin ! " 

 Solitary , and full of the heavy sadness , she try to think and to 
 form plan -- but her mind be tired , and she could come to no decisive 
 resolution beyond the one all - convincing necessity -- that of leave 
 Briar Farm . of course she must go,--there be no other alternative . and 
 now , thank to Hugo Jocelyn 's forethought in give her money for her 
 bridal " prettie , " no financial difficulty stand in the way of she 
 departure . she must go -- but where ? to begin with , she have no name . she 
 would have to invent one for herself--"Yes ! " she murmured--"i must 
 invent a name -- and make it famous ! " involuntarily she clench she 
 small hand as though she hold some prize within its soft grasp . " why 
 not ? other people have do the same -- I can but try ! if I fail-- ! " 

 her delicate finger relaxed,--in her imagination she see some coveted 
 splendour slip from her hold , and her little face grow set and serious 
 as though she have already suffer a whole life 's disillusion . 

 " I can but try , " she repeated--"somethe urge I on -- something tell 
 I I may succeed . and then-- ! " 

 her eye brighten slowly -- a faint rise flush she cheeks,--and with 
 the sudden change of expression , she become almost beautiful . Herein 
 lie her particular charm,--the rare of all in women,--the passing of 
 the light and shadow of thought over feature which respond swiftly 
 and emotionally to the prompting and play of the mind . 

 " I should have to go , " she go on--"even if Dad be still alive . I 
 could not -- I can not marry Robin!--I do not want to marry anybody . it be 
 the common lot of woman -- why they should envy or desire it , I can not 
 think ! to give one 's self up entirely to a man 's humour -- to be glad of 
 his caress , and miserable when he be angry or tired -- to bear his 
 child and see they grow up and leave you for their own ' betterment ' 
 as they would call it -- oh!--what an old , old drudge life!--a life of 
 monotony , sickness , pain , and fatigue!--and nothing higher do than 
 what animal can do ! there be plenty of woman in the world who like to 
 stay on this level , I suppose -- but I should not like it,--I could not 
 live in this beautiful , wonderful world with no high ambition than a 
 sheep or a cow ! " 

 at that moment she suddenly see Priscilla run from the house across 
 the meadow , and beckon to she in evident haste and excitement . she 
 get up at once and run to meet she , fly across the grass with light 
 airy foot as swiftly as Atalanta . 

 " what be it ? " she cry , see Priscilla 's face , crimson with hurry 
 and nervousness--"Is there some new trouble ? " 

 Priscilla be breathless , and could scarcely speak . 

 " there be a lady"--she presently gasped--"a lady to see you -- from 
 London -- in the good parlour -- she ask for Farmer Jocelyn 's adopt 
 daughter name Innocent . and she give I her card -- here it is"--and 
 Priscilla wipe her face and gasp again as Innocent take the card and 
 read " Lady Maude Blythe,"--then gaze at Priscilla , wonderingly . 

 " who can she be?--some one who know Dad-- ? " 

 " bless you , child , he never know lord nor lady ! " reply Priscilla , 
 recover her breath somewhat--"no -- it be more likely one o ' they grand 
 folk what like to buy old furniture , an ' mebbe somebody 's tell ' er 
 about Briar Farm thing , an ' ' ow they might p'raps be sell now the 
 master 's gone-- " 

 " but that would be very silly and wicked talk , " say Innocent . " nothing 
 will be sell -- Robin would never allow it-- " 

 " well , come an ' see the lady , " and Priscilla hurry she along--"She 
 say she wish to see you partikler . I tell ' er the master be dead , 
 an ' onny bury this mornin ' , an ' she smile kind o ' pleasant like , an ' 
 say she be sorry to have call on such an unfortunate day , but her 
 business be important , an ' if you could see ' er-- " 

 " be she young ? " 

 " no , she be not young -- but she be not old , " reply Priscilla--"She 's 
 wonderful good - look an ' dress beautiful ! I never see such clothe 
 cut out o ' blue serge ! an ' she be get a scent about she like our 
 stillroom when we be makin ' pot - purry bag for the linen . " 

 by this time they have reach the house , and Innocent go straight 
 into the good parlour . her unexpected and unknown visitor stand there 
 near the window , look out on the bed of flower , but turn round 
 as she enter . for a moment they confront each other in 
 silence,--innocent gaze in mute astonishment and enquiry at the tall , 
 graceful , self - possess woman , who , evidently of the world , worldly , 
 gaze at she in turn with a curious , almost quizzical interest . 
 presently she speak in a low , sweet , yet cold voice . 

 " so you be innocent ! " she say . 

 the girl 's heart beat quickly,--something frighten she , though she 
 know not what . 

 " yes , " she answer , simply--"i be innocent . you wish to see me-- ? " 

 " yes -- I wish to see you,"--and the lady quietly shut the window--"and 
 I also wish to talk to you . in case anyone may be about 
 listening , will you shut the door ? " 

 with increase nervousness and bewilderment , Innocent obey . 

 " you have my card , I think ? " continue the lady , smile ever so 
 slightly--"i give it to the servant-- " 

 Innocent hold it half crumple in her hand . 

 " yes , " she say , try to rally her self - possession--"Lady Maude 
 blythe-- " 

 " Exactly!--you have quite a nice pronunciation ! may I sit down ? " and , 
 without wait for the require permission , Lady Blythe sink 
 indolently into the old oaken arm - chair where Farmer Jocelyn have so 
 long be accustom to sit , and , take out a cobweb of a handkerchief 
 powerfully scented , pass it languorously across her lip and brow . 

 " you have have a very sad day of it , I fear ! " she continued--"Deaths and 
 funeral be such unpleasant affair ! but the farmer -- Mr. Jocelyn -- be 
 not your father , be he ? " the question be put with a repetition of the 
 former slight , cold smile . 

 " No,"--and the girl look at her wonderingly--"but he be well than 
 my own father who desert I ! " 

 " dear I ! your own father desert you ! how shocking of he ! " and Lady 
 Blythe turn a pair of brilliant dark eye full on the pale little 
 face confront her--"And your mother ? " 

 " she desert I , too . " 

 " what a reprehensible couple ! " here Lady Blythe extend a delicately 
 gloved hand towards she . " come here and let I look at you ! " 

 but Innocent hesitate . 

 " excuse I , " she say , with a quaint and simple dignity--"i do not know 
 you . I can not understand why you have come to see I -- if you would 
 explain-- " 

 while she thus speak Lady Blythe have survey she scrutinisingly 
 through a gold - mount lorgnon . 

 " quite a proud little person it be ! " she remark , and smiled--"Quite 
 proud ! I suppose I really must explain ! only I do hope you will not 
 make a scene . nothing be so unpleasant ! and such bad form ! please sit 
 down ! " 

 Innocent place a chair close to the table so that she could lean she 
 arm on that friendly board and steady her tremble little frame . when 
 she be seat , Lady Blythe again look at she critically through the 
 lorgnon . then she continued-- 

 " well , I must first tell you that I have always know your 
 history -- such a romance , be not it ! you be bring here as a baby by a 
 man on horseback'--and he leave you with the good old farmer who have 
 take care of you ever since . I be right ? yes!--i'm quite sure about 
 it -- because I know the man -- the curious sort of parental 
 Lochinvar!--who get rid of you in such a curious way ! " 

 Innocent draw a sharp breath . 

 " you know he ? " 

 Lady Blythe give a delicate little cough . 

 " yes -- I know he -- rather well ! I be quite a girl -- and he be an 
 artist -- a rather famous one in his way -- half french -- and very 
 good - look . yes , he certainly be remarkably good - look ! we run 
 away together -- most absurd of we -- but we do . please do not look at I 
 like that!--you remind I of Sara Bernhardt in ' La Tosca ' ! " 

 Innocent 's eye be indeed full of something like positive terror . her 
 heart beat violently -- she feel a strange dread , and a foreboding that 
 chill her very blood . 

 " People often do that kind of thing -- fall in love and run away , " 
 continue Lady Blythe , placidly--"when they be young and silly . it be 
 quite a delightful sensation , of course , but it do not last . they 
 do not know the world -- and they never calculate result . however , we have 
 quite a good time together . we go to Devon and Cornwall , and he 
 paint picture and make love to I -- and it be all very nice and 
 pretty . then , of course , trouble come , and we have to get out of it as 
 good we could -- we be both tired of each other and quarrelled 
 dreadfully , so we decide to give each other up . only you be in the 
 way ! " 

 Innocent rise , steady herself with one hand against the table . 

 " I ! " she exclaim , with a kind of sob in her throat . 

 " yes -- you ! dear me,--how you stare ! do not you understand ? I suppose 
 you have live such a strange sort of hermit life down here that you know 
 nothing . you be in the way -- you , the baby ! " 

 " do you mean-- ? " 

 " yes -- I mean what you ought to have guess at once -- if you be not as 
 stupid as an owl ! I have tell you I run away with a man -- I would not marry 
 he , though he ask I to -- I should have be tie up for life , and I 
 do not want that -- so we decide to separate . and he undertake to get 
 rid of the baby-- " 

 " I ! " cry Innocent , wildly--"oh , dear God ! it be I ! " 

 " yes -- it be you -- but you need not be tragic about it ! " say Lady 
 Blythe , calmly--"i think , on the whole , you be fortunately 
 place -- and I be tell where you were-- " 

 " you be told?--oh , you be told!--and you never come ! and you -- you 
 be -- my mother!"--and overpower by the shock of emotion , the girl 
 sink back on her chair , and bury her head in her hand , sob 
 bitterly . Lady Blythe look at she in meditative silence . 

 " what a tiresome creature ! " she murmur , under her breath--"quite 
 undisciplined ! no repose of manner -- no style whatever ! and apparently 
 very little sense ! I think it be a pity I came,--a mistaken sense of 
 duty ! " 

 Aloud she said-- 

 " I hope you be not go to cry very long ! will not you get it over ? I 
 think you would be glad to know I -- and I have come out of pure 
 kindness to you , simply because I hear your old farmer be dead . why 
 Pierce Armitage should have bring you to he I never could 
 imagine -- except that once he be paint a picture in the 
 neighbourhood and be rather take with the history of this place -- Briar 
 Farm be not it call ? you will make your eye quite sore if you 
 go on cry like that ! yes -- I be your mother -- most unfortunately!--i 
 hop you would never know it!--but now -- as you be leave quite alone in 
 the world , I have come to see what I can do for you . " 

 Innocent check her sob , and lift her head look straight into 
 the rather shallow bright eye that regard she with such cold and 
 easy scrutiny . 

 " you can do nothing for I , " she answer , in a low voice--"you never 
 have do anything for I . if you be my mother , you be an unnatural 
 one ! " and move by a sudden , swift emotion , she stand up with 
 indignation and scorn lighting every feature of her face . " I be in 
 your way at my birth -- and you be glad to be rid of I . why should you 
 seek I now ? " 

 Lady Blythe glance she over amusedly . 

 " really , you would do well on the stage ! " she said--"if you be 
 tall , you would make your fortune with that tragic manner ! it be 
 quite waste on I , I assure you ! I have tell you a very simple 
 commonplace truth -- a thing that happen every day -- a silly couple run 
 away together , madly in love , and delude by the idea that love will 
 last -- they get into trouble and have a child -- naturally , as they be 
 not marry , the child be in the way , and they get rid of it -- some 
 people would have kill it , you know ! your father be quite a 
 kind - hearted person -- and his one idea be to place you where there be 
 no other child , and where you would have a chance of be take 
 care of . so he bring you to Briar Farm -- and he tell I where he have 
 leave you before he go away and die . " 

 " die ! " echo the girl--"My father be dead ? " 

 " so I believe,"--and Lady Blythe stifle a slight yawn--"he be always 
 a rather reckless person -- go out to paint picture in all weather , 
 or to ' study effect ' as he call it -- how I hat his ' art ' talk!--and 
 I hear he die in Paris of influenza or pneumonia or something or 
 other . but as I be marry then , it do not matter . " 

 Innocent 's deep - set , sad eye study her " mother " with strange 
 wistfulness . 

 " do you not love he ? " she ask , pitifully . 

 Lady Blythe laugh , lightly . 

 " you odd girl ! of course I be quite crazy about him!--he be so 
 handsome -- and very fascinating in his way -- but he could be a terrible 
 bore , and he have a very bad temper . I be thankful when we separate . 
 but I have make my own private enquiry about you , from time to 
 time -- I always have rather a curiosity about you , as I have have no other 
 child . will not you come and kiss I ? " 

 Innocent stand rigid . 

 " I can not ! " she say . 

 Lady Blythe flush and bite her lip . 

 " as you like ! " she say , airily--"i do not mind ! " 

 the girl clasp her hand tightly together . 

 " how can you ask I ! " she say , in low , thrill tones--"you who have 
 let I grow up without any knowledge of you!--you who have no shame in 
 leave I here to live on the charity of a stranger!--you who never 
 care at all for the child you bring into the world!--can you imagine 
 that I could care -- now ? " 

 " well , really , " smile Lady Blythe--"I'm not sure that I have ask you 
 to care ! I have simply come here to tell you that you be not entirely 
 alone in the world , and that I , know myself to be your 
 mother--(although it happen so long ago I can hardly believe I be 
 ever such a fool!)--am willing to do something for you -- especially as I 
 have no child by my second marriage . I will , in fact , ' adopt ' you ! " 
 and she laugh -- a pretty , musical laugh like a chime of little silver 
 bell . " Lord Blythe will be delighted -- he be a kind old person ! " 

 Innocent look at she gravely and steadily . 

 " do you mean to say that you will own me?--name me?--acknowledge I as 
 your daughter-- " 

 " why , certainly not ! " and Lady Blythe 's eye flash over she in cold 
 disdain--"What be you think of ? you be not legitimate -- and you 
 really have no lawful name -- besides , I be not bind to do anything at 
 all for you now you be old enough to earn your own living . but I be 
 quite a good - natured woman,--and as I have say already I have no other 
 child -- and I be willing to ' adopt ' you , bring you out in society , 
 give you pretty clothe , and marry you well if I can . but to own that I 
 ever make such an idiot of myself as to have you at all be a little too 
 much to ask!--lord Blythe would never forgive I ! " 

 " so you would make I live a life of deception with you ! " say 
 innocent--"you would make I pretend to be what I be not -- just as you 
 pretend to be what you be not!--and yet you say I be your child ! oh 
 God , save I from such a mother ! Madam"--and she speak in cold , 
 deliberate accents--"you have live all these year without child , 
 save I whom you have ignore -- and I , though nameless and illegitimate , 
 now ignore you ! I have no mother ! I would not own you any more than you 
 would own me;--my shame in say that such a woman be my mother would 
 be great than your in say that I be your child ! for the stigma of 
 my birth be not my fault , but yours!--I am , as my father call 
 me--'innocent ' ! " 

 her breath come and go quickly -- a crimson flush be on her 
 cheek -- she look transfigure -- beautiful . Lady Blythe star at she 
 in wide - eyed disdain . 

 " you be exceedingly rude and stupid , " she said--"you talk like a 
 badly - train actress ! and you be quite blind to your own interest . 
 now please remember that if you refuse the offer I make you , I shall 
 never trouble about you again -- you will have to sink or swim -- and you 
 can do nothing for yourself -- without even a name-- " 

 " have you never hear , " interrupt Innocent , suddenly , " that it be 
 quite possible to make a name ? " 

 her " mother " be for the moment startle -- she look so intellectually 
 strong and inspire . 

 " have you never think , " she go on--"even you , in your strange life 
 of hypocrisy-- " 

 " Hypocrisy ! " exclaim Lady blythe--"how dare you say such a thing ! " 

 " of course it be hypocrisy , " say the girl , resolutely--"you be 
 married to a man who know nothing of your past life -- be not that 
 hypocrisy ? you be a great lady , no doubt -- you have everything you want 
 in this world , except child -- one child you have in I , and you let I 
 be take from you -- yet you would pretend to ' adopt ' I though you know 
 I be your own ! be not that hypocrisy ? " 

 Lady Blythe for a moment tighten her lip in a line of decide 
 temper -- then she smile ironically . 

 " it be tact , " she said--"and good manner . society live by certain 
 convention , and we must be careful not to outrage they . in your own 
 interest you should be glad to learn how to live suitably without 
 offence to other around you . " 

 Innocent look at she with straight and relentless scorn . 

 " I have do that , " she answered--"so far . I shall continue to do it . I 
 do not want any help from you ! I would rather die than owe you 
 anything ! please understand this ! you say I be your daughter , and I 
 suppose I must believe it -- but the knowledge bring I sorrow and 
 shame . and I must work my way out of this sorrow and shame,--somehow ! I 
 will do all I can to retrieve the damage life you have give I . I 
 never know my mother be alive -- and now -- I wish to forget it ! if my 
 father live , I would go to him-- " 

 " would you indeed ! " and Lady Blythe rise , shake her elegant skirt , 
 and preen herself like a bird prepare for flight--"i'm afraid you 
 would hardly receive a parental welcome ! fortunately for himself and 
 for I , he be dead,--so you be quite untrammelled by any latent 
 notion of filial duty . and you will never see I again after to - day ! " 

 " no?"--and the interrogation be put with the slight inflection of 
 satire -- so fine as to be scarcely perceptible -- but Lady Blythe catch 
 it , and flush angrily . 

 " of course not ! " she said--"do you think you , in your position of a 
 mere farmer 's girl , be likely to meet I in the great world ? you , 
 without even a name-- " 

 " would you have give I a name ? " interpose the girl , calmly . 

 " of course ! I should have invent one for you-- 

 " I can do that for myself , " say Innocent , quietly--"and so you be 
 relieve from all trouble on my score . may I ask you to go now ? " 

 Lady Blythe star at she . 

 " be you insolent , or only stupid ? " she asked--"Do you realise what it 
 be that I have tell you -- that I , Lady Blythe , wife of a peer , and 
 move in the high rank of society , be willing to take charge of 
 you , feed you , clothe you , bring you out and marry you well ? do you 
 understand , and still refuse ? " 

 " I understand -- and I still refuse , " reply innocent--"i would accept , 
 if you own I as your daughter to your husband and to all the 
 world -- but as your ' adopt ' child -- as a lie under your roof -- I refuse 
 absolutely and entirely ! be you astonish that I should wish to live 
 truly instead of falsely ? " 

 Lady Blythe gather her priceless lace scarf round her elegant 
 shoulder . 

 " I begin to think it must have be all a bad dream ! " she say , and 
 laugh softly--"my little affair with your father can not have really 
 happen , and you can not really be my child ! I must consider it in that 
 light ! I feel I have do my part in the matter by come here to see 
 you and talk to you and make what I consider a very kind and reasonable 
 proposition -- you have refuse it -- and there be no more to be say . " she 
 settle her dainty hat more piquantly on her rich dark hair , and smile 
 agreeably . " will you show I the way out ? I leave my motor - car on the 
 high - road -- my chauffeur do not care to bring it down your rather muddy 
 back lane . " 

 Innocent say nothing -- but merely open the door and stand aside for 
 her visitor to pass . a curious tightening at her heart oppress she as 
 she think that this elegant , self - possess , exquisitely attire 
 creature be actually her " mother!"--and she could have cry out with 
 the pain which be so hard to bear . suddenly Lady Blythe come to an 
 abrupt standstill . 

 " you will not kiss I ? " she said--"Not even for your father 's sake ? " 

 with a quick sobbing catch in her breath , the girl look up -- her 
 " mother " be a full head tall than she . she lift her fair head -- her 
 eye be full of tear . her lip quiver -- Lady Blythe stoop and 
 kiss they lightly . 

 " there!--be a good girl ! " she say . " you have the most extraordinary 
 high - fly notion , and I think they will lead you into trouble ! 
 however , I will give you one more chance -- if at the end of this year you 
 would like to come to I , my offer to you still hold good . after 
 that -- well!--as you yourself say , you will have no mother ! " 

 " I have never have one ! " answer Innocent , in low choke 
 accents--"And -- I shall never have one ! " 

 Lady Blythe smile -- a cold , amused smile , and pass out through the 
 hall into the garden . 

 " what delightful flower ! " she exclaim , in a sweet , sing voice , 
 for the benefit of anyone who might be listening--"a perfect paradise ! 
 no wonder Briar Farm be so famous ! it be perfectly charming ! be this the 
 way ? thank ever so much ! " this , as Innocent open the gate--"let I 
 see!--i go up the old by - road?--yes?--and the main road join it at the 
 summit?--no , pray do not trouble to come with I -- I can find my car 
 quite easily ! good - bye ! " 

 and pick up her dainty skirt with one ungloved hand , on which two 
 diamond ring shone like circlet of dew , she nod , smile , and go 
 her way -- Innocent stand at the gate and watch she go with a kind 
 of numb patience as though she see a figure in a dream vanishing 
 slowly with the dawn of day . in truth she could hardly grasp the full 
 significance of what have happen -- she do not feel , even remotely , the 
 slight attraction towards this suddenly declare " mother " of 
 her -- she could hardly believe the story . yet she know it must be 
 true,--no woman of title and position would thus acknowledge a stigma 
 on her own life without any cause for the confession . she stand at the 
 gate still watch , though there be nothing now to watch , save the 
 bend tree , and the flower wild plant that fringe each side of 
 the old by - road . Priscilla 's voice call she in a clear , yet lower 
 tone , startle she at last -- she slowly shut the gate and turn in 
 answer . 

 " yes , dear ? what be it ? " 

 Priscilla trot out from under the porch , full of eager curiosity . 

 " have the lady go ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " what do she want with ye , dearie ? " 

 " nothing very much ! " and Innocent smile -- a strange , wistful 
 smile--"only just what you thought!--she wish to buy something from 
 Briar Farm -- and I tell she it be not to be sell ! " 




 CHAPTER XI 

 that night Innocent make an end of all her hesitation . resolutely she 
 put away every thought that could deter she from the step she be now 
 resolve to take . poor old Priscilla little imagine the underlie 
 cause of the linger tenderness with which the girl kiss she 
 " good - night , " look back with more than her usual sweetness as she 
 go along the corridor to her own little room . once there , she lock 
 and bolt the door fast , and then set to work gather a few little 
 thing together and put they in a large but light - weight satchel , 
 such as she have often use to carry some of the choice apple from 
 the orchard when they be be gather in . her first care be for 
 she manuscript,--the long - treasure scribble , keep so secretly and so 
 often consider with hope and fear , and wonder and doubting -- then she 
 take one or two of the more cherished volume which have formerly be 
 the property of the " Sieur Amadis " and pack they with it . choose 
 only the most necessary garment from her little store , she soon fill 
 her extemporary travel - bag , and then sit down to write a letter to 
 Robin . it be brief and explicit . 

 " DEAR ROBIN,"--it ran--"i have leave this beloved home . it be impossible 
 for I to stay . Dad leave I some money in bank - note in that seal 
 letter -- so I want for nothing . do not be anxious or unhappy -- but marry 
 soon and forget I . I know you will always be good to Priscilla -- tell 
 she I be not ungrateful to she for all her care of I . I love she 
 dearly . but I be place in the world unfortunately , and I must do 
 something that will help I out of the shame of be a burden on 
 other and an object of pity or contempt . if you will keep the old 
 book Dad give I , and still call they mine , you will be do I a 
 great kindness . and will you take care of cupid?--he be quite a clever 
 bird and know his friend . he will come to you or Priscilla as easily 
 as he come to I . good - bye , you dear , kind boy ! I love you very much , 
 but not as you want I to love you,--and I should only make you 
 miserable if I stay here and marry you . God bless you ! " INNOCENT . " 

 she put this in an envelope and address it,--then make sure that 
 everything be ready , she take a few sovereign from the little pile of 
 housekeeping money which Priscilla always bring to she to count over 
 every week and compare with the household expense . 

 " I can return these when I change one of Dad 's bank - note , " she say to 
 herself--"but I must have something small to pay my way with just now 
 than a hundred pound . " 

 indeed the note Hugo Jocelyn have leave for she might have give she 
 some little trouble and embarrassment , but she do not pause to 
 consider difficulty . when a human creature resolve to dare and to 
 do , no impediment , real or imaginary , be allow to stand long in the 
 way . an impulse push the soul forward , be it ever so reluctantly -- the 
 impulse be sometimes from heaven and sometimes from hell -- but as long 
 as it be active and peremptory , it be obey blindly and to the full . 

 this little ignorant and unworldly girl pass the rest of the night in 
 tidy the beloved room where she have spend so many happy hour , and 
 set everything in order,--talke in whisper between while to the 
 ghostly presence of the " Sieur Amadis " as to a friend who know she 
 difficult plight and guess her intention . 

 " you see , " she say , softly , " there be no way out of it . it be not as 
 if I be anybody -- I be nobody ! I be never want in the world at all . 
 I have no name . I have never be baptise . and though I know now that 
 I have a mother , I feel that she be nothing to I . I can hardly believe 
 she be my mother . she be a lady of fashion with a secret -- and _ i _ be 
 the secret ! I ought to be put away and bury and forgotten!--that 
 would be safest for she , and perhaps good for I ! but I should like to 
 live long enough to make her wish she have be true to my father and 
 have own I as his child ! ah , such dream ! will they ever come true ! " 

 she pause , look up by the dim candle - light at the arm of the 
 " Sieur Amadis"--who " here seekinge Forgetfulnesse do here fynde 
 peace"--and at the motto " Mon coeur I soutien . " 

 " poor ' Sieur Amadis ! ' " she murmured--"He seek forgetfulness!--shall I 
 ever do the same ? how strange it will be not to wish to 
 remember!--surely one must be very old , or sad , to find gladness in 
 forget ! " 

 a faint little thrill of dread run through her slight frame -- thought 
 begin to oppress she and shake her courage -- she resolutely put they 
 away and bend herself to the practical side of action . Re - attire 
 herself in the plain black dress and hat which Priscilla have get for 
 her mourning garb , she wait patiently for the first peep of 
 daylight -- a daylight which be little more than darkness -- and then , 
 take her satchel , she creep softly out of her room , never once 
 look back . there be nothing to stay her progress , for the great 
 mastiff Hero , since Hugo Jocelyn 's death , have take to such dismal 
 howling that it have be find necessary to keep he away from the 
 house in , a far - off shed where his melancholy plaint could not be 
 hear . tread with light , soundless footstep down the stair , she 
 reach the front - door,--unbarre and unlock it without any noise , 
 and as softly close it behind her,--then she stand in the open , 
 shiver slightly in the sweet coldness of the come dawn , and 
 inhaling the fragrance of awaken unseen flower . she know of a gap 
 in the hedge by mean of which she could leave the garden without 
 open the big farm - gate which move on rather creak hinge -- and 
 she take this way over a couple of rough stepping - stone . once out on 
 the old by - road she pause . Briar Farm look like a house in a 
 dream -- there be not enough daylight yet to show its gable distinctly , 
 and it be more like the shadowy suggestion of a building than any 
 actual substance . yet there be something solemn and impressive in its 
 scarcely define outline -- to the girl 's sensitive imagination it be 
 like the darken and disappear vision of her youth and 
 happiness,--a curtain fall , as it be , between the past and the 
 future like a drop - scene in a play . 

 " good - bye , Briar Farm ! " she whisper , kiss her hand to the quaintly 
 peaked roof just dimly perceptible--"good - bye , dear , beloved home ! I 
 shall never forget you ! I shall never see anything like you ! good - bye , 
 peace and safety!--good - bye ! " 

 the tear rush to her eye , and for the moment blind her,--then , 
 overcome this weakness , she set herself to walk quickly and steadily 
 away . up the old by - road , through the darkness of the overhang 
 tree , here and there cross by pale wandering gleams of fitful light 
 from the nearing dawn , she move swiftly , treading with noiseless 
 footstep as though she think the unseen spirit of wood and field 
 might hear and interrupt her progress -- and in a few minute she find 
 herself upon the broad highway branch right and leave and lead in 
 either direction to the wide world . Briar Farm have disappear behind 
 the trees,--it be as though no such place exist , so deeply be it 
 hide . 

 she stop , consider . she be not sure which be the way to the 
 near railway - station some eight mile distant . she be prepared to 
 walk it , but fear to take the wrong road , for she instinctively feel 
 that if she have to endure any unexpected delay , some one from Briar 
 Farm would be send to trace she and find out where she go . while she 
 thus hesitate , she hear the heavy rumbling of slow cart - wheel , and 
 wait to see what sort of vehicle might be approach . it be a large 
 waggon draw by two ponderous horse and drive by a man who , dimly 
 perceive by the light of the lantern fasten in front of he , 
 appear to be asleep . Innocent hail he -- and after one or two 
 effort succeed at last in rouse his attention . 

 " which be the way to the railway - station ? " she ask . 

 the man blink drowsily at she . 

 " Railway - station , be it ? I be a - go there now to fetch a load o ' 
 nitrate . be ye wantin ' to git ? " 

 " Wantin ' to git " be a country phrase to which Innocent be well 
 accustom . she answer , gently-- 

 " yes . I should be so glad if you would give I a lift -- i'll pay you for it . 
 I have to catch the first train to London . " 

 " Lunnon ? Quiet , ye rascals!"--this to the sturdy horse who be 
 drag away at their shaft in stolid determination to move 
 on--"Lunnon 's a good way off ! ever bin there ? " 

 " no . " 

 " nor I , nayther . Seekin ' service ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " Wal , ye can ride along wi ' me , if so be ye like it -- we be go main 
 slow , but we will be there before first engine . Climb up!--that be right ! 
 ' Ere 's a corner beside I -- ye could sit in the waggon if ye like , but 
 it be ' ard as nail . ' Ere be a bit of ' oss - cloth for a cushion . " 

 the girl spring up as he bid she and be soon seat . 

 " Ye're a light ' un an ' a little ' un , an ' a young ' un , " he say , with a 
 chuckle--"an ' what ye're do all alone I ' the wake o ' the marnin ' be 
 more than yer own mother know , I bet ! " 

 " I have no mother , " she say . 

 " eh , eh ! that be bad -- that be bad ! yet for all that there be bad mother 
 wot 's bad than none . Git on wi ' ye!"--this in a stentorian voice to 
 the horse , accompany by a sound crack of the whip . " Git on ! " 

 the big strong creature tug at the shaft and obey , their hoof 
 make a noisy clatter in the silence of the dawn . the daylight be 
 begin to declare itself more openly , and away to the east , just 
 above a line of dark tree , the sky show pale suggestion of amber 
 and of rose . Innocent sit very silent ; she be almost afraid of the 
 come light lest by chance the man beside she should ever have see 
 she before and recognise she . his sleep have be break , he be 
 disposed to be garrulous . 

 " ever bin by train afore ? " he ask . 

 " no . " 

 " no ! eh , that be mighty cur'ous . a'most everyone go somewhere by train 
 nowadays -- there be such a sight o ' cheap ' scursion . I know a man wot 
 get up I ' the middle o ' night , ' e do , an ' more fool ' e!--an ' off ' e 
 go by train down to seaside for the day--'e'd never see the sea 
 before an ' it giv ' ' I m such a scare as ' e be not get over it yet . ' e 
 say there be such a sight o ' wobblin ' water that ' e thort it ' ud 
 wobble off altogether an ' wash away all the land and ' I m with it . ay , 
 ay ! ' e be main scared with ' be cheap ' scursion ! " 

 " I have never see the sea , " say Innocent then , in a low clear 
 tone--"but I have read about it -- and I think I know what it be like . it 
 be always changing,--it be full of beautiful colour , blue and green , 
 and grey and violet -- and it have great wave edge with white foam!--oh 
 yes!--the poet write about it , and I have often see it in my dream . " 

 the dawn light in the sky deepen -- and the waggoner turn his head 
 to look more closely at his girl - companion . 

 " ye talk mighty strange ! " he said--"a'most as if ye'd be eddicate 
 up to it . I be not be eddicate , an ' I have no notion above my better , 
 but ye may be right about the sea -- if ye've read about it , though the 
 paper be mostly lie , if ye ask I , tell ye one thing one day an ' 
 another to - morrow-- " 

 " I do not read the papers"--and Innocent smile a little as in the 
 widening light she begin to see the stolid , stupid , but good - natured 
 face of the man--"i do not understand they . I have read about the sea in 
 books,--book of poetry . " 

 he utter a sound between a whistle and a grunt . 

 " book of poetry ! an ' ye're go to seek service in Lunnon ? take my 
 word for't , my gel , they will not want any folk there wi ' sort o ' gammon 
 like that in their ' ed -- they're all on the make there , an ' they do not 
 care for nothing ' cept money an ' ' ow to grab it . I be not bin there , but 
 I have heerd a good deal . " 

 " you may have hear wrong , " say Innocent , gather more courage as 
 she realise that the light be now quite clear enough for he to see 
 her feature distinctly and that it be evident he do not know 
 her--"London be such a large place that there must be all sort in 
 it -- good as well as bad -- they can not all be greedy for money . there must 
 be people who think beautiful thing , and do beautiful work-- " 

 " oh , there be plenty o ' work do there"--and the waggoner flick his 
 long whip against the sturdy flank of his labour horses--"i be not 
 denyin ' that . an ' you'll ' ave to work , my gel!--you bet ! you will ' ave to 
 wash down step an ' sweep kitchen a good while afore you git into the 
 way of it ! why not take a service in the country ? " 

 " I be a little tired of the country , " she answered--"i'd like a change . " 

 " an ' a change ye're likely to git ! " he retort , somewhat gruffly--"Lor ' 
 bless yer ' art ! there be not nothing like the country ! all the 
 tree a - greenin ' an ' the flower a - blowin ' an ' the bird a - singin ' ! 
 ' ave ye ever ' era tell of a place call Briar Farm ? " 

 she control the nervous start of her body , and reply quietly-- 

 " I think I have . a very old place . " 

 " ah ! Old ? I believe ye ! ' twa old in the time o ' good Queen Bess -- an ' 
 the same fam'ly ' as ' ad it these three ' undred year -- a fam'ly o ' the 
 name o ' Jocelyn . ay , if ye could a ' get service wi ' Farmer Jocelyn ye'd 
 a ' bin in luck 's way ! but ' e be dead an ' go last week -- more be the 
 pity!--an ' ' be nephew 's get the place now , forbye ' e be not a Jocelyn . " 

 she be silent , affect not to be interested . the waggoner go on-- 

 " that be the sort o ' place to seek service in ! Safe an ' clean an ' ' onest 
 as the sunshine -- good work an ' good pay -- a deal well than a place in 
 Lunnon . an ' country air , my gel!--country air!--nuthin ' like it ! " 

 a sudden blaze of gold light up the tree -- the sun be rise -- full day 
 be disclose , and the last filmy curtain of the night be withdraw , 
 show a heavenly blue sky fleck lightly with wander trail of 
 white cloud like swansdown . he point eastward with his long whip . 

 " look at that ! " he said--"Fine , be not it ! no roof and chimney -- just 
 the wood and field ! nothing like it anywhere ! " 

 Innocent draw a long breath -- the air be indeed sweet and keen -- new 
 life seem give to the world with its exhilarate freshness . but she 
 make no reply to the enthusiastic comment of her companion . thought 
 be in her brain too deep for speech . not here , not here , in this 
 quiet pastoral scene could she learn the way to wrest the golden 
 circlet of fame from the hand of the silent gods!--it must be in the 
 turmoil and rush of endeavour -- the swift pursuit of the fly Apollo ! 
 and -- as the slow waggon jog along -- she feel herself draw , as it 
 be , by a magnet -- on -- on -- on!--on towards a veil mystery which 
 wait for she -- a mystery which she alone could solve . 

 presently they come within sight of several row of ugly wooden shed 
 with galvanised iron roof and short black chimney . 

 " a'most there now , " say the waggoner--"'Ere 's a bit o ' Lunnon 
 a'ready!--dirt an ' muck and muddle ! where man do make a mess o ' thing 
 ' e make a mess all round ! spoil everything ' e can lay ' be ' and on ! " 

 the approach to the railway be certainly not attractive -- no railway 
 approach ever be . perhaps they appear more than usually hideous when 
 build amid a fair green country , where for mile and mile one see 
 nothing but flower hedgerow and soft pasture shade by the 
 graceful foliage of shelter tree . then the shin , slippery iron 
 of the railway run like a knife through the verdant bosom of the 
 land almost hurt the eye , and the accessory of station - shed , 
 coal - truck , and the like , affront the taste like an ill - do 
 foreground in an otherwise pleasing picture . a slight sense of 
 depression and foreboding come like a cloud over the mind of poor 
 little lonely Innocent , as she alight at the station at last , and 
 with uplifted wistful eye tender a sovereign to the waggoner . 

 " please take as much of it as you think right , " she said--"It be very 
 kind of you to let I ride with you . " 

 the man star , whistle , and think . feel in the depth of a 
 capacious pocket he draw out a handful of silver and count it over 
 carefully . 

 " ' Ere y'are ! " he say , hand it all over with the exception of one 
 half - crown--"ye'll want all yer change in Lunnon an ' more . I be takin ' 
 two bob an ' sixpence -- if ye think it too much , say so ! " 

 " oh no , no ! " and Innocent look distressed--"Perhaps it be too 
 little -- I hope you be not wrong yourself ? " 

 the waggoner laugh , kindly enough . 

 " do not ye mind I ! " he said--"i'm all right ! if I ' adn't two kid at 
 ' ome I would charge ye nothin'--but I be go to get them a toy they want , 
 an ' I will take the ' arf - crown for the luck of it . good - day t'ye ! Hope 
 you will find an easy place ! " 

 she smile and thank him,--then enter the station and , find the 
 ticket - office just open , pay a third - class fare to London . a sudden 
 thrill of nervousness come over she . she speak to the booking - clerk , 
 peer wistfully at he through his little ticket - aperture . 

 " I have never be in a train before ! " she say , in a small , anxious 
 voice . 

 the clerk smile , and yawn expansively . he be a young man who 
 consider himself a " gentleman , " and among his own particular set 
 pass for be a wit . 

 " really ! " he drawled--"quite a new experience for you ! a little country 
 mouse , be it ? " 

 Innocent draw back , offend . 

 " I do not know what you mean , " she say , coldly -- and move away . 

 the young clerk finger his embryo moustache dubiously -- conscious of a 
 blunder in manner . this girl be a lady -- not a mere country wench to 
 joke with . he feel rather uncomfortable -- and presently leave his 
 office , go out on the platform where she be walk up and down , and 
 slightly lift his cap . 

 " I beg your pardon ! " he say , his face redden a little--"if you be 
 travel alone you would like to get into a carriage with other 
 people , would not you ? " 

 " oh yes ! " she answer , eagerly--"if you would be so kind-- " 

 he make no answer , as just then , with a rush and crash and clatter , and 
 deafening shriek of the engine - whistle , the train come thunder in . 
 there be open and shutting of door , much banging and confusion , 
 and before she very well know where she be , Innocent find herself in 
 a compartment with three other person -- one benevolent - looking old 
 gentleman with white hair who be seat opposite to she , and a man and 
 woman , evidently husband and wife . another shriek and roar , and the 
 train start -- as it begin to race along , Innocent close her eye with 
 a sicken sensation of faintness and terror -- then , open they , see 
 hedge , field , tree and pond all fly past she like scud in the 
 wind , and sit watch in stupefied wonderment -- one little hand 
 grasp the satchel that hold all her worldly possession -- the other 
 hang limply at her side . now and then she look at her 
 companion -- the husband and wife sit opposite each other and speak 
 occasionally in monosyllable -- the old gentleman on the seat face 
 herself be read a paper which show its title--"The Morning Post . " 
 sometimes he look at she over the top of the paper , but for the most 
 part he appear absorb in the print page . on , on , on , the train 
 rush at a pace which to she seem madden and full of danger -- she 
 feel sick and giddy -- would it never stop , she thought?--and a deep 
 sense of relief come over she when , with a scream from the 
 engine - whistle loud enough to tear the drum of a sensitive ear , the 
 whole shake , rattle concern come to an abrupt standstill at a 
 station . then she muster up courage to speak . 

 " please , would you tell me-- " she begin , faintly . 

 the old gentleman lay down his " Morning Post " and survey she 
 encouragingly . 

 " yes ? what be it ? " 

 " will it be long before we get to London ? " 

 " about three hour . " 

 " three hour ! " 

 she give a deep and weary sigh . three hour ! hardly till then have she 
 realise how far she be from Briar Farm -- or how entirely she have cut 
 herself off from all the familiar surrounding of her childhood 's home , 
 her girlhood 's life . she lean back in her seat , and one or two tear 
 escape from under her droop eyelid and trickle slowly down her 
 cheek . the train start off again , rush at what she think an 
 awful speed,--she imagine herself as be tear away from the peaceful 
 past and hurl into a stormy future . yet it be her own 
 doing -- whatever chance to she now she would have no one but herself to 
 blame . the event of the past few day have crush and beat she so 
 with blows,--the old adage " misfortune never come singly " have be 
 fulfil for she with cruel and unlooked - for plenitude . there be a 
 turning - point in every human life -- or rather several 
 turning - point -- and at each one be gather certain thread of destiny 
 which may either be involve in a tangle or weave distinctly as a 
 clue -- but which in any case lead to change in the formerly accept 
 order of thing . we may thank the god that this be so -- otherwise in 
 the jog - trot of a carefully treasure conservatism and sameness of 
 daily existence we should become the easy prey of adventurer , who , 
 discover our desire for the changelessness of a convenient and 
 comfortable routine , would mulct we of all individuality . our very 
 servant would become our master , and would take advantage of our 
 easy - go way to domineer over we , as in the case of " lone lady " 
 who be often half afraid to claim obedience from the domestic they 
 keep and pay . Ignorant of the way of the world and full of such dream 
 as the world consider madness , Innocent have act on a powerful inward 
 impetus which push her spirit towards liberty and independence -- but 
 of any difficulty or danger she might have to encounter she never 
 think . she have the blind confidence of a child that run along 
 heedless of fall , be instinctively sure that some hand will be 
 stretch out to save it should it run into positive danger . 

 master the weakness of tear , she furtively dry her eye and 
 endeavour not to think at all -- not to dwell on the memory of she 
 " Dad " whom she have love so tenderly , and all the sweet surrounding of 
 Briar Farm which already seem so far away . Robin would be sorry she 
 have go -- indeed he would be very miserable for a time -- she be certain 
 of that!--and Priscilla ! yes , Priscilla have love she as her own 
 child,--here her thought begin run riot again , and she move 
 impatiently . just then the old gentleman with the " Morning Post " fold 
 it neatly and , bend forward , offer it to she . 

 " would you like to see the paper ? " he ask , politely . 

 the warm colour flush her cheek -- she accept it shyly . 

 " thank you very much ! " she murmur -- and , gratefully shield her 
 tearful eye behind the convenient news - sheet , she begin glance up 
 and down the front page with all its numerous announcement , from the 
 " Agony " column down to the late new concert - singer and sailing of 
 steamer . 

 suddenly her attention be catch by the following advertisement-- 

 " a Lady of good connection and position will be glad to take another 
 lady as Paying Guest in her charming house in Kensington . would suit 
 anyone study art or for a scholarship . liberal table and refine 
 surrounding . please communicate with ' Lavinia ' at-- " here follow an 
 address . 

 over and over again Innocent read this with a sort of fascination . 
 finally , take from her pocket a little note - book and pencil , she 
 copy it carefully . 

 " I might go there , " she thought--"if she be a poor lady want money , 
 she might be glad to have I as a ' pay guest , ' anyhow , it will do no 
 harm to try . I must find some place to rest in , if only for a night . " 

 here she become aware that the old gentleman who have lend she the paper 
 be eye she curiously yet kindly . she meet his glance with a mixture 
 of frankness and timidity which give her expression a wonderful charm . 
 he venture to speak as he might have speak to a little child . 

 " be you go to London for the first time ? " he ask . 

 " yes , sir . " 

 he smile . he have a pleasant smile , distinctly humorous and 
 good - natured . 

 " it be a great adventure ! " he said--"especially for a little girl , all 
 alone . " 

 she colour . 

 " I be not a little girl , " she answer , with quaint dignity--"I'm 
 eighteen . " 

 " really!"--and the old gentleman look more humorous than ever--"oh 
 well!--of course you be quite old . but , you see , I be seventy , so to 
 I you seem a little girl . I suppose your friend will meet you in 
 London ? " 

 she hesitate -- then answer , simply-- 

 " no . I have no friend . I be go to earn my living . " 

 the old gentleman whistle . it be a short , low whistle at first , but 
 it develop into a bar of " Sally in our Alley , " then he look 
 round -- the other people in the compartment , the husband and wife , be 
 asleep . 

 " poor child ! " he then say , very gently--"I'm afraid that will be hard 
 work for you . you do not look very strong . " 

 " oh , but I be ! " she reply , eagerly--"i can do anything in housework 
 or dairy - farming -- I've be bring up to be useful-- " 

 " that be more than a great many girl can say ! " he remark , 
 smiling--"Well , well ! I hope you may succeed ! I also be bring up to 
 be useful -- but I be not sure that I have ever be of any use ! " 

 she look at he with quick interest . 

 " be you a clever man ? " she ask . 

 the simplicity of the question amuse he , and he laugh . 

 " a few people have sometimes call I so , " he answered--"but my 
 ' cleverness , ' or whatever it may be , be not of the successful order . 
 and I be get old now , so that most of my activity be past . I have 
 write a few books-- " 

 " books!"--she clasp her hand nervously , and her eye grow 
 brilliant--"Oh ! if you can write book you must always be happy ! " 

 " do you think so ? " and he bend his brow and scrutinise she more 
 intently . " what do you know about it ? be you fond of reading ? " 

 a deep blush suffuse her fair skin . 

 " yes -- but I have only read very old book for the most part , " she 
 said--"In the farm - house where I be bring up there be a great many 
 manuscript on vellum , and curious thing -- I read those -- and some book 
 in old french-- " 

 " book in old French ! " he echo , wonderingly . " and you can read they ? 
 you be quite a french scholar , then ? " 

 " oh no , indeed ! " she protested--"i have only teach myself a little . of 
 course it be difficult at first,--but I soon manage it,--just as I 
 learn how to read old English -- I mean the English of Queen 
 Elizabeth 's time . I love it all so much that it be a pleasure to 
 puzzle it out . we have a few modern book -- but I never care for they . " 

 he study her face with increase interest . 

 " and you be go to earn your own living in London ! " he said--"have 
 you think of a way to begin ? in old French , or old English ? " 

 she glance at he quickly and see that he be smile kindly . 

 " yes , " she answer , gently--"i have think of a way to begin ! will 
 you tell I of some book you have write so that I may read it ? " 

 he shake his head . 

 " not I ! " he declared--"i could not stand the criticism of a young lady 
 who might compare I with the writer of the Elizabethan 
 period -- Shakespeare , for instance-- " 

 " ah no ! " she said--"no one can ever be compare with Shakespeare -- that 
 be impossible ! " 

 he be silent,--and as she resume her reading of the " Morning Post " he 
 have lend she , he lean back in his seat and leave she to herself . but 
 he be keenly interested,--this young , small creature with her 
 delicate , intelligent face and wistful blue - grey eye be a new 
 experience for he . he be a well - season journalist and man of 
 letters,--clever in his own line and not without touch of originality 
 in his work -- but hardly brilliant or forceful enough to command the 
 attention of the public to a large or successful issue . he be , 
 however , the right hand and chief power on the staff of one of the most 
 influential of daily newspaper , whose proprietor would no more have 
 thought of manage thing without he than of go without a dinner , 
 and from this post , which he have hold for twenty year , he derive a 
 sufficiently comfortable income . in his profession he have see all 
 class of humanity -- the wise and the ignorant,--the conceited and the 
 timid,--man who consider themselves new Shakespeares in 
 embryo,--women in whom the unbounded vanity of a little surface 
 cleverness be sufficient to place they beyond the pale of common 
 respect,--but he have never till now meet a little country girl make 
 her first journey to London who admit read " old French " and 
 Elizabethan English as unconcernedly as she might have speak of 
 gathering apple or churn cream . he determine not to lose sight of 
 she , and to improve the acquaintance if he get the chance . he hear she 
 give a sudden sharp sigh as she read the " Morning Post,"--she have 
 turn to the middle of the newspaper where the event of the day be 
 chronicle , and where a column of fashionable intelligence announce 
 the ephemeral doing of the so - call " great " of the world . here one 
 paragraph have catch and rivet her attention -- it run thus--"Lord and 
 Lady Blythe have leave town for Glen - Alpin , inverness - shire , where they 
 will entertain a large house - party to meet the Prime Minister . " 

 her mother!--it be difficult to believe that but a few hour ago this 
 very Lady Blythe have offer to " adopt " her!--"adopt " her own child and 
 act a lie in the face of all the " society " she frequented,--yet , 
 strange and fantastic as it seem , it be true ! possibly 
 she -- Innocent -- have she choose , could have be take to " Glen - Alpin , 
 inverness - shire!"--she too might have meet the Prime Minister ! she 
 almost laugh at the thought of it!--the paper shake in her hand . she 
 " mother " ! just then the old gentleman bend forward again and speak to 
 she . 

 " we be very near London now , " he said--"can I help you at the station 
 to get your luggage ? you might find it confusing at first-- " 

 " oh , thank you ! " she murmured--"But I have no luggage -- only this"--and 
 she point to the satchel beside her--"i shall get on very well . " 

 here she fold up the " Morning Post " and return it to he with a 
 pretty air of courtesy . as he accept it he smile . 

 " you be a very independent little lady ! " he said--"but -- just in case 
 you ever do want to read a book of mine,--I be go to give you my 
 name and address . " here he take a card from his waistcoat pocket and 
 give it to she . " that will always find I , " he continued--"don't be 
 afraid to write and ask I anything about London you may wish to know . 
 it be a very large city -- a cruel one!"--and he look at she with 
 compassionate kindness--"you must not lose yourself in it ! " 

 she read the name on the card--"John Harrington"--and the address be 
 the office of a famous daily journal . look up , she give he a 
 grateful little smile . 

 " you be very kind ! " she said--"and I will not forget you . I do not 
 think I shall lose myself -- i'll try not to be so stupid ! yes -- when I 
 have read one of your book I will write to you ! " 

 " do!"--and there be almost a note of eagerness in his voice--"i should 
 like to know what you think"--here a loud and persistent scream from 
 the engine - whistle drown all possibility of speech as the train 
 rush past a bewildering wilderness of house pack close together 
 under bristle black chimney -- then , as the deafening din cease , he 
 add , quietly , " here be London . " 

 she look out of the window,--the sun be shin , but through a dull 
 brown mist , and nothing but brick and mortar , build upon building , 
 meet her view . after the sweet freshness of the country she have leave 
 behind , the scene be appallingly hideous , and her heart sink with a 
 sense of fear and foreboding . another few minute and the train stop . 

 " this be Paddington , " say John Harrington ; then , note she troubled 
 expression--"let I get a taxi for you and tell the man where to drive . " 

 she submit in a kind of stunned bewilderment . the address she have 
 find in the " Morning Post " be her rescue -- she could go there , she 
 think , rapidly , even if she have to come away again . almost before she 
 could realise what have happen in all the noise and bustle to and 
 fro , she find herself in a taxi - cab , and her kind fellow - traveller 
 standing beside it , raise his hat to her courteously in farewell . she 
 give he the address of the house in Kensington which she have copy 
 from the advertisement she have see in the " Morning Post , " and he 
 repeat it to the taxi - driver with a sense of relief and pleasure . it 
 be what be call " a respectable address"--and he be glad the child 
 know where she be go . in another moment the taxi be off,--a 
 parting smile brighten the wistful expression of her young face , and 
 she wave her little hand to he . and then she be whirl away among 
 the seethe crowd of vehicle and lose to sight . Old John Harrington 
 stand for a moment on the railway - platform , lose in thought . 

 " a sweet little soul ! " he mused--"i wonder what will become of she ! I 
 must see she again some day . she remind I of -- let I see!--who do 
 she remind I of ? by Jove , I have it ! Pierce Armitage!--haven't see 
 he for twenty year at least -- and this girl 's face have a look of 
 his -- just the same eye and intense expression . poor old Armitage!--he 
 promise to be a great artist once , but he be go to the dog by this 
 time , I suppose . curious , curious that I should remember he just now ! " 

 and he go his way , think and wonder , while Innocent go her , 
 without any thought at all , in a blind and simple faith that God would 
 take care of she . 




 CHAPTER XII 

 to be whirl along through the crowded street of London in a taxi - cab 
 for the first time in one 's life must need be a somewhat 
 disconcerting , even alarm experience , and Innocent be the poor 
 little prey of so many nervous fear during her journey to Kensington 
 in this fashion , that she could think of nothing and realise nothing 
 except that at any moment it seem likely she would be kill . with 
 wide - open , terrified eye , she watch the huge motor - omnibus almost 
 bear down upon the vehicle in which she sit , and shiver at the 
 narrow margin of space the driver seem to allow for any sort of 
 escape from instant collision and utter disaster . she only begin to 
 breathe naturally again when , turn away out of the great press of 
 traffic , the cab begin to run at a smoother and less noisy pace , till 
 presently , in less time than she could have imagine possible , it draw 
 up at a modestly retreat little door under an arched porch in a 
 quiet little square , where there be some brave and pretty tree do 
 their good to be green , despite London soot and smoke . Innocent step 
 out , and see a bell - handle pull it timidly . the summon be 
 answer by a very neat maid - servant , who look at she in primly 
 polite enquiry . 

 " be mrs.--or Miss ' Lavinia ' at home ? " she murmur . " I see she 
 advertisement in the ' Morning Post . ' " 

 the servant 's face change from primness to propitiation . 

 " oh yes , miss ! please step in ! I will tell Miss Leigh . " 

 " thank you . I will pay the driver . " 

 she thereupon pay for the cab and dismiss it , and then follow the 
 maid into a very small but prettily arrange hall , and from thence into 
 a charming little drawing - room , with french window set open , show a 
 tiny garden beyond -- a little green lawn , smooth as velvet , and a few 
 miniature flower - bed gay with well - keep blossom . 

 " would you please take a seat , miss ? " and the maid place a chair . 
 " Miss Leigh be upstairs , but she will be down directly . " 

 she leave the room , close the door softly behind she . 

 Innocent sit still , satchel in hand , look wistfully about she . the 
 room appeal to her taste in its extreme simplicity -- and it 
 instinctively suggest to her mind resign poverty make the good of 
 itself . there be one or two old miniature on little velvet stand 
 set on the mantelpiece -- these be beautiful , and of value ; some 
 engraving of famous picture adorn the wall , all well choose ; the 
 quaint china bowl on the centre table be full of rose carefully 
 arrange -- and there be a very ancient harpsichord in one corner which 
 apparently serve only as a stand for the portrait of a man 's 
 strikingly handsome face , near which be place a vase contain a 
 stem of Madonna lily . Innocent find herself look at this portrait 
 now and again -- there be something familiar in its expression which have 
 a curious fascination for she . but her thought revolve chiefly round 
 a difficulty which have just present itself -- she have no real name . 
 what name could she take to be know by for the moment ? she would not 
 call herself " Jocelyn"--she feel she have no right to do so . " Ena " might 
 pass muster for an abbreviation of " innocent"--she decide to make use 
 of that as a christian name -- but a surname that would be appropriately 
 fit to her ultimate intention she could not at once select . then 
 she suddenly think of the man who have be her father and have bring 
 she as a helpless babe to Briar Farm . Pierce Armitage be his name -- and 
 he be dead . surely she might call herself Armitage ? while she be 
 still puzzle her mind over the question the door open and a little 
 old lady enter -- a soft - eye , pale , pretty old lady , as dainty and 
 delicate as the fairy - godmother of a child 's dream , with white hair 
 bunch on either side of her face , and a wistful , rather plaintive 
 expression of mingled hope and enquiry . 

 " I be sorry to keep you wait , " she begin -- then pause in a kind of 
 embarrassment . the two look at each other . Innocent speak , a little 
 shyly : 

 " I see your advertisement in the ' Morning Post , ' " she say , " and I 
 think perhaps -- I think that I might come to you as a pay guest . 
 I have to live in London , and I shall be very busy study all day , so 
 I should not give you much trouble . " 

 " pray do not mention it ! " say the old lady , with a quaint air of 
 old - fashioned courtesy . " trouble would not be consider ! but you be a 
 much young person than I expect or wish to accommodate . " 

 " you say in the advertisement that it would be suitable for a person 
 study art , or for a scholarship , " put in Innocent , quickly . " and I 
 be study for literature . " 

 " be you indeed ? " and the old lady wave a little hand in courteous 
 deprecation of all unnecessary explanation -- a hand which Innocent 
 notice have a delicate lace mitten on it and one or two sparkling 
 ring . " well , let we sit down together and talk it over . I have two 
 spare room -- a bedroom and a sit - room -- they be small but very 
 comfortable , and for these I have be tell I should ask three guinea 
 a week , include board . I feel it a little difficult"--and the old 
 lady heave a sigh--"i have never do this kind of thing before -- I 
 do not know what my poor father , Major Leigh , would have say -- he be a 
 very proud man -- very proud-- ! " 

 while she thus talk , Innocent have be make a rapid calculation in 
 her own mind . three guineas a week ! it be more than she have mean to 
 pay , but she be instinctively wise enough to realise the advantage of 
 safety and shelter in this charming little home of one who be 
 evidently a lady , gentle , kindly , and well - mannered . she have plenty of 
 money to go on with -- and in the future she hop to make more . so she 
 speak out bravely . 

 " I will pay the three guineas a week gladly , " she say . " may I see the 
 room ? " 

 the old lady meanwhile have be study she with great intentness , and 
 now ask abruptly-- 

 " be you an english girl ? " 

 Innocent flush a sudden rosy red . 

 " yes . I be bring up in the country , but all my people be dead now . 
 I have no friend , but I have a little money leave to I -- and for the 
 rest -- I must earn my own living . " 

 " well , my dear , that will not hurt you ! " and an encouraging smile 
 brighten Miss Leigh 's pleasantly wrinkle face . " you shall see the 
 room . but you have not tell I your name yet . " 

 again Innocent blush . 

 " my name be Armitage , " she say , in a low , hesitate tone--"Ena 
 Armitage . " 

 " Armitage!"--Miss Leigh repeat the name with a kind of wonder 
 accent--"Armitage ? be you any relative of the painter , Pierce 
 Armitage ? " 

 the girl 's heart beat quickly -- for a moment the little drawing - room 
 seem to whirl round she -- then she collect her force with a strong 
 effort and answered--"no ! " 

 the old lady 's wistful blue eye , dim with age , yet retain a 
 beautiful tenderness of expression , rest upon her anxiously . 

 " you be quite sure ? " 

 repress the feeling that prompt she to cry out--"He be my 
 father ! " she replied-- 

 " I be quite sure ! " 

 Lavinia Leigh raise her little mittened hand and point to the 
 portrait stand on the harpsichord : 

 " that be Pierce Armitage ! " she say . " he be a dear friend of 
 mine"--her voice tremble a little--"and I should have be glad if you 
 have be in any way connect with he . " 

 as she speak Innocent turn and look steadily at the portrait , and 
 it seem to her excited fancy that its eye give her glance for 
 glance . she could hardly breathe -- the threatening tear half choke 
 she . what strange fate be it , she think , that have lead she to a house 
 where she look upon her own father 's likeness for the first time ! 

 " he be a very fine man , " continue Miss Leigh in the same 
 half - tremulous voice--"very gift -- very clever ! he would have be a 
 great artist , I think-- " 

 " be he dead ? " the girl ask , quietly . 

 " yes -- i -- I think so -- he die abroad -- so they say , but I have never 
 quite believe it -- I do not know why ! come , let I show you the room . I 
 be glad your name be Armitage . " 

 she lead the way , walk slowly,--innocent follow like one in a 
 dream . they ascend a small staircase , softly carpet , to a square 
 landing , and here Miss Leigh open a door . 

 " this be the sit - room , " she say . " you see , it have a nice 
 bow - window with a view of the garden . the bedroom be just beyond 
 it -- both lead into one another . " 

 Innocent look in and could not resist give a little exclamation of 
 pleasure . everything be so clean and dainty and well keep -- it seem 
 to she a perfect haven of rest and shelter . she turn to Miss Leigh in 
 eager impulsiveness . 

 " oh , please let I stay ! " she say . " now , at once ! I have only just 
 arrive in London and this be the first place I have see . it seem 
 so -- so fortunate that you should have have a friend name Armitage ! 
 perhaps -- perhaps I may be a friend too ! " 

 a curious tremor seem to pass over the old lady as though she 
 shiver in a cold wind . she lay one hand gently on the girl 's arm . 

 " you may , indeed ! " she say . " one never can tell what may happen in 
 this strange world ! but we have to be practical -- and I be very poor and 
 press for money . I do not know you -- and of course I should expect 
 reference from some respectable person who can tell I who you be and 
 all about you . " 

 Innocent grow pale . she give a little expressive gesture of utter 
 hopelessness . 

 " I can not give you any reference , " she said--"i be quite alone in the 
 world -- my people be dead -- you see I be in mourning . the last friend I 
 have die a little while ago and leave I four hundred pound in 
 bank - note . I have they here"--and she touch she breast--"and if you 
 like I will give you one of they in advance payment for the room and 
 board at once . " 

 the old lady heave a quick sharp sigh . one hundred pound ! it would 
 relieve she of a weight of press difficulty -- and yet-- ! she pause , 
 consider . 

 " no , my child ! " she say , quietly . " I would not on any account take so 
 much money from you . if you wish to stay , and if I must omit reference 
 and take you on trust -- which I be quite willing to do!"--and she 
 smile , gravely--"i will accept two month ' rent in advance if you 
 think you can spare this -- can you ? " 

 " yes -- oh , yes ! " the girl exclaim , impulsively . " if only I may 
 stay -- now ! " 

 " you may certainly stay now , " and Miss Leigh ring a bell to summon the 
 neat maid - servant . " Rachel , the room be let to this young lady , Miss 
 Armitage . will you prepare the bedroom and help she unpack her thing ? " 
 then , turn round to Innocent , she say kindly,--"You will of course 
 take your meal with I at my table -- I keep very regular hour , and if 
 for any cause you have to be absent , I should wish to know beforehand . " 

 Innocent say nothing;--her eye be full of tear , but she take the 
 old lady 's little hand and kiss it . they go down together again to 
 the drawing - room , Innocent just pause to tell the maid Rachel that 
 she would prefer to unpack and arrange the content of her satchel -- all 
 her luggage,--herself ; and in a very few minute the whole business be 
 settle . eager to prove her good faith to the gentle lady who have so 
 readily trust she , she draw from her bosom the envelope contain 
 the bank - note leave to she by Hugo Jocelyn , and , unfold all four , 
 she spread they out on the table . 

 " you see , " she say , " this be my little fortune ! please change one of 
 they and take the two month ' rent and anything more you want -- please 
 do ! " 

 a faint colour flush Miss Leigh 's pale cheek . 

 " no , my dear , no ! " she answer . " you must not tempt I ! I will take 
 exactly the two month ' rent and no more ; but I think you ought not to 
 carry this money about with you -- you should put it in a bank . we will 
 talk of this afterwards -- but go and lock it up somewhere now -- there be a 
 little desk in your room you could use -- but a bank would be safe . 
 after dinner this evening I will tell you what I think you ought to 
 do -- you be so very young!"--and she smiled--"such a young little 
 thing ! I shall have to look after you and play chaperone ! " 

 Innocent look up with a sweet confidence in her eye . 

 " that will be kind of you ! " she say , and leave the one bank - note of 
 a hundred pound on the table , she fold up the other three in their 
 original envelope and return they to their secret place of safety . 
 " in a little while I will tell you a great deal about myself -- and I do 
 hope I shall please you ! I will not give any trouble , and I will try to 
 be useful in the house if you will let I . I can cook and sew and do all 
 sort of thing ! " 

 " can you , indeed ! " and Miss Leigh laugh good - naturedly . " and what 
 about study for literature ? " 

 " ah!--that of course come first ! " she say . " but I shall do all my 
 writing in the morning -- in the afternoon I can help you as much as 
 you like . " 

 " my dear , your time must be your own , " say Miss Leigh , decisively . 
 " you have pay for your accommodation , and you must have perfect 
 liberty to do as you like , as long as you keep to my regular hour for 
 meal and bed - time . I think we shall get on well together,--and I hope 
 we shall be good friend ! " 

 as she speak she bend forward and on a sudden impulse draw the girl to 
 she and kiss she . poor lonely Innocent thrill through all her be 
 to the touch of instinctive tenderness , and her heart beat quickly as 
 she see the portrait on the harpsichord -- her father 's picture 
 face -- apparently look at she with a smile . 

 " oh , you be very good to I ! " she murmur , with a little sob in her 
 breath , as she return the gentle old lady 's kiss . " I feel as if I have 
 know you for year ! do you know him"--and she point to the 
 portrait--"very long ? " 

 Miss Leigh 's eye grow bright and tender . 

 " yes ! " she answer . " we be boy and girl together -- and once -- once we 
 be very fond of each other . perhaps I will tell you the story some 
 day ! now go up to your room and arrange everything as you like , and 
 rest a little . would you like some tea ? anything to eat ? " 

 Poor Innocent , who have leave Briar Farm at dawn without any thought of 
 food , and have travel to London almost unconscious of either hunger 
 or fatigue , be begin to feel the lack of nourishment , and she 
 gratefully accept the suggestion . 

 " I lunch at two o'clock , " continue Miss Leigh . " but it be only a little 
 past twelve now , and if you have come a long way from the country you 
 must be tired . I will send Rachel up to you with some tea . " 

 she go to give the order , and Innocent , leave to herself for a moment , 
 move softly up to her father 's picture and gaze upon it with all her 
 soul in her eye . it be a wonderful face -- a face expressive of the 
 high thought and intelligence -- the face of a thinker or a poet , 
 though the finely mould mouth and chin have nothing of the weakness 
 which sometimes mark a mere dreamer of dream . timidly glance about 
 she to make sure she be not observe , she kiss the portrait , the 
 cold glass which cover it meet her warm caressing lip with a 
 repelling chill . he be dead -- this father whom she could never 
 claim!--dead as Hugo Jocelyn , who have take that father 's place in her 
 life . she might love the ghost of he if her fancy lead she that way , as 
 she love the ghost of the " Sieur Amadis"--but there be nothing else 
 to love ! she be alone in the world , with neither father nor " knight of 
 old " to protect or defend she , and on herself alone depend she 
 future . she turn away and leave the room , look a fragile , sad , 
 unobtrusive little creature , with nothing about she to suggest either 
 beauty or power . yet the mind in that delicate body have a strength of 
 which she be unconscious , and she be already bend it instinctively 
 and intellectually like a bow ready for the first shot -- with an arrow 
 which be destine to go straight to its mark . 

 meanwhile on Briar Farm there have fall a cloud of utter desolation . 
 the day be fair and brilliant with summer sunshine , the bird sing , 
 the rose bloom , the dove fly to and fro on the gable roof , and 
 Innocent 's pet " Cupid " wait in vain on the corner of her window - sill 
 for the usual summon that call it to she hand,--but a strange 
 darkness and silence like a whelm wave submerge the very light from 
 the eye of those who suddenly find themselves deprive of a beloved 
 presence -- a personality unobtrusively sweet , which have bestow on the 
 old house a charm and grace far great than have be fully recognise . 
 the " base - bear " innocent , nameless , and unbaptise , and therefore 
 shadow by the stupid scandal of commonplace convention , have give the 
 " home " its homelike quality -- her pretty idealistic fancy about the 
 old sixteenth - century knight " Sieur Amadis " have invest the place with 
 a touch of romance and poetry which it would hardly have possess 
 with - out she -- her gentle way , her care of the flower and the animal , 
 and the never - weary delight she have take in the household 
 affair -- all her part in the daily life of the farm have be as 
 necessary to happiness as the mastership of Hugo Jocelyn himself -- and 
 without she nothing seem the same . poor Priscilla go about her 
 work , cry silently , and Robin Clifford pace restlessly up and down 
 the smooth grass in front of the old house with Innocent 's farewell 
 letter in his hand , read it again and again . he have return early 
 from the market town where he have stay the night , eager to explain to 
 she all the detail of the business he have go through with the lawyer 
 to whom his Uncle Hugo have entrust his affair , and to tell she how 
 admirably everything have be arrange for the prosperous continuance 
 of Briar Farm on the old traditional method of labour by which it have 
 always be work to advantage . Hugo Jocelyn have indeed show plenty 
 of sound wisdom and foresight in all his plan save one -- and that one 
 be his fix idea of Innocent 's marriage with his nephew . it have 
 evidently never occur to he that a girl could have a will of she 
 own in such a momentous affair -- much less that she could or would be so 
 unwise as to refuse a good husband and a settle home when both be at 
 hand for her acceptance . Robin himself , despite her rejection of he , 
 have still hop and believe that when the first shock of his uncle 's 
 death have lessen , he might by patience and unwearye tenderness move 
 her heart to soft yielding , and he have mean to plead his cause with 
 she for the sake of the famous old house itself , so that she might 
 become its mistress and help he to prove a worthy descendant of its 
 long line of owner . but now ! all hope be at an end -- she have take the 
 law into her own hand and go -- no one know whither . Priscilla be the 
 last who have see she -- Priscilla could only explain , with many tear , 
 that when she have go to call she to breakfast she have find her room 
 vacant , her bed unslept in , and the letter for Robin on the table -- and 
 that letter disclose little or nothing of her intention . 

 " oh , the poor child ! " Priscilla say , sobbingly . " all alone in a hard 
 world , with her strange little fancy , and no one to take care of she ! 
 oh , Mr. Robin , whatever be we to do ! " 

 " nothing ! " and Robin 's handsome face be pale and set . " we can only 
 wait to hear from she -- she will not keep we long in anxiety -- she have 
 too much heart for that . after all , it be MY fault , Priscilla ! I try 
 to persuade she to marry I against her will -- I should have let she 
 alone . " 

 sudden boyish tear spring to his eye -- he dash they away in 
 self - contempt . 

 " I be a regular coward , you see , " he say . " I could cry like a baby -- not 
 for myself so much , but to think of she run away from Briar Farm 
 out into the wide world all alone ! little Innocent ! she be safe 
 here -- and if she have wish it , _ i _ would have go away -- I would have 
 make she the owner of the farm , and leave she in peace to enjoy it and 
 to marry any other man she fancy . but she would not listen to any plan 
 for her own happiness since she know she be not my uncle 's 
 daughter -- that be what have change she ! I wish she have never know ! " 

 " ay , so do I ! " agree Priscilla , dolefully . " but she be get the 
 fancifull notion ! all about that old stone knight in the 
 garden -- an ' what wi ' the thing he be leave carve all over the wall of 
 the room where she read they queer old book , she be fair ' mazed with 
 idea that do not belong to the way o ' the world at all . I can not think 
 what will become o ' the child . will not there be any mean of findin ' out 
 where she be go ? " 

 " I be afraid not ! " answer Robin , sadly . " we muse trust to her 
 remembrance of we , Priscilla , and her thought of the old home where 
 she be love and care for . " his voice shake . " it will be a dreary 
 place without she ! we shall miss she every minute , every hour of the 
 day ! I can not fancy what the garden will look like without her little 
 white figure flit over the grass , and her sweet fair face smile 
 among the rose ! hang it all , Priscilla , if it be not for the last 
 wish of my Uncle Hugo I would throw the whole thing up and go abroad ! " 

 " do not do that , Mister Robin!"--and Priscilla lay her rough work - wear 
 hand on his arm--"Don't do it ! it be turn your back on duty to give 
 up the work entrust to you by a dead man . you know it be ! an ' the 
 child may come back any day ! I should not wonder if she get frighten 
 at be alone and run home again to - morrow ! think of it , Mister Robin ! 
 suppose she come an ' you be not here ? why , you would never forgive 
 yourself ! I can not think she be go far or that she will stay away long . 
 her heart 's in Briar Farm all the while -- I'd swear to that ! why , only 
 yesterday when a fine lady come to see if she could not buy something 
 out o ' the house , you should just a ' see she toss she pretty little 
 head when she tell I how she have say it be not to be sell . " 

 " Lady ? what lady ? " and Robin look , as he feel , bewilder by 
 Priscilla 's vague statement . " do someone come here to see the house ? " 

 " not exactly -- I do not know what it be all about , " reply Priscilla . 
 " but quite a grand lady call an ' give I her card . I see the name on 
 it--'lady Maude Blythe'--and she ask to see ' Miss Jocelyn ' on 
 business . I ask if it be anything I could do , and she say no . so I 
 call the child in from the garden , and she and the lady have quite a 
 long talk together in the good parlour . then when the lady go away , 
 Innocent tell I that she have wish to buy something from Briar 
 Farm -- but that it be not to be sell . " 

 Robin listen attentively . " curious ! " he murmured--"very curious ! what 
 be the lady 's name ? " 

 " Lady Maude Blythe , " repeat Priscilla , slowly . 

 he take out a note - book and pencil , and write it down . 

 " you do not think she come to engage Innocent for some service ? " he 
 ask . " or that Innocent herself have perhaps write to an agency 
 ask for a place , and that this lady have come to see she in 
 consequence ? " 

 such an idea have never occur to Priscilla 's mind , but now it be 
 suggest to she it seem more than likely . 

 " it might be so , " she answer , slowly . " but I can not bear to think the 
 child be playin ' a part an ' tellin ' me thing that be not true just 
 to get away from we . no ! Mister Robin ! I do not believe that lady have 
 anything to do with she go . " 

 " well , I shall keep the name by I , " he say . " and I shall find out 
 where the lady live , who she be and all about she . for if I do not hear 
 from Innocent , if she do not write to we , I will search the whole world 
 and never rest till I find she ! " 

 Priscilla look at he , pityingly , tear spring again to her eye . 

 " Aye , you have lose the love o ' your heart , my lad ! I know that well 
 enough ! " she say . " an ' it be mighty hard on you ! but you must be a man 
 an ' turn to work as though nowt have happen . there be the farm-- " 

 " yes , there be the farm , " he repeat , absently . " but what do I care for 
 the farm without she ! Priscilla , you will stay with I ? " 

 " stay with you ? surely I will , Mister Robin ! where should an old woman 
 like I go to at this time o ' day ! " and Priscilla take his hand and 
 clasp it affectionately . " do not you fear ! my place be in Briar Farm 
 till the Lord make an end of I ! and if the child come back at any 
 hour of the day or night , she will find old Priscilla ready to welcome 
 her,--ready an ' glad an ' thankful to see she pretty face again . " 

 here , unable to control her sob , she turn away and make a hasty 
 retreat into the kitchen . 

 he do not follow she , but act on the sudden impulse of his mind he 
 enter the house and go up to Innocent 's deserted room . he open 
 the door hesitatingly,--the little study , in its severe simplicity and 
 neatness , look desolate -- like an empty shrine from which the 
 worship figure have be take . he trod softly across the floor , 
 hush his footstep , as though some one sleep whom he fear to wake , 
 and his eye wander from one familiar object to another till they 
 rest on the shelf where the old vellum - bind book , which Innocent 
 have love and study so much , be range in orderly row . take one 
 or two of they out he glance at their title - pages;--he know that most 
 of they be rare and curious , though his Oxford training have not 
 impress he with as great a love of thing literary as it might or 
 should have do . but he realise that these strange black - letter and 
 manuscript volume be of unique value , and that their content , so 
 difficult to decipher , be responsible for the formation of Innocent 's 
 guileless and romantic spirit , colour her outlook on life with a 
 glamour of rainbow brilliancy which , though beautiful , be unreal . one 
 quaint little book he open have for its title--"ye Whole Art of Love , 
 set Forth ye Noble Manner of Noble Knights who woulde serve their 
 Ladies Faithfullie in Death as in Lyfe"--this bore the date of 1590 . he 
 sigh as he put it back in its place . 

 " ah , well , " he say , half aloud , " these book be her , and I will keep 
 they for she -- but I believe they have do she a lot of mischief , and I 
 do not love they ! they have make she see the world as it be not -- and life 
 as it never will be ! and she have get strange fancy into her 
 head -- fancy which she will run after like a child chase pretty 
 butterfly -- and when the butterfly be catch , they die , much to the 
 child 's surprise and sorrow ! my poor little innocent ! she have go out 
 alone into the world , and the world will break her heart ! oh dear 
 little love , come back to I ! " 

 he sit down in her vacant chair and cover his face with his hand , 
 give himself up to the relief of unwitnessed tear . above his head 
 shine the worn glitter of the old armoured device of the " Sieur Amadis " 
 with its motto--"Mon coeur I soutien"--and only a psychist could have 
 think or imagine it possible that the spirit of the old french 
 knight of Tudor time might still be work through cloud of 
 circumstance and weave the web of the future from the torn thread of 
 the past . and when Robin have regain his self - possession and have leave 
 the room , there be yet a Presence in its very emptiness,--the silent 
 assertion of an influence which if it have be give voice and speech 
 might have said--"do what you consider be your own will and intention , 
 but _ i _ be still your Master!--and all your thought and wish be but 
 the reflex of MY desire ! " 

 it be soon know in the village that Innocent have leave briar 
 farm--"run away , " the gossip say , eager to learn more . but they could 
 get no information out of Robin Clifford or Priscilla Priday , and the 
 labourer on the farm know nothing . the farm work be go on as 
 usual -- that be all they care about . Mr. Clifford be very 
 silent -- Miss Priday very busy . however , all anxiety and suspense come 
 to an end very speedily so far as Innocent 's safety be concern , for 
 in a few day letter arrive from she -- both for Robin and 
 Priscilla -- kind , sweetly - express letter full of the tender 
 affection . 

 " do not be at all sorry or worried about I , dear good Priscilla ! " she 
 write . " I know I be do right to be away from Briar Farm for a 
 time -- and I be quite well and happy . I have be very fortunate in 
 find room with a lady who be very kind to I , and as soon as I feel 
 I can do so I will let you know my address . but I do not want anyone 
 from home to come and see I -- not yet!--not for a very long time ! it 
 would only make I sad -- and it would make you sad too ! but be quite 
 sure it will not be long before you see I again . " 

 her letter to Robin be long and full of restrained feeling : 

 " I know you be very unhappy , you kind , love boy , " it run . " you have 
 lose I altogether -- yes , that be true -- but do not mind , it be well 
 so , and you will love some other girl much more than I some day . I 
 should have be a mistake in your life have I stay with you . you will 
 see I again -- and you will then understand why I leave Briar Farm . I 
 could not wrong the memory of the Sieur Amadis , and if I marry you I 
 should be do a wicked thing to bring myself , who be base - bear , into 
 his lineage . surely you do understand how I feel ? I be quite safe -- in a 
 good home , with a lady who take care of I -- and as soon as I can I 
 will let you know exactly where I be -- then if you ever come to London I 
 will see you . but your work be on Briar Farm -- that dear and belove 
 home!--and you will keep up its old tradition and make everybody happy 
 around you . will you not ? yes ! I be sure you will ! you must , if ever 
 you love I . " INNOCENT . " 

 with this letter his last hope die within he . she would never be 
 his -- never , never ! some dim future beckon she in which he have no 
 part -- and he confront the fact as a brave soldier front the gun , 
 with grim endurance , aware , yet not afraid of death . 

 " if ever I love she ! " he think . " if ever I cease to love she then I 
 shall be as stone - cold a man as her fetish of a french knight , the 
 Sieur Amadis ! ah , my little Innocent , in time to come you may 
 understand what love be -- perhaps to your sorrow!--you may need a strong 
 defender -- and I shall be ready ! soon or later -- now or year hence -- if 
 you call I , I shall answer . I would find strength to rise from my 
 death - bed and go to you if you want I ! for I love you , my little 
 love ! I love you , and nothing can change I . only once in a life - time 
 can a man love any woman as I love you ! " 

 and with a deep vow of fidelity swear to his secret soul he sit alone , 
 watch the shadow of evening steal over the landscape -- fall , 
 fall slowly , like a gradually descend curtain upon all visible 
 thing , till Briar Farm stand spectral in the gloom like the ghost of 
 its own depart day , and light twinkle in the lattice window like 
 little eye glitter in the dark . then silently bid farewell to 
 all his former dream of happiness , he set himself to face " the burden 
 and heat of the day"--that long , long day of life so difficult to live , 
 when deprive of love ! 





 BOOK two : his fact 


 BOOK two 

 CHAPTER I 

 in London , the great metropolis of the world , the small affair 
 be often discuss with more keenness than thing of national 
 importance,--and it be by no mean uncommon to find society more 
 interested in the doing of some particular man or woman than in the 
 late and most money - milk scheme of Government finance . in this way 
 it happen that about a year after Innocent have , like a small boat in 
 a storm , break loose from her mooring and drift out to the wide 
 sea , everybody who be anybody become suddenly thrill with curiosity 
 concern the unknown personality of an Author . there be so many 
 author nowadays that it be difficult to get up even a show of interest 
 in one of them,--everybody " writes"--from Miladi in Belgravia , who 
 consider the story of her social experience , express in 
 questionable grammar , quite equal to the fine literature , down to the 
 stable - boy who essay a " prize " shocker for a penny dreadful . but this 
 latest aspirant to literary fame have two magnetic quality which 
 seldom fail to arouse the jade spirit of the read public,--novelty 
 and mystery , unite to that scarce and seldom recognise power call 
 genius . he or she have produce a Book . not an ephemeral piece of 
 fiction,--not a " Wells " effort of imagination under hydraulic 
 pressure -- not an hysterical outburst of sensual desire and 
 disappointment such as move the soul of demimondaine and 
 dressmakers,--not even a " detective " sensation -- but just a Book -- a real 
 Book , likely to live as long as literature itself . it be something in 
 the nature of a marvel , say those who know what they be talk 
 about , that such a book should have be write at all in these modern 
 day . the " style " of it be exquisite and scholarly -- quaint , 
 expressive , and all - sufficing in its artistic simplicity,--thoughts 
 true for all time be present afresh with an admirable point and 
 delicacy that make they seem new and singularly imperative,--and the 
 story which , like a silken thread , hold all the choice jewel of 
 language together in even and brilliant order , be pure and 
 idyllic,--warm with a penetrate romance , yet most sincerely human . 
 when this extraordinary piece of work be publish , it slip from 
 the press in quite a modest way without much preliminary announcement , 
 and for two or three week after its appearance nobody know anything 
 about it . the publisher themselves be evidently in doubt as to its 
 reception , and signify their caution by economy in the way of 
 advertisement -- it be not placard in the newspaper column as " A Book 
 of the Century " or " a New Literary Event . " it simply glide into the 
 crowd of book without noise or the notice of reviewer -- just one of a 
 pushing , scramble , shout multitude,--and quite suddenly find 
 itself the centre of the throng with all eye upon it , and all tongue 
 question the how , when and where of its author . no one could say how 
 it first begin to be thus busily talk about,--the critic have 
 bestow upon it nothing of either their praise or blame,--yet somehow 
 the ball have be set roll , and it gather size and force as it 
 roll , till at last the publisher wake up to the fact that they have , 
 by mere chance , hit upon a " pay concern . " they at once assist in 
 the general chorus of delight and admiration , take wide space in the 
 advertisement column of the press for the " work of genius " which have 
 inadvertently fall into their hand -- but when it come to answer 
 the question put to they respect its writer they have very little to 
 say , be themselves more or less in the dark . 

 " the manuscript be send to we in the usual way , " the head of the firm 
 explain to John Harrington , one of the sound and most influential 
 of journalist , " just on chance,--it be neither introduce nor 
 recommend . one of our reader be immensely take with it and advise 
 we to accept it . the author give no name , and merely request all 
 communication to be make through his secretary , a Miss Armitage , as he 
 wish for the time be to remain anonymous . we draw up an agreement 
 on these line which be sign for the author by Miss Armitage,--she 
 also correct and pass the proofs-- " 

 " perhaps she also write the book , " interrupt Harrington , with an 
 amuse twinkle in his eyes--"i suppose such a solution of the mystery 
 have not occur to you ? " 

 the publisher smile . " under different circumstance it might have do 
 so , " he reply , " but we have see Miss Armitage several time -- she be 
 quite a young girl , not at all of the ' literary ' type , though she be 
 very careful and accurate in her secretarial work -- I mean as regard 
 business letter and attention to detail . but at her age she could not 
 have have the scholarship to produce such a book . the author show a 
 close familiarity with sixteenth - century literature such as could only 
 be gain by a student of the style of that period,--Miss Armitage have 
 nothing of the ' book - worm ' about she -- she be quite a simple young 
 person -- more like a bright school - girl than anything else-- " 

 " where do she live ? " ask Harrington , abruptly . 

 the publisher look up the address and give it . 

 " there it be , " he say ; " if you want to write to the author she will 
 forward any letter to he . " 

 Harrington star at the pencil direction for a moment in silence . 
 he remember it -- of course he remember it!--it be the very address 
 give to the driver of the taxi - cab in which the girl with whom he have 
 travel to London more than a year ago have go , as it seem , out of 
 his sight . every little incident connect with she come freshly back 
 to his mind -- how she have speak of the book she love in " old French " 
 and " Elizabethan English"--and how she have say she know the way to 
 earn her own living . if this be the way -- if she be indeed the author 
 of the book which have stir and waken the drowsing soul of the age , 
 then she have not venture in vain ! 

 Aloud he say : 

 " it seem to be another case of the ' author of Waverley ' and the ' Great 
 Unknown ' ! I suppose you will take anything else you can get by the same 
 hand ? " 

 " rather ! " and the publisher nod emphatically--"we have already 
 secure a second work . " 

 " through Miss Armitage ? " 

 " yes . through Miss Armitage . " 

 Harrington laugh . 

 " I believe you be all blinder than bat ! " he said--"why on earth you 
 should think that because a woman look like a school - girl she can not 
 write a clever book if gift that way , be a condition of 
 non - intelligence I fail to fathom ! you speak of this author as a ' he . ' 
 do you think only a male creature can produce a work of genius ? look at 
 the twaddle man turn out every day in the form of novel alone ! many of 
 they be bad than the bad weak fiction by woman . I tell you I have 
 live long enough to know that a woman 's brain can beat a man 's if she 
 care to test it , so long as she do not fall in love . when once that 
 disaster happen it be all over with she ! it be the one drawback to a 
 woman 's career ; if she would only keep clear of love and self - sacrifice 
 she would do wonder ! man never allow love to interfere with so much as 
 their own smoke -- very few among they would sacrifice a good cigar for 
 a woman ! as for this girl , Miss Armitage , I will pluck out the heart of 
 her mystery for you ! I suppose you will not pay any less for good work if 
 it turn out to be by a ' she ' instead of a ' he ' ? " 

 the publisher be amuse . 

 " certainly not ! " he answer . " we have already pay over a thousand 
 pound in royalty on the present book , and we have agree to give two 
 thousand in advance on the next . the author have express himself as 
 perfectly satisfied-- " 

 " through Miss Armitage ? " put in Harrington . 

 " yes . through Miss Armitage . " 

 " well ! " and Harrington turn to go--"i hope Miss Armitage will also 
 express herself as perfectly satisfied after I have see she ! I shall 
 write and ask permission to call-- " 

 " surely"--and the publisher look distressed--"surely you do not 
 intend to trouble this poor girl by question concern her employer ? 
 it be hardly fair to her!--and of course it be only your way of joking , 
 but your idea that she write the book we be all talk about be simply 
 absurd ! she could not do it ! when you see she , you will understand . " 

 " I daresay I shall ! " and Harrington smiled-"don't you worry ! I be too 
 old a hand to get myself or anybody else into trouble ! but I will wager 
 you anything that your simple school - girl be the author ! " 

 he go back then and there to the office of his big newspaper and 
 write a guard little note as follows:-- 

 " DEAR MISS ARMITAGE , 

 I wonder if you remember a grumpy old fellow who travel with you on 
 your first journey to London rather more than a year ago ? you never 
 tell I your name , but I keep a note of the address you give through I 
 to your taxi - driver , and through that address I have just by chance 
 hear that you and the Miss Armitage who correct the proof of a 
 wonderful book recently publish be one and the same person . may I 
 call and see you ? your sincerely , 

 JOHN HARRINGTON . " 

 he wait impatiently for the answer , but none come for several day . 
 at last he receive a simple and courteous " put off , " thus expressed:-- 

 " DEAR MR . HARRINGTON , 

 I remember you very well -- you be most kind , and I be grateful for 
 your thought of I . but I hope you will not think I rude if I ask you 
 not to call . I be live as a pay guest with an old lady whose 
 health be not very strong and who do not like I to receive visitor , 
 and you can understand that I try not to inconvenience she in any way . 
 I do hope you be well and successful . 

 your sincerely , 

 ENA ARMITAGE . " 

 he fold up the note and put it in his pocket . 

 " that finish I very decisively ! " he say , with a laugh at himself 
 for his own temerity . " who be it say a woman can not keep a secret ? she 
 can , and will , and does!--when it suit she to do so ! never mind , Miss 
 Armitage ! I shall find you out when , you least expect it -- never fear ! " 

 meanwhile Miss Leigh 's little house in Kensington be the scene of 
 mingle confusion and triumph . the " pay guest"--the little 
 unobtrusive girl , with all her wardrobe in a satchel and her legacy of 
 four hundred pound in bank - note tuck into her bosom -- have achieve 
 a success beyond her wild dream , and now have only to declare her 
 identity to become a " celebrity . " Miss Lavinia have be for some day 
 in a state of nervous excitement , know that it be Innocent 's first 
 literary effort which have create such a sensation . by this time she 
 have learn all the girl 's history -- Innocent have tell she everything , 
 save and except the one fact of she parentage,--and this she hold back , 
 not out of shame for herself , but consideration for the memory of the 
 handsome man whose portrait stand on the silent harpsichord . for she in 
 her turn have discover Miss Lavinia 's secret,--how the dear lady 's 
 heart have be devote to Pierce Armitage all her life , and how when 
 she know he have be draw away from she and captivate by another 
 woman her happiness have be strike down and wither like a flowering 
 rise in a hard gale of wind . for this romance , and the disillusion she 
 have suffer , Innocent love she . the two have become fast friend , 
 almost like devoted mother and daughter . Miss Leigh be , as she have 
 state in her " Morning Post " advertisement , well - connect , and she do 
 much for the girl who have by chance bring a new and thrilling 
 interest into her life -- more than Innocent could possibly have do for 
 herself . the history of the child,--as much as she be tell of it,--who 
 have be leave so casually at a country farm on the mere chance of its 
 be keep and take care of , affect she profoundly , and when 
 Innocent confide to she the fact that she have never be baptise , the 
 gentle old lady be move to tear . no time be lose in lift this 
 spiritual ban from the young life concern , and the sacred rite be 
 perform quietly one morning in the church which Miss Leigh have 
 attend for many year , Miss Leigh have herself explain beforehand 
 some of the circumstance to the Vicar , and stand as god - mother to 
 the newly - receive little Christian . and though there have arise some 
 question as to the name by which she should be baptise , Miss Leigh 
 hold tenaciously to the idea that she should retain the name she 
 " unknown " father have give her--"innocent . " 

 " suppose he should not be dead , " she say , " then if he be to meet you 
 some day , that name might waken his memory and lead he to identify 
 you . and I like it -- it be pretty and original -- quite christian , 
 too,--there be several pope name Innocent . " 

 the girl smile . she think of Robin Clifford , and how he have air 
 his knowledge to she on the same subject . 

 " but it be a man 's name , be not it ? " she ask . 

 " not more so than a woman 's , surely ! " declare Miss Leigh . " you can 
 always call yourself ' ena ' for short if you like -- but ' Innocent ' be the 
 pretty name . " 

 and so " innocent " it was,--and by the sprinkling of water and the 
 blessing of the Church the name be finally bestow and sanctify . 
 Innocent herself be peacefully glad of her newly - attain spiritual 
 dignity and call Miss Lavinia her " fairy god - mother . " 

 " do you mind ? " she ask , coaxingly . " it make I so happy to feel that 
 you be one of those kind people in a fairy - tale , bring good fortune 
 and blessing . I be sure you be like that ! " 

 Miss Lavinia protest against the sweet flattery , but all the same she 
 be pleased . she begin to take the girl out with she to the house of 
 various " great " personage -- friend whom she know well and who make an 
 intimate little social circle of their own--"old - fashioned " people 
 certainly , but happily free from the sort of suppress rowdyism which 
 distinguish the " nouveaux rich " of the present day,--people who 
 adhere rigidly to almost obsolete notion of honour and dignity , who 
 live simply and well within their mean , who speak reverently of 
 thing religious and believe in the old adage--"Manners makyth the 
 man . " so by degree , Innocent find herself among a small choice " set " 
 chiefly make up of the fragment of the real " old " aristocracy , to 
 which Miss Leigh herself belonged,--and , with her own quick intuition 
 and inborn natural grace , she soon become a favourite with they all . 
 but no one know the secret of her literary aspiration save Miss Leigh , 
 and when her book be publish anonymously and the reading world begin 
 to talk of it as something unusual and wonderful , she be more 
 terrified than pleased . its success be great than she have ever 
 dream of , and her one idea be to keep up the mystery of its 
 authorship as long as possible , but every day make this more difficult . 
 and when John Harrington write to she , she feel that disclosure be 
 imminent . she have always keep the visit - card he have give she when 
 they have travel to London together , and she know he belong to the 
 staff of a great and lead newspaper,--he be a man not likely to be 
 baffle in any sort of enquiry he might choose to make . she think 
 about this as she sit in her quiet little room , work at the last few 
 chapter of her second book which the publisher be eagerly wait 
 for . what a magical change have be work in her life since she leave 
 Briar Farm more than a year , aye,--nearly eighteen month ago ! for one 
 thing , all fear of financial difficulty be at an end . her first book 
 have bring she more money than she have ever have in her life , and the 
 publisher 's offer for her second outweigh she most ambitious desire . 
 she be independent -- she could earn sufficient , and more than 
 sufficient to keep herself in positive luxury if she chose,--but for 
 this she have no taste . her little room in Miss Leigh 's house satisfy 
 all her idea of rest and comfort , and she stay on with the kind old 
 lady by choice and affection , help she in many way , and submit 
 to her guidance in every little social matter with the charming 
 humility of a docile and obedient spirit all too rare in these day 
 when youth be more full of effrontery than modesty . she have manage she 
 " literary " business so far well and carefully , represent herself as 
 the private secretary of an author who wish to remain anonymous , and 
 who have go abroad , entrust she with his manuscript to " place " with 
 any suitable firm that would make a suitable offer . the ruse would 
 hardly have succeed in the case of any ordinary piece of work , but 
 the book itself be of too exceptional a quality to be pass over , and 
 the firm to which it be first offer recognise this and accept it 
 without parley , astute enough to see its possibility and to risk its 
 chance of success . and now she realise that her little plot might be 
 discover any day , and that she would have to declare herself as the 
 writer of a strange and brilliant book which be the talk of the moment . 

 " I wonder what they will say when they know it at Briar Farm ! " she 
 think , with a smile and a half sigh . 

 Briar Farm seem a long way off in these day . she have write 
 occasionally both to Priscilla and Robin Clifford ; give her address 
 and briefly state that she have take the name of Armitage , feel 
 that she have no right to that of Jocelyn . but Priscilla could not 
 write , and content herself with send her " dear love and duty and 
 do come back soon , " through Robin , who answer for both in letter 
 that be carefully cold and restrain . now that he know where she be 
 he make no attempt to visit her,--he be too grieve and disappoint 
 at her continued absence , and deeply hurt at what he consider she 
 " quixotic " conduct in adopt a different name,--an " alias " as he 
 call it . 

 " you have separate yourself from your old home by your own choice in 
 more way than one , " he write , " and I see I have no right to criticise 
 your action . you be in a strange place and you have take a strange 
 name,--I can not feel that you be Innocent,--the Innocent of our bygone 
 happy year ! it be well I should not go and see you -- not unless you 
 send for I , when , of course , I will come . " 

 she be both glad and sorry for this,--she would have like to see he 
 again , and yet!--well!--she know instinctively that if they meet , it 
 would only cause he fresh unhappiness . her new life have bestow new 
 grace on her personality -- all the interior intellectual phase of she 
 mind have develop in she a beauty of face and form which be rare , 
 subtle and elusive , and though she be not conscious of it herself , she 
 have that compelling attraction about she which few can resist,--a 
 fascination far great than mere physical perfection . no one could 
 have call she actually beautiful,--hardly could it have be say she 
 be even " pretty"--but in her slight figure and intelligent face with 
 its large blue - grey eye half veil under dreamy , droop lid and 
 long lash , there be a magnetic charm which be both sweet and 
 powerful . moreover , she dress well,--in quiet taste , with a careful 
 avoidance of anything foolish or eccentric in fashion , and wherever she 
 go she make her effect as a graceful young presence expressive of 
 repose and harmony . she speak delightfully,--in a delicious voice , 
 attuned to the most melodious inflection , and her constant study of 
 the fine literature of the past give she certain way of express 
 herself in a manner so far remove from the abrupt slanginess commonly 
 use to - day by young people of both sex that she be call " quaint " 
 by some and " weird " by other of her own sex , though by man young and 
 old she be declare " charming . " guard and chaperon by good old 
 Miss Lavinia Leigh , she have no cause to be otherwise than satisfied 
 with she apparently reckless and unguided plunge into the mighty vortex 
 of London,--some beneficent spirit have lead she into a haven of safety 
 and bring she straight to the goal of her ambition without difficulty . 

 " of course I owe it all to Dad , " she think . " if it have not be for 
 the four hundred pound he leave I to ' buy prettie ' with I could not 
 have do anything . I have buy my ' pretties'!--not bridal one -- but 
 thing so much well ! " 

 as the memory of her " Dad " come over she , tear spring to her eye . in 
 her mind she see the smooth green pasture round Briar Farm -- the 
 beautiful old gable house,--the solemn tree wave their branch in 
 the wind over the tomb of the " Sieur Amadis,"--the dove wheel round 
 and round in the clear air , and her own " Cupid " fall like a 
 snowflake from the roof to her caress hand . all the old life of 
 country sight and sound pass before she like a fair mirage , give 
 place to dark day of sorrow , disillusion and loss,--the fleeting 
 glimpse of her self - confess " mother , " Lady Maude Blythe,--and the 
 knowledge she have so unexpectedly gain as to the actual identity of 
 her father -- he , whose portrait be in the very house to which she have 
 come through no more romantic mean than a chance advertisement in the 
 " Morning Post ! " and Miss Lavinia -- her " fairy godmother"--could she have 
 find a well friend , even in any elf step out of a magic pumpkin ? 

 " if she ever know the truth -- if I be ever able to tell she that I be 
 his daughter , " she say to herself , " I wonder if she will care for I 
 less or more ? but I must not tell her!--She say he be so good and 
 noble ! it would break her heart to think he have do anything wrong -- or 
 that he have desert his child . " 

 and so she hold her peace on this point , though she be often tempt 
 to break silence whenever Miss Leigh revert to the story of her be 
 leave in such a casual , yet romantic way at Briar Farm . 

 " I wonder who the handsome man be , my dear ? " she would query--"perhaps 
 he will go back to the place and enquire for you . he may be some very 
 great personage ! " 

 and Innocent would smile and shake her head . 

 " I fear not , my godmother ! " she would reply . " you must not have any 
 fairy dream about I ! I be just a deserted baby -- not want in the 
 world -- but the world may have to take I all the same ! " 

 and her eye would flash , and her sensitive mouth would quiver as the 
 vision of fame like a mystical rainbow circle the heaven of her 
 youthful imagination -- while Miss Leigh would sigh , and listen and 
 wonder,--she , whose simple hope and faith have be centre in a love 
 which have prove false and vain,--praye that the girl might realise 
 her ambition without the wreckage and disillusion of her life . 

 one evening -- an evening destine to mark a turning - point in Innocent 's 
 destiny -- they go together to an " at home " hold at a beautiful studio 
 in the house of an artist deservedly famous . Miss Leigh have a great 
 taste for picture , no doubt foster since the early day of her 
 romantic attachment to a man who have paint them,--and she know most 
 of the artist whose name be more or less celebrate in the modern 
 world . her host on this special occasion be what be call a 
 " fashionable " portrait painter,--from the Queen downwards he have 
 paint the " counterfeit presentment " of lady of wealth and title , 
 flatter they as delicately as his really clever brush would allow , 
 and thereby secure golden opinion as well as golden guineas . he be 
 a genial , breezy sort of man,--quite without vanity or any sort of 
 " art " ostentation , and he have be a friend of Miss Leigh 's for many 
 year . Innocent love go to his studio whenever her " godmother " 
 would take she , and he , in his turn , find interest and amusement in 
 talk to a girl who show such a fresh , simple and unworldly nature , 
 unite to intelligence and perception far beyond her year . on the 
 particular evening in question the studio be full of notable 
 people,--not uncomfortably crowd , but sufficiently so as to compose a 
 brilliant effect of colour and movement -- beautiful woman in wonderful 
 attire flutter to and fro like gaily - plumage bird among the 
 conventionally dark - clothe man who stand about in that aimless fashion 
 they so often affect when disinclined to talk or to make themselves 
 agreeable,--and there be a pleasantly subdue murmur of 
 voices,--culture voice , well - attune , and incapable of break into 
 the sheep - like snigger or asinine bray . innocent , keep close beside 
 her " god - mother , " watch the animate scene with happy interest , 
 unconscious that many of those present watch she in turn with a good 
 deal of scarcely restrain curiosity . for , somehow or other , rumour 
 have whisper a fly word or two that it be possible she -- even 
 she -- that young , childlike - look creature -- might be , and probably be 
 the actual author of the clever book everybody be talk about , and 
 though no one have the hardihood to ask her point - blank if the report 
 be true , people glance at she inquisitively and murmur their 
 " aside " of suggestion or incredulity , find it difficult to believe 
 that a woman could at any time or by any mean , alone and unaided , 
 snatch one flower from the coronal of fame . she look very fair and 
 sweet and non - literary , clothe in a simple white gown make of some softly 
 cling diaphanous material , wholly unadorned save by a small posy of 
 natural rose at her bosom,--and as she stand a little apart from the 
 throng , several artist notice the grace of her personality -- one 
 especially , a rather handsome man of middle age , who gaze at she 
 observantly and critically with a frank openness which , though bold , 
 be scarcely rude . she catch the straight light of his keen blue 
 eye -- and a thrill run through her whole being , as though she have be 
 suddenly influence by a magnetic current -- then she flush deeply as 
 she fancy she see he smile . for the first time in her life she find 
 pleasure in the fact that a man have look at she with plainly evince 
 admiration in his fleeting glance,--and she watch he talk to 
 several people who all seem delighted and flatter by his 
 notice -- then he disappear . later on in the evening she ask her host 
 who he be . the famous r.a. consider for a moment . 

 " do you mean a man with rough dark hair and a youngish face?--rather 
 good - look in an eccentric sort of way ? " 

 Innocent nod eagerly . 

 " yes ! and he have blue eye . " 

 " have he , really ! " and the great artist smile . " well , I be sure he would 
 be flatter at your close observation of he ! I think I know 
 him,--that be , I know he as much as he will let anybody know he -- he 
 be a curious fellow , but a magnificent painter -- a real genius ! he be 
 half french by descent , and his name be Jocelyn,--Amadis de Jocelyn . " 

 for a moment the room go round in a giddy whirl of colour before she 
 eyes,--she could not credit her own hearing . Amadis de Jocelyn!--the 
 name of her old stone Knight of France , on his tomb at Briar Farm , with 
 his motto--"Mon coeur I soutien ! " 

 " Amadis de Jocelyn ! " she repeat , falteringly ... " be you sure ? ... I 
 mean ... be that his name really ? ... it be so unusual ... so curious ... " 

 " yes -- it be curious"--agreed she host--"but it be quite a good old 
 french name , belong to a good old french family . the Jocelyns bore 
 arm for the Duc d'Anjou in the reign of Queen Elizabeth -- and this man 
 be a sort of last descendant , very proud of his ancestry . I will bring 
 he along and introduce he to you if you will allow I . " 

 Innocent murmur something -- she scarcely know what,--and in a few 
 minute find herself give the conventional bow in response to the 
 formal words--"Miss Armitage , Mr. de Jocelyn"--and look straight up 
 at the blue eye that a short while since have flash an almost 
 compelling glance into her own . a strange sense of familiarity and 
 recognition move she ; something of the expression of her " Dad " be in 
 the face of this other Jocelyn of whom she know nothing,--and her heart 
 beat so quickly that she could scarcely speak in answer when he 
 address she , as he do in a somewhat abrupt manner . 

 " be you an art student ? " 

 she smile a little . 

 " oh no ! I be -- nothing ! ... I love picture of course-- " 

 " there be no ' of course ' in it , " he say , a humorous curve lift the 
 corner of his moustache--"you're not bind to love picture at all ! 
 Most people hate they , and scarcely anybody understand they ! " 

 she listen , charm by the mellow and deep vibration of his voice . 

 " everybody come to see our friend here , " he continue , with a slight 
 gesture of his hand towards their host , who have move away,--"because 
 he be the fashion . if he be not the fashion he might paint like 
 Velasquez or Titian and no one would care a button ! " 

 he seem entertain by his own talk , and she do not interrupt he . 

 " you look like a stranger here , " he go on , in milder accents--"a sort 
 of elf who have lose her way out of fairyland ! be anyone with you ? " 

 " yes , " she answer , quickly--"Miss leigh-- " 

 " Miss Leigh ? who be she ? your aunt or your chaperone ? " 

 she be more at her ease now , and laugh at his quick , brusque manner 
 of speech . 

 " Miss Leigh be my godmother , " she said--"i call she my fairy godmother 
 because she be always so good and kind . there she be , stand by that 
 big easel . " 

 he look in the direction indicate . 

 " oh yes!--I see ! a charming old lady ! I love old lady when they do not 
 pretend to be young . that white hair of hers be very picturesque ! so 
 she be your godmother!--and she take care of you ! well ! she might do 
 bad ! " 

 he ruffle his thick crop of hair and look at she more or less 
 quizzically . 

 " you have an air of suppress enquiry , " he said--"there be something 
 on your mind ! you want to ask I a question -- what be it ? " 

 a soft colour fly over her cheek -- she be confused to find he 
 read her thought . 

 " it be really nothing ! " she answer , quickly--"i be only wonder a 
 little about your name -- because it be one I have know all my life . " 

 his eyebrow go up in surprise . 

 " indeed ? this be very interesting ! I think I be the only wearer of 
 such a very medieval appellation ! be there another so endow ? " 

 " there be another -- long , long ago"--and , unconsciously to herself her 
 delicate feature soften into a dreamy and rapt expression as she 
 spoke,--while her voice fall into its sweetest and most persuasive 
 tone . " he be a noble knight of France , and he come over to England 
 with the Due d ' Anjou when the great Elizabeth be queen . he fall in 
 love with a very beautiful Court lady , who would not care for he at 
 all,--so , as he be unhappy and break - hearted , he go away from 
 London and hide himself from everybody in the far country . there he 
 buy an old manor - house and call it Briar Farm -- and he marry a 
 farmer 's daughter and settle in England for good -- and he have six son 
 and daughter . and when he die he be bury on his own land -- and his 
 effigy be on his tomb -- it be sculpture by himself . I use to put 
 flower on it , just where his motto be carved--'Mon coeur I soutien . ' 
 for I -- I be bring up at Briar Farm ... and I be quite fond of the 
 Sieur Amadis ! " 

 she look up with a serious , sweet luminance in her eye -- and he be 
 suddenly thrill by her glance , and move by a desire to turn her 
 romantic idyll into something of reality . this feeling be merely the 
 physical one of an amorously minded man,--he knew , or think he know , 
 woman well enough to hold they at no high estimate than that of 
 sex - attraction,--yet , with all the cynicism he have attain through 
 long experience of the world and its way , he recognise a charm in 
 this fair little creature that be strange and new and singularly 
 fascinating , while the exquisite modulation of her voice as she tell 
 the story of the old french knight , so simply yet so eloquently , give 
 her word the tenderness of a soft song well sung . 

 " a pity you should waste fondness on a man of stone ! " he say , lightly , 
 bend his keen steel - blue eye on her . " but what you tell I be most 
 curious , for your ' Sieur Amadis ' must be the miss branch of my own 
 ancestral tree . may I explain?--or will it bore you ? " 

 she give he a swift , eager glance . 

 " bore I ? " she echoed--"how could it ? oh , do please let I know 
 everything -- quickly ! " 

 he smile at her enthusiasm . 

 " we will sit down here out of the crowd , " he said,--and , take her arm 
 gently , he guide she to a retired corner of the studio which be 
 curtain off to make a cosy and softly cushion recess . " you have 
 tell I half a romance ! perhaps I can supply the other half . " he 
 pause , look at she , whimsically pleased to see the warm young blood 
 flush her cheek as he speak , and her eye droop under his 
 penetrating gaze . " long , long ago -- as you put it -- in the day of good 
 Queen Bess , there live a certain Hugo de Jocelin , a nobleman of 
 France , fame for fierce deed of arm , and for make himself 
 generally disagreeable to his neighbour with whom he be for ever at 
 cross - purpose . this contentious personage have two sons,--jeffrey and 
 amadis,--also knight - at - arm , inherit the somewhat excitable nature 
 of their father ; and the young of these , Amadis , whose name I bear , 
 be select by the Duc d'Anjou to accompany he with his train of 
 noble and gentle , when that ' petit grenouille ' as he call himself , 
 go to England to seek Queen Elizabeth 's hand in marriage . the Duke 
 fail in his ambitious quest , as we all know , and many of his 
 attendant get scatter and dispersed,--among they Amadis , who be 
 entirely lose sight of , and never return again to the home of his 
 father . he be therefore suppose to be dead-- " 

 " MY Amadis ! " murmur Innocent , her eye shin like star as she 
 listen . 

 " your amadis!--ye ! " and his voice soften . " of course he must have 
 be your amadis!--your ' Knight of old and warrior bold ! ' well ! none of 
 his own people ever hear of he again -- and in the family tree he be 
 mark as miss . but Jeffrey stay at home in France,--and in due 
 course inherit his father 's grim old castle and land . he marry , 
 and have a large family,--much large than the six olive - branch 
 allot to your friend of Briar Farm,"--and he smile . " he , Jeffrey , 
 be my ancestor , and I can trace myself back to he in direct lineage , 
 so you see I have quite the right to my curious name ! " 

 she clasp and unclasp her little hand nervously -- she be shy of 
 raise her eye to his face . 

 " it be wonderful ! " she murmured--"i can hardly believe it possible that 
 I should meet here in London a real Jocelyn!--one of the family of the 
 Sieur Amadis ! " 

 " do it seem strange ? " he laugh . " oh no ! nothing be strange in this 
 queer little world ! but I do not quite know what the exact connection be 
 between I and your knight -- it be too difficult for I to grasp ! I 
 suppose I be a sort of great - great - great - grand - nephew ! however , nothing 
 can alter the fact that I be also an Amadis de Jocelyn ! " 

 she glance up at he quickly . 

 " you be , indeed ! " she say . " it be you who ought to be the master of 
 Briar Farm ! " 

 " ought I ? " he be amuse at her earnestness . " why ? " 

 " because there be no direct heir now to the Sieur Amadis ! " she 
 answer , almost sadly . " his last descendant be dead . his name be 
 Hugo -- Hugo Jocelyn -- and he be a farmer , and he leave all he have to his 
 nephew , the only child of his sister who die before he . the nephew be 
 very good , and clever , too,--he be educate at Oxford,--but he be not 
 an actually lineal descendant . " 

 he laugh again , this time quite heartily , at the serious expression 
 of her face . 

 " that be very terrible ! " he say . " I do not know when I have hear anything 
 so lamentable ! and I be afraid I can not put matter right ! I should never 
 do for a farmer -- I'm a painter . I have well go down and see this 
 famous old place , and the tomb of my ever so great - great - grand - uncle ! I 
 could make a picture of it -- I ought to do that , as it belong to the 
 family of my ancestor . will you take I ? " 

 she give he a little fleeting , reluctant smile . 

 " you be make fun of it all , " she say . " that be not wise of you ! you 
 should not laugh at grave and noble thing . " 

 he be charm with her quaintness . 

 " be he grave and noble?--amadi , I mean ? " he ask , his blue eye 
 sparkle with a kind of mirthful ardour . " you be sure ? well , all 
 honour to he ! and to you -- for believe in he ! I hope you will consider 
 I kindly for his sake ! will you ? " 

 a quick blush suffuse her cheek . 

 " of course!--i must do so ! " she answer , simply . " I owe he so much-- " 
 then , fearful of betray her secret of literary authorship , she 
 hesitated--"I mean -- he teach I all I know . I study all his old 
 book .... " 

 just then their cheery host come up . 

 " well ! have you make friend ? Ah!--I see you have ! mutual intelligence , 
 mutual comprehension ! Jocelyn , will you bring Miss Innocent in to 
 supper?--i leave she in your charge . " 

 " Miss Innocent ? " repeat Jocelyn , doubtful as to whether this be say 
 by way of a joke or not . 

 " yes -- some people call she Ena -- but her real name be innocent . be not 
 it , little lady ? " 

 she smile and colour . Jocelyn look at she with a curious 
 intentness . 

 " really ? your name be innocent ? " he ask . 

 " yes , " she answer him--"I'm afraid it be a very unusual name-- " 

 " it be indeed ! " he say with emphasis . " innocent by name and by nature ! 
 will you come ? " 

 she rise at once , and they move away together . 




 CHAPTER II 

 Chance and coincidence play curious prank with human affair , and one 
 of the most obvious fact of daily experience be that the merest 
 trifle , occur in the most haphazard way , will often suffice to 
 change the whole intention and career of a life for good or for evil . 
 it be as though a musician in the composition of a symphony should 
 suddenly bethink himself of a new and strange melody , and , please his 
 fancy with the innovation , should wilfully introduce it at the last 
 moment , thereby create more or less of a surprise for the audience . 
 something of this kind happen to Innocent after her meeting with the 
 painter who bear the name of her long idealise knight of France , 
 Amadis de Jocelin . she soon learn that he be a somewhat famous 
 personage,--famous for his genius , his scorn of accepted rule , and his 
 contempt for all " puffery , " push and patronage , as well as for his 
 brusquerie in society and carelessness of convention . she also hear 
 that his work have be reject twice by the Royal Academy Council , a 
 reason he deem all - sufficient for never appeal to that exclusive 
 school of favouritism again,--while everything he choose to send be 
 eagerly accept by the French Salon , and purchase as soon as 
 exhibit . his name have begin to stand very high -- and his original 
 character and personality make he somewhat of a curiosity among 
 man -- one more fear than favour . he take a certain pleasure in 
 analyse his own disposition for the benefit of any of his 
 acquaintance who choose to listen,--and the harsh judgment he pass on 
 himself be not altogether without justice or truth . 

 " I be an essentially selfish man , " he would say--"i have meet 
 selfishness everywhere among my fellow man and woman , and have imbibe 
 it as a sponge imbibe water . I have have a fairly hard time , and I have 
 experience the rough side of human nature , get more kick than 
 halfpence . now that the kick have cease I be in no mood for soft soap . 
 I know the humbug of so - call ' friendship'--the rarity of 
 sincerity -- and as for love!--there 's no such thing permanently in man , 
 woman or child . what be call ' love ' be merely a comfortable 
 consciousness that one particular person be agreeable and useful to you 
 for a time -- but it be only for a time -- and marriage which seek to bind 
 two people together till death be the heavy curse ever impose on 
 manhood or womanhood ! devotion and self - sacrifice be merest folly -- the 
 people you sacrifice yourself for be never worth it , and devotion be 
 generally , if not always , misplace . the only thing to do in this life 
 be to look after yourself,--serve yourself -- please yourself ! no one 
 will do anything for you unless they can get something out of it for 
 their own advantage,--you're bind to follow the general example ! " 

 notwithstanding this candid confession of cynical egotism , the man have 
 greatness in he , and those who know his work readily recognise his 
 power . the impression he have make on Innocent 's guileless and romantic 
 nature be beyond analysis,--she do not try to understand it herself . 
 his name and the connection he have with the old french knight of her 
 childhood 's dream and fancy have move and rouse she to a new 
 interest in life -- and just as she have hitherto be unwilling to betray 
 the secret of her literary authorship , she be now eager to have it 
 declare -- for one reason only,--that he might perhaps think well of 
 she . whereby it will be see that the poor child , endow with a 
 singular genius as she be , know nothing of man and their never - fail 
 contempt for the achievement of gifted woman . delicate of taste and 
 sensitive in temperament she be the very last sort of creature to 
 realise the ugly truth that man , take en masse , consider woman in one 
 only way -- that of sex,--as the low half of man , necessary to man 's 
 continuance , but always the mere vessel of his pleasure . to she , Amadis 
 de Jocelyn be the wonderful realisation of an ideal,--but she be very 
 silent concern him,--reserved and almost cold . this rather 
 surprised good Miss Lavinia Leigh , whose romantic tendency have be 
 greatly stir by the story of the knight of Briar Farm and the 
 discovery of a descendant of the same family in one of the most admired 
 artist of the day . they visit Jocelyn 's studio together -- a vast , 
 bare place , wholly unadorned by the tawdry paraphernalia which be 
 sometimes affect by third - rate man to create an " art " impression on 
 the mind of the uninstructed -- and they have stand lose in wonder and 
 admiration before a great picture he be paint on commission , 
 entitle " Wild Weather . " it be what be call by dealer an " important 
 work , " and represent night close in over a sea lash into fury by 
 the sweep of a stormy wind . so faithfully be the scene of terror and 
 elemental confusion render that it be like nature itself , and the 
 imaginative eye almost look for the rise wave to tumble liquidly 
 from the paint canvas and break on the floor in stretch of creamy 
 foam . gentle Miss Leigh be conscious of a sudden beating of the heart 
 as she look at this masterpiece of form and colour,--it remind she 
 of the work of Pierce Armitage . she venture to say so , with a little 
 hesitation , and Jocelyn catch at the name . 

 " armitage?--yes -- he be begin to be rather famous some 
 five - and - twenty year ago -- I wonder what become of he ? he promise 
 great thing . by the way"--and he turn to Innocent--"YOUR name be 
 Armitage ! any relation to he ? " 

 the colour rush to her cheek and flee again , leave she very pale . 

 " no , " she answer . 

 he look at she inquisitively . 

 " well , Armitage be not as outlandish a name as Amadis de Jocelyn , " he 
 said--"you will hardly find two of me!--and I expect I shall hardly 
 find two of you ! " and he smiled--"especially if what I have hear be 
 anything more than rumour ! " 

 her eye fill with an eager light . 

 " what do you mean ? " 

 he laughed,--yet in himself be conscious of a certain embarrassment . 

 " well!--that a certain ' innocent ' young lady be a great author ! " he 
 said--"there ! you have it ! I be loth to believe it , and hope the report 
 be not true , for I be afraid of clever woman ! indeed I avoid they 
 whenever I can ! " 

 a sudden sense of hopelessness and loss fall over she like a cloud -- her 
 lip quiver . 

 " why should you do so ? " she asked--"we do not avoid clever man ! " 

 he smile . 

 " ah ! that be different ! " 

 she be silent . Miss Leigh look a little distressed . 

 he go on lightly . 

 " my dear Miss Armitage , do not be angry with I ! " he said--"you be so 
 delightfully ignorant of the way of our sex , and I for one heartily 
 wish you might always remain so ! but we man be proverbially 
 selfish - and we like to consider cleverness , or ' genius ' if you will , as 
 our own exclusive property . we hate the feminine poacher on our 
 particular preserve ! we consider that woman be make to charm and to 
 amuse we -- not to equal we . do you see ? when a woman be clever -- perhaps 
 cleverer than we be -- she cease to be amusing -- and we must be amuse ! 
 we can not have our fun spoil by the blue - stocking element,--though 
 you -- you do not look in the least ' blue ' ! " 

 she turn from he in a mute vexation . she think his talk trifling 
 and unmanly . Miss Leigh come to the rescue . 

 " no -- Innocent be certainly not ' blue , ' " she say , sweetly--"if by that 
 term you mean ' advanced ' or in any way unwomanly . but she have be 
 singularly gifted by nature -- yes , dear child , I must be allow to 
 speak!"--this , as Innocent make an appealing gesture,--"and if people 
 say she be the author of the book that be just now be so much talk 
 of , they be only say the truth . the secret can not be keep much 
 long . " 

 he hear -- then go quickly up to the girl where she stand in a 
 somewhat dejected attitude near his easel . 

 " then it be true ! " he said--"i hear it yesterday from an old 
 journalist friend of mine , John Harrington -- but I could not quite 
 believe it . let I congratulate you on your brilliant success-- " 

 " you do not care ! " she say , almost in a whisper . 

 " oh , do I not ? " he be amuse , and take her hand kiss it lightly . 
 " if all literary woman be like you-- " 

 he leave the sentence unfinishe , but his eye convey a wordless 
 language which make her heart beat foolishly and her nerve thrill . she 
 forget the easy mockery which have distinguish his manner since when 
 speak of the " blue - stocking element"-and once more " Amadis de 
 Jocelyn " sit firmly on her throne of the ideal ! 

 that very afternoon , on her return from Jocelyn 's studio to Miss 
 Leigh 's little house in Kensington which she now call she " home"--she 
 find a reply - pay telegram from her publisher , run thus : 

 " eminent journalist John Harrington review book favourably in evening 
 paper suggest that you be the actual author . may we deny or 
 confirm ? " 

 she think for some minute before decide -- and go to Miss Leigh 
 with the telegram in her hand . 

 " godmother mine ! " she say , kneel down beside her--"Tell I , what 
 shall I do ? be it any use continue to wear the veil of mystery ? shall 
 I take up my burden and bear it like a man ? " 

 Miss Lavinia smile , and draw the girl 's fair head to her bosom . 

 " poor little one ! " she say , tenderly--"i know just what you feel about 
 it ! you would rather remain quietly in your own dreamland than face the 
 criticism of the world , or be point out as a ' celebrity'--ye , I 
 quite understand ! but I think you must , in justice to yourself and 
 other , ' take up the burden'--as you put it -- yes , child ! you must wear 
 your laurel , though for you I should prefer the rose ! " 

 Innocent shiver , as with sudden cold . 

 " a rose have thorn ! " she say , as she get up from her kneeling attitude 
 and move away--"It 's beautiful to look at -- but it soon fade ! " 

 she send off her reply wire to the publisher without further delay . 

 " statement quite true . you can confirm it publicly . " 

 and so the news be soon all over London , and for that matter all over 
 the world . from one end of the globe to the other the fact be make 
 know that a girl in her twentieth year have produce a literary 
 masterpiece , admirable both in design and execution , worthy to rank 
 with the high work of the most brilliant and renowned author . she 
 be speedily overwhelm by letter of admiration , and invitation from 
 every possible quarter where " lion - hunting " be practise as a stimulant 
 to jade and over - wrought society , but amid all the attraction and 
 gaiety offer to she she hold fast by her sheet - anchor of safety , 
 Miss Leigh , who redouble her love care and vigilance , keep she as 
 much as she could in the harbour of that small and exclusive " set " of 
 well - breed and finely - educate people for whom noise and fuss and show 
 mean all that be bad in taste and manner . and remain more or 
 less in seclusion , despite the grow hubbub around her name , she 
 finish her second book , and take it herself to the great publishing 
 house which be rapidly coin good hard cash out of the delicate 
 dream of her woman 's brain . the head of the firm receive she with 
 eager and respectful cordiality . 

 " you keep your secret very well ! " he said--"i assure you I have no idea 
 you could be the author of such a book!--you be so young-- " 

 she smile , a little sadly . 

 " one may be young in year and old in thought , " she answered--"i pass 
 all my childhood in read and study -- I have no playmate and no 
 game -- and I be nearly always alone . I have only old book to 
 read -- mostly of the sixteenth century -- I suppose I form a ' style ' 
 unconsciously on these . " 

 " it be a very beautiful and expressive style , " say the publisher--"i 
 tell Mr. Harrington , when he first suggest that you might be the 
 author , that it be altogether too scholarly for a girl . " 

 she give a slight deprecatory gesture . 

 " pray do not let we discuss it , " she said--"i be not at all pleased to 
 be know as the author . " 

 " no ? " and he look surprised--"surely you must be happy to become so 
 suddenly famous ? " 

 " be famous person happy ? " she asked--"i do not think they be ! to be 
 star at and whisper about and criticise -- that be not happiness ! and 
 man never like you ! " 

 the publisher laugh . 

 " you can do without their liking , Miss Armitage , " he said--"you've 
 beat all the literary fellow on their own ground ! you ought to be 
 satisfied . we be very proud ! " 

 " thank you ! " she say , simply , as she rise to go--"i be grateful for 
 your good opinion . " 

 when she have leave he , the publisher eagerly turn over the page of 
 her new manuscript . at a glance he see that there be no 
 " fall - off"--he recognise the same lucidity of expression , the same 
 point and delicacy of phraseology which have distinguish her first 
 effort , and the wonderful charm with which a thought be press firmly 
 yet tenderly home to its mark . 

 " it will be a great triumph for she and for we than the previous 
 book ! " he said--"She be a wonder!--and the most wonderful thing about 
 she be that she have no conceit , and be unconscious of her own power ! " 

 two or three day after the announcement of her authorship , come a 
 letter from Robin Clifford . 

 " DEAR INNOCENT , " it run , " I see that your name , or rather the name you 
 have take for yourself , be make famous as that of the author of a book 
 which be create a great sensation -- and I venture to write a word of 
 congratulation , hop it may be acceptable to you from your playmate 
 and friend of bygone day . I can hardly believe that the dear little 
 ' Innocent ' of Briar Farm have become such a celebrated and 
 much - talk - of personage , for after all it be not yet two year since 
 you leave we . I have tell Priscilla , and she send her love and duty , 
 and hop God will allow she to see you once again before she die . the 
 work of the farm go on as usual , and everything prosper -- all be as 
 Uncle Hugo would have wish -- all except one thing which I know will 
 never be ! but you must not think I grumble at my fate . I might feel 
 lonely if I have not plenty of work to do and people dependent on 
 I -- but under such circumstance I manage to live a life that be at 
 least useful to other and I want for nothing . in the evening when the 
 darkness close in , and we light the tall candle in the old pewter 
 sconce , I often wish I could see a little fair head shin like a 
 cameo against the dark oak panelling -- a vision of grace and hope and 
 comfort!--but as this can not be , I read old book -- even some of those 
 belong to your favourite french Knight Amadis!--and try to add to 
 the little learning I gain at Oxford . I be send for your 
 book!--when it come I shall read every word of it with an interest too 
 deep to be express to you in my poor language . ' Cupid ' be well -- he 
 fly to my hand , surprised , I think , to find it of so rough a texture 
 as compare with the little rose - velvet palm to which he be 
 accustom . will you ever come to Briar Farm again ? God bless you ! 
 ROBIN . " 

 she shed some tear over this letter -- then , move by a sudden impulse , 
 sit down and answer it at once , give a full account of her meeting 
 and acquaintance with another Amadis de Jocelyn--"the real last 
 descendant , " she write , " of the real old family of the very Amadis of 
 Briar Farm ! " she describe his appearance and manners,--descante on 
 his genius as a painter , and all unconsciously pour out her ardent , 
 enthusiastic soul on this wonderful discovery of the Real in the Ideal . 
 she say nothing of her own work or success , save that she be glad to 
 be able to earn her living . and when Robin read the simple outflow of 
 her thought his heart grow cold within he . he , with the keen instinct 
 of a lover , guess at once all that might happen,--saw the hidden fire 
 smouldering , and become conscious of an inexplicable dread , as though a 
 note of alarm have sound mystically in his brain . what would happen to 
 Innocent , if she , with her romantic , old - world fancy , should allow a 
 possible traitor to intrude within the crystal - pure sphere where her 
 sweet soul dwelt unsullied and serene ? he tell Priscilla the strange 
 story -- and she in her shrewd , motherly way feel something of the same 
 fear . 

 " eh , the poor lamb ! " she sighed--"that old french knight be ever a fly 
 in her brain and a stumble - block in the way of we all!--and now to 
 come across a man o ' the same name an ' family , turn up all 
 unexpected like,--why , it be like a ghost 's sudden risin ' from the tomb ! 
 An ' what do it mean , Mister Robin ? be you the master o ' Briar Farm 
 now?--or be he the rightful one ? " 

 Clifford laugh , a trifle bitterly . 

 " I be the master , " he say , " accord to my uncle 's will . this man be 
 a painter -- famous and admired,--he'll scarcely go in for farming ! if he 
 do -- if he would buy the farm from I -- I should be glad enough to sell it 
 and leave the country . " 

 " Mister Robin ! " cry Priscilla , reproachfully . 

 he pat her hand gently . 

 " not yet -- not yet anyhow , Priscilla ! " he said--"i may be yet of some 
 use -- to Innocent . " he pause , then add , slowly--"i think we shall 
 hear more of this second Amadis de Jocelyn ! " 

 but month go on , and he hear nothing , save of Innocent 's grow 
 fame which , by leap and bound , be spread abroad like fire blow 
 into brightness by the wind . he get her first book and read it with 
 astonishment and admiration , utterly confound by its brilliancy and 
 power . when her second work appear with her adopt name append to 
 it as the author , all the read world " rush " at it , and equally 
 " rush " at she , lift she , as it be , on their shoulder and 
 bear she aloft , against her own desire , above the seething tide of 
 fashion and frivolity as though she be a queen of many kingdom , 
 crown with victory . and again the old journalist , John Harrington , 
 seek an audience of she , and this time be not refuse . she receive 
 he in Miss Leigh 's little drawing - room , hold out both her hand to 
 he in cordial welcome , with a smile frank and sincere enough to show 
 he at a glance that her " celebrity " have leave she unscathed . she be 
 still the same simple child - like soul , wear the mystical halo of 
 spiritual dream rather than the brazen baldric of material 
 prosperity -- and he , bitterly seasoned in the hard way of humanity , 
 feel a thrill of compassion as he look at she , wonder how her 
 frail argosy , freight with fine thought and rich imagination , would 
 weather a storm should storm arise . he sit talk for a long time 
 with she and Miss Leigh -- remind she pleasantly of their journey up 
 to London together,--while she , in her turn , amuse and astonish he 
 by avow the fact that it be his loan of the " Morning Post " that have 
 lead she , through an advertisement , to the house where she be now 
 live . 

 " so I have have something of a hand in it all ! " he say , cheerily--"I'm 
 glad of that ! it be chance or luck , or whatever you call it!--but I 
 never think that the little girl with the frightened eye , carry a 
 satchel for all her luggage , be a future great author , to whom I , as a 
 poor old journalist , would have to bow ! " he laugh kindly as he 
 spoke--"and you be still a little girl!--or you look one ! I feel 
 disposed to play literary grandfather to you ! but you want nobody 's 
 help -- you have make yourself ! " 

 " she have , indeed ! " say Miss Leigh , with pride sparkle in her tender 
 eyes--"When she come here , and suddenly decide to stay with I , I have 
 no idea of her plan , or what she be study . she use to shut 
 herself up all the morning and write -- she tell I she be finish off 
 some work -- in fact it be her first book,--a manuscript she bring 
 with she from the country in that famous satchel ! I know nothing at all 
 about it till she confide to I one day that she have write a book , 
 and that it have be accept by a publisher . I be amazed ! " 

 " and the result must have amazed you still more , " say 
 harrington,--"but I be a very astute person!--and I guess at once , 
 when I be tell the address of the ' private SECRETARY of the author , ' 
 that the SECRETARY be the author herself ! " 

 Innocent blush . 

 " perhaps it be wrong to say what be not true , " she say , " but really 
 I was and be the secretary of the author!--i write all the manuscript 
 with my own hand ! " 

 they laugh at this , and then Harrington go on to say-- 

 " I believe you know the painter Amadis Jocelyn , do not you ? yes ? well , I 
 be with he the other day , and I say you be the author of the 
 wonderful book . he tell I I be talk nonsense -- that you could not 
 be,--he have meet you at an artist 's evening party and that you have tell 
 he a story about some ancestor of his own family . ' she be a nice little 
 thing with baby eye , ' he say , ' but she could not write a clever book ! 
 she may have get some man to write it for she ! ' " 

 Innocent give a little cry of pain . 

 " Oh!--did he say that ? " 

 " of course he do ! all man say that sort of thing ! they can not bear a 
 woman to do more than marry and have child . simple girl with the 
 satchel , do not you know that ? you must not mind it -- it be their way . of 
 course I round on Jocelyn and tell he he be a fool , with a swell 
 head on the subject of his own sex -- he be a fool in many ways,--he 's a 
 great painter , but he might be much great if he would get up early in the 
 morning and stick to his work . he ought to have be in the front rank 
 long ago . " 

 " but surely he be in the front rank ? " query Miss Leigh , mildly--"He 
 be a wonderful artist ! " 

 " wonderful -- yes!--with a lot of wonderful thing in he which have not 
 come out ! " declare Harrington , " and which never will come out , I fear ! 
 he turn night into day too often . oh , he be clever!--I grant you all 
 that -- but he have not a resolute will or a great mind , like Watts or 
 Burne - Jones or any of the fellow who serve their art nobly -- he be a 
 selfish sort of chap ! " 

 Innocent hear , and long to utter a protest -- she want to say-"no , 
 no!--you wrong he ! he be good and noble -- he must be!--he be Amadis de 
 Jocelyn ! " 

 but she repress her thought and sit very quiet,--then , when 
 Harrington pause , she tell he in a sweet , even voice the story of the 
 " Knight of France " who found Briar Farm . he be enthral -- not so 
 much by the tale as by her way of tell it . 

 " and so Jocelyn the painter be the lineal descendant of the brother of 
 your Jocelin!--the knight who disappear and take to farming in the 
 day of Elizabeth ! " he said--"upon my word , it be a quaint bit of 
 history and coincidence -- almost too romantic for such day as these ! " 

 Innocent smile . 

 " be romance at an end now ? " she ask . 

 Harrington look at she kindly . 

 " almost ! it be gasp its last gasp in company with poetry . realism be 
 our only wear -- Realism and Prose -- very prosy Prose . you be a romantic 
 child!--i can see that!--but do not over - do it ! and if you ever make an 
 ideal out of your sixteenth - century man , do not make another out of the 
 twentieth - century one ! he could not stand it!--he'd crumble at a touch ! " 

 she answer nothing , but avoid his glance . he prepare to take his 
 leave -- and on rise from his chair suddenly catch sight of the 
 portrait on the harpsichord . 

 " I know that face ! " he say , quickly,--"Who be he ? " 

 " he be also a painter -- as great as the one we have just be speak 
 of , " answer Miss leigh--"his name be Pierce Armitage . " 

 " that be it ! " exclaim Harrington , with some excitement . " of course ! 
 Pierce Armitage ! I know he ! one of the handsome fellow I ever see ! 
 there be an artist , if you like!--he might have be anything ! what 
 become of him?--do you know ? " 

 " he die abroad , so it be said"--and Miss Leigh 's gentle voice tremble 
 a little--"but nothing be quite certainly known-- " 

 Harrington turn swiftly to stare eagerly at Innocent . 

 " your name be Armitage ! " he said--"and do you know you be rather like 
 he ! your face remind I --- be you any relative ? " 

 she give the usual answer-- 

 " no . " 

 " strange ! " he bend his eye scrutinisingly upon she . " I remember I 
 think the same thing when I first meet you -- and his feature be not 
 easily forget ! you have his eye -- and mouth,--you might almost be 
 his daughter ! " 

 her breath quickened-- 

 " I wish I be ! " she say . 

 he still look puzzle . 

 " no -- don't wish for what would perhaps be a misfortune ! " he 
 said--"you've do very well for yourself!--but do not be romantic ! keep 
 that old ' french knight ' of yours in the page of an old French 
 chronicle!--shut the volume,--lock it up,--and -- lose the key ! " 




 CHAPTER III 

 some week later on , when the London season be at its height , and 
 Fashion , that frille and furbelowe goddess , sit enthrone in state , 
 control the mood of the Elect and Select which she choose to call 
 " society , " Innocent be invite to the house of a well - know Duchess , 
 renowned for a handsome personality , and also for an unassailable 
 position , notwithstanding certain sinister rumour . People say -- people 
 be always say something!--that her moral be easy - go , but 
 everyone agree that her taste be unimpeachable . she -- this great lady 
 whose rank permit she to entertain the King and Queen -- hear of " Ena 
 Armitage " as the brilliant author whose book be the talk of the 
 town , and forthwith make up her mind that she must be see at her house 
 as the " sensation " of at least one evening . to this end she glide in 
 her noiseless , satin - cushion motor brougham up to the door of Miss 
 Leigh 's modest little dwelling and leave the necessary slip of 
 pasteboard bear her title name , with similar slip on behalf of her 
 husband the Duke , for Miss Armitage and Miss Leigh . the slip be 
 follow in due course by a more imposing and formal card of invitation 
 to a " Reception and Small Dance . R.S.V.P. " on receive this , good old 
 Miss Lavinia be a little fluttered and excited , and turn it over 
 and over in her hand , look at Innocent with a kind of nervous anxiety . 

 " I think we ought to go , my dear , " she said--"or rather -- I do not know 
 about myself -- but you ought to go certainly . it be a great house -- a 
 great family -- and she be a very great lady -- a little -- well!--a little 
 ' modern ' perhaps-- " 

 Innocent lift her eyebrow with a slight , almost weary smile . a 
 scarcely perceptible change have come over she of late -- a change too 
 subtle to be notice by anyone who be not as keenly observant as Miss 
 Lavinia -- but it be sufficient to give the old lady who love her cause 
 for a suspicion of trouble . 

 " what be it to be modern ? " she asked--"In your sense , I mean ? I know 
 what be call ' modern ' generally -- bad art , bad literature , bad manner 
 and bad taste ! but what do you call modern ? " 

 Miss Leigh consider -- look at the girl with steadfast , kindly eye . 

 " you speak a trifle bitterly -- for you , dear child ! " she said--"these 
 thing you name as ' modern ' truly be so , but they be ancient as well ! 
 the world have alter very little , I think . what we call ' bad ' have 
 always exist as badness -- it be only present to we in different 
 forms-- " 

 Innocent laugh -- a soft little laugh of tenderness . 

 " wise godmother ! " she say , playfully--"you talk like a book ! " 

 Miss Lavinia laugh too , and a pretty pink colour come into her wan 
 cheek . 

 " naughty child , you be make fun of I ! " she said--"what I mean 
 about the Duchess-- " 

 Innocent stretch out her hand for the card of invitation and look 
 at it . 

 " well ! " she say , slowly--"what about the duchess ? " 

 Miss Leigh hesitate . 

 " I hardly know how to put it , " she answer , at last--"She be a 
 kind - hearted woman -- very generous -- and most helpful in work of 
 charity . I never know such energy as she show in organise charity 
 bail and bazaars!--perfectly wonderful!--but she like to live her 
 life-- " 

 " who would not ! " murmur the girl , scarcely audibly . 

 " and she live it -- very much so!--rath to the dreg ! " continue the 
 old lady , with emphasis . " she have no real aim beyond the satisfaction 
 of her own vanity and social power -- and you , with your beautiful 
 thought and ideal , might not like the kind of people she surround 
 herself with -- people , who only want amusement and 
 ' sensation'--particularly sensation-- " 

 Innocent say nothing for a minute or two -- then she look up , brightly . 

 " to go or not to go , godmother mine ! which be it to be ? the decision 
 rest with you ! yes , or no ? " 

 " I think it must be ' yes'"--and Miss Leigh emphasise the word with a 
 little nod of her head . " it would be unwise to refuse -- especially just 
 now when everyone be talk of you and wish to see you . and you be 
 quite worth see ! " 

 the girl give a slight gesture of indifference and move away slowly 
 and listlessly , as though fatigue by the mere effort of speech . Miss 
 Leigh note this with some concern , watch she as she go , and 
 admire the supple grace of her small figure , the well - shape little 
 head so proudly poise on the slim throat , and the burnished sheen of 
 her bright hair . 

 " she grow pretty every day , " she thought--"but not happy , I 
 fear!--not happy , poor child ! " 

 innocent meanwhile , upstairs in her own little study , be read and 
 re - read a brief letter which have come for she by the same post that 
 have deliver the Duchess 's invitation . 

 " I hear you be among the guest invite to the Duchess of Deanshire 's 
 party , " it ran--"i hope you will go -- for the purely selfish reason that 
 I want to meet you there . Hers be a great house with plenty of room , 
 and a fine garden -- for London . People crowd to her ' crush ' , but one 
 can always escape the mob . I have see so little of you lately , and you 
 be now so famous that I shall think myself lucky if I may touch the 
 hem of your garment . will you encourage I thus far ? like Hamlet , ' I 
 lack advancement ' ! when will you take I to Briar Farm ? I should like 
 to see the tomb of my very ancestral uncle -- could we not arrange a 
 day 's outing in the country while the weather be fine ? I throw myself 
 on your consideration and clemency for this -- and for many other 
 unwritten thing ! 

 your , 

 AMADIS DE JOCELYN . " 

 there be nothing in this easily word scrawl to make an ordinarily 
 normal heart beat fast , yet the heart of this simple child of the 
 god , gift with genius and deprive of worldly wisdom as all such 
 divine child be , throb uneasily , and her eye be wet . More 
 than this , she touch the signature,--the long - familiar name -- with her 
 soft lips,--and as though afraid of what she have do , hurriedly fold 
 the letter and lock it away . 

 then she sit down and think . nearly two year have elapse since she 
 have leave Briar Farm , and in that short time she have make the name she 
 have adopt famous . she could not call it her own name ; bear out of 
 wedlock , she have no right , by the stupid law , to the name of her 
 father . she could , legally , have wear the maiden name of her mother have 
 she know it -- but she do not know it . and what she be think of 
 now , be this : should she tell she lately discover second " Amadis de 
 Jocelyn " the true story of her birth and parentage at this , the outset 
 of their friendship , before -- well , before it go any far ? she 
 could not consult Miss Leigh on the point , without smirch the 
 reputation of Pierce Armitage , the man whose memory be enshrine in 
 that dear lady 's heart as a thing of unsullied honour . she puzzle 
 herself over the question for a long time , and then decide to keep she 
 own counsel . 

 " after all , why should I tell he ? " she ask herself . " it might make 
 trouble -- he be so proud of his lineage , and I too be proud of it for 
 he ! ... why should I let he know that I inherit nothing but my 
 mother 's shame ! " 

 her heart grow heavy as her position be thus force back upon she by 
 her own thought . up to the present no one have ask who she be , or 
 where she come from -- she be understand to be an orphan , leave alone in 
 the world , who by her own genius and unaided effort have lift herself 
 into the front rank among the " shin light " of the day . this , so 
 far , have be sufficient information for all with whom she have come in 
 contact -- but as time go on , would not people ask more about her?--who 
 be her father and mother?--where she be born?--how she have be 
 educate ? these inquisitorial demand be surely among the penalty 
 of fame ! and , if she tell the truth , would she not , despite the renown 
 she have win , be lightly , even scornfully esteem by conventional 
 society as a " bastard " and interloper , though the manner of her birth 
 be no fault of her own , and she be unjustly punishable for the sin 
 of her parent , such be the wicked law ! 

 the night of the Duchess 's reception be one of those close sultry 
 night of June in London when the atmosphere be well - nigh as 
 suffocating as that of some foetid prison where criminal have be 
 pace their dreary round all day . Royal Ascot be just over , and space 
 and opportunity be give for several social entertainment to be 
 conveniently check off before Henley . outside the Duke 's great house 
 there be a constant stream of motor - car and taxi - cab ; a pass 
 stranger might have imagine all the world and his wife be go to 
 the Duchess 's " at home . " it be difficult to effect an entrance , but 
 once inside , the scene be one of veritable enchantment . the lovely 
 hue and odour of flower , the soften glitter of thousand of 
 electric lamp shade with rose - colour , the bewilder brilliancy of 
 woman 's clothe and jewel , the exquisite music pour like a rippling 
 stream through the magnificent reception - room , all combine to create 
 a magical effect of sensuous beauty and luxury ; and as Innocent , 
 accompany by the sweet - faced old - fashioned lady who play the part 
 of chaperone with such gentle dignity , approach her hostess , she be 
 a little dazzled and nervous . her timidity make she look all the more 
 charming -- she have the air of a wonder child call up to receive an 
 unexpected prize at school . she shrink visibly when her name be 
 shout out in a stentorian voice by the gorgeously liveried major - domo 
 in attendance , quite unaware that it create a thrill throughout the 
 fashionable assemblage , and that all eye be instantly upon she . the 
 Duchess , diamond - crown and glorious in gold - embroider tissue , keep 
 back by a slight gesture the press crowd of guest , and extend she 
 hand with mark graciousness and a delightful smile . 

 " SUCH a pleasure and honour ! " she say , sweetly--"so good of you to 
 come ! you will give I a few word with you later on ? yes ? everybody 
 will want to speak to you!--but you must let I have a chance too ! " 

 Innocent murmur something gently deprecatory as a palliative to this 
 sort of society " gush " which always trouble she -- and move on . 
 everybody gaze , whisper and wonder , astonish at the youth and 
 evident unworldliness of the " author of those marvellous books!"--so 
 the commentary ran;--the woman criticise her gown , which be one of 
 pale blue silken stuff catch at the waist and shoulder by quaint 
 clasp of dull gold -- a gown with nothing remarkable about it save its 
 cut and fit -- melt itself , as it be , around she in harmonious fold 
 of fine azure which suggest without emphasise the graceful line of 
 her form . the man look , and say nothing much except " a pity she be a 
 write woman ! muck about Fleet Street!"--mere senseless talk which 
 they know to be senseless , inasmuch as " muck " about Fleet Street be 
 no part of any writer 's business save that of the professional 
 journalist . happily ignorant of comment , the girl make her way quietly 
 and unobtrusively through the splendid throng , till she be presently 
 address by a stoutish , pleasant - feature man , with small twinkling 
 eye and an agreeable surface manner . 

 " I miss you just now when my wife receive you , " he said--"May I 
 present myself ? I be your host -- proud of the privilege ! " 

 Innocent smile as she bow and hold out her hand ; she be amuse , and 
 take a little by surprise . this be the Duke of Deanshire -- this quite 
 insignificant - look personage -- he be the owner of the great house 
 and the husband of the great lady,--and yet he have the appearance of a 
 very ordinary nobody . but that he be a " somebody " of paramount 
 importance there be no doubt ; and when he say , " may I give you my arm 
 and take you through the room ? there be one or two picture you may 
 like to see , " she be a little startled . she look round for Miss 
 Leigh , but that tactful lady , see the position , have disappear . so 
 she lay her little cream - glove hand on the Duke 's arm and go with 
 he , shyly at first , yet with a pretty stateliness which be all her 
 own , and move slowly among the crowd of guest , gradually recover 
 her ease and self - possession , and begin to talk to he with a 
 delightful naturalness and candour which fairly captivate his grace , 
 in fact , " bowl he over , " as he afterwards declare . she be 
 blissfully unaware that his manner of escort she on his arm through 
 the long vista of the magnificent room have be command and arrange 
 by the Duchess , in order that she should be well look at and 
 criticise by all assemble as the " show " person of the evening . she 
 be so unconscious of the ordeal to which she be be subject that 
 she bear it with the perfect indifference which such unconsciousness 
 give . all at once the Duke come to a standstill . 

 " here be a great friend of mine -- one of the good I have in the world , " 
 he said--"i want to introduce he to you,"--this , as a tall old man 
 pause near they with a smile and enquiring glance , " Lord Blythe -- Miss 
 Armitage . " 

 Innocent 's heart give a wild bind ; for a moment she feel a struggle 
 sensation in her throat move she to cry out , and it be only with a 
 violent effort that she repress herself . 

 " you have hear of Miss Armitage -- Ena Armitage,--haven't you , Blythe ? " 
 go on the Duke , garrulously . " of course ! all the world have hear of 
 she ! " 

 " indeed it have ! " and Lord Blythe bow ceremoniously . " may I 
 congratulate you on win your laurel while you be young enough to 
 enjoy they ! one moment!--my wife be most anxious to meet you-- " 

 he turn to look for she , while Innocent , tremble violently , 
 wonder desperately whether it would be possible for she to run 
 away!--anywhere -- anywhere , rather than endure what she know must come ! 
 the Duke notice she sudden pallor with concern . 

 " be you cold ? " he asked--"i hope there be no draught--- " 

 " oh no -- no ! " she murmured--"It be nothing-- " 

 then she brace herself up in every nerve -- draw her little body 
 erect , as though a lily should lift itself to the sun -- she see Lord 
 Blythe approach with a handsome woman dress in silvery grey and 
 wear a coronet of emerald -- and in one more moment look full in 
 the face -- of her mother ! 

 " Lady Blythe -- Miss Armitage . " 

 Lady Blythe turn white to the lip . her dark eye open widely in 
 amazement and fear -- she put out a hand as though to steady herself . her 
 husband catch it , alarm . 

 " Maude ! be you ill ? " 

 " not at all ! " and she force a laugh . " I be perfectly -- perfectly 
 well!--a little faint perhaps ! the heat , I think ! yes -- of course ! Miss 
 Armitage -- the famous author ! I be -- I be very proud to meet you ! " 

 " Most kind of you ! " say Innocent , quietly . 

 and they still look at each other , very strangely . 

 the man beside they be a little embarrassed , the Duke twirl his 
 short white moustache , and Lord Blythe glance at his wife with some 
 wonder and curiosity . both imagine , with the usual short - sightedness 
 of the male sex , that the woman have take a sudden fantastic dislike to 
 one another . 

 " by jove , she be jealous ! " think the Duke , fully aware that Lady 
 Blythe be occasionally " move that way . " 

 " the girl seem frightened of she , " be Lord Blythe 's inward comment , 
 know that his wife do not always create a sympathetic atmosphere . 

 but her ladyship be soon herself again and laugh quite merrily at 
 her husband 's anxious expression . 

 " I be all right -- really ! " she say , with a quick , almost defiant turn of 
 her head towards he , the emerald in her dark hair flash with a 
 sinister gleam like lightning on still water . " you must remember it be 
 rather overwhelming to be introduce to a famous author and think of 
 just the right thing to say at the right moment ! be not it , Miss 
 Armitage ? " 

 " it be as you feel , " reply Innocent , coldly . 

 Lady Blythe rattle on gaily . 

 " do come and talk to I for a few moments!--it will be so good of you ! 
 the garden 's lovely!--shall we go there ? now , my dear Duke , do not look 
 so cross , I will bring she back to you directly ! " and she nod 
 pleasantly . " you want she , of course!--everybody want her!--such a 
 celebrity ! " then , turn again to Innocent , " will you come ? " 

 as one in a dream the girl obey her invite gesture , and they pass 
 out of the room together through a large open french window to a 
 terrace garden , dimly illumine in the distance by the glitter of 
 fairy lamp , but for the most part leave to the temper brilliancy of a 
 misty red moon . once away from the crowd , Lady Blythe walk quickly 
 and impatiently , scarcely look at the youthful figure that 
 accompany her own , like a fair ghost gliding step for step beside 
 she . at last she stop ; they be well away from the house in a 
 quaint bit of garden shade with formal fir - tree and clipped yew , 
 where a fountain dash up a slender spiral thread of white spray . a 
 strange sense of fury in she break loose ; with pale face and cruel , 
 glitter eye she turn upon her daughter . 

 " how dare you ! " she half whisper , through her set teeth--"how dare 
 you ! " 

 Innocent draw back a step , and look at she steadfastly . 

 " I do not understand you , " she say . 

 " you do understand!--you understand only too well ! " and Lady Blythe put 
 her hand to the pearl at her throat as though she feel they choke 
 she . " oh , I could strike you for your insolence ! I wish I have never 
 seek you out or tell you how you be bear ! be this your revenge for 
 the manner of your birth , that you come to shame I among my own 
 class -- my own people-- " 

 Innocent 's eye flash with a fire seldom see in their soft depth . 

 " shame you ? " she echo . " I ? what shame have I bring you ? what shame 
 shall I bring ? have you own I as your child I would have make you 
 proud of I ! I would have give you honour,--you abandon I to 
 stranger , and I have make honour for myself ! shame be yours and your 
 only!--it would be mine if I have to acknowledge you as my mother!--you 
 who never have the courage to be true ! " her young voice thrill with 
 passion.--"i have win my own way ! I be something beyond and above 
 you!--'your own class -- your own people , ' as you call they , be at MY 
 feet,--and you -- you who play with my father 's heart and spoil his 
 career -- you have live to know that I , his deserted child , have make 
 his name famous ! " 

 Lady Blythe star at she like some enrage cat ready to spring . 

 " his name -- his name ! " she mutter , fiercely . " yes , and how dare you 
 take it ? you have no right to it in law ! " 

 " wise law , just law ! " say the girl , passionately . " would you rather I 
 have take yours ? I might have do so have I know it -- though I think 
 not , as I should have be ashamed of any ' maiden ' name you have 
 dishonour ! when you come to Briar Farm to find I -- to see I -- so 
 late , so late!--after long year of desertion -- I tell you it be 
 possible to make a name;--one can not go nameless through the world ! I 
 have make mine!--independently and honestly -- in fact"--and she smile , 
 a sad cold smile--"it be an honour for you , my mother , to know I , your 
 daughter ! " 

 Lady Blythe 's face grow ghastly pale in the uncertain light of the 
 half - veil moon . she move a step and catch the girl 's arm with some 
 violence . 

 " what do you mean to do ? " she ask , in an angry whisper , " I must know ! 
 what be your plan of vengeance?--your campaign of notoriety?--your 
 scheme of self - advertisement ? what claim will you make ? " 

 " none ! " and Innocent look at she fully , with calm and fearless 
 dignity . " I have no claim upon you , thank God ! I be less to you than a 
 drop lamb , lose in a thicket of thorn , be to the sheep that bear 
 it ! that be a rough country simile,--i be bring up on a farm , you 
 know!--but it will serve your case . think nothing of I , as I think 
 nothing of you ! what I be , or what I may be to the world , be my own 
 affair ! " 

 there be a pause . presently Lady Blythe give a kind of shrill 
 hysterical laugh . 

 " then , when we meet in society , as we have meet to - night , it will be as 
 comparative stranger ? " 

 " why , of course!--we have always be stranger , " the girl reply , 
 quietly . " no stranger be ever more strange to each other than we ! " 

 " you mean to keep MY secret?--and your own ? " 

 " certainly . do you suppose I would give my father 's name to slander ? " 

 " your father!--you talk of your father as if he be worth 
 consideration!--he be chiefly to blame for your position-- " 

 " be he ? I be not quite sure of that , " say Innocent , slowly--"i do not 
 know all the circumstance . but I have hear that he be a great 
 artist ; and that some woman he love ruin his life . and I believe you 
 be that woman ! " 

 Lady Blythe laugh -- a hard mirthless laugh . 

 " believe what you like ! " she said--"you be an imaginative little fool ! 
 when you know more of the world you will find out that man ruin woman 's 
 life as casually as crack nut , but they take jolly good care of 
 their own skin ! Pierce Armitage be too selfish a man to sacrifice his 
 own pleasure and comfort for anyone -- he be glad to get rid of I -- and 
 of you ! and now -- now ! " she throw up her hand with an expressive , 
 half - tragic gesture . " now you be famous!--actually famous ! good 
 heavens!--why , I think you would stay in that old farmhouse all your 
 life , scrub the floor and look after the poultry , and perhaps 
 marry some good - natured country yokel ! Famous!--you!--with social 
 London dancing attendance on you ! what a ghastly comedy ! " she laugh 
 again . " Come!--we must go back to the house . " 

 they walk side by side -- the dark full - figured woman and the fair 
 slight girl -- the one a mere ephemeral unit in an exclusively 
 aristocratic and fashionable " set,"--the other , the possessor of a 
 sudden brilliant fame which be spread a new light across the two 
 hemisphere . not another word be exchange between they , and as they 
 re - enter the ducal reception - room , now more crowded than ever , Lord 
 Blythe meet they . 

 " I be just go to look for you , " he say to his wife--"There be 
 dozen of people wait to be present to Miss Armitage ; the Duchess 
 have ask for her several time . " 

 Lady Blythe turn to Innocent with a dazzle smile . 

 " how guilty I feel ! " she exclaim . " everybody want to see you , and 
 I selfishly detain you in the garden ! it be so good of you to give 
 I a few minutes!--you , the guest of the evening too ! good - night!--in 
 case I do not find you again in this crowd ! " 

 she move away then , leave Innocent fairly bewildered by her entire 
 coolness and self - possession . she herself , poor child , move to the 
 very soul by the interview she have just go through , be tremble 
 with extreme nervousness , and could hardly conceal her agitation . 

 " I be afraid you have catch cold ! " say Lord Blythe , kindly--"That will 
 never do ! I promise I would take you to the Duchess as soon as I find 
 you -- she have some friend with she who wish to meet you . will you come ? " 

 she smile assent , look up at he gratefully and think what a 
 handsome old man he be , with his tall , well - form figure and fine 
 intellectual face on which the constant progress of good thought have 
 mark many a pleasant line . her mother 's husband!--and she wonder 
 how it happen that such a woman have be choose for a wife by such a 
 man ! 

 " they be go to dance in the ball - room directly , " he continue , as he 
 guide she through the press throng of people . " you will not be 
 without partner ! be you fond of dancing ? " 

 her face light up with the lovely youthful look that give she such 
 fascination and sweetness of expression . 

 " yes , I like it very much , though before I come to London I only know 
 country dance such as they dance at harvest - home ; but of course here , 
 you all dance so differently!--it be only just go round and round ! 
 but it be quite pleasant and rather amusing . " 

 " you be bring up in the country then ? " he say . 

 " yes , entirely . I come to London about two year ago . " 

 " but -- I hope you do not think I too inquisitive!--where do you study 
 literature ? " 

 she laugh a little . 

 " I do not think I study it at all , " she answer , " I just love it ! 
 there be a small library of very old book in the farmhouse where I 
 live , and I read and re - read these . then , when I be about sixteen , it 
 suddenly come into my head that I would try to write a story 
 myself -- and I do . little by little it grow into a book , and I bring 
 it to London and finish it here . you know the rest ! " 

 " like Byron , you awake one morning to find yourself famous ! " say Lord 
 Blythe , smile . " you have no parent live ? " 

 her cheek burn with a hot blush as she reply . 

 " no . " 

 " a pity ! they would have be very proud of you . here be the Duchess ! " 

 and in another moment she be draw into the vortex of a brilliant 
 circle surround her hostess -- man and woman of notable standing in 
 politic , art and letter , to whom the Duchess present she with the 
 half kindly , half patronise air of one who feel that any genius in 
 man or woman be a kind of disease , and that the person affect by it 
 must be soothingly consider as a sort of " freak " or nondescript 
 creature , like a white crow or a red starling . 

 " these abnormal people be so interesting ! " she be will not to say . " these 
 prodigy and thing ! I love they ! they be often quite ugly and have 
 rude manner -- Beethoven use to eat with his finger I believe ; be not 
 it wonderful of he ! such a relief from the conventional way ! when I 
 be quite a girl I use to adore a man in Paris who play the ' cello 
 divinely -- a perfect marvel!--but he would not comb his hair or blow his 
 nose properly -- and it be not very nice!--not that it matter much , he 
 be such a wonderful artist ! oh yes , I know ! it would not have lessen 
 his genius to have wipe his nose with a handkerchief instead of-- ! 
 well!--perhaps we would well not mention it ! " and she would laugh 
 charmingly and again murmur , " these deaf abnormal people ! " 

 with Innocent , however , she be somewhat put off her usual line of 
 conduct ; the girl be too graceful and easy - mannered to be call 
 " abnormal " or eccentric ; she be perfectly modest , simple and 
 unaffected , and the Duchess be a trifle disappointed that she be not 
 ill - dress , frowsy , frumpish and blue - spectacle . 

 " she be so young too ! " think her grace , half crossly--"almost a 
 child!--and not in the least ' bookish . ' it seem quite absurd that such 
 a baby - look creature should be actually a genius , and famous at 
 twenty ! simply amazing ! " 

 and she watch the little " lion " or lioness of the evening with keen 
 interest and curiosity , whimsically vex that it do not roar , snort , 
 or make itself as noticeable as certain other animal of the literary 
 habitat whom she have occasionally entertain . just then a mirthful , 
 mellow voice speak close beside she . 

 " where be the new Corinne ? the Sappho of the leucadian rock of London ? 
 have she meet her Phaon ? " 

 " how late you be , Amadis ! " and the Duchess smile captivatingly as she 
 extend her hand to Jocelyn , who gallantly stoop and kiss the 
 perfectly fitting glove which cover it . " if you mean Miss Armitage , 
 she be just over there talk to two old fogy . I think they be 
 Cabinet minister -- they look it ! she be quite the success of the 
 evening,--and pretty , do not you think ? " 

 Jocelyn look , and see the small fair head rise like a golden flower 
 from sea - blue drapery ; he smile enigmatically . 

 " not exactly , " he answer , " but spirituelle -- she have what some 
 painter might call an imaginative head -- she could pose very well for 
 St. Dorothy . I can quite realise she prefer the executioner 's axe 
 to the embrace of Theophilus . " 

 the Duchess give he a swift glance and touch his arm with the edge 
 of her fan . 

 " be you go to make love to she ? " she ask . " you make love to every 
 woman -- but most woman understand your sort of love - making-- " 

 " do they ? " and his blue eye flash amusement . " and what do they think 
 of it ? " 

 " they laugh at it ! " she answer , calmly . " but that clever child would 
 not laugh -- she would take it au grand serieux . " 

 he pass his hand carelessly through the rough dark hair which give 
 his ruggedly handsome feature a singular softness and charm . 

 " would she ? my dear Duchess , nobody take anything ' au grand serieux ' 
 nowadays . we grin through every scene of life , and we do not know and 
 do not care whether it be comedy or tragedy we be grin at ! it do not 
 do to be serious . I never be . ' life be real , life be earnest ' be the 
 line of conduct practise by my french ancestor ; they cut up all their 
 enemy with long sword , and then sit down to wild boar roasted whole 
 for dinner . that be real life , earnest life ! we in our day do not cut 
 up our enemy with long sword -- we cut they up in the daily press . 
 it be so much easy ! " 

 " how you love to hear yourself talk ! " comment the Duchess . " I let you 
 do it -- but I know you do not mean half you say ! " 

 " you think not ? well , I be go to join the court of Corinne -- she be not 
 the usual type of Corinne -- I fancy she have a heart-- " 

 " and you want to steal it if you can , of course ! " and the Duchess 
 laugh . " man always long for what they have not get , and tire of what 
 they have ! " 

 " true , o Queen ! we be make so ! blame , not we , but the Creator of the 
 poor world - mannikin ! " 

 he move away and be soon beside Innocent , who blush into a pretty 
 rise at sight of he . 

 " I think you be never come ! " she say , shyly . " I be so glad you 
 be here ! " 

 he look at she with an admiring softness in his eye . 

 " may I have the first dance ? " he say . " I time myself to gain the 
 privilege . " 

 she give he her dance programme where no name be yet inscribe . he 
 take it and scribble his name down several time , then hand it back 
 to she . several of the young man in the group which have gather 
 about she laugh and remonstrate . 

 " give somebody else a chance , Miss Armitage ! " 

 she look round upon they , smile . 

 " but of course ! Mr. Amadis de Jocelyn have not take all ? " 

 they laugh again . 

 " his name dominate your programme , anyhow ! " 

 her eye shine softly . 

 " it be a beautiful name ! " she say . 

 " grant ! but show a little mercy to the unbeautiful name ! " say one 
 man near she . " my name , for instance , be Smith -- can you tolerate it ? " 

 she give a light gesture of protest . 

 " you play with I ! " she said--"of course ! you will find a dance , Mr. 
 Smith!--and I will dance it with you ! " 

 they be all now ready for fun , and take her programme hand it 
 round amongst themselves and soon fill it . when it come back to she 
 she look at it , amazed . 

 " but I shall never dance all these ! " she exclaim . 

 " no , you will sit out some of they , " say Jocelyn , coolly--"With I ! " 

 the ball - room door be just then throw invitingly open and 
 entrancing strain of rhythmical music come swing and ring in 
 sweet cadence on the ear . he pass his arm round her waist . 

 " we will begin the revelry ! " he say , and in another moment she feel 
 herself float deliciously , as it be , in his arm -- her little foot 
 fly over the polished floor , his hand warmly clasp her slim soft 
 body -- and her heart flutter wildly like the beat wing of a snare 
 bird as she fall into the mystic web weave by the strange and pitiless 
 loom of destiny . the thread be already tangle about she -- but she 
 make no effort to escape . she be happy in her dream ; she imagine that 
 her Ideal have be find in the real . 




 CHAPTER IV 

 the first waltz over , Jocelyn lead his partner out of the ball - room . 

 " come into the garden , " he say . " it be quite a real garden for 
 London -- and I know every inch of it . we will find a quiet corner and sit 
 down and rest . " 

 she answer nothing -- she be flushed , and breathe quickly from the 
 excitement of the dance , and he pause on his way to pick up a light 
 wrap he find on one of the sofas , and put it round her shoulder . 

 " you must not catch a chill , " he go on . " but it be not a cold night -- in 
 fact it be very close and sultry -- almost like thunder . a little air will 
 be good for we . " 

 they go together , pace along slowly -- she meanwhile think of her 
 previous walk in that same garden!--what would he , Amadis de Jocelyn , 
 say of it and of her " mother " if he know ! he look at her sideway now 
 and then , curiously move by mingled pity , admiration and desire,--the 
 cruelty latent in every man make he long to awaken the first spark of 
 passion in that maidenly soul,--and with the full consciousness of a 
 powerful personality , he be perfectly aware that he could do so if he 
 choose . but he wait , play with the fire of his own inclination , 
 and talk lightly and charmingly of thing which he know would 
 interest she sufficiently to make she , in her turn , talk to he 
 naturally and candidly , thereby display more or less of her 
 disposition and temperament . with every word she speak he find she 
 more and more fascinating -- she have a quaint directness of speech which 
 be extremely refreshing after the half - veil subtlety convey in 
 the often dubious conversation of the woman he be accustom to meet 
 in society -- while there be no doubt she be endow with extraordinary 
 intellectual grasp and capacity . her knowledge of thing artistic and 
 literary might , perhaps , have be term archaic , but it be base 
 upon the principle which be good and true for all time -- and as she 
 tell he quite simply and unaffectedly of her study by herself among 
 the old book which have belong to the " Sieur Amadis " of Briar Farm , 
 he be both touch and interested . 

 " so you make quite a friend of the Sieur Amadis ! " he say . " he be your 
 teacher and guide ! I be jealous of he ! " 

 she laugh softly . " he be a spirit , " she said--"you be a man . " 

 " well , his spirit have have a good innings with you ! " and , take she 
 hand , he draw it within his arm--"i bear his name , and it be time I come 
 in somewhere ! " 

 she laugh again , a trifle nervously . 

 " you think so ? but you do come in ! you be here with I now ! " 

 he bend his eye upon she with an ardour he do not attempt to conceal , 
 and her heart leap within she -- a warmth like fire run swiftly through 
 her vein . he hear her sigh,--he see her tremble beneath his gaze . 
 there be an elf - like fascination about her child - like face and figure 
 as she move glidingly beside he -- a " belle dame san merci " charm 
 which rouse the strongly amorous side of his nature . he quicken his 
 step a little as he lead she down a sloping path , shut in on either 
 side by tall tree , where there be a seat place invitingly in the 
 deep shadow and where the dim uplifted moon cast but the faint 
 glimmer , just sufficiently to make the darkness visible . 

 " shall we stay here a little while ? " he say , in a low tone . 

 she make no reply . something vaguely sweet and irresistible overpowered 
 her,--she be barely conscious of herself , or of anything , save that 
 " Amadis de Jocelyn " be beside she . she have live so long in her dream 
 of the old french knight , whose write thought and confession have 
 influence her imagination and sway her mind since childhood , that 
 she could not detach herself from the idealistic conception she have 
 form of his character,--and to she the sixteenth - century " Amadis " have 
 become embody in this modern man of brilliant but erratic genius , 
 who , if the truth be tell , have nothing idealistic about he but his 
 art , which in itself be more the outcome of emotionalism than 
 conviction . he draw she gently down beside he , feel her quiver like 
 a leaf touch by the wind , and his own heart begin to beat with a 
 pleasurable thrill . the silence around they seem wait for speech , 
 but none come . it be one of those tense moment on which sometimes 
 hang the happiness or the misery of a lifetime -- a stray thread from 
 the web of Chance , which may be weave into a smooth pattern or knot 
 into a cruel tangle,--a freakish circumstance in which the human being 
 most concerned be helplessly involve without any conscious 
 premonition of impend fate . suddenly , yield to a passionate 
 impulse , he catch she close in his arm and kiss she . 

 " forgive I ! " he whispered--"i could not help it ! " 

 she put he gently back from she with two little hand that caress 
 rather than repulse he , and gaze at he with startled , tender eye 
 in which a new and wonderful radiance shone,--while he in 
 self - confident audacity still hold she in his embrace . 

 " you be not angry ? " he go on , in quick , soft accent . " no ! why 
 should you be ? why should not love come to you as to other woman ! do not 
 analyse!--don't speak ! there be nothing to be say -- we know all ! " 

 silently she clung to he , yield more and more to the sensation of 
 exquisite joy that pour through her whole be like sunlight -- her 
 heart beat with new and keener life,--the warm kindling blood burn 
 her cheek like the breath of a hot wind -- and her whole soul rise to 
 meet and greet what she in her poor credulousness welcome as the crown 
 and glory of existence -- love ! love be her , she think -- at last!--she 
 know the great secret,--the long delight that death itself could not 
 destroy,--her ideal of romance be realise , and Amadis de Jocelyn , the 
 brave , the true , the chivalrous , the strong , be she very own ! 
 enchant with the ease of his conquest , he play with her pretty hair 
 as with a bird 's wing , and hold she against his heart , sensuously 
 gratify to feel her soft breast heave with its pen - up emotion , and 
 to hear her murmur word of love confess . 

 " how I have wish and pray that you might love I ! " she say , 
 raise her dewy eye to his in the darkness . " be it good when God 
 grant one 's prayer ? I be almost afraid ! my Amadis ! it be a dream come 
 true ! " 

 he be amuse at her fidelity to the romance which surround his name . 

 " dear child , I be not a ' knight of old'--don't think it ! " he say . " you 
 must not run away with that idea and make I a kind of sixteenth - century 
 sentimentalist . I could not live up to it ! " 

 " you be more than a knight of old , " she answer , proudly--"you be a 
 great genius ! " 

 he be embarrassed by her simple praise . 

 " no , " he answered--"not even that -- sweet soul as you are!--not even 
 that ! you think I be -- but you do not know . you be a clever , 
 imaginative little girl -- and I love to hear you praise I -- but-- " 

 her lip touch his shyly and sweetly . 

 " no ' but ! ' " she said,--"i shall always stop your mouth if you put a 
 ' but ' against any work you do ! " 

 " in that way ? " he ask , smile . 

 " yes ! in that way . " 

 " then I shall put a ' but ' to everything ! " he declare . 

 they laugh together like child . 

 " where be Miss Leigh all this while ? " he query . 

 she start , awake suddenly to convention and commonplace . 

 " poor little godmother ! she must be wonder where I be ! but I do not 
 leave her,--she leave I when the Duke take charge of I -- I lose sight 
 of she then . " 

 " well , we must go and find her now"--and Jocelyn again fold his arm 
 closely round the dainty , elf - like figure in its moonlight - blue 
 drapery . " innocent , look at I ! " 

 she lift her eye , and as she meet his , glow with the fervent fire 
 of a new passion , her cheek grow hot and she be thankful for the 
 darkness . his lip close on hers in a long kiss . 

 " this be our secret ! " he said--"you must not speak of it to anyone . " 

 " how could I speak of it ? " she ask , wonderingly . 

 he let she go from his embrace , and take her hand begin to walk 
 slowly with she towards the house . 

 " you might do so , " he continued--"and it would not be wise!--neither 
 for you in your career , nor for I in mine . you be famous,--your name 
 be be talk of everywhere -- you must be very careful . no one must 
 know we be lover . " 

 she thrill at the word " lover , " and her hand tremble in his . 

 " no one shall know , " she say . 

 " not even Miss Leigh , " he insist . 

 " if I say ' no one ' of course I mean ' no one , ' " she answer , 
 gently--"not even Miss Leigh . " 

 he raise her hand to his lip and kiss it , relieve by this 
 assurance . he want his little " amour " to go on without suspicion or 
 interference , and he feel instinctively that if this girl make any sort 
 of a promise she would fulfil it . 

 " you can keep a secret then ? " he say , playfully--"unlike most woman ! " 

 she look up at he , smile . 

 " do man keep secret well ? " she ask . " I think not ! will you , for 
 instance , keep mine ? " 

 " your ? " and for a moment he be puzzle , be a man who think 
 chiefly of himself and his own pleasure for the moment . " what be your 
 secret ? " 

 she laugh . " oh , ' Sieur Amadis ' ! you pretend not to know ! be it not 
 the same as your ? you must not tell anybody that I -- I-- " 

 he understand - and press hard the little hand he hold . 

 " that you -- well ? go on ! I must not tell anybody -- what ? " 

 " that I love you ! " she say , in a tone so grave and sweet and 
 angelically tender , that for a second he be smite with a sudden 
 sense of shame . 

 be it right to steal all this unspoilt treasure of love from a heart 
 so warm and susceptible ? be it fair to enter such an ivory castle of 
 dream and break open all the " magic casement open on the foam , of 
 perilous sea in fairy land forlorn " ? he be silent , have no 
 response to give to the simple ardour of her utterance . what he feel 
 for she be what all man feel for each woman who in turn attract their 
 wandering fancy -- the desire of conquest and possession . he be move 
 to this desire by the irritate fact that this girl have startle an 
 apathetic public on both side of the Atlantic by the display of her 
 genius in the short space of two year -- whereas he have be more than 
 fifteen year intermittently at work without secure any such fame . to 
 throw the lasso of Love round the fly Pegasus on which she ride so 
 lightly and securely , would be an excitement and amusement which he be 
 not incline to forgo -- a triumph worth attain . but love such as she 
 imagine love to be , be not in his nature -- he conceive of it merely 
 as a powerful physical attraction which exert its influence between 
 two person of opposite sex and last for a certain time -- then wan 
 and wear off -- and he recognise marriage as a legal device to safeguard 
 a woman when the inevitable indifference and coldness of her mate set 
 in , make he no long a lover , but a household companion of habit 
 and circumstance , lawfully bind to pay for the education of child 
 and the necessary expense of living . in his inmost consciousness he 
 know very well that Innocent be not of the ordinary feminine 
 mould -- she have vision of the high and unattainable , and her ideal of 
 life be of that pure and transcendental quality which belong to 
 fine element unseen . the carnal mind can never comprehend 
 spirituality,--nevertheless , Jocelyn be a man cultured and clever 
 enough to feel that though he himself could not enter , and do not even 
 care to enter the uplifted sphere of thought , this strange child with 
 a gift of the god in her brain , already dwelt in they , serenely 
 unconscious of any low plane . and she love him!--and he would , on 
 that ground of love , teach she many thing she have never know -- he 
 would widen her outlook,--warm her sens -- increase her 
 perception -- train she like a wild rise on the iron trelli of his 
 experience -- while thus to instruct an unworldly soul in worldliness 
 would be for he an interesting and pleasurable pastime . 

 " and I can make she happy"--wa his additional thought--"in the only 
 way a woman be ever happy -- for a little while ! " 

 all this run through his mind as he hold her hand a moment long , till 
 the convincing music of the band and the brilliant light of the house 
 warn they to break away from each other . 

 " we have well go straight to the ball - room and dance in , " he say . " no 
 one will have miss we long . we have only be absent about a quarter of 
 an hour . " 

 " so much in such a little time ! " she say , softly . 

 he smile , answer the adore look of her eye with his own amorous 
 glance , and in another few second they be part of the brilliant 
 whirl of dancer now crowd the ball - room and swing round in a 
 blaze of colour and beauty to the somewhat hackneyed strain of the 
 " Fruhlings Reigen . " and as they float and fly , the delight of their 
 attractiveness to each other draw they close together till the sense 
 of separateness seem lose and whelm in a magnetic force of mutual 
 comprehension . 

 when this waltz be finish she be claim by many more partner , and 
 dance till she be weary,--then , between two " extras , " she go in 
 search of Miss Leigh , whom she find sit patiently in one of the 
 great drawing - room , look somewhat pale and tired . 

 " oh , my godmother ! " she exclaim , run up to she . " I have forget 
 how late it be get ! " 

 Miss Lavinia smile cheerfully . 

 " never mind , child ! " she say . " you be young and ought to enjoy 
 yourself . I be old , and hardly fit for these late assembly -- and how 
 very late they be too ! when I be a girl we never stay beyond 
 midnight-- " 

 " and be it midnight now ? " ask Innocent , amazed , turn to her 
 partner , a young scion of the aristocracy , who look as if he have not 
 be to bed for a week . 

 he smile simperingly , and glance at his watch . 

 " it be nearly two o'clock , " he say . " in fact it be tomorrow morning ! " 

 just then Jocelyn come up . 

 " be you go ? " he inquire . " well , perhaps it be time ! may I see you 
 to your carriage ? " 

 Miss Leigh gratefully accept this suggestion -- and Innocent , smile 
 her " good - night " to partner whom she have disappoint , walk with she 
 through the long vista of room , Jocelyn lead the way . they soon run 
 the gauntlet of the lady ' cloak - room and the wait mob of footman 
 and chauffeur that line the long passage lead to the 
 entrance - hall , and Jocelyn , go out into the street succeed in 
 find their modest little hire motor - brougham and assist they 
 into it . 

 " good - night , Miss Leigh ! " he say , lean on the door of the vehicle 
 and smile at they through the open window--"good - night , Miss 
 Armitage ! I hope you be not very tired ? " 

 " I be not tired at all ! " she answer , with a thrill of joy in her 
 voice like the note of a sweet bird . " I have be so very happy ! " 

 he smile . his face be pale and look unusually handsome,--she 
 stretch one little hand out to he . 

 " good - night , ' Sieur Amadis ! ' " 

 he bend down and kiss it . 

 " good - night ! " 

 the motor begin to move -- another moment , and they be off . innocent 
 sink back in the brougham with a sigh . 

 " you be tired , child!--you must be ! " say Miss Leigh . 

 " no , godmother mine ! that sigh be one of pleasure . it have be a most 
 wonderful evening!--wonderful ! " 

 " it be certainly very brilliant , " agree Miss Leigh . " and I be glad you 
 be make so much of , my dear ! that be as it ought to be . Lord Blythe 
 tell I he have seldom meet so charming a girl ! " 

 Innocent sit up suddenly . " Lord Blythe ? do you know he ? " 

 " no , I can not say I really know he , " reply Miss Leigh . " I have meet he 
 several time -- and his wife too -- there be some scandal about her year 
 and year ago before she be marry -- nobody ever know exactly what it 
 be , and her people hush it up . I daresay it be not very much . anyhow 
 Lord Blythe marry she -- and he be a very fine man with a great 
 position . I think I see you talk to Lady Blythe ? " 

 " Yes"--Innocent speak almost mechanically--"i have a few minute ' 
 conversation with she . " 

 " she be very handsome , " go on Miss Leigh . " she use to be quite 
 beautiful . a pity she have no child . " 

 Innocent be silent . the motor - brougham glide along . 

 " you and Mr. Jocelyn seem to get on very well together , " observe the 
 old lady , presently . " he be a very ' take ' man -- but I wonder if he be 
 quite sincere ? " 

 Innocent 's colour rose,--fortunately the interior of the brougham be 
 too dark for her face to be see . 

 " why should he not be ? " she asked--"surely with his great art , he would 
 be more sincere than most man ? " 

 " well , I hope so ! " and Miss Leigh 's voice be a little tremulous ; " but 
 artist be very impressionable , and live so much in a world of their 
 own that I sometimes doubt whether they have much understanding or 
 sympathy with the world of other people ! even Pierce Armitage -- who be 
 very dear to I -- run away with impression like a child with toy . he 
 would adore a person one day -- and hate he , or she , the next!"--and she 
 laugh softly and compassionately--"he would indeed , poor fellow ! he 
 be rather like Shelley in his like and dislike -- you've read all 
 about your Shelley of course ? " 

 " indeed I have ! " the girl answered,--"A glorious poet!--but he must 
 have be difficult to live with ! " 

 " difficult , if not impossible!"--and the gentle old lady take her hand 
 and hold it in a kind , motherly clasp--"you be a genius yourself -- but 
 you be a human little creature , not above the sweet and simple way of 
 life,--some of the poet and artist be and be in - human ! now Mr. 
 Jocelyn-- " 

 " he be human ! " say Innocent , quickly--"i'm sure of that ! " 

 " you be sure ? well , dear , you like he very much and you have make a 
 friend of him,--which be quite natural consider the long association 
 you have have with his name -- such a curious and romantic 
 coincidence!--but I hope he will not disappoint you . " 

 Innocent laugh , happily . 

 " do not be afraid , you dear little godmother ! " she said--"i do not expect 
 anything of he , so no disappointment be possible ! here we be ! " 

 the brougham stop and they alight . open the house - door with a 
 latch - key they enter , and pause one moment in the drawing - room , 
 where the light have be leave burn for their return , Miss Leigh 
 take Innocent tenderly by the arm and point to the portrait on the 
 harpsichord . 

 " there be a true genius ! " she said--"He might have be the great 
 artist in England to - day if he have not let his impression and 
 prejudice overmaster his judgment . you know -- for I have tell you my 
 story -- that he love I , or think he do -- and I love he and know I 
 do ! there be the difference between we ! he tired of I -- all artist 
 tire of the one face -- they want dozens!--and he lose his head over some 
 woman whose name I never know . the result must have be fatal to his 
 career , for it stop short just when he be succeeding;--for I , it 
 only leave I resolve to be true to his memory till the end . but , my 
 child , it be a hard lot to be alone all one 's day , with only the 
 remembrance of a past love to keep one 's heart from grow cold ! " 

 there be a little sob in her voice,--innocent , touch to the quick , 
 kiss she tenderly . 

 " why do you talk like this so sadly to - night ? " she asked--"has 
 something remind you of -- of HIM ? " and she glance half nervously 
 towards the portrait . 

 " yes , " answer the old lady , simply--"Something have remind I -- very 
 much -- of he ! good - night , dear little child ! keep your beautiful dream 
 and ideal as long as you can ! sleep well ! " 

 she turn off the light , and they go upstairs together to their 
 several room . 

 once alone , Innocent fling off her dainty ball attire,--release her 
 bright hair from the pin that hold it bind in ripple wave about 
 her shapely head , and slip on a loose white wrapper sit down to 
 think . she have to realise the unpleasing fact that against her own wish 
 and will she have become involved in mysteries,--secrets which she dare 
 not , for the sake of other , betray . her parentage could not be 
 divulge , because her father be Pierce Armitage , the worship memory 
 of Miss Leigh 's heart,--while her mother , Lady Blythe , occupy a high 
 social position which must not be assail . and now -- now , Amadis de 
 Jocelyn be her lover!--yet no one must know , because he do not wish 
 it . for some cause or other which she could not determine , he insist 
 on secrecy . so she be mesh in net of other ' weaving , and could not 
 take a step to disentangle herself and stand clear . of her own accord 
 she would have be frank and open as the daylight,--but from the 
 first , a forward fate appear to have take delight in surround she 
 with deception enforce by the sin of other . her face burn as she 
 think of Jocelyn 's passionate kiss -- she must hide all that joy!--it 
 have already become almost a guilty secret . he be the first man that 
 have ever kiss she since her " Dad " died,--the first that have ever 
 kiss she as a lover . her mind fly suddenly and capriciously back to 
 Briar Farm -- to Robin Clifford who have long to kiss she , and yet have 
 refuse to do so unless she could have love he . she have never love 
 he -- no!--and yet the thought of he just now give she a thrill of 
 remorseful tenderness . she know in herself at last what love could 
 mean,--and with that knowledge she realise what Robin must have 
 suffer . 

 " to love without return -- without hope ! " she mused--"Oh , it would be 
 torture!--to I , death ! poor Robin ! " 

 Poor Robin , indeed ! he would not have dare to caress she with the wild 
 and tender audacity of Amadis de Jocelyn ! 

 " my love ! " she whisper to the silence.--"My love ! " she repeat , as 
 she kneel down to say her prayer , send the adore and idealise 
 name up on vibration of light to the throne of the most high,--and " my 
 love ! " be the last word she murmur as she nestle into her little 
 bed , her fair head on its white pillow look like the head of one of 
 Botticelli 's angel . her own success,--her celebrity as a genius in 
 literature,--her dream of fame -- these now be all as naught!--less 
 than the cloud of a night or the mist of a morning -- there be nothing 
 for she in earth or heaven save " my love ! " 




 CHAPTER V 

 Lord Blythe be sit alone in his library . he be accustom to sit 
 alone , and rather like it . it be the evening after that of the 
 Duchess of Deanshire 's reception ; his wife have go to another similar 
 " crush , " but have graciously excuse his attendance , for which he be 
 honestly grateful . he be old enough , at sixty - eight , to appreciate the 
 luxury of peace and quietness,--he have put on an old lounge coat and an 
 easy pair of slipper , and be thoroughly enjoy himself in a 
 comfortable arm - chair with a book and a cigar . the book be by " Ena 
 Armitage"--the cigar , one of a choice brand know chiefly to fastidious 
 connoisseur of tobacco . the book , however , be a powerful rival to the 
 charm of the fragrant Havana -- for every now and again he allow the 
 cigar to die out and have to re - light it , owe to his fascinated 
 absorption in the volume he hold . he be an exceedingly clever 
 man -- deeply verse in literature and language , and in his young day 
 have be a great student,--he have read nearly every book of note , and 
 be as familiar with the great author as with his great friend , 
 so that he be well fit to judge without prejudice the merit of any 
 new aspirant to literary fame . but he be wholly unprepared for the 
 power and the daring genius which stamp itself on every page of the 
 new writer 's work,--he almost forget , while read , whether it be man 
 or woman who have give such a production to the world , so impressed be 
 he by the masterly treatment of a simple subject make beautiful by a 
 scholarly and incisive style . it be literature of the high 
 kind,--and realise this with every sentence he peruse , it be with a 
 shock of surprise that he remember the personality of the author -- the 
 unobtrusive girl who have be the " show animal " at her Grace of 
 Deanshire 's reception and dance . 

 " positively , I can scarcely believe it ! " he exclaim sotto - voce--"That 
 child I meet last night actually write this amazing piece of work ! it be 
 almost incredible ! a nice child too,--simple and perfectly 
 natural,--nothing of the blue - stocking about she . well , well ! what a 
 career she will make!--what a name!--that be , if she take care of 
 herself and do not fall in love , which she be sure to do ! that be the 
 bad of woman -- God occasionally give they brain , but they have 
 scarcely begin to use they when heart and sentiment step in and 
 overthrow all reason . now , we men-- " 

 he paused,--thinke . there have be a time in his life -- long ago , when 
 he be very young -- when heart and sentiment have very nearly overthrow 
 reason in his own case -- and sometimes he be inclined to regret that 
 such overthrow have be avert . 

 " for the moment it be perhaps worth everything else ! " he 
 mused--"But -- for the moment only ! the ecstasy do not last . " 

 his cigar have go out again , and he re - light it . the clock on the 
 mantelpiece strike twelve with a silvery clang , and almost at the same 
 instant he hear the rustle of a silk gown and a light footstep,--the 
 door open , and his wife appear . 

 " be you busy ? " she enquired--"May I come in ? " 

 he rise , with the stately old - fashioned courtesy habitual to he . 

 " by all mean come in ! " he said--"you have return early ? " 

 " yes . " she loosen her rich evening cloak , line with ermine , and let 
 it fall on the back of the chair in which she seat herself--"It be a 
 boresome affair,--there be recitation and music which I hate -- so I 
 come away . you be read ? " 

 " not now"--and he close the volume on the table beside him--"But I 
 have be read -- that amazing book by the young girl we meet at the 
 Deanshires ' last night -- Ena Armitage . it be really a fine piece of work . " 

 she be silent . 

 " you do not take to she , I be afraid ? " he go on--"Yet she seem a 
 charming , modest little person . perhaps she be not quite what you 
 expect ? " 

 Lady Blythe give a sudden harsh laugh . 

 " you be right ! she certainly be not what I expect ! be the door well 
 shut ? " 

 surprise at her look and manner , he go to see . 

 " the door be quite closed , " he say , rather stiffly . " one would think 
 we be talk secret -- and we never do ! " 

 " no ! " she rejoin , look at he curiously--"we never do . we be 
 model husband and wife , have nothing to conceal ! " 

 he take up his cigar which he have lay down for a minute , and with 
 careful minuteness flick off the ash . 

 " you have something to tell I , " he remark , quietly--"Pray go on , and 
 do not let I interrupt you . do you object to my smoking ? " 

 " not in the least . " 

 he stand with his back to the fireplace , a tall , stately figure of a 
 man , and look at her expectantly,--she meanwhile recline in a 
 cushion chair with the fold of her ermine fall about she , like a 
 queen of languorous luxury . 

 " I suppose , " she began--"hardly anything in the social life of our day 
 would very much surprise or shock you-- ? " 

 " very little , certainly ! " he answer , smile coldly--"i have live a 
 long time , and be not easily surprised ! " 

 " not even if it concern some one you know ? " 

 his fine open brow knit itself in a momentary line of puzzle 
 consideration . 

 " some one I know ? " he repeated--"Well , I should certainly be very sorry 
 to hear anything of a scandalous nature connect with the girl we see 
 last night -- she look too young and too innocent-- " 

 " Innocent -- oh yes ! " and Lady Blythe again laugh that harsh laugh of 
 suppress hysterical excitement--"she be innocent enough ! " 

 " Pardon ! I think you be about to speak of she , as you say she be 
 not what you expected-- " 

 he paused,--startle by the haggard and desperate expression of her 
 face . 

 " Richard , " she said--"you be a good man , and you hold very strong 
 opinion about truth and honour and all that sort of thing . I do not 
 believe you could ever understand badness -- real , downright 
 badness -- could you ? " 

 " Badness ? ... in that child ? " he exclaim . 

 she give an impatient , angry gesture . 

 " dear I , you be perfectly obsess by ' that child , ' as you call she ! " 
 she answered--"you have well know the truth then at once,--'that 
 child ' be my daughter ! " 

 " your daughter?--your -- your-- " 

 the word die on his lip -- he stagger slightly as though under a 
 sudden physical blow , and grip the mantelpiece behind he with one 
 hand . 

 " Good God ! " he half whispered--"What do you mean?--you have have no 
 children-- " 

 " not by you,--no ! " she say , with a flash of scorn--"not in marriage , 
 that church - and - law form of union!--but by love and passion -- yes ! 
 stop!--do not look at I like that ! I have not be false to you -- I 
 have not betray you ! your honour have be safe with I ! it be before 
 I meet you that this thing happen . " 

 he stand rigid and very pale . 

 " before you meet I ? " 

 " yes . I be a silly , romantic , headstrong girl,--my parent be 
 compel to go abroad , and I be leave in the charge of one of my 
 mother 's society friend -- a thoroughly worldly , unprincipled woman 
 whose life be make up of intrigue and gambling . and I run away with a 
 man -- Pierce Armitage-- " 

 " Pierce Armitage ! " 

 the name break from he like a cry of agony . 

 " yes -- Pierce Armitage . do you know he ? " 

 he look at she with eye in which there be a strange horror . 

 " know he ? he be my good friend ! " 

 she shrug her shoulder , and a slight weary smile part her lip . 

 " well , you never tell me,--I have never hear you mention his name . but 
 the world be a small place!--and when I be a girl he be begin to 
 be know by a good many people . anyhow , he throw up everything in the 
 way of his art and work , and run away with I . I go quite 
 willingly -- I take a maid whom we bribed,--we pretend we be marry , 
 and we have a charming time together -- a time of real romance , till he 
 begin to get tired and want change -- all man be like that ! then he 
 become a bore with a bad temper . he certainly behave very well when he 
 know the child be come , and offer to marry I in real earnest -- but 
 I refuse . " 

 " you refuse ! " Lord Blythe echo the word in a kind of stupefied 
 wonderment . 

 " of course I do . he be quite poor -- and I should have be miserable 
 run about the world with a man who depend on art for a living . 
 besides he be cease to be a lover -- and as a husband he would have 
 be insupportable . we manage everything very well -- my own people be 
 all in India -- and my mother 's friend , if she guess my affair , say 
 nothing about it,--wisely enough for her own sake!--so that when my 
 time come I be able to go away on an easy pretext and get it all over 
 secretly . Pierce come and stay in a hotel close at hand -- he be 
 rather in a fright lest I should die!--it would have be such an 
 awkward business for him!--however , all go well , and when I have quite 
 recover he take the child away from I , and leave it at an old 
 farmhouse he have once make a drawing of , say he would call back for 
 it -- as if it be a parcel ! " she laugh lightly . " he write and tell I 
 what he have do and give I the address of the farm -- then he go 
 abroad , and I never hear of he again-- " 

 " he die , " interpose Lord Blythe , slowly--"He die -- alone and very 
 poor-- " 

 " so I be tell , " she rejoin , indifferently--"Oh yes ! I see you look 
 at I as if you think I have no heart ! perhaps I have not,--i use to 
 have something like one,--your friend Armitage kill it in I . anyhow , 
 I know the child have be adopt by the farm people as their own , and 
 I take no further trouble . my parent come home from India to inherit 
 an unexpected fortune , and they take I about with they a great 
 deal -- they be never tell of my romantic escapade!--then I meet 
 you -- and you marry I . " 

 a sigh break from he , but he say nothing . 

 " you be sorry you do , I suppose ! " she go on in a quick , reckless 
 way--"anyhow , I try to do my duty . when I hear by chance that the 
 old farmer who have take care of the child be dead , I make up my mind 
 to go and see what she be like . I find she , and offer to adopt 
 she -- but she would not hear of it -- so I let she be . " 

 Lord Blythe move a little from his statuesque attitude of attention . 

 " you tell she you be her mother ? " 

 " I do . " 

 " and offer to ' adopt ' your own child ? " she give an airy gesture . 

 " it be the only thing to do ! one can not make a social scandal . " 

 " and she refuse ? " 

 " she refuse . " 

 " I admire she for it , " say Lord Blythe , calmly . 

 she shoot an angry glance at he . he go on in cold , deliberate accent . 

 " you be unprepared for the strange compensation you have 
 received?--the sudden fame of your deserted daughter ? " 

 her hand clasp and unclasp themselves nervously . 

 " I know nothing of it ! armitage be not an uncommon name , and I do not 
 connect it with she . she have no right to wear it . " 

 " if her father be alive he would be proud that she wear 
 it!--moreover he would give she the right to wear it , and would make it 
 legal , " say Lord Blythe sternly--"out of old memory I can say that for 
 he ! you recognise each other at once , I suppose , when I present she 
 to you at the Duchess 's reception ? " 

 " of course we do ! " retort his wife--"You yourself see that I be 
 rather take aback,--it be difficult to conceal our mutual 
 astonishment-- " 

 " it must have be ! " and a thin ironic smile hover on his lips--"and 
 you carry it off well ! but -- the poor child!--what an ordeal for she ! 
 you can hardly have feel it so keenly , be season to hypocrisy for 
 so many year ! " her eye flash up at he indignantly . he raise his 
 hand with a warning gesture . 

 " permit I to speak , Maude ! you can scarcely wonder that I be -- well!--a 
 little shake and bewilder by the confession you have made,--the 
 secret you have -- after year of marriage -- suddenly divulge . you 
 suggest -- at the beginning of this interview -- that perhaps there be 
 nothing in the social life of our day that would very much shock or 
 surprise I -- and I answer you that I be not easily surprised -- but -- I 
 be think of others.--it do not occur to I that -- that my own 
 wife-- " he pause , steady his voice,--then continued--"that my own 
 wife 's honour be involve in the matter-- " he pause again . " Sentiment 
 be of course out of place -- nobody be suppose to feel anything 
 nowadays -- or to suffer -- or to break one 's heart , as the phrase 
 goes,--that would be consider abnormal , or bad form,--but I have the 
 idea -- a foolish one , no doubt!--that though you may not have marry I 
 for love on your own part , you do so because you recognise the 
 love,--the truth -- the admiration and respect -- on mine . I be at any 
 rate happy in believe you did!--I never dream you marry I for 
 the sake of convenience!--to kill the memory of a scandal , and 
 establish a safe position-- " 

 she move restlessly and gather her ermine cloak about she as though 
 to rise and go . 

 " one moment ! " he go on--"after what you have tell I I hope you see 
 clearly that it be impossible we can live together under the same roof 
 again . if you could endure it , _ i _ could not ! " 

 she spring up , pale and excited . 

 " what ? you mean to make trouble ? I , who have keep my own counsel all 
 these year , be to be disgrace because I have at last confide in you ? 
 you will scandalise society -- you will separate from me-- " 

 she stop , half choke by a rise paroxysm of rage . 

 he look at she as he might have look at some small angry animal . 

 " I shall make no trouble , " he answer , quietly--"and I shall not 
 scandalise society . but I can not live with you . I will go away at once 
 on some convenient excuse -- abroad -- anywhere -- and you can say whatever 
 you please of my prolonged absence . if I could be of any use or 
 protection to the girl I see last night -- the daughter of my friend 
 Pierce Armitage -- I would stay , but circumstance render any such 
 service from I impossible . besides , she need no one to assist 
 she -- she have make a position for herself -- a position more enviable than 
 your or mine . you have that to think about by way of -- consolation?--or 
 reproach ? " 

 she stand draw up to her full height , look at he . 

 " you can not forgive I , then ? " she say . 

 he shudder . 

 " forgive you ! be there a man who could forgive twenty year of 
 deliberate deception from the wife he think the soul of honour ? 
 Maude , Maude ! we live in lax time truly , when man and woman laugh at 
 principle and good faith , and deal with each other less honestly than 
 the beast of the field,--but for I there be a limit!--a limit you 
 have pass ! I think I could pardon your wrong to I more readily than 
 I can pardon your callous desertion of the child you bring into the 
 world -- your lack of womanliness -- motherliness!--your deliberate refusal 
 to give Pierce Armitage the chance of right the wrong he have 
 commit in a headstrong , heart - strong rush of thoughtless 
 passion!--he would have right it , I know , and be a loyal husband to 
 you , and a good father to his child . for whatever his fault be he 
 be neither callous nor brutal . you prevent he from do this,--you 
 be tired of he -- your so - call ' love ' for he be a mere selfish 
 caprice of the moment -- and you prefer deceit and a rich marriage to 
 the simple duty of a woman ! well!--you may find excuse for 
 yourself,--i can not find they for you ! I could not remain by your side 
 as a husband and run the risk of come constantly in contact , as we 
 do last night , with that innocent girl , place as she be , in a 
 situation of so much difficulty , by the sin of her parent -- her 
 mother , my wife!--her father , my dead friend ! the position be , and 
 would be untenable ! " 

 still she stand , look at he . 

 " have you do ? " she ask . 

 he meet her fix gaze , coldly . 

 " I have . I have say all I wish to say . so far as I be concerned the 
 incident be closed . I will only bid you good - night -- and farewell ! " 

 " good - night -- and farewell ! " she repeat , with a mocking drawl,--then 
 she suddenly burst into a fit of shrill laughter . " oh dear , oh dear ! " 
 she cry , between little scream of hysterical mirth--"You be so very 
 funny , you know ! like -- what's - his - name?--marius in the ruin of 
 carthage!--or one of those antique classical bore with their household 
 god break around they ! you -- you ought to have live in their 
 days!--you be so terribly behind the time ! " she laugh recklessly 
 again . " we do not do the Marius and Carthage business now -- life 's too 
 full and too short ! really , Richard , I be afraid you be get very 
 old!--poor dear!--past sixty I know!--and you be quite prehistoric in 
 some of your fancies!--'Good - night!'--er--'and farewell ! ' sound so 
 stagey , do not it ! " she wipe the spasmodic tear of mirth from her 
 eye , and still shake with laughter gather up her rich ermine wrap 
 on one white , jewel arm . " womanliness -- motherliness!--good Lord , 
 deliver us!--I never think you likely to preach at I -- if I have I 
 would not have tell you anything ! I take you for a sensible man of the 
 world -- but you be only a stupid old - fashioned thing after all ! 
 Good - night!--and farewell ! " 

 she perform the taunt travesty of an elaborate Court curtsey and 
 pass he -- a handsome , gleam vision of satin , lace and glitter 
 jewel -- and open the door with some noise and emphasis , she turn 
 her head gracefully over her shoulder . unkind laughter still light up her 
 face and hard , brilliant eye . 

 " good - night!--farewell ! " she say again , and be go . 

 for a moment he stand inert where she leave he -- then sink into a 
 chair he cover his face with his hand . so he remain for some 
 time -- silently wrestle with himself and his own emotion . he have to 
 realise that at an age when he might naturally have look for a 
 tranquil home life -- a life tend and soothe into its natural decline 
 by the care and devotion of the wife he have undemonstratively but most 
 tenderly love , he be suddenly cast adrift like the hulk of an old 
 battleship break from its mooring , with nothing but solitude and 
 darkness close in upon his latter day . then he think of the 
 girl,--his wife 's child -- the child too of his college chum and dearest 
 friend,--he saw , impress like a picture on the cell of his brain , 
 her fair young face , pathetic eye and sweet intelligence of 
 expression,--he remember how modestly she wear she sudden fame , as a 
 child might wear a wild flower,--and , place by her parentage in a 
 difficulty for which she be not responsible , she must have suffer 
 considerable pain and sorrow . 

 " I will go and see she to - morrow , " he say to himself--"It will be 
 well for she to know that I have hear all her sad little 
 history -- then -- if she ever want a friend she can come to I without 
 fear . ah!--if only she be MY daughter ! " 

 he sighed,--hi handsome old head drooped,--he have long for child 
 and the boon have be deny . 

 " if she be my daughter , " he repeat , slowly--"i should be a proud 
 man instead of a sorrowful one ! " 

 he turn off the light in the library and go upstairs to his 
 bedroom . outside his wife 's door he pause a moment , think he hear 
 a sound,--but all be silent . imagine that he probably would not 
 sleep he place a book near his bedside -- but nature be kind to his age 
 and temperament , and after about an hour of wakefulness and sad 
 perplexity , all ruffle care be gradually smooth away from his 
 mind , and he fall into a deep and dreamless slumber . 

 meanwhile Lady Blythe have be disrobe by a drowsy maid whom she 
 sharply reproach for be sleepy when she ought to have be wide 
 awake , though it be long past midnight,--and dismiss the girl at 
 last , she sit alone before her mirror , think with some pettishness 
 of the interview she have just have with her husband . 

 " old fool ! " she soliloquised--"He ought to know well than to play the 
 tragic - sentimental with I at his time of life ! I think he would 
 accept the situation reasonably and help I to tackle it . of course it 
 will be simply abominable if I be to meet that girl at every big 
 society function -- I do not know what I shall do about it ! why do not she 
 stay in her old farm - house!--who could ever have imagine her become 
 famous ! I shall go abroad , I think -- that will be the good thing to do . 
 if Blythe leave I as he threaten , I shall certainly not stay here by 
 myself to face the music ! besides , who knows?--the girl herself may 
 ' round ' on I when her head get a little more swelled with success . 
 such a horrid bore!--i wish I have never see Pierce Armitage ! " 

 even as she think of he the vision come back to she of the handsome 
 face and passionate eye of her former lover,--again she see the 
 romantic little village by the sea where they have dwelt together as in 
 another eden,--she remember how he would hurry up from the shore 
 bring with he the sketch he have be work at , eager for her eye 
 to look at it , thrill at her praise , and pour out upon her such 
 tender word and caress such as she have never know since those wild 
 and ardent day ! a slight shiver run through she -- something like a pang 
 of remorse sting her harden spirit . 

 " and the child , " she murmured--"the child -- it clung to I and I kiss 
 it!--it be a dear little thing ! " 

 she glance about she nervously -- the room seem full of wandering 
 shadow . 

 " I must sleep ! " she thought--"i be worried and out of sort -- I must 
 sleep and forget-- " 

 she take out of a drawer in her dressing - table a case of medicinal 
 cachet mark " Veronal . " 

 " one or two more or less will not hurt I , " she say , with a pale , 
 force smile at herself in the mirror--"i be accustomed to it -- and I 
 must have a good long sleep ! " 

                              * * * * * * * * 

                               * * * * * * 

                                * * * * 

 she have her way . morning came,--and she be still sleep . noon -- and 
 nothing could waken she . doctor , hastily summon , do their good to 
 rouse she to that life which with all its pain and possibility still 
 throb in the world around she -- but their effort be vain . 

 " Suicide ? " whisper one . 

 " oh no ! mere accident!--an overdose of veronal -- some carelessness -- quite 
 a common occurrence . nothing to be do ! " 

 no!--nothe to be do ! her slumber have deepen into that strange 
 stillness which we call death,--and her husband , a statuesque and rigid 
 figure , gaze on her quiet body with tearless eye . 

 " good - night ! " he whisper to the heavy silence--"Good - night ! farewell ! " 




 CHAPTER VI 

 one of the advantage or disadvantage of the way in which we live in 
 these modern day be that we be cease to feel . that be to say we do 
 not permit ourselves to be affect by either death or misfortune , 
 provide these natural calamity leave our own person unscathed . we 
 be begin not to understand emotion except as a phase of bad 
 manner , and we cultivate an apathetic , soulless indifference to event 
 of great moment whether triumphant or tragic , whenever they do not 
 involve our own well - be and creature comfort . whole boatload of 
 fisherman may go forth to their doom in the tooth of a gale without 
 move we to pity so long as we have our well - fry sole or grill cod 
 for breakfast,--and even such appalling disaster as the wicked 
 assassination of hapless monarchs , or the wreck of palatial 
 ocean - liner with more than a thousand human being all whelm at once 
 in the pitiless depth of the sea , leave we cold , save for the 
 uplifting of our eye and shoulder during an hour or so,--an 
 expression of slight shock , follow by forgetfulness . air - man , 
 recklessly brave the space of the sky , fall headlong , and be 
 smash to mutilate atom every month or so , without rouse we to 
 more than a pass comment , and a chorus of " how dreadful ! " from 
 simper women,--and the great and good man alive can not hope for 
 long remembrance by the world at large when he die . Shakespeare 
 recognise this tendency in callous human nature when he make his 
 Hamlet say-- 

 " O heaven ! die two month ago and not forget yet ? then there be hope 
 a great man 's memory may outlive his life half a year , but by ' r lady , 
 he must build church then , or else shall he suffer not think on . " 

 wife recover the loss of their husband with amazing 
 rapidity,--husband " get over " the demise of their wife with the 
 galloping ease of train hunter leap an accustomed fence -- family 
 forget their dead as resolutely as some debtor forget their 
 bills,--and to express sorrow , pity , tenderness , affection , or any sort 
 of " sentiment " whatever be to expose one 's self to derision and 
 contempt from the " normal " modernist who cultivate cynicism as a fine 
 art . many of we elect to live , each one , in a little back - yard garden 
 of selfish interest -- wall round carefully , and guard against 
 possible intrusion by uplifted spike of conventionalism,--the door be 
 keep jealously close -- and only now and then do some impulsive spirit 
 bold than the rest , venture to put up a ladder and peep over the 
 wall . shut in with various favourite form of hypocrisy and cowardice , 
 each little unit pass its short life in mistrust its neighbour 
 unit , and death find none of they wiser , well or nearer the utmost 
 good than when they be first uselessly bear . 

 among such vain and unprofitable atom of life Lady Maude Blythe have 
 be one of the vain and most unprofitable,--though of such " social " 
 importance as to be hold in respectful awe by tuft - hunter and 
 parasite , who feed on the rich as the green - fly feed on the rose . the 
 news of her sudden death briefly chronicle by the fashionable 
 intelligence column of the press with the usual--"we deeply 
 regret"--create no very sorrowful sensation -- a few vapid people idly 
 remark to one another--"then her great ball will not come 
 off!"--somewhat as if she have retire into the grave to avoid the 
 trouble and expense of the function . Cards inscribed--"Sympathy and 
 kind enquiries"--were leave for Lord Blythe in the care of his dignified 
 butler , who receive they with the impassiveness of a buddhist idol and 
 deposit they all on the orthodox salver in the hall -- and a few 
 message of " deeply shock and grieve . condolences"--by wire , not 
 exceed sixpence each , be despatch to the lonely widower,--but 
 beyond these purely formal observance , the handsome brilliant society 
 woman drop out of thought and remembrance as swiftly as a dead leaf 
 drop from a tree . she have never be love , save by her two deluded 
 dupe -- Pierce Armitage and her husband,--no one in the whole wide range 
 of her social acquaintance would have ever think of feel the 
 slight affection for she . the first announcement of her death 
 appear in an evening paper , state the cause to be an accidental 
 overdose of veronal take to procure sleep , and Miss Leigh , see the 
 paragraph by mere chance , give a shocked exclamation-- 

 " innocent ! my dear!--how dreadful ! that poor Lady Blythe we see the 
 other night be dead ! " 

 the girl be stand by the tea - table just pour out a cup of tea 
 for Miss Leigh -- she start so nervously that the cup almost fall from 
 her hand . 

 " dead ! " she repeat , in a low , stifle voice . " Lady Blythe ? dead ? " 

 " Yes!--it be awful ! that horrid veronal ! such a dangerous drug ! it 
 appear she be accustom to take it for sleep -- and unfortunately she 
 take an over - dose . how terrible for Lord Blythe ! " 

 Innocent sit down , tremble . her gaze involuntarily wander to the 
 portrait of Pierce Armitage -- the lover of the dead woman , and her 
 father ! the handsome face with its dreamy yet proud eye appear 
 conscious of her intense regard -- she look and look , and long to 
 speak -- to tell Miss Leigh all -- but something hold her silent . she have 
 her own secret now -- and it restrain she from disclose the secret 
 of other . nor could she realise that it be her mother -- actually her 
 own mother -- who have be take so suddenly and tragically from the 
 world . the news barely affect she -- nor be this surprising , see 
 that she have never entirely grasp the fact of her mother 's 
 personality or existence at all . she have feel no emotion concern 
 she , save of repulsion and dislike . her unexpected figure have appear 
 on the scene like a strange vision , and now have vanish from it as 
 strangely . Innocent be in very truth " motherless"--but so she have 
 always be -- for a mother who desert her child be bad than a mother 
 dead . yet it be some few minute before she could control herself 
 sufficiently to speak or look calmly -- and her eye be downcast as 
 Miss Leigh come up to the tea - table , newspaper in hand , to discuss the 
 tragic incident . 

 " she be a very brilliant woman in society , " say the gentle old lady , 
 then--"you do not know she , of course , and you could not judge of she 
 by see she just one evening . but I remember the time when she be 
 much talk of as ' the beautiful Maude Osborne'--she be a very 
 lively , wilful girl , and she have be rather neglect by her parent , 
 who leave she in England in charge of some friend while they be in 
 India . I think she run rather wild at that time . there be some talk of 
 she have go off secretly somewhere with a lover -- but I never 
 believe the story . it be a silly scandal -- and of course it stop 
 directly she marry Lord Blythe . he give she a splendid position,--and 
 he be devoted to she -- poor man ! " 

 " yes ? " murmur Innocent , mechanically . she do not know what to say . 

 " if she have be bless with child -- or even one child , " go on 
 Miss leigh--"i think it would have be well for she . I be sure she 
 would have be happy ! he would , I feel certain ! " 

 " no doubt ! " the girl answer in the same quiet tone . 

 " my dear , you look very pale ! " say Miss Leigh , with some anxiety--"have 
 you be work too hard ? " 

 she smile . 

 " that would be impossible ! " she answer . " I could not work too 
 hard -- it be such happiness to work -- one forgets!--yes -- one forget all 
 that one do not wish to remember ! " 

 the anxious expression still remain on Miss Lavinia 's face,--but , 
 true to the instinct of an old - fashioned gentlewoman , she do not 
 press enquiry where she see they might be embarrassing or unwelcome . 
 and though she now love Innocent as much as if she have be her own 
 child , she never fail to remember that after all , the girl have earn 
 her own almost wealthy independence , and be free to do as she like 
 without anybody 's control or interference , and that though she be so 
 young she be bind to be in all respect untrammelle in her life and 
 action . she go where she please -- she have her own little hire 
 motor - brougham -- she also have many friend who invite she out without 
 include Miss Leigh in the invitation , and she be still the " pay 
 guest " at the little Kensington house,--a guest who be never tired of 
 do kindly and helpful deed for the benefit of the sweet old woman 
 who be her hostess . once or twice Miss Leigh have make a faint 
 half - hearted protest against her constant and lavish generosity . 

 " my dear , " she have said--"With all the money you earn now you could 
 live in a much large house -- you could indeed have a house of your own , 
 with many more luxury -- why do you stay here , shower advantage on 
 I , who be nothing but a prosy old body?--you could do much well ! " 

 " could I really ? " and Innocent have laugh and kiss she . " Well!--I 
 do not want to do any well -- i'm quite happy as I be . one thing 
 is--(and you seem to forget it!)--that I be very fond of you!--and when 
 I be very fond of a person it be difficult to shake I off ! " 

 so she stay on -- and live her life with a nun - like simplicity and 
 economy -- spend her money on other rather than herself , and help 
 those in need,--and never even in her dress , which be always 
 exquisite , run into vagary of extravagance and folly of 
 fashion . she have discover a little french dressmaker , whose husband 
 have desert she , leave she with two small child to feed and 
 educate , and to this humble , un - famous plier of the needle she 
 entrust her wardrobe with entirely successful result . worth , Paquin , 
 Doucet and other loudly advertise personage be all quote as 
 " creator " of her gown , whereat she be amuse . 

 " a little personal taste and think go so much far in dress than 
 money , " she be will not to say to some of her rather envious woman 
 friend . " I would rather copy the clothe in an old picture than the 
 clothe in a fashion book . " 

 Odd fancy about her dead mother come to she when she be alone in her 
 own room -- particularly at night when she say her prayer . some 
 mysterious force seem compel she to offer up a petition for the 
 peace of her mother 's soul,--she know from the old book write by the 
 " Sieur Amadis " that to do this be a custom of his creed . she miss it 
 out of the Church of England Prayer - book , though she dutifully follow 
 the tenet of the faith in which Miss Leigh have have she baptise and 
 confirm -- but in her heart of heart she think it good and right to 
 pray for the peace of depart souls-- 

 " for who can tell"--she would say to herself--"what strange confusion 
 and sorrow they may be suffering!--away from all that they once know 
 and care for ! even if prayer can not help they it be kind to pray ! " 

 and for her mother 's soul she feel a dim and far - off sense of 
 pity -- almost a fear , lest that unsatisfie spirit might be lose and 
 wander in a chaos of dark experience without any clue to guide or 
 any light to shine upon its dreadful solitude . so may the dead come 
 near to the living than when they also live ! 

 some three or four week after Lady Blythe 's sudden exit from a world 
 too callous to care whether she stay in it or go from it , Lord 
 Blythe call at Miss Leigh 's house and ask to see she . he be 
 admit at once , and the pretty old lady come down in a great flutter 
 to the drawing - room to receive he . she find he stand in front of 
 the harpsichord , look at the portrait upon it . he turn quickly 
 round as she enter and speak with some abruptness . 

 " I must apologise for call rather late in the afternoon , " he 
 said--"but I could not wait another day . I have something important to 
 tell you-- " he pause -- then go on--"it 's rather startling to I to 
 find that portrait here!--I know the man . surely it be Pierce Armitage , 
 the painter ? " 

 " Yes"--and Miss Leigh 's eye open in a little surprise and 
 bewilderment--"He be a great friend of mine -- and of your ? " " he be my 
 college chum"--and he walk close to the picture and look at it 
 steadfastly--"that must have be take when he be quite a young 
 man -- before-- " he pause again,--then say with a forced 
 smile--"talking of Armitage -- be Miss Armitage in ? " 

 " no , she be not"--and the old lady look regretful--"She have go out 
 to tea -- I'm sorry-- " 

 " it be just as well"--and Lord Blythe take one or two restless pace up 
 and down the little room--"i would rather talk to you alone first . 
 yes!--that portrait of Pierce must have be take in early day -- just 
 about the time he run away with Maude osborne-- " 

 Miss Leigh gaze at he enquiringly . 

 " with Maude Osborne ? " 

 " yes -- with Maude Osborne , who afterwards become my wife . " 

 Miss Leigh tremble and draw back , look about she in a daze way as 
 though seek for some place to hide in . Lord Blythe see her agitation . 

 " I be afraid I be worry you ! " he say , kindly . " sit down , 
 please,"--and he place a chair for she . " we be both elderly folk and 
 shock be not good for we . there!"--and he take her hand and pat it 
 gently--"as I be say , that portrait must have be take about 
 then -- do he give it to you ? " 

 " yes , " she answer , faintly--"He do . we be engaged-- " 

 " engage ! good God ! You?--to Pierce?--My dear lady , forgive me!--I'm 
 very sorry!--i have no idea-- " 

 but Miss Leigh compose herself very quickly . 

 " please do not mind I ! " she said--"It all happen so very long ago ! 
 yes -- Pierce Armitage and I be engage -- but he suddenly go away -- and 
 I be tell he have go with some very beautiful girl he have fall head 
 over ear in love with -- and I never see he again . but I never 
 reproach he -- I -- I love he too well ! " 

 silently Lord Blythe take the worn little hand and raise it to his 
 lip . 

 " Pierce be more cruel than I think be possible to him"--he say , at 
 last , very gently--"But -- you have the good of he with you in -- his 
 daughter ! " 

 " his daughter ! " 

 she spring up , white and scared . 

 he grip her arm and hold it fast to support she . 

 " yes , " he said--"his daughter ! that be what I have come to tell you ! 
 the girl who live with you -- the famous author whose name be just now 
 ring through the world be his child!--and her mother be my wife ! " 

 there be a little stifle cry -- she drop back in her chair and 
 cover her face with her hand to hide the tear that rush to her 
 eye . 

 " innocent ! " she murmur , sobbingly--"his child!--innocent ! " 

 he be silent , watch she , his own heart deeply move . he think of 
 her life of unbroken fidelity -- waste in its youth -- solitary in its 
 age -- all for the sake of one man . presently , master her quiet 
 weeping , she look up . 

 " do she -- the dear girl!--doe she know this ? " she ask , in a half 
 whisper . 

 " she have know it all the time , " he answered--"she know who her mother 
 be before she come to London -- but she keep her own counsel -- I think to 
 save the honour of all concern . and she have make her name famous to 
 escape the reproach of birth which other fasten upon she . a brave 
 child!--it must have be strange to she to find her father 's portrait 
 here -- do you ever speak of he to she ? " 

 " often ! " reply Miss Leigh . " she know all my story ! " 

 he smile , very kindly 

 " no wonder she be silent ! " he say . 

 just then they hear the sound of a latch - key turning in the lock of 
 the hall door -- there be a light step in the passage -- they look at 
 one another half in wonder , half in doubt . a moment more and Innocent 
 enter , radiant and smiling . she stop on the threshold , amazed at 
 the sight of Lord Blythe . 

 " why , godmother"--she begin . then , glance from one to the other , she 
 cheek grow pale -- she hesitate , instinctively guess at the truth . 
 Lord Blythe advance and take she gently by both hand . 

 " dear child , your secret be ours ! " he say , quietly . " Miss Leigh know , 
 and _ I _ know that you be the daughter of Pierce Armitage , and that 
 your mother be my late wife . no one can be dearer to we both than you 
 be -- for your father 's sake ! " 




 CHAPTER VII 

 Startled and completely take aback , she let her hand remain passively 
 in his for a moment,--then quietly withdraw they . a hot colour rush 
 swiftly into her cheek and as swiftly recede , leave she very pale . 

 " how can you know ? " she faltered--"who have tell you ? " 

 " your mother herself tell I on the night she die , " he answered--"she 
 give I all the truth of herself,--at last -- after long year ! " 

 she be silent -- stand inert as though she have receive a numb 
 blow . Miss Leigh rise and come tremblingly towards she . 

 " my dear , my dear ! " she exclaimed--"i wish I have know it all 
 before!--i might have do more -- I might have try to be kinder-- " 

 the girl spring to her side and impulsively embrace she . 

 " you would have try in vain ! " she say , fondly , " no one on earth 
 could have be kind than my beloved little godmother ! you have be 
 the dearest and good of friend ! " 

 then she turn towards Lord Blythe . 

 " it be very good of you to come here and say what you have said"--and 
 she speak in soft , almost pathetic accents--"but I be sorry that anyone 
 know my story -- it be no use to know it , really ! I should have always 
 keep it a secret -- for it chiefly concern I , after all,--and why 
 should my existence cast a shadow on the memory of my father ? perhaps 
 you may have know him-- " 

 " I know he and love he ! " say Lord Blythe , quickly . 

 she look at he with wistful , tear - wet eye . 

 " well then , how hard it must be for you to think that he ever do 
 anything unworthy of himself ! " she said--"and for this dear lady it be 
 cruel!--for she love he too . and what be I that I should cause all 
 this trouble ! I be a nameless creature -- I take his name because I 
 want to kindle a little light of my own round it -- I have do that ! 
 and then I want to guard his memory from any whisper of scandal -- will 
 you help I in this ? the secret must still be keep -- and no one must 
 ever know I be his daughter . for though your wife be dead her name must 
 not be sham for the long ago sin of her youth -- nor must I be brand 
 as what I be -- base - bear . " 

 profoundly touch by the simple straightforward eloquence of her 
 appeal , Lord Blythe go up to she where she stand with one arm round 
 Miss Leigh . 

 " my dear child , " he say , earnestly--"believe I , I shall never speak 
 of your parentage or give the slight hint to anyone of the true 
 fact of your history -- still less would I allow you to be lightly 
 esteem for what be no fault of your own . you have make a brilliant 
 name and fame for yourself -- you have the right to that name and fame . I 
 come here to - day for two reason -- one to tell you that I be fully 
 acquaint with all you have endure and suffer -- the other to ask if 
 you will let I be your guardian -- your other father -- and give I some 
 right to shelter you from the rough way of the world . I may perhaps in 
 this way make some amend to you for the loss of mother - love and 
 father - love -- I would do my best-- " 

 he stop -- a little trouble by unusual emotion . innocent , draw she 
 embrace arm away from Miss Leigh , look at he with wonder , 
 grateful eye . 

 " how good you be ! " she say , softly--"you would take care of I -- you 
 with your proud name and place!--and I -- the poor , unfortunately bear 
 child of your dead friend ! ah , you kind , gentle heart!--I thank 
 you!--but no!--I must not accept such a sacrifice on your part-- " 

 " it would be no sacrifice"--he interrupt she , eagerly--"no , 
 child!--it would be pure selfishness!--for I be get old and be 
 lonely -- and -- and I want someone to look after I ! " he laugh a little 
 awkwardly . " why not come to I and be my daughter ? " 

 she smile -- catch his hand and kiss it . 

 " I will be a daughter to you in affection and respect , " she said--"but 
 I will not take any benefit from you -- no , none ! oh , I know well all 
 you could and would do for me!--you would place I in the high rank 
 of that society where you be a leader , and you would surround I with 
 so many advantage and powerful friend that I should forget my duty , 
 which be to work for myself , and owe nothing to any man ! dear , kind 
 Lord Blythe!--do not think I ungrateful ! but I have make my own little 
 place in the world , and I must keep it -- independently ! be I not right , 
 my godmother ? " 

 Miss Leigh look at her anxiously , and sigh . 

 " my dear , you must think well about it , " she said--"Lord Blythe would 
 care for you as his own child , I be sure -- and his home would be a safe 
 and splendid one for you -- but there!--do not ask I ! " and the old lady 
 wipe away one or two trickle tear from her eyes--"I am 
 selfish!--and now I know you be Pierce 's daughter I want to keep you 
 for myself!--to have you near me!--to look at you and love you!-- " 

 her voice break -- her gaze instinctively wander to the portrait of the 
 man whose memory she have cherish so long and so fondly . 

 " what do you think -- what must you have think the first day you come 
 here when I ask you if you be any relation to Pierce Armitage , and 
 tell you that be his portrait ! " she say , wistfully . 

 " I think that God have guide I to you , " the girl answer , in soft , 
 grave accents--"and that my father 's spirit have not forsake I ! " 

 there be a moment 's silence . then she speak more lightly-- 

 " Dear Lord Blythe , " she said--"now that you know so much may I tell you 
 my own story ? it will not take long ! come and sit here -- yes!"--and she 
 place a comfortable arm - chair for he , while she draw Miss Leigh 
 gently down on the sofa and sit next to her--"It be nothing of a 
 story!--my little life be not at all like the life live by all the 
 girl of my age that I have ever meet or see -- it be all in the past , as 
 it were,--the old , very old past!--as far back as the day of 
 Elizabeth ! " 

 she laugh , but there be tear in her eye -- she brush they away 
 and hold Miss Leigh 's hand in her own , she tell with simple truth 
 and directness the narrative of her childhood 's day -- her life on 
 Briar Farm -- how she have be train by Priscilla to bake , and brew , 
 and wash and sew,--and how she have find her chief joy and relaxation 
 from household duty in the reading of the old book she have find 
 stow away in the dower - chest belong to the " Sieur Amadis de 
 Jocelin . " 

 as she pronounce the name with an unconsciously tender accentuation 
 Lord Blythe interrupt she . 

 " why , that be a curious thing ! I know a rather clever painter name 
 Amadis de Jocelyn -- and surely you be dance with he on the evening 
 I first meet you ? " 

 a wave of rosy colour sweep over her cheek . 

 " yes!--that be what I be just go to tell you ! " she say . " he be 
 another Amadis de Jocelyn!--and he be actually connect with a branch 
 of the same family ! his ancestor be the brother of that very Amadis 
 who lie bury at Briar Farm ! be it not strange that I should have meet 
 him!--and he be go to paint my portrait ! " 

 " be he indeed ! " and Lord Blythe do not look impressed--"i think he 
 be a landscape man . " 

 " so he be , " she explain , with eagerness--"but he can do 
 portrait -- and he wish to make a picture of I , because I have be a 
 student of the book write by one of his ancient line . those book 
 teach I all I know of literature . you see , it be curious , be not it ? " 

 " it be , " he agree , rather hesitatingly--"but I have never quite like 
 Jocelyn -- he be clever -- yet he have always strike I as be intensely 
 selfish,--a callous sort of man -- many artist be . " 

 her eye droop , and her breath come and go quickly . 

 " I suppose all clever man get self - absorb sometimes ! " she say , with 
 a quaint little air of wisdom--"but I do not think he be really 
 callous-- " she break off , and laugh brightly--"anyhow we need not 
 discuss he -- need we ? I just want to tell you what an odd experience 
 it have be for I to meet and to know someone descend from the 
 family of the old french knight whose spirit be my instructor in 
 beautiful thing ! the little book of his own poem be full of 
 loveliness -- and I use to read they over and over again . they be all 
 about love and faith and honour-- " 

 " very old - fashioned subject ! " say Lord Blythe , with a slight 
 smile--"and not very much in favour nowadays ! " 

 Miss Leigh look at he questioningly . 

 " you think not ? " she say . 

 he give a quick sigh . 

 " it be difficult to know what to think , " he answered--"but I have live 
 a long life -- long enough to have see the dispersal of many illusion ! 
 I fear selfishness be the keynote of the great part of humanity . 
 those who do the kind deed be invariably the worst reward -- and 
 love in its high form be so little known that it may be almost 
 term non - existent . you"--and he look at Innocent--"you write in a 
 very powerful and convincing way about thing of which you can have have 
 no real experience -- and therein lie your charm ! you restore the lost 
 youth of manhood by idealisation , and you compel your reader to 
 ' idealise ' with you -- but ' to idealise ' be rather a dangerous verb!--and 
 its conjugation generally mean trouble and disaster . ideal -- unless 
 they be of the spiritual kind unattainable on this planet -- be apt to 
 be very disappointing . " 

 Innocent smile . 

 " but love be an ideal which can not disappoint , because it be 
 everlaste ! " she say , almost joyously . " the story of the old French 
 knight be , in its way , a proof of that . he love his ideal all his 
 life , even though he could not win she . " 

 " very wonderful if true ! " he answered--"but I can not quite believe it ! 
 I be too familiar with the way of my own sex ! anyhow , dear child , I 
 should advise you not to make too many ideal apart from the character 
 in the book you write . fortunately your special talent bring you an 
 occupation which will save you from that kind of thing . you have 
 ambition as an incentive , and fame for a goal . " 

 she be silent for a moment . in relate the story of her life at Briar 
 Farm she have not speak of Robin clifford,--some instinct tell she that 
 the sympathy of her hearer might be enlist in his favour , and she 
 do not want this . 

 " well , now you know what my ' literary education ' have be , " she go 
 on--"since I come to London I have try to improve myself as much as I 
 can -- and I have read a great many modern book -- but to I they seem to 
 lack the real feeling of the old - time literature . for instance , if you 
 read the account of the battle of the Armada by a modern historian it 
 sound tame and cold,--but if you read the same account in Camden 's 
 ' Elizabeth'--the whole scene rise before you,--you can almost see 
 every ship rid the wave ! " 

 her cheek glow and her eye shone,--Lord Blythe smile approvingly . 

 " I see you be an enthusiast ! " he said--"and you could not have well 
 teacher than the Elizabethans . they live in a great age and they be 
 great man . our time , though crowd with the splendid discovery of 
 science , seem small and poor compare to theirs . if you ever come to 
 I , I can give you the run of a library where you will find many 
 friend . " 

 she thank he by a look , and he go on-- 

 " you will come and see I often , will you not?--you and Miss 
 Leigh -- by - and - by , when the conventional time of mourning for my poor 
 wife be over . make my house your second home , both of you!--and when I 
 return from Italy-- " 

 " oh ! " the girl exclaim , impulsively--"Are you go to Italy ? " 

 " for a few week -- yes!--will you come with I -- you and your godmother ? " 

 his old heart beat,--a sudden joy light his eye . it would have be 
 like the dawn of a new day to he have she consent , but she shake she 
 fair little head decisively . 

 " I must not ! " she said-"-i be bind to finish some work that I have 
 promise . but some day -- ah , yes!--some day I should love to see Italy ! " 

 the light go slowly from his face . 

 " some day!--well!--I hope I may live to be with you on that ' some day . ' 
 I ought not to leave London just now -- but the house be very lonely -- and 
 I think I be well away for a time-- " 

 " much good ! " say Miss Leigh , sympathetically--"And if there be 
 anything we can do-- " 

 " yes -- there be one thing that will please I very much , " say Lord 
 Blythe , draw from his pocket a small velvet case--"i want my friend 
 Pierce 's daughter to wear this -- it be my first gift to her mother . " 
 here he open the case and show an exquisite pendant , in the shape 
 of a dove , finely work in superb brilliant , and support on a thin 
 gold chain . " I give it as an emblem of innocence"--a quick sigh escape 
 him--"i little knew!--but you , dear girl , be the one to wear it now ! 
 let I fasten it round your neck . " 

 she stoop forward , and he take a linger pleasure in put the 
 chain on and watch the diamond flash against her fair skin . she be 
 too much move to express any word thank -- it be not the value or 
 the beauty of the gift that touch she , but its association and the 
 way it be give . and then , after a little more desultory conversation , 
 he rise to go . 

 " remember ! " he say , take she tenderly by both hands--"Whenever you 
 want a home and a father , both be ready and wait for you ! " and he 
 kiss she lightly on the forehead . " you be famous and independent , 
 but the world be not always kind to a clever woman even when she be 
 visibly know to be earn her own living . there be always spiteful 
 tongue wag in the secret corner and byway , ready to assert that 
 her work be not her own and that some man be in the background , help 
 to keep she ! " 

 he then shake hand warmly with Miss Leigh . 

 " if she ever come to me"--he go on--"you be free to come with 
 she -- and be assure of my utmost friendship and respect . I shall feel I 
 be in some way do what I know my old friend Pierce Armitage would , 
 in his good moment , approve , if I can be of the least service to you . 
 you will not forget ? " 

 Miss Leigh be too overcome by the quiet sweetness and dignity of his 
 manner to murmur more than a few scarcely audible word of gratitude in 
 reply -- and when at last he take his leave , she relieve her heart by 
 throw her arm round Innocent and have what she call " a good 
 cry . " 

 " and you Pierce 's child ! " she half laugh , half sobbed--"oh , how could 
 he leave you at that farm!--poor little thing!--and yet it might have 
 be much worse-- " 

 " indeed I should think so ! " and Innocent soothe she fondly with the 
 tender caresses--"very much worse ! why , if I have not be leave at 
 Briar Farm , I should never have know dad!--and he be one of the good 
 of man -- and I should never have learn how to think , and write my 
 thought , from the teaching of the Sieur Amadis de Jocelin ! " 

 there be a little thrill of triumph in her voice -- and Miss Leigh , 
 wipe away her tear , look at she timidly and curiously . 

 " how you dwell on the memory of that french knight ! " she say . " when 
 be you go to have your portrait paint by the modern Amadis ? " 

 Innocent smile . 

 " very soon ! " she answered--"we be to begin our sitting next week . I 
 be to wear a white frock -- and I tell he about my dove Cupid , and how 
 it use to fly from the gable of the house to my hand -- and he be go 
 to paint the bird as well as I ! " 

 she laugh with the joy of a child . 

 " Fancy ! Cupid will be there ! " 

 " Cupid ? " echo Miss Leigh , wonderingly . 

 " yes -- cupid!--usually know as the little god of love,--but only a dove 
 this time!--so much more harmless than the god ! " 

 Miss Leigh touch the diamond pendant at the girl 's neck . 

 " you have a dove there now , " she said--"all in jewel ! and in your 
 heart , dear child , I pray there be a spiritual dove of holy purity to 
 guard you from all evil and keep your sweet soul safe and clean ! " 

 a startled look come into the girl 's soft grey - blue eyes,--a deep flush 
 of rose fly over her cheek and brow . 

 " a blessing or a warning , godmother mine ? " she say . 

 Miss Leigh draw she close in her arm and kiss she . 

 " Both ! " she answer , simply . 

 there be a moment 's silence . 

 then Innocent , her face still warm with colour , walk close up to the 
 harpsichord where her father 's picture stand . 

 " let we talk of HIM ! " she said--"now that you know I be his daughter , 
 tell I all you remember of him!--how he speak , how he looked!--what 
 sort of picture he paint -- and what he use to say to you ! he love 
 you once , and I love you now!--so you must tell I everything ! " 




 CHAPTER VIII 

 Fame , or notoriety , whichever that special noise may be call when the 
 world like a hound " give tongue " and announce that the quarry in some 
 form of genius be at bay , be apt to increase its clamour in proportion 
 to the aloofness of the pursued animal,--and Innocent , who see nothing 
 remarkable in remain somewhat secluded and apart from the ordinary 
 routine of social life so feverishly follow by more than half her 
 sex , be very soon classify as " proud"--"eccentric"--"difficult " and 
 " vain , " by idle and ignorant person who know nothing about she , and 
 only judge she by their own limited conception of what a successful 
 author might or could possibly be like . some of these , more foolish 
 than the rest , express themselves as afraid or unwilling to meet 
 her--"l she should put they into her books"--this be a common 
 form of conceit with many individual too utterly dull and 
 uninteresting to " make copy " for so much as the humblest paragraphist . 
 it be quite true that she show herself sadly deficient in the 
 appreciation of society function and society people,--to she they 
 seem stupid and boresome , involve much waste of precious time,--but 
 notwithstanding this , she be invite everywhere , and the accumulation 
 of " R.S.V.P. " card on her table and desk make such a formidable heap 
 that it be quite a business to clear they , as she do once a week , 
 with the assistance of the useful waste - paper basket . as a writer she 
 popularity be unquestionable , and so great and insistent be the 
 public demand for anything from her pen that she could command her own 
 term from any publishing quarter . her good fortune make very little 
 effect upon her,--sometime it seem as if she hardly realise or 
 care to realise it . she have odd , almost child - like way of spend 
 some of her money in dainty " surprise " gift to her friend -- that be to 
 say , such friend as have show she kindness,--beautiful flower and 
 fruit for invalid -- choice wine for those who need yet could not 
 afford them,--a new drawing - room carpet for Miss Leigh , which be , in 
 the old lady 's opinion , a most important and amazing affair!--costly 
 fur , also for Miss Leigh,--and device and adornment of all sort for 
 the pleasure , beauty or comfort of the house -- but on herself personally 
 she spend nothing save what be necessary for such dress and appearance 
 as well accord with she now acknowledge position . dearly as she 
 would have love to shower gift and benefit on the inhabitant of 
 never - forget Briar Farm , she know that if she do anything of the 
 kind poor lonely old Priscilla Friday and patiently endure Robin 
 Clifford be more likely to be hurt than gratify . for a silence have 
 fall between that past life , which have be like a wild rose 
 blossoming in a country lane , and the present one , which resemble a 
 wonderful orchid flower , flame in heat under glass,--and though she 
 write to Robin now and again , and he reply , his letter be 
 restrained and formal -- almost cold . he know too well how far she be 
 remove from he by more than distance , and bravely content himself 
 with merely give she such news of the farm and her former home 
 surrounding as might awaken her momentary interest without recall 
 too many old memory to her mind . 

 she seem , and to a very great extent she be , unconscious of the 
 interest and curiosity both her work and her personality excite -- the 
 more so now as the glamour and delight of her creative imagination have 
 be obscure by what she consider a far great and more lasting 
 glory -- that of love!--the golden mirage of a fancied sun , which for a 
 time have quench the steady shining of eternal star . since that 
 ever memorable night when he have suddenly storm the fortress of her 
 soul , and by the mastery of a lover 's kiss have take full possession , 
 Amadis de Jocelyn have pursue his " amour " with admirable tact , 
 cleverness and secrecy . he find a new and stimulating charm in make 
 love to a tender - hearted , credulous little creature who seem truly 
 " of such stuff as dream be make of"--and to a man of his particular 
 type and temperament there be an irresistible provocation to his 
 vanity in the possibility of be able to lure she gradually and 
 insidiously down from the high ground of intellectual ambition and 
 power to the low level of that pitiful sex - submission which be 
 responsible for so much more misery than happiness in this world . 
 little by little , under his apparently brusque and playful , but really 
 studied training , she begin to think less and less of her work,--the 
 book she have love to read and refer to , insensibly lose their 
 charm,--she go reluctantly to her desk , and as reluctantly take up 
 her pen,--what she have write already , appear to her utterly 
 worthless,--and what she attempt to write now be to her mind poor 
 and unsatisfying . she be not move by the knowledge , constantly 
 press upon she , that she be steadily rise , despite herself , to the 
 zenith of her career in such an incredibly swift and brilliant way as 
 to be the envy of all her contemporaries,--she be hardly as grateful 
 for her honour as weary of they and a little contemptuous . what do it 
 all matter to she when half of she once busy work morning be now 
 often pass in the studio of Amadis de Jocelyn ! he be paint a 
 full - length portrait of she -- a mere excuse to give her facility for 
 visit he , and ensure his own privacy and convenience in receive 
 she -- and every day she go to he , sometimes late in the afternoon as 
 well as the morning , slip in and out familiarly and quite 
 unnoticed , for he have give she a key to the private door of his 
 studio , which be reach through a small , deeply shade garden , 
 abut on an old - fashioned street near Holland Park . she could enter 
 at any time , and think it be the customary privilege accord by an 
 artist to his sitter , while it save the time and trouble of the 
 rheumatic " odd man " or servant whose fail limb be slow to respond 
 to a summon at the orthodox front entrance . she would come in , dress 
 in her simple navy blue serge walking costume , and then in a little 
 room just off the studio would change and put on the white dress which 
 her lover have choose as the most suitable for his purpose , and which he 
 call the " portrait gown . " it be simple , and severely Greek , make of 
 the soft and filmiest material which fall gracefully away in 
 enchanting fold from her childishly rounded neck and arms,--it give 
 she the appearance of a psyche or an Ariadne,--and at the first 
 sitting , when he have pose she in several attitude before attempt 
 to draw a line , she have so much sweet attractiveness about she that he 
 be hardly to be blame for throw aside all work and devote 
 himself to such ardent delight in woman 's fairness as may sometimes 
 fall to the lot of man . while move from one position to another as he 
 suggest or command , she have playfully break off one flower from a 
 large plant of " marguerite " daisy grow in a quaint japanese pot , 
 close at hand , and have begin pull off the petal accord to the 
 old fanciful charm--"Il m'aime!--un peu!--beaucoup!--passionement!--pa 
 du tout ! " he stop she at the word " passionement , " and catch she in 
 his arm . 

 " not another petal must be pluck ! " he whisper , kiss her soft 
 warm neck--"i will not have you say ' Pas du tout ! ' " 

 she laugh delightedly , nestle against he . 

 " very well ! " she said--"but suppose-- " 

 " suppose what ? " 

 " suppose it ever come to that?"--and she sigh as she spoke--"Then the 
 last petal must fall ! " 

 " do you think it ever will or can come to that ? " he ask , press a 
 kiss on the sweet upturned lips--"doe it seem like it ? " 

 she be too happy to answer he , and he be too amorous just then to 
 think of anything but her soft eye , dewy with tenderness -- her white , 
 ivory - smooth skin -- her small caressing hand , and the fine bright 
 tendril of her wave hair -- all these be his to play with as a child 
 play with beautiful toy unconscious of or indifferent to their value . 

 many such passage of love occupy their time -- though he manage to 
 make a good show of progressive work after the first rough outline 
 drawing of the picture be complete . he be undeniably a genius in his 
 way , uncertain and erratic of impulse , but his art be strong because 
 its effect be broad and simple . he have begin Innocent 's portrait out 
 of the mere desire to have she with he constantly,--but as day after 
 day go on and the subject develop under his skilled hand and brush 
 he realise that it would probably be " the " picture of the Salon in the 
 follow year . as this conviction dawn upon he , he take great 
 pain , and work more carefully and conscientiously with the happy 
 result , feel a thrill of true artistic satisfaction as the picture 
 begin to live and smile in response to his masterly touch and 
 treatment . its composition be simple -- he have draw the girl as though 
 she be slowly advance towards the spectator , give her figure all 
 the aerial grace habitual to it by nature,--one little daintily shaped 
 hand hold a dove lightly against her breast , as though the bird have 
 just fly there for protection from its own alarm,--her face be 
 slightly uplifted,--the lip smile , and the eye look straight out 
 at the world with a beautiful , clear candour which be all their own . 
 yet despite the charm and sweetness of the likeness there be a strange 
 pathos about it,--a sadness which Jocelyn have never set there by his 
 own will or intention . 

 " you be a puzzle subject , " he say to her one day--"i want to give 
 you a happy expression -- and yet your portrait be actually grow 
 sad!--almost reproachful ! ... do you look at I like that ? " 

 she open her pretty eye wonderingly . 

 " Amadis ! surely not ! I could not look sad when I be with you!--that be 
 impossible ! " 

 he pause , palette in hand . 

 " nor reproachful ? " 

 " how ? when I have nothing to reproach you for ? " she answer . 

 he put his palette aside and come and sit at her foot on the step of 
 the dais where he have pose she . 

 " you may rest , " he say , smile up at her--"And so may i. " she sit 
 down beside he and he fold she in his arm . " how often we rest in 
 this way , do not we ! " he murmured--"And so you think you have nothing to 
 reproach I for ! Well,--I'm not so sure of that -- innocent ! " 

 she look at he questioningly . 

 " be you talk nonsense , my ' Sieur Amadis'?--or be you serious ? " she 
 ask . 

 " I be quite serious -- much more serious than be common with I , " he 
 reply , take one of her hand and study it as the perfect model 
 it was--"i believe I be involve you in all sort of trouble -- and you , 
 you absurd little child , do not see it ! suppose Miss Leigh be to find 
 out that we make the maddest love to each other in here -- you all alone 
 with I -- what would she say ? " 

 " what could she say ? " Innocent demand , simply--"There be no 
 harm!--and I should not mind tell she we be lover . " 

 " I should , though ! " be his quick thought , while he marvel at her 
 unworldliness . 

 " Besides"--she continued--"she have no right over I . " 

 " who have any right over you ? " he ask , curiously . 

 she laugh , softly . 

 " no one!--except you ! " 

 " oh , hang I ! " he exclaim , impatiently--"leave I out of the 
 question . have you no father or mother ? " 

 she be a little hurt at his sudden irritability . 

 " no , " she answer , quietly--"i have often tell you I have no one . I be 
 alone in the world -- I can do as I like . " then a smile brighten she 
 face . " Lord Blythe would have I as a daughter if I would go to he . " 

 he start and loosen she from his embrace . 

 " Lord Blythe ! that wealthy old peer ! what do he want with you ? " 

 " nothing , I suppose , but the pleasure of my company ! " and she 
 laughed--"doesn't that seem strange ? " 

 he rise and go back to work at his easel . 

 " rather ! " he say , slowly--"are you go to accept his offer ? " 

 her eye open widely . 

 " I ? my Amadis , how can you think it ? I would not accept it for all the 
 world ! he would load I with benefit -- he would surround I with 
 luxury -- but I do not want these . I like to work for myself and be 
 independent . " he lay a brush lightly in colour and begin to use it 
 with delicate care . 

 " you be not very wise , " he then said--"It be a great thing for a young 
 girl like you who be all alone in the world , to be take in hand by 
 such a man as Blythe . he be a statesman,--very useful to his 
 country,--he 's very rich and have a splendid position . his wife 's sudden 
 death have leave he very lonely as he have no children,--you could be a 
 daughter to he , and it would be a great leap upwards for you , socially 
 speak . you would be much well off under his care than scribble 
 book . " 

 she draw a sharp breath of pain,--all the pretty colour flee from her 
 cheek . 

 " you do not care for I to scribble book ! " she say , in low , stifle 
 accent . 

 he laugh . 

 " oh , I do not mind!--i never read them,--and in a way it amuse I ! you 
 be such an armful of sweetness -- such a warm , nestle little bird of 
 love in my arms!--and to think that you actually write book that the 
 world talk about!--the thing be so incongruous -- so ' out of draw ' 
 that it make I laugh ! I do not like write woman as a rule -- they give 
 themselves too many air to please I -- but you-- " 

 he pause . 

 " well , go on , " she say , coldly . 

 he look at she , smile . 

 " you be cross ? do not be cross,--you lose your enchanting expression ! 
 well -- you do not give yourself any air , and you seem to play at 
 literature like a child play at a game : of course you make money by 
 it,--but -- you know well than I do that the great writers"--he 
 emphasize the word " great " slightly--"never make money and be 
 never popular . " 

 " do failure constitute greatness ? " she ask , with a faintly 
 satirical inflection in her sweet voice which he have never hear before . 

 " sometimes -- in fact pretty often , " he reply , dab his brush busily 
 on his canvas--"you should read about great authors-- " 

 " I have read about they , " she said--"walter Scott be popular and make 
 money,--charle Dickens be popular and make money -- Thackeray be 
 popular and make money -- Shakespeare himself seem to have have the one 
 principal aim of make sufficient money enough to live comfortably in 
 his native town , and he be ' popular ' in his day -- indeed he ' play to 
 the gallery . ' but he be not a ' failure'--and the whole world 
 acknowledge his greatness now , though in his life - time he be 
 unconscious of it . " 

 surprise at her quick eloquence , he pause in his work . 

 " very well speak ! " he remark , condescendingly--"i see you take a 
 high view of your art ! but like all woman , you wander from the point . 
 we be talk of Lord Blythe -- and I say it would be far well for 
 you to be -- well!--his heiress!--for he might leave you all his 
 fortune -- than go on write book . " 

 her lip quiver : despite her effort , tear start to her eye . he 
 see , and throw down his brush come and kneel beside she , pass his 
 arm round her waist . 

 " what have I say ? " he murmur , coaxingly--"innocent -- sweet little 
 love ! forgive I if I have -- what?"--and he laugh softly--"rubbed you 
 up the wrong way ! " 

 she force a smile , and her delicate white hand wander caressingly 
 through his hair as he lay his head against her bosom . 

 " I be sorry ! " she say , at last--"i think -- I hop -- you might be 
 proud of my work , Amadis ! I be plan it all for that ! you see"--she 
 hesitated--"i learn so much from the Sieur Amadis de Jocelin -- the 
 brother of your ancestor!--that I have be think all the time how I 
 could well show you that I be worthy of his teaching . the world -- or 
 the public -- you know the thing they say of I -- but I do not want their 
 praise . I believe I could do something really great if you cared!--for 
 now it be only to please you that I live . " 

 a sense of shame sting he at this simple avowal . 

 " nonsense ! " he say , almost brusquely--"You have a thousand other 
 thing to live for -- you must not think of please I only . besides I be 
 not very -- keen on literature,--I'm a painter . " 

 " surely painting owe something to literature ? " she queried--"we should 
 not have have all the wonderful Madonnas and Christs of the old master 
 if there have be no Bible ! " 

 " true!--but perhaps we could have do without they ! " he say , 
 lightly--"I'm not at all sure that painting would not have get on just 
 as well without literature at all . there be always nature to 
 study -- sky , sea , landscape and the face of lovely woman and 
 children,--quite enough for any man . where be Lord Blythe now ? " 

 " in Italy , " she replied--"He will be away some month . " 

 she speak with constraint . her heart be heavy -- the hope and ambition 
 she have cherish of add lustre to her fame for the joy and pride of 
 her lover , seem all crush at one blow . she be too young and 
 inexperienced to realise the fact that few man be proud of any woman 's 
 success , especially in the art . their attitude be one of amused 
 tolerance when it be not of actual sex - jealousy or contempt . Least of 
 all can any man endure that the woman for whom he have a short spell of 
 passionate fancy should be consider notable , or in an intellectual 
 sense superior to himself . he like she to be dependent on he alone 
 for her happiness,--for such poor crumb of comfort he be pleased to 
 give she when the heat of his first passion have cooled,--but he be not 
 altogether pleased when she have sufficient intelligent perception to 
 see through his web of subterfuge and break away clear of the 
 entangle thread , stand free as a goddess on the height of her own 
 independent attainment . Innocent 's idea of love be the angelic dream 
 of truth and everlastingness set forth by poet , whose sweet singing 
 delude themselves and others,--she be ready to devote all the unique 
 power of her mind and brain to the perfecting of herself for her 
 lover 's delight . she wish to be beautiful , brilliant , renowned and 
 admire , simply that he might take joy in know that this beautiful , 
 brilliant , renowned and admire creature be his , body and 
 soul -- exist solely for he and content to live only so long as he 
 live , to work only so long as he worked,--to be nothing apart from his 
 love , but to be everything he could desire or command while his love 
 environ she . she think of the eternal union of souls,--while he have 
 no belief in the soul at all , his half french materialism persuade 
 he that there be nothing eternal . and like all man of his type he 
 estimate her tenderness for he , her cling arm , and the linger 
 passion of her caress , to be chiefly the outflow of pleased 
 vanity -- the kittenish satisfaction of be stroke and fondle -- the 
 sense of her own sex - attractiveness,--but of anything deep and closely 
 root in the centre of a more than usually sensitive nature he have not 
 the faint conception , take it for grant that all woman , even 
 clever one , be more or less alike , easily console by new millinery 
 when lover fail . 

 sometimes , during the progress of their secret amour , a thrill of 
 uneasiness and fear run coldly through her vein -- a wonder doubt 
 which she repel with indignation whenever it suggest itself . 
 Amadis de Jocelyn be and must be the very embodiment of loyalty and 
 honour to the woman he loved!--it could not be otherwise . his 
 tenderness be ardent,--his passion fiery and eager,--yet she 
 wonder -- timidly and with deep humiliation in herself for dare to 
 think so far -- why , if he love she so much as he declare , do he not 
 ask she to be his wife ? she suppose he would do so,--though she have 
 hear he depreciate marriage as a necessary evil . evidently he have his 
 own good reason for defer the fateful question . meanwhile she make 
 a little picture - gallery of ideal joy in her brain,--and one of her 
 fancy be that when she marry her Amadis she would ask Robin 
 Clifford to let she buy Briar Farm . 

 " he could paint well there ! " she think , happily , already see in 
 her mind 's eye the " Great Hall " transform into an artist 's 
 studio--"and I almost think _ I _ could carry on the farm -- Priscilla 
 would help me,--and we know just how Dad like thing to be 
 do -- if -- if Robin go away . and the master of the house would again 
 be a true Jocelyn ! " 

 the whole plan seem perfectly natural and feasible . only one obstacle 
 present itself like a dark shadow on the brightness of her dream -- and 
 that be her own " base " birth . the brand of illegitimacy be upon 
 her,--and whereas once she alone have know what she judge to be a 
 shameful secret , now two other share it with she -- Miss Leigh and Lord 
 Blythe . they would never betray it -- no!--but they could not alter what 
 unkind fate have do for she . this be one reason why she be glad that 
 Amadis de Jocelyn have not as yet speak of their marriage . 

 " for I should have to tell he ! " she think , woefully--"i should have 
 to say that I be the illegitimate daughter of Pierce Armitage -- and 
 then -- perhaps he would not marry I -- he might change -- ah no!--he could 
 not!--he would not!--he love I too dearly ! he would never let I 
 go -- he want I always ! we be all the world to each other!--nothing 
 could part we now ! " 

 and so the time drift on -- and with its drift her work drift too , 
 and only one all - absorb passion possess her life with its close 
 and consume fire . Amadis de Jocelyn be an expert in the seduction of 
 a soul -- little by little he teach she to judge all man as worthless 
 save himself , and all opinion unwarrantable and ill - founded unless he 
 confirm they . and , lead she away from the contemplation of high 
 vision , he make she the blind worshipper of a very inadequate idol . 
 she be happy in her faith , and yet not altogether sure of happiness . 
 for there be two kind of love -- one with strong wing which lift the 
 soul to a dazzle perfection of immortal destiny,--the other with 
 gross and heavy chain which fetter every hope and aspiration and drag 
 the fine intelligence down to dark waste and nothingness . 




 CHAPTER IX 

 in affair of love a woman be perhaps most easily ensnare by a man who 
 can combine passion with pleasantry and hot pursuit with social tact 
 and diplomacy . Amadis de Jocelyn be an adept at this kind of thing -- he 
 be , if it may be so express , a refined libertine , love woman from 
 a purely physical sense of attraction and pleasure convey to himself , 
 and obtusely ignorant of the need or demand of their high nature . 
 from a mental or intellectual standpoint all woman to he be alike , 
 make to be " manage " alike , use alike , and alike set aside when their 
 use be do with . the leaven of the Jew or the Turk be in the 
 temperament of this descendant of a long line of french noble , who have 
 gain their chief honour by kill man , ravish woman and 
 plunder their neighbour ' land -- though occasional flash of 
 bravery and chivalry have glance over their annal in history like the 
 light from a wandering will o ' the wisp flicker over a morass . 
 Gifted in his art , but wholly undisciplined in his nature , he have live 
 a life of selfish aim to selfish end , and in the course of it have 
 make love to many women,--one especially , on whose devoted affection 
 he have prey like an insect that ungratefully poison the flower from 
 which it have suck the honey . this woman , drive to bay at last by his 
 neglect and effrontery , have rouse the scatter force of her pride 
 and have give he his conge -- and he have be look about for a fresh 
 victim when he meet Innocent . she be a complete novelty to he , and 
 stimulate his more or less jade emotions,--he find her quaint and 
 charming as a poet 's dream of some nymph of the woodlands,--her manner 
 of look at life and the thing of life be so deliciously 
 simple -- almost mediaeval,--for she believe that a man should die 
 rather than break his word or imperil his honour , which to Jocelyn be 
 such a primitive state of thing as to seem prehistoric . then there be 
 she fixed and absurd " fancy " about the noble quality and manifold 
 virtue of the french knight who have serve the Duc d'Anjou,--and who 
 have be to she from childhood a kind of lover in the spirit,--a being 
 whom she have instinctively try to serve and to please ; and he have 
 sufficient imagination to understand and take advantage of the feeling 
 arouse in she when she have meet one of the same descent , and bear 
 the same name , in himself . he have run through the gamut of many 
 emotion and sentiments,--he have join one or two of the new school 
 of atheism and modernism start by certain self - opinionate young 
 University man , and in the early stage of his career have in the 
 cock - sure impulse of youth design scheme for the regeneration of the 
 world , till the usual difficulty present themselves as oppose to 
 such vast business,--he have associate himself with man who follow 
 what be call the " fleshly school " of poetry and art generally , and 
 have evolve from his own mentality a comfortable faith of which the 
 chief tenet be " self for Self"--a religion which lift the mind no 
 high than the purely animal plane;--and in its environment of 
 physical consciousness and agreeable physical sensation , he be 
 content to live . 

 with such a temperament and disposition as he possess , which sway 
 he hither and thither on the caprice or impulse of the moment , his 
 intention toward Innocent be not very clear even to himself . when he 
 have begin his " amour " with she he have mean it to go just as far as 
 should satisfy his own whim and desire,--but as he come to know she 
 well , he put a check on himself and hesitate as one may hesitate 
 before pull up a rose - bush from its happy grow place and flinging 
 it out on the dust - heap to die . she be so utterly unsuspicious and 
 unaware of evil , and she have place he on so high a pedestal of 
 honour , trust he with such perfect and unquestione faith , that 
 for very manhood 's sake he could not bring himself to tear the veil 
 from her eye . moreover he really love she in a curious , haphazard way 
 of love,--more than he have ever love any one of her sex,--and , when 
 in her presence and under her influence , he gain a glimmering of 
 consciousness of what love might mean in its good and purest sense . 

 he laugh at himself however for this very thought . he have always 
 pooh - pooh'd the idea of love as have anything divine or uplifting in 
 its action,--nevertheless in his more sincere moment he be bind to 
 confess that since he have know Innocent his very art have gain a 
 certain breadth and subtlety which it have lack before . it be a 
 pleasure to he to see her eye shine with pride in his work , to hear 
 her voice murmur dulcet praise of his skill , and for a time he take 
 infinite pain with all his subject , put the very good of himself 
 into his drawing and colour with result that be brilliant and 
 convince enough to ensure success for all his effort . 
 sometimes -- lose in a sudden fit of musing -- he wonder how his life 
 would shape itself if he marry she ? he have avoid marriage as a man 
 might avoid hanging,--considere it , not without reason , the possible 
 ruin of an artist 's great career . among many man he have know , man of 
 undoubted promise , it have prove the fatal step downward from the high 
 to the low . one particular " chum " of his own , a gifted painter , have 
 marry a plump rosy young woman with " a bit o ' money , " as the country 
 folk say,--and from that day have be steadily drag down to the 
 domestic level of sad and sordid commonplace . instead of study form 
 and colour , he be call upon to examine drain and superintend the 
 plumber , mark house linen and take care of the child -- his wife 
 believe in " make a husband useful . " of regard for his art or 
 possible fame she have none,--while his child be teach to regard 
 his work in that line as less important than if he have be a 
 bricklayer at so much penny the hour . 

 " child ! " think Jocelyn--"Do I want they ? ... no -- I think not ! 
 they be all very well when they be young -- really young!--two to five 
 year old be the enchanting age,--but , most unfortunately , they grow ! 
 yes!--they grow,--often into hideous man and woman -- a sort of human 
 vulture sit on their father ' pocket and scream ' Give ! give ! ' 
 the prospect do not attract I ! and she?--Innocent ? I do not think I 
 could bear to watch that little flower - like face gradually enlarge 
 into matronly line and spread into a double chin ! those pretty eye 
 peer into the larder and consider the appearance of uncooked 
 bacon ! Perish the thought ! one might as well think of Shakespeare 's 
 Juliet pay the butcher 's bill , or bad still , select the 
 butcher 's meat ! forbid it , o ye heaven ! of course if ideal could be 
 realise , which they never be , I can see myself wed for pure love , 
 without a care , paint my picture at ease , with a sweet woman 
 worship I , ever at my beck and call , and shield I from trouble 
 with all the tender force of her passionate little soul!--but 
 commonplace life will net fit itself into these sort of beatific 
 vision ! baby , and the necessary provision of food and clothe and 
 servant -- this be what marriage mean -- love have sober down to a 
 matter - of - fact conclusion . no -- no ! I will not marry she ! it would be 
 like catch a fairy in the wood , cut off its sunbeam wing and 
 set it to scrub the kitchen floor ! " 

 it be curious that while he please himself with this fanciful 
 soliloquy it do not occur to he that he have already catch the " fairy 
 in the wood , " and ever since the capture have be engage in cut 
 off its " sunbeam wing " with all a vivisector 's scientific 
 satisfaction . and in his imaginary picture of what might have be if 
 " ideal " be realise , he do not for a moment conceive himself as 
 " worship " the woman who be to worship HIM , or as be at she 
 " beck and call , " or as shield she from trouble -- oh no ! he merely 
 consider himself , and how she would care for HIM,--never once do he 
 consider how he would care for she . 

 meanwhile thing go on in an outwardly even and uneventful course . 
 Innocent work steadily to fulfil certain contract into which she have 
 enter with the publisher who be eager to obtain as much of she 
 work as she could give them,--but she have lose heart , and her once 
 soar ambition be like a poor bird that have be clumsily shoot at , 
 and have fall to the ground with a broken wing . what she have dream 
 of as greatness , now seem vain and futile . the " Amadis de Jocelin " of 
 the sixteenth century have teach she to love literature -- to believe in 
 it as the refiner of thought and expression , and to use it as a charm 
 to inspire the mind and uplift the soul,--but the Amadis de Jocelyn of 
 the twentieth have no such lesson to teach . utterly lack in 
 reverence for great thinker , he dismiss the fine passage of 
 poetry or prose from his consideration with light scorn as " purple 
 patch , " borrow that hackneyed phrase from the low walk of the 
 press,--the most inspired writer , both of ancient and modern time , 
 come equally under the careless lash of his derision,--so that 
 Innocent , utterly bewilder by his sweeping denunciation of many 
 brilliant and famous author , shrink into her wound self with pain , 
 humiliation and keen disappointment , feel that there be certainly 
 no chance for she to appeal to he in any way through the thought she 
 cherish and express with truth and fervour to a listen world . 
 that world listen -- but he do not!--therefore the world seem 
 worthless and its praise mere mockery . she have no vanity to support 
 her,--she be not " strong - minded " enough to oppose her own 
 individuality to that of the man she love . and so she begin to droop a 
 little,--her bright and ardent spirit sink like a sink flame,--much 
 to the concern of Miss Leigh , who watch she with a jealous tenderness 
 of love beyond all expression . the child of Pierce Armitage , lawfully 
 or unlawfully beget , be now to she the one joy of existence,--the 
 link that fasten she more closely to life,--and she worry herself 
 secretly over the evident listlessness , fatigue and depression of the 
 girl who have so lately be the very embodiment of happiness . but she 
 do not like to ask questions,--she know that Innocent have a very 
 resolute mind of her own , and that if she elect to remain silent on 
 any subject whatsoever , nothing , not even the most affectionate appeal , 
 would induce she to speak . 

 " you will not let she come to any harm , Pierce ! " murmur the old lady 
 prayerfully one day , stand before the portrait of her former and 
 faithless lover--"you will step in if danger threaten her!--ye , I be 
 sure you will ! you will guide and help she again as you have guide and 
 help she before . for I believe you bring she to I , Pierce!--yes , I 
 be sure you do ! in that other world where you be , you have learn 
 how much I love you long ago!--how much I love you now!--and how I 
 love your child for your sake as well as for her own ! all wrong and 
 mistake be forgive and forget , Pierce ! and when we meet again we 
 shall understand ! " 

 and with her little trembling wear hand she set a rose , just open 
 its deep red heart - bud into flower , in a crystal vase beside the 
 portrait as a kind of votive offering , with something of the same 
 superstitious feeling that induce a devout roman Catholic to burn a 
 candle before a favourite saint , in the belief that the spirit of the 
 dead man hear her word and would respond to they . 

 just at this time , Innocent go about a good deal among the few 
 friend who have learn to know she well and to love she accordingly . 
 Lord Blythe be still away , have prolong his tour in order to enjoy 
 the beauty of the italian lake in autumn . summer in England be 
 practically over , but the weather be fine and warm still , and 
 country - house party , especially in Scotland , be the order of the 
 day . the " social swim " be subside , and what be call " notable " 
 people be begin to leave town . once or twice , infect by the 
 general exodus , Innocent think of go down to Briar Farm just for a 
 few day as a surprise to Priscilla -- but a feeling for Robin hold she 
 back . it would be needless unkindness to again vex his mind with the 
 pain of a hopeless passion . so she pay a few casual visit here and 
 there , chiefly at house where Amadis de Jocelyn be also one of the 
 invite guest . she be make the centre of a considerable amount of 
 adulation , which do not move she to any sort of self - satisfaction , 
 because in the background of her thought there be always the light 
 jest and smile of her lover , who laugh at praise , except , be it here 
 say , when it be award to himself . then he do not laugh -- he assume 
 a playful humility which , be admirably act , almost pass for 
 modesty . but if by chance he have to listen to any praise of " Ena 
 Armitage " as author or woman , he change the subject as soon as he 
 could conveniently do so without brusquerie . and very gradually it 
 dawn upon she that he take no pride in her work or in the position 
 she have win , and that he be more reluctant than glad to hear she 
 praise . he seem to prefer she should be unnoticed , save by himself , 
 and more or less submissive to his will . have she be worldly - wise , she 
 would by every action have move a silent protest against this , his 
 particular form of sex - dominance , but she be of too love a nature to 
 dispute any right of command he choose to assume . other man , young and 
 far high in place and position than Jocelyn , admire she , and make 
 such advance as they dare , find she very coldness attractive , 
 unite as it be to such sweetness of manner as few could resist , but 
 they have no chance with she . once or twice some of her woman friend 
 have sound she on the subject of love and lover , and she have put 
 aside all their question with a smile . " love be not to be talk 
 about , " she have said--"It be like God , serve well in silence . " 

 but by scarcely perceptible degree , busy rumour get hold of a thread 
 or two of the clue lead to the labyrinth of her mystery,--people 
 nod mysteriously at each other and begin to whisper 
 suggestion -- suggestion which certainly do not go very far , but just 
 float in the air like bit of thistledown . 

 " she be have her portrait paint , be not she ? " 

 " yes -- by that man with the queer name -- Amadis de Jocelyn . " 

 " have she give he the commission ? " 

 " oh no ! I believe not . he be paint it for the French Salon . " 

 " oh ! " 

 then there would follow a silence , with an exchange of smile all 
 round . and presently the talk would begin again . 

 " will it be a ' case , ' do you think ? " 

 " a ' case ' ? you mean a marriage ? oh dear no ! Jocelyn be not a marrying 
 man . " 

 " be not she a little -- er -- well!--a little take with he ? " 

 " perhaps ! very likely ! clever woman be always fool on one point -- if 
 not on several ! " 

 " and he ? be not he very attentive ? " 

 " not more so than he have be and be to dozen of other woman . he be too 
 clever to show she any special attention -- it might compromise he . he be 
 a man that take care of Number one ! " 

 so the gossip ran,--and only Jocelyn himself catch wind of it 
 sufficiently to set he think . his " affaire de coeur " have go far 
 enough,--and he realise that the time have come for he to beat a 
 retreat . but how to do it ? the position be delicate and difficult . if 
 Innocent have be an ordinary type of woman , vain and selfish , fond of 
 frivolity and delight in new conquest , his task would have be 
 easy,--but with a girl who believe in love as the ultimatum of all 
 good , and who trust her lover with implicit faith as next in order of 
 worship to God , what be to be do ? 

 " we talk a vast amount of sentimental rubbish about woman be pure 
 and faithful ! " he soliloquised--"but when they be pure and faithful we 
 be more bored with they than if they be the bad woman in town ! " 

 he have however one subject of congratulation for which he 
 metaphorically pat himself on the back as be " a good boy"--he have 
 not go to such extreme in his love - affair as could result in what be 
 usually call " trouble " for the girl . he have leave she unscathed , save 
 in a moral and spiritual sense . the sweet body , with its delicate 
 waver tint of white and rise be as the unspoilt sheath of a 
 lily - bud,--no one could guess that within the sheath the lily itself 
 be blight and slowly wither . one may question whether it be not a 
 more cruel thing to seduce the soul than the body,--to crush all the 
 fine faith and happy illusion of a fair mind and leave they scorch 
 by a devastating fire whose trace shall never be obliterate . Amadis 
 de Jocelyn would have laugh his gay and most ironical laugh at the 
 bare possibility of such havoc be work by the passion of love 
 alone . 

 " what be the use of love or remember anything ? " he would 
 exclaim--"one love -- one tire of love!--and by - and - by one forget that 
 love ever exist . I look forward to the time when my memory shall 
 dwell chiefly on the agreeable entremet of life -- a good dinner -- a 
 choice cigar ! these thing never bother you afterwards,--unless you 
 eat too much or smoke too much,--then you have headache and 
 indigestion -- distinctly your own fault ! but if you love a woman for a 
 time and tire of her afterwards she always bother you!--reminde you 
 of the day when you ' once ' love she with persistent and dreadful 
 monotony ! I believe in forgetting,--and ' let go . ' " 

 with these sentiment , which be the true outcome of his real self , it 
 be not and never would be possible for he to conceive that with 
 certain high and ultra - sensitive nature love be a great necessity 
 than life itself , and that if they be deprive of the glory they have 
 be lead to imagine they possess , nothing can make compensation for 
 what to they be eternal loss , couple with eternal sorrow . 

 meanwhile Innocent 's portrait on which he have work for a considerable 
 time be nearly complete . it be one of the good thing he have ever 
 do , and he contemplate it with a pleasant thrill of artistic 
 triumph , forget the " woman " entirely in satisfied consideration of 
 the " subject . " as a portrait he realise that it would be the crown of 
 the next year 's Salon , bear comparison with any work of the great 
 modern master . he be however a trifle perplexed , and not altogether 
 pleased at the expression , which , entirely away from his will and 
 intention , have insensibly throw a shadow of sadness on the face,--it 
 have come there apparently of itself , unbidden . he have be particularly 
 proud of his success in the drawing of the girl 's extremely sensitive 
 mouth , for he have , as he think , catch the fleeting sweetness of the 
 smile which be one of she great charms,--but now , despite his 
 pain , that smile seem to lose itself in the sorrow and pathos of an 
 unspeak reproach , which , though enthral and appeal to the 
 beholder as the look of the famous " Mona Lisa , " have fasten itself as 
 it be on the canvas without the painter 's act or consent . he be 
 annoy at this , yet dare not touch it in any attempt to alter what 
 assert itself as convincingly finished,--for the picture be a fine 
 work of art and he realise that it would add to his renown . 

 " I shall not name it as the portrait of a live woman , " he say to 
 himself--"i shall call it simply--'innocent . ' " 

 as he think this , the subject of the painting herself enter the 
 studio . he turn at the sound of the door opening , and catch a 
 strange new impression of her,--an impression that move he to a touch 
 of something like fear . be she go to be tiresome , he 
 wondered?--would she make he a " scene"--or do something odd as woman 
 generally do when their feeling escape control ? her face be very 
 pale -- her eye startlingly bright,--and the graceful white summer frock 
 she wear , with soft old lace fall about it , a costume complete in 
 perfection by a picturesque Leghorn hat bind with black velvet and 
 adorn with a cluster of pale rose , make she a study worthy the brush 
 of many a great artist than Amadis de Jocelyn . his quick eye note 
 every detail of her dainty dress and fair look as he go to meet she 
 and take she in his arm . she cling to he for a moment -- and he feel 
 her tremble . 

 " what be the matter ? " he ask , with unconscious sharpness--"is anything 
 wrong ? " 

 she put he away from her tenderly and look up smile -- but there be 
 a sparkle dew in her eye . 

 " no , my Amadis ! nothing wrong ! " 

 he heave a quick sigh of relief . 

 " thank heaven ! you look at I as if you have a grievance -- all woman 
 have grievance -- but they should keep they to themselves . " 

 she give the slight little shrug of her shoulder ; then go and sit 
 on the high step of the familiar dais where she have pose for her 
 picture , and wait a moment . he do not at once come to sit beside she 
 as he have so often do -- he stand opposite his easel , look at her 
 portrait but not at she . 

 " I have no grievance , " she say then , make an effort to steady her 
 voice , which tremble despite herself--"and if I have I should not vex 
 you with it . but -- when you can quite spare the time I should like a 
 quiet little talk with you . " 

 he look round at she with a kind smile . 

 " just what I want to have with you ! ' Les beaux esprit se 
 rencontrent'--and we both want exactly the same thing ! dear little 
 girl , how sensible you be ! of course we must talk -- about the future . " 

 a lovely radiance light up her face . 

 " that be what I think you would wish , " she said--"now that the 
 portrait be finish . " 

 " well,--all but a touch or two , " he rejoined--"i shall ask a few people 
 to come here and see it before it leave London . then it must be 
 property pack in readiness for Paris before -- before I go-- " 

 her eye open in sudden terrify wonderment . 

 " before you go -- where ? " 

 he laugh a little awkwardly . 

 " oh -- only a short journey -- on business -- I will explain when we have our 
 talk out -- not now -- in a day or two-- " 

 he leave the easel , and come to where she sit , lift she in his arm 
 and fold she close to his breast . 

 " you sweet soul ! " he murmured--"you little innocent ! you be so pretty 
 to - day!--you madden me-- " 

 he unfasten her hat and put it aside,--then draw she close , 
 shower quick eager kiss on her lip , eye and warm soft neck . he 
 feel her heart beat wildly and her whole body tremble under his 
 gust of passion . 

 " you love I -- you truly love I ? " she question , between little sigh 
 of pleasure--"Tell me!--are you sure ? " 

 " be I not prove it ? " he answered--"doe a man behave like this if he 
 do not love ? " 

 " ah , yes ! " and she look up with a wild piteousness in her sweet 
 eyes--"a man will behave like this to any woman ! " 

 he loosen his clasp of she , astonished -- then laugh . 

 " where do you learn that ? " he asked--"Who tell you man be so 
 volatile ? " 

 " no one!"--and her caress arm fall away from him--"My Amadis , you 
 find it pleasant to kiss and to embrace I for the moment -- but perhaps 
 not always will you care ! love -- real love be different-- " 

 " what do you mean by love ? " he ask still smile . 

 she sigh . 

 " I can hardly tell you , " she said--"but one thing I do know -- love would 
 never hurt or wrong the thing it love ! word , kiss , embrace -- they 
 be just the sweet outflow of a great deep!--but love be above and 
 beyond all these , like an angel live with God ! " 

 he be silent . 

 she come up to he and lay she little hand timidly on his arm . 

 " it be time we be quite sure of that angel , my Amadis ! " she said--"we 
 be sure -- but-- " 

 he look her full and quietly in the eye . 

 " yes , child ! " he answered--"It be time ! but I can not talk about angel 
 or anything else just now -- it be grow late in the afternoon and you 
 must not stay here too long . come to - morrow or next day , and we will 
 consult together as to what be good to be do for your happiness-- " 

 " for your ! " she interpose , gently . 

 he smile , curiously . 

 " very well ! as you will ! for mine ! " 




 CHAPTER x 

 Lord Blythe stand at the open window of his sitting - room in the Grand 
 Hotel at Bellaggio -- a window opening out to a broad balcony and 
 command one of the most enchanting view of the lake and mountain 
 ever create by Divine Beneficence for the delight of man . the heavenly 
 scene , warm with rich tint of morning in Italy , glow like a jewel in 
 the sun : picturesque boat with little red and blue awning rock at 
 the edge of the calm lake , in charge of their bronzed and red - cap 
 boatman , wait for hire,--the air be full of fragrance , and every 
 visible thing appeal to beauty - love eye with exquisite and 
 irresistible charm . his attention , however , have wander far from the 
 enjoyable prospect,--he be read and re - read a letter he have just 
 receive from Miss Leigh , in which certain passage occur which 
 cause he some uneasiness . on leave England he have ask she to 
 write regularly , give he all the news of Innocent , and she have 
 readily undertake what to she be a pleasing duty . his thought be 
 constantly with the little house in Kensington , where the young 
 daughter of his dead friend work so patiently to bring forth the 
 fruit of her genius and live independently by their result , and his 
 intense sympathy for the difficult position in which she have be 
 place through no fault of her own and the courage with which she have 
 surmount it , be fast deepen into affection . he rather encourage 
 this sentiment in himself with the latent hope that possibly when he 
 return to England she might still be persuade to accept the position 
 he be so ready to offer she -- that of daughter to he and heiress,--and 
 just now he be trouble by an evident anxiety which betray itself in 
 Miss Leigh 's letter -- anxiety which she plainly do she good to conceal , 
 but which nevertheless make itself apparent . 

 " the dear child work incessantly , " she write , " but she be very quiet 
 and seem easily tired . she be not as bright as she use to be , and 
 look very pale , so that I fear she be do too much , though she say 
 she be perfectly well and happy . we have a call from Mr. John Harrington 
 the other afternoon -- I think you know he -- and he seem quite to think 
 with I that she be over - work herself . he suggest that I should 
 persuade she to go for a change somewhere , either with I or with other 
 friend . I wonder if you would care for we to join you at the italian 
 Lakes ? if you would I might be able to manage it . I have not mention 
 the idea to she yet , as I know she be finish some work -- but she 
 tell I it will all be do in a few day , and that then she will take 
 a rest . I hope she will , for I be sure she need it . " 

 another part of the letter run as follows:-- 

 " I rather hesitate to mention it , but I think so many prolonged 
 sitting for her portrait to that painter with the strange name , Amadis 
 de Jocelyn , have rather tire she out . the picture be finish now , and 
 I and a few friend go to see it the other day . it be a most 
 beautiful portrait , but very sad!--and it be wonderful how the likeness 
 of her father as he be in his young day come out in her face ! she 
 and Mr. de Jocelyn be very intimate friend -- and some people say he be 
 in love with she ! perhaps he may be!--but I do hope she be not in love 
 with HIM ! " 

 Lord Blythe take off his spectacle , fold up the letter and put it in 
 his pocket . then he look out towards the lake and the charming 
 picture it present . how delightful it would be to see Innocent in one 
 of those dainty boat scatter about near the water 's edge , revel 
 with all the keenness of a bright , imaginative temperament in the 
 natural loveliness around she ! Young , and with the promise of a 
 brilliant career opening out before she , happiness seem ready and 
 wait to bless and to adorn the life of the little deserted girl who , 
 leave alone in the world , have nevertheless manage to win the world 's 
 hearing through the name she have make for herself -- yet now -- yes!--now 
 there be the cruel suggestion of a shadow -- an ugly darkness like a 
 black cloud , blot the fairness of a blue sky,--and Blythe feel an 
 uncomfortable sense of premonition and wrong as the thought of Amadis 
 de Jocelyn come into his head and stay there . what be he that he 
 should creep into the unspoiled sphere of a woman 's opening life ? a 
 painter , something of a genius in his line , but erratic and unstable in 
 his character,--known more or less for several " affair of gallantry " 
 which have slip off his easy conscience like water off a duck 's 
 back,--not a highly cultured man by any mean , because ignorant of many 
 of the fine thing in art and letter , and without any positively 
 assure position . yet , undoubtedly a man of strong physical magnetism 
 and charm -- fascinating in his manner , especially on first acquaintance , 
 and capable of overthrow many a strong citadel than the tender 
 heart of a sensitive girl like Innocent , who by a most curious 
 mischance have be associate all her life with the romance of his 
 medieval name and lineage . 

 " yes -- of course she must come out here , " Blythe decide , after a few 
 minute ' cogitation . " I will send a wire to Miss Leigh this morning and 
 follow it up by a letter to the child herself , urge she to join I . 
 the change and distraction will perhaps save she from too much 
 association with Jocelyn,--I do not trust that man -- never have trust 
 he ! poor little girl ! she shall not have her spirit break if I can 
 help it . " 

 he stay yet another few minute at the open window , and take out a 
 cigar from his case begin to light it . while do this his eye be 
 suddenly catch by the picturesque , well - knit figure of a man sit 
 easily on a step near the cluster boat gather close to the 
 hotel 's special landing place . he be apparently one of the many 
 road - side artist one meet everywhere about the italian Lakes , ready 
 to paint a sunset or moonlight on Como or Maggiore on commission at 
 short notice for a few franc . he be not young -- his white hair and 
 grizzle moustache mark the unpleasing passage of resistless 
 time,--yet there be something lissom and graceful about he that 
 suggest a kind of youth in age . his attire consist of much worn 
 brown trouser and a loose white shirt keep in place by a red 
 belt,--his shirt sleeve be roll up to the elbow , display thin 
 brown muscular arm , expressive of energy , and he wear a battered brown 
 hat which might once have be of the so - call " Homburg " shape , but 
 which now resemble nothing ever see in the way of ordinary head - gear . 
 he be busily engage in sketch a view of the lake and the opposite 
 mountain , evidently to the order of some fashionably dress woman who 
 stand near he watch the rapid and sure movement of his brush -- he 
 have his box of water - colour beside he , and smile and talk as he 
 work . Lord Blythe watch he with lively interest , while enjoy 
 the first whiff of his lately light cigar . 

 " a clever chap , evidently ! " he think . " these Italians be all artist 
 and poet at heart . when those woman have finish with he I will get 
 he to do a sketch for I to send to Innocent -- just to show she the 
 loveliness of the place . she will be delighted ! and it may tempt she to 
 come here . " 

 he wait a few minute long , till he see the artist hand over the 
 complete draw to his lady patron , one of whom pay he with a 
 handful of silver coin . something in the bearing and attitude of the 
 man as he rise from the step where he have be seat and lift his 
 shapeless brown hat to his customer in courteous acknowledgment of 
 their favour as they leave he , strike Blythe with an odd sense of 
 familiarity . 

 " I must have see he somewhere before , " he think . " in Venice , 
 perhaps -- or Florence -- these fellow be like gipsy , they wander about 
 everywhere . " 

 he saunter out of the Hotel into the garden and from the garden down 
 to the landing - place , where he slowly approach the artist , who be 
 stand with his back towards he , slip his lately earn franc 
 into his trouser pocket . several sample drawing be set up in view 
 beside him,--lovely little study of lake and mountain which would 
 have do honour to many a Royal Academician , and Blythe pause , 
 look at these with wonder and admiration before speak , unaware 
 that the artist have take a backward glance at he of swift and more or 
 less startled recognition . 

 " you be an admirable painter , my friend ! " he say , at last -- speak 
 in italian of which he be a master . " your drawing be worth much more 
 than you be ask for they . will you do one specially for I ? " 

 " I have do a good many for you in my time , Blythe ! " be the 
 half - laugh answer , give in perfect English . " but I do not mind do 
 another . " 

 and he turn round , push his cap off his brow , and show a 
 wonderfully handsome face , wear with year and privation , but fine and 
 noble - feature and full of the unquenchable light which be give by an 
 indomitable and endure spirit . 

 Lord Blythe stagger back and catch at the handrail of the landing 
 step to save himself from fall . 

 " my God ! " he gasp . " you ! you , of all man in the world ! you!--you , 
 Pierce Armitage ! " 

 and he star wildly , his brain swimming,--his pulse beat 
 hammer - stroke -- be it -- could it be possible ? the artist in brown 
 trouser and white shirt straighten himself , and instinctively seek 
 to assume a less tramp - like appearance , look at his former friend 
 meanwhile with a half - glad , half - doubtful air . 

 " well , well , Dick ! " he say , after a moment 's pause--"don't take it 
 badly that you find I pursue my profession in this peripatetic 
 style ! it be a nice life -- well than be a pavement artist in 
 Pimlico ! you must not be afraid ! I be not go to claim acquaintance 
 with you before the public eye -- you , a peer of the realm , Dick ! no , no ! 
 I will not shame you ... " 

 " shame I ! " Blythe spring forward and catch his hand in a close warm 
 grip . " never say that , Pierce ! you know I well ! thank God you be 
 here -- alive!--thank God I have meet you!-- " 

 he stop , too overcome to say another word , and wring the hand he 
 hold with unconscious fervour , tear spring to his eye . the two 
 look full at each other , and Armitage smile a little confusedly . 

 " why , Dick ! " he began,--then turn his head quickly he glance up at 
 the clear blue sky to hide and to master his own emotion--"i believe we 
 feel like a couple of sentimental undergrad still , Dick in spite of 
 age and infirmity ! " 

 he laugh forcedly , while Blythe , at last release his hand , take he 
 by the arm , regardless of the curious observation of some of the hotel 
 guest who be stroll about the garden and terrace . 

 " come with I , Pierce , " he say , in hurry nervous accents--"i have 
 news for you -- such news as you can not guess or imagine . put away all 
 those drawing and come inside the hotel -- to my room-- " " what ? in this 
 guise ? " and Armitage shake his head--"my dear fellow , your enthusiasm 
 be run away with you ! besides -- there be some one else to consider-- " 

 " some one else ? whom do you mean ? " demand Blythe with visible 
 impatience . 

 Armitage hesitate . 

 " your wife , " he say , at last . 

 Blythe look he steadily in the eye . 

 " my wife be dead . " 

 " dead ! " armitage loosen his arm from the other 's hold , and stand 
 inert as though he have receive a numb blow . " dead ! when do she 
 die ? " 

 in a few word Blythe tell he . 

 Armitage hear in silence . mechanically he begin to collect his 
 drawing and put they in a portfolio . his face be pale under its 
 sun - brown tint,--his expression almost tragic . Lord Blythe watch 
 he for a moment , move by strong heart - beat of affection and 
 compassion . 

 " Pierce , " he then say , in a low tone--"i know everything ! " 

 Armitage turn on he sharply . 

 " you -- you know?--what?--how?-- " 

 " she -- Maude -- tell I all , " say Blythe , gently--"And I think -- your 
 wrong to she -- be not so blameworthy as her wrong to you ! but I have 
 something to tell you of one whose wrong be great than hers or 
 your -- one who be innocent ! " 

 he emphasise the name , and Armitage start as though strike with a 
 whip . 

 " innocent ! " he muttered--"the child -- yes!--but I could not make enough 
 to send money for it after a while -- I pay as long as I could-- " 

 he trembled,--his fine eye have a strained look of anguish in they . 

 " not dead too ? " he said--"surely not -- the people at the farm have a good 
 name -- they would not be cruel to a child-- " 

 Blythe grip he by the arm . 

 " come , " he said--"we can not talk here -- there be too many people 
 about -- I must have you to myself . never mind your appearance -- many an 
 R. a. cut a bad figure than you do for the sake of ' pose ' ! you be 
 entirely picturesque"--and he relieve his pen - up feeling by a 
 laugh--"and there be nothing strange in your come to my room to see 
 the particular view I want from my window . " 

 thus persuade , Armitage gather his drawing and paint material 
 together , and follow his friend , who quickly lead the way into the 
 Hotel . the gorgeously liverie hall - porter nod familiarly to the 
 artist , whom he have see for several season sell his work on the 
 landing , and make a good - natured comment on his " luck " in have 
 secure the patronage of a rich English " Milor , " but otherwise little 
 notice be take of the incongruous couple as they pass up the stair 
 to " Milor 's " private room on the first floor , where , as soon as they 
 enter , Blythe shut and lock the door . 

 " now , Pierce , I have you ! " he say , affectionately take he by the 
 shoulder and push he towards a chair . " why , in heaven 's name , do 
 you never let I know you be alive ? everyone think you be dead 
 year and year ago ! " 

 Armitage sit down , and take off his cap , pass his hand through his 
 thick crop of silvery hair . 

 " I spread that report myself , " he say . " I want to get out of it 
 all -- to give up!--to forget that such a place as London exist . I be 
 sick to death of it!--of its convention , and vile hypocrisy -- its 
 ' bounder ' in art as in everything else!--beside , I should have be 
 in the way -- Maude be tired of me-- " 

 he break off , with an abstracted look . 

 " you know all about it , you say ? " he go on after a pause--"she tell 
 you-- " 

 " she tell I the night she die , " answer Blythe quietly--"After a 
 silence of nearly twenty year ! " 

 Armitage give a short , sharp sigh . " woman be strange creature ! " he 
 say . " I do not think they know when they be love . I love she -- much 
 more than she knew,--she seem to I the most beautiful thing on 
 earth!--and when she ask I to run away with her-- " 

 " she ask you ? " 

 " yes -- of course ! do you think I would have take she against her own 
 wish and will ? she suggest and plan the whole thing -- and I be mad 
 for she at the time -- even now those week we pass together seem to I 
 the only real living of my life ! I think she love I as I love 
 she -- and if she have marry I , as I beg she to do , I believe I 
 should have do something as a painter,--somethe great , I mean . but 
 she get tired of my ' art - jargon , ' as she call it -- and she could not 
 bear the idea of have to rough it a bit before I could hope to make 
 any large amount of money . then I be disappoint -- and I tell she 
 so -- and SHE be disappoint , and she tell I so -- and we 
 quarrel -- but when I hear a child be to be bear , I urge she again 
 to marry me-- " 

 " and she refuse ? " interpose Blythe . 

 " she refuse . she say she intend to make a rich marriage and live in 
 luxury . and she declare that if I ever love she at all , the only way 
 to prove it be to get rid of the child . I do not think she would have 
 care if I have be brute enough to kill it . " 

 Blythe give a gesture of horror . 

 " do not say that , man ! do not think it ! " 

 Armitage sigh . 

 " well , I can not help it , Blythe ! some woman go callous when they have have 
 their fling . maude be like that . she do not care for I any more,--she 
 see nothing in front of she but embarrassment and trouble if her affair 
 with I be find out -- and as it be all in my hand I do the good I 
 could think of,--took the child away and place it with kind country 
 folk -- and remove myself from England and out of Maude 's way 
 altogether . the year after I come abroad I hear she have marry 
 you,--rather an unkind turn of fate , you be my old friend ! and 
 this be what make I resolve to ' die'--that be , to be report dead , 
 so that she might have no misgiving about I or my turn up 
 unexpectedly to cause you any annoyance . I determine to lose myself 
 and my name too -- no one know I here as Pierce Armitage,--I'm Pietro 
 Corri for all the english amateur art - lover in Italy ! " 

 he laugh rather bitterly . 

 " I think I lose a good deal more than myself and my name ! " he go on . 
 " I believe if I have stay in England I should have win something of a 
 reputation . but -- you see , I really love Maude -- in a stupid man 's way 
 of love,--i do not want to worry she or remind she of her phase of 
 youthful madness with I -- or cause scandal to she in any way-- " 

 " but do you ever think of the child ? " interrupt Blythe , suddenly . 

 Armitage look up . 

 " think of it ? of course I do ! the place where I leave it be call 
 Briar Farm,--a wonderful old sixteenth - century house -- I make a drawing 
 of it once when the apple - blossom be out -- and the owner of it , know 
 as Farmer Jocelyn , have a wonderful reputation in the neighbourhood for 
 integrity and kindness . I leave the child with he -- one stormy night in 
 autumn -- say I would come back for it -- of course I never do -- but for 
 twelve year I send money for it from different place in Europe -- and 
 before I leave England I tell Maude where it be , in case she ever 
 want to see it -- not that such an idea would ever occur to she ! I 
 think the probability be that the farmer , have no child of 
 his own , would be likely to adopt the one leave on his hand , and that 
 she would grow up a happy , healthy country lass , without a care , and 
 marry some good , sound , simple rustic fellow . but you know everything , 
 I suppose!--or so your look imply . be the child alive ? " 

 Lord Blythe hold up his hand . 

 " now , Pierce , it be my turn , " he said--"Your share in the story I 
 already know in part -- but one thing you have not tell I -- one wrong you 
 have not confess . " 

 " oh , there be a thousand wrong I have commit , " say Armitage , with 
 a slight , weary gesture . " life and love have both disappoint I -- and 
 I suppose when that sort of thing happen a man go more or less to 
 the dogs-- " 

 " life and love have disappoint a good many folk , " say 
 blythe--"woman perhaps more than man . and one woman especially , who 
 hardly merit disappointment -- one who love you very truly , 
 pierce!--have you any idea who it be I mean ? " 

 Armitage move restlessly,--a slight flush colour his face . 

 " you mean Lavinia Leigh ? " he said--"yes -- I behave like a cad . I know 
 it ! but -- I could not help myself . Maude draw I on with her lovely eye 
 and smile ! and to think she be dead!--all that beauty in the 
 grave!--cold and mouldering ! " he cover his eye with one hand , and a 
 visible tremor shake he . " somehow I have always fancy she as young 
 as ever and endow with a sort of earthly immortality ! she be so 
 bright , so imperious , so queen - like ! you ask I why I do not let you 
 know I be live ? Blythe , I would have die in very truth by my own 
 hand rather than trouble her peace in her married life with you ! " he 
 pause -- then glance up at his friend , with the wan flicker of a 
 smile--"And -- do you know Lavinia Leigh ? " 

 " I do , " answer blythe--"i know and honour she ! and -- your daughter be 
 with she now ! " 

 Armitage spring up . 

 " my daughter ! with Lavinia ! no!--impossible -- incredible!-- " 

 " sit down again , Pierce , " and Lord Blythe himself draw up a chair close 
 to armitage--"sit down and be patient ! you know the lines--'there be a 
 divinity that shape our end , rough - hew they how we will ' ? divinity 
 have work in strange way with you , Pierce!--and still more strangely 
 with your child . will you listen while I tell you all ? " 

 Armitage sink into his chair,--his hand tremble -- he be greatly 
 agitated,--and his eye be fix on his friend 's face in an eager 
 passion of appeal . 

 " I will listen as if you be an angel speak , Dick ! " he say . " let 
 I know the worst!--or the good -- of everything ! " 

 and Blythe , in a low quiet voice , thrill in its every accent by the 
 affection and sympathy of his honest spirit , tell he the whole story 
 of Innocent -- of her sweetness and prettiness -- of her grace and 
 genius -- of the sudden and brilliant fame she have win as " Ena 
 Armitage"--of the brief and bitter knowledge she have be give of her 
 mother -- of her strange chance in go straight to the house of Miss 
 Leigh when she travel alone and unguide from the country to 
 London -- and lastly of his own admiration for her courage and 
 independence , and his desire to adopt she as a daughter in order to 
 leave she his fortune . 

 " but now you have turn up , Pierce , I resign my hope in that 
 direction ! " he conclude , with a smile . " you be her father!--and you 
 may well be proud of such a daughter ! and there be a duty star you 
 in the face -- a duty towards she which , when once perform , will 
 release she from a good deal of pain and perplexity -- you know what it 
 be ? " 

 " rather ! " and Armitage rise and begin pace to and fro--"To 
 acknowledge and legalise she as my child ! I can do this now -- and I 
 will ! I can declare she be bear in wedlock , now Maude be dead -- for no 
 one will ever know . the real identity of her mother"--he pause and 
 come up to Blythe , rest his hand on his shoulders--"the real 
 identity of her mother be and shall ever be our secret ! " 

 there be a pause . then Armitage 's mellow musical voice again break the 
 silence . 

 " I can never thank you , Blythe ! " he said--"You bless old man as you 
 be ! you seem to I like a god disguise in a tweed suit ! you have 
 change life for I altogether ! I must cease to be a wandering scamp on 
 the face of the earth!--i must try to be worthy of my fair and famous 
 daughter ! how strange it seem ! little Innocent!--the poor baby I leave 
 to the mercy of a farm - yard training!--for she I must become 
 respectable ! I think I will even try to paint a great picture , so that 
 she be not ashamed of her Dad ! what do you say ? will you help I ? " 

 he laughed,--but there be great tear in his eye . they clasp hand 
 silently . 

 then Lord Blythe speak in a light tone . 

 " I will wire to Miss Leigh this morning , " he say . " I will ask she to come 
 out here with Innocent as soon as possible . I will not break the news of 
 you to they yet -- it would quite overpower Miss Leigh -- it might almost 
 kill her-- " 

 " why , how ? " ask Armitage . 

 " with joy ! " answer Blythe . " Hers be a faithful soul ! " 

 he wait a moment -- then go on : 

 " I will prepare the way cautiously in a letter -- it would never do to 
 blurt the whole thing out at once . I will tell Innocent I have a very 
 great and delightful surprise await her-- " 

 " oh , very great and delightful indeed ! " echo Armitage with a sad 
 little laugh . " the discovery of a tramp father with only a couple of 
 shirt to his back and a handful of franc in his pocket ! " 

 " my dear chap , what do that matter ? " and Blythe give he a light 
 friendly blow on the shoulder . " we can put all these exterior matter 
 right in no time . trust me!--are we not old friend ? you have come back 
 from death , as it seem , just when your child may need you -- she do 
 need you -- every young girl need some protector in this world , 
 especially when her name have become famous , and a matter of public talk 
 and curiosity . ah ! I can already see her joy when she throw her arm 
 around your neck and say ' my father ! ' I would gladly change place 
 with you for that one exquisite moment ! " 

 they stay together all that day and night . Lord Blythe send his wire 
 to Miss Leigh , and write his letter,--then both man settle down , as it 
 be , to wait . armitage go off for two day to Milan , and return 
 transform in dress , look the very beau - ideal of an handsome 
 englishman,--and the people at Bellaggio who have know he as the 
 wander landscape painter " Pietro Corri " fail to recognise he now 
 in his true self . 

 " yes , " say Blythe again , with the fine unselfishness which be part of 
 his nature , when at the end of one of their many conversation 
 concern Innocent , he have go over every detail he could think of 
 which relate to her life and literary success--"When she come she 
 will give you all her heart , Pierce ! she will be proud and glad,--she 
 will think of no one but her beloved father ! she be like that ! she be 
 full of an unspent love -- you will possess it all ! " 

 and in his honest joy for the joy of other , he never once think of 
 Amadis de Jocelyn . 




 CHAPTER XI 

 it be a gusty September afternoon in London , and autumn have give some 
 unpleasing sign of its early presence in the yellow leaf that fly 
 whirling over the grass in Kensington Gardens and other open space 
 where tree spread their kind bough to the rough and chilly wind . a 
 pretty little elm in Miss Leigh 's tiny garden be clothe in gold 
 instead of green , and shake its glitter foliage down with every 
 breath of air like fairy coin mint from the sky . innocent , lean 
 from her study window , watch the fall brightness with an unwilling 
 sense of pain and foreboding . 

 " summer be over , I be afraid ! " she sighed--"such a wonderful summer it 
 have be for me!--the summer of my life -- the summer of my love ! oh , 
 dear summer , stay just a little long ! " 

 and the verse of a song , sing so often as to have become hackneye , 
 ring in her ears-- 

 " fall leaf and fading tree , line of white in a sullen sea , shadow 
 rise on you and I -- the swallow be make they ready to fly , 
 wheel out on a windy sky : good - bye , Summer ! good - bye , good - bye ! " 

 she shiver , and close the window . she be dress for go out , and 
 her little motor - brougham wait for she below . Miss Leigh have go to 
 lunch and to spend the afternoon with some old friend reside out of 
 town,--an unusual and wonderful thing for she to do , as she seldom 
 accept invitation now where Innocent be not concerned,--but the 
 people who have ask she be venerable folk who could not by the law 
 of nature be expect to live very much long , and as they have know 
 Lavinia Leigh from girlhood she consider it somewhat of a duty to go 
 and see they when , as in this instance , they earnestly desire it . 
 moreover she know Innocent have her own numerous engagement and be 
 never concern at be leave alone -- especially on this particular 
 afternoon when she have an appointment with her publishers,--and another 
 appointment afterwards , of which she say nothing , even to herself . she 
 have take more than usual pain with her attire , and look she 
 sweetest in a soft dove - colour silk gown gather about her slight 
 figure in cunning fold of exquisite line and drapery , while the tender 
 gold of her hair shine like ripen corn from under the curved brim of 
 a graceful " picture " hat of black velvet , adorn with one droop 
 pale grey plume . a small knot of rose nestle among the delicate lace 
 on her bodice , and the diamond dove - pendant Lord Blythe have give she 
 sparkle like a frozen sunbeam against the ivory whiteness of her 
 throat . she glance at herself in the mirror with a smile,--wondering 
 if " he " would be pleased with her appearance,--"he " have be what be 
 call " difficult " of late , find fault with some of the very point 
 of her special way of dress which he have once eagerly admire . but she 
 attribute his capricious humour to fatigue and irritability from 
 " over - strain"--that convenient ailment which be now - a - day bring in 
 as a disguise for mere want of control and bad temper . " he have be 
 work so hard to finish his portrait of I ! " she think , 
 tenderly--"poor fellow!--he must have get quite tired of look at my 
 face ! " 

 she glance round her study to see that everything be in order -- and 
 then take up a neatly tie parcel of manuscript -- her third 
 book -- complete . she have a fancy -- one of many , equally harmless,--that 
 she would like to deliver it herself to the publisher rather than send 
 it by post , on this day of all day , when plan for the future be to 
 be discuss with her lover and everything settle for their mutual 
 happiness . her heart grow light with joyous anticipation as she run 
 downstair and nod smilingly at the maid Rachel , who stand ready at 
 the door to open it for she pass . 

 " if Miss Leigh come home before I do , tell she I will not be long , " 
 she say , as she step into her brougham and be whirl away . at the 
 office of her publisher she be expect and receive with eager 
 homage . the head of the firm take the precious packet of manuscript 
 from her hand with a smile of entire satisfaction . 

 " you be up to your promise time , Miss Armitage ! " he say , 
 kindly--"and you must have work very hard . I hope you will give 
 yourself a good long rest now ? " 

 she laugh , lightly . 

 " oh , well!--perhaps ! " she answered--"if I feel I can afford it ! I want 
 to work while I be young -- not to rest . but I think Miss Leigh would like 
 a change -- and if she do I will take she wherever she wish to go . she 
 be so kind to me!--I can never do enough for she ! " 

 the publisher look at her sweet , thoughtful face curiously . 

 " do you never think of yourself ? " he asked--"must you always plan some 
 pleasure for other ? " 

 she glance at he in quick surprise . 

 " why , of course ! " she replied--"pleasure for other be the only 
 pleasure possible to I . I assure you I be quite selfish!--i'm greedy 
 for the happiness of those I love -- and if they can not or will not be happy 
 I be perfectly miserable ! " 

 he smiled,--and when she leave , escort she himself out of his office 
 to her brougham with a kind friendliness that touch she . 

 " you will not let I call you a brilliant author , " he say , as he shake 
 hand with her--"perhap it will please you well if I say you be a 
 true woman ! " 

 her eye flash up a bright gratitude,--she wave her hand in 
 parting -- as the brougham glide off . and never to his die day do 
 that publisher and man of hard business detail forget the radiance of 
 the face that smile at he that afternoon,--a face of light and youth 
 and loveliness , as full of hope and faith as the face of a picture 
 angel kneeling at the foot of the Madonna with heaven 's own glory 
 encircle it in gold . 

 the quick little motor - brougham seem unusually slow - go that 
 afternoon . Innocent , with her full happy heart and young pulsing blood , 
 grow impatient with its tardy progress , yet , as a matter of fact , it 
 travel along at its most rapid speed . the well - know by - street near 
 Holland Park be reach at last , and while the brougham go off to an 
 accustomed retired corner choose by the chauffeur to await she 
 pleasure , she push open the gate of the small garden lead to the 
 back entrance of Jocelyn 's studio -- a garden now look rather damp and 
 dreary , strew as it be with wet mass of fall leaf . it be 
 begin to rain -- and she run swiftly along the path to the familiar 
 door which she open with her private key . Jocelyn be work at his 
 easel -- he hear the turn of the lock and look round . she enter , 
 smile -- but he do not at once go and meet she . he be finish off 
 some special touch of colour over which he bend with assiduous 
 care,--and she be far too unselfishly interested in his work to 
 disturb he at what seem to be an anxious moment . so she wait . 

 presently he speak , with a certain irritability in his tone . 

 " be you there ? I wish you would come forward where I can see you ! " 

 she laugh -- a pretty ripple laugh of kindly amusement . 

 " Amadis ! if you be a true Knight , it be you who should turn round and 
 look at I for yourself ! " 

 " but I be busy , " he say , with the same sharpness of voice--"surely you 
 see that ? " 

 she make no answer , but move quietly to a position where she stand 
 face he at about an arm 's length . never have she make a pretty 
 picture than in that attitude of charming hesitation , with a tender 
 little smile on her pretty mouth and a wistful light in her eye . he 
 lay down his palette and brush . 

 " I must give up work for to - day , " he say -- and go to she he take she 
 in his arms--"you be too great an attraction for I to resist ! " he 
 kiss she lightly , as he would have kiss a child . " you be very 
 fascinating this afternoon ! be you bent on some new conquest ? " 

 she give he a sweet look . 

 " why will you talk nonsense , my Amadis ! " she said--"you know I never 
 wish for ' conquest ' as you call them,--I only want you ! nothing but 
 you ! " 

 with his arm about she he draw she to a corner of the studio , half 
 curtain , where there be a double settee or couch , comfortably 
 cushion , and here he sit down still hold she in his embrace . 

 " you only want me!--nothe but I ! " he repeat , softly--"Dear little 
 Innocent!--Ah!--But I fear I be just what you can not have ! " 

 she smile , not understand . 

 " what do you mean ? " she asked--"you always play with I ! be you not 
 all mine as I be all your ? " 

 he be silent . then he slowly withdraw his arm from her waist . 

 " now , child , " he said--"listen to I and be good and sensible ! you know 
 this can not go on . " 

 she lift her eye trustfully to his face . 

 " what can not go on ? " she query , as softly as though the question be 
 a caress . 

 he move restlessly . 

 " why -- this -- this love - making , of ours ! we must not give ourselves over 
 to sentiment -- we must be normal and practical . we must look the thing 
 squarely in the face and settle on some course that will be good and 
 wisest for we both-- " 

 she tremble a little . something cold and terrifying begin to creep 
 through her blood . 

 " yes -- I know , " she falter , nervously--"you say -- you say we would 
 arrange everything together to - day . " 

 " true ! so I do ! well , I will ! " he draw close to she and take she 
 little hand in his own . " you see , dear , we can not live on the height of 
 ecstasy for ever " and he smiled,--a force , ugly smile--"we've have a 
 very happy time together , have not we?"--and he be conscious of a 
 certain nervousness as he feel her soft little body press against he 
 in answer--"but the time have come for we to think of other 
 thing -- other interest -- your career,--my future-- " 

 she look up at he in sudden alarm . 

 " Amadis ! " she said--"what be it ? you frighten me!--you speak so 
 strangely ! what do you mean ? " 

 " now if you be unreasonable I shall go away ! " he say , with sudden 
 harshness , drop she hand--"i shall leave you here by yourself 
 without another word ! " 

 she turn deathly pale -- then flush a faint crimson -- a sense of giddy 
 faintness overcame her,--she put up her hand to her head tremblingly , 
 and loosen her hat take it off as though its weight oppress she . 

 " I -- I be not unreasonable , Amadis , " she faltered--"only -- I do not 
 understand-- " 

 " well , you ought to understand , " he answer , heatedly--"a clever 
 little woman like you who write book should not want any explanation . 
 you ought to be able to grasp the whole position at a glance ! " 

 her breath come and go quickly -- she try to smile . 

 " I be afraid I be very stupid then , " she answer , gently--"for I can 
 only see that you seem angry with I for nothing . " 

 he take her hand again . 

 " dear little goose , I be not angry , " he said--"If you be to make I a 
 ' scene ' I should be angry -- very angry ! but you will not do that , will you ? 
 it would upset my nerve . and you be such a wise , independent little 
 person that I feel quite safe with you . well , now let we talk 
 sensibly,--i've a great deal to tell you . in the first place , I be go 
 to Algiers . " 

 her lip be dry and stiff , but she manage to ask-- 

 " when ? " 

 " oh , any time!--to - morrow ... next day -- before the week be over , 
 certainly . there be some fine subject out there that I want to 
 paint -- and I feel I could do good work-- " 

 her hand in his contract a little,--she instinctively withdraw it ... 
 then she hear herself speak as though it be someone else a long 
 way off . 

 " when be you come back ? " 

 " Ah!--That be my own affair ! " he answer carelessly--"in the spring 
 perhaps,--perhaps not for a year or two-- " 

 " Amadis ! " 

 the name spring from her lip like the cry of an animal wound to 
 death . she rise suddenly from his side and stand face he , sway 
 slightly like a reed in a cruel wind . 

 " well ! " he rejoined--"you say ' Amadis ' as though it hurt you ! what now ? " 

 " do you mean , " she say , faintly--"by -- what -- you -- say,--do you 
 mean -- that we be -- to part ? " 

 the strained agony in her eye compel he to turn his own away . he 
 get up from the settee and leave she where she stand . 

 " we must part soon or later , " he answer , lightly--"surely you know 
 that ? " 

 " surely I know that ! " she repeat , with a bewildered look,--then 
 run to he , she catch his arm--"amadis ! Amadis ! you do not mean 
 it!--say you do not mean it!--you can not mean it , if you love I ! ... oh , 
 my dearest!--if you love I ! ... " 

 she stop , half choke by a throb ache in her throat,--and 
 totter against he as though about to fall . alarm at this he catch 
 her round the waist to support she . 

 " of course I love you ! " he say , hurriedly--"When you be good and 
 reasonable!--not when you behave like this ! if I don't love you , it 
 will be quite your own fault-- " 

 " my own fault ? " she murmur , sobbingly--"my own fault ? Amadis ! what 
 have I do ? " 

 " what have you do ? it be what you be do that matter ! give way 
 to temper and make I uncomfortable ! do you call that ' love ' ? " 

 she drop her hand from his arm and draw herself away from he . she 
 be tremble from head to foot . 

 " please -- please do not misunderstand I ! " she stammer , like a 
 frightened child--"i -- I have no temper ! I -- I -- feel nothing -- I only want 
 to please you -- to know what you wish-- " 

 she break off -- her eye , lift to his , have a strange , wild stare , but 
 he be too absorb in his own particular and personal difficulty to 
 notice this . he go on , speak rapidly-- 

 " if you want to please I you will first of all be perfectly normal , " 
 he said--"make up your mind to be calm and good - natured . I can not stand 
 an emotional woman all tantrum and tear . I like good sense and good 
 manner . you ought to have both , with all the book you have read-- " 

 she give a sudden low laugh , empty of mirth . 

 " book ! " she echo -- and raise her arm above her head she let they 
 drop again at her side with a gesture of utter abandonment . " ah yes ! 
 book ! book by the Sieur Amadis de Jocelin ! " 

 her hair be ruffle and fall about her face,--her cheek have flame 
 into a feverish red . the tragic beauty of her expression annoy he . 

 " your hair be come down , " he say , with a coldly critical 
 smile--"You look like a Bacchante ! " 

 she pay no attention to this remark . she be apparently talk to 
 herself . 

 " book ! " she say again--"such sweet love - letter and poem by the 
 Sieur Amadis de Jocelin ! " 

 he grow impatient . 

 " you be a silly child ! " he said--"Are you go to listen to I or not ? " 

 she gaze at he with an almost awful directness . 

 " I be listen ! " she answer . 

 " well , do not be melodramatic while you listen ! " he retorted--"be 
 normal ! " 

 she be silent , still gaze fixedly at he . 

 he turn his eye away , and take up one of his brush , dip it in 
 colour and make a great pretence of work in a bit of sky on his 
 canvas . 

 " you see , dear child , " he resume , with an unctuous air of patient 
 kindness--"your idea of love and mine be totally different . you want 
 to live in a paradise of romance and tenderness -- I want nothing of the 
 sort . of course , with a sweet caressable creature like you it be very 
 pleasant to indulge in a little folly for a time,--and we have have quite 
 four month of the ' divine rapture ' as the poet call it,--four month 
 be a long time for any rapture to last ! you have -- yes!--you have amuse 
 me!--and I have make you happy -- give you something to think about 
 besides scribble and publishing -- yes -- i'm sure I have make you 
 happy -- and,--what be much more to my credit -- I have take care of you 
 and leave you unharmed . think of that ! day after day I have have you here 
 entirely in my power!--and yet -- and yet"--here he turn his cold blue 
 eye upon she with an under - gleam of mockery in their steely 
 light--"you be still -- innocent ! " 

 she do not move -- she scarcely seem to breathe . 

 " that be why I tell you it would be a good thing for you if you 
 accept Lord Blythe 's offer,--in his great position he would be able 
 to marry you well to some rich fellow with a title"--he go on , 
 easily . " now I be not a marry man . domestic bliss would not suit I . 
 I have sometimes think it would hardly suit you ! " 

 she stir slightly , as though some invisible creature have touch 
 she , and hold up one little trembling hand . 

 " stop ! " she say , and her voice though faint be clear and steady--"Do 
 you think -- can you imagine that I be of so low and common a nature as 
 to marry any man , after-- " she pause , struggle with herself . 

 " after what ? " he query , smilingly . 

 she shudder , as with keenest cold . 

 " after your kiss ! " she answered--"after your embrace which have hold 
 I away from everything save you!--after your caress -- oh god!--after 
 all this,--do you think I would shame my body and perjure my soul by 
 give myself to another man ? " 

 he almost laugh at her saintly idea of a lover 's chastity . 

 " every woman would ! " he declared--"and I be sure every woman do ! " 

 she look straight before she into vacancy . 

 " I be not ' every woman , ' " she say , slowly--"I be only one unhappy 
 girl ! " 

 he be still dab colour on his canvas , but now throw down his brush 
 and come to she . 

 " dear child , why be tragic ? " he said--"Life be such a pleasant thing 
 and hold so much for both of we ! I shall always love you -- if you be 
 good ! " and he laugh , pleasantly--"and you can always love I -- if you 
 like ! but I can not marry you -- I have never think of such a thing ! 
 marriage would not suit I at all . I know , of course , what you would 
 like . you would like a grand wedding with lot of millinery and 
 present , and then a honeymoon at your old Briar Farm -- in fact , I 
 daresay you would like to buy Briar Farm and imprison I there for life , 
 along with the dust and ash of my ancestor 's long - lose brother -- but I 
 should not like it ! no , child!--not even you , attractive as you be , 
 could turn I into a Farmer Jocelyn ! " 

 he try to take she in his arm , but she draw herself back from he . 

 " you speak truly , " she say , in a measured , lifeless tone--"nothing 
 could turn you into a Farmer Jocelyn . for he be an honest man ! " 

 he wince as though a whip have strike he , and an ugly frown darken 
 his feature . 

 " he would not have hurt a dog that trust he , " she go on in the 
 same monotonous way--"He would not have betray a soul that love he ! " 

 all at once the unnatural rigidity of her face break up into piteous , 
 terrible weeping , and she fling herself at his foot . 

 " Amadis , Amadis ! " she cry . " it be not -- it can not be you who be so 
 cruel!--no , no!--it be some devil that speak to I -- not you , not you , 
 my love , my heart ! oh , say it be not true!--say it be not true ! have 
 mercy -- mercy ! I love you , I love you ! you be all my life!--i can not 
 live without you ! Amadis ! " 

 vex and frighten for himself at her sudden wild abandonment of 
 grief , he stoop , and grip she by the arm try to draw she up 
 from the floor . 

 " be quiet ! " he say , roughly--"i will not have a scandal here in my 
 studio ! you will bring my man - servant up in a moment with your stupid 
 noise ! I be ashamed of you!--screame and cry like a virago ! if you 
 make this row I shall go away ! " 

 " oh , no , no , no!--do not go away ! " she moan , sobbingly--"have some 
 little pity ! do not leave I , Amadis ! be everything forget so soon ? 
 think for a moment what you have say to me!--what you have be to I ! 
 I think you love I , dear!--yes , I think you love me!--you tell 
 I so ! " and she hold up her little hand to he fold as in prayer , 
 the tear rain down her cheeks--"but if for some fault of mine you 
 do not love I any more , kill I now -- here -- just where I am!--kill I , 
 Amadis!--or tell I to go away and kill myself -- I will obey you!--but 
 don't -- don't send I into the empty darkness of life again all alone ! 
 oh , no , no ! let I die rather than that!--you would not think unkindly 
 of I if I be dead ! " 

 he take her uplifted hand in his own -- he begin to be " artistically " 
 interested,--with the same sort of interest Nero might have feel while 
 watch the effect of some new poison on a tortured slave,--and a 
 slight , very slight sense of regret and remorse tug at his tough 
 heart - string . 

 " I should think of you exactly as I do now , " he say , resolutely--"if 
 you be to kill yourself I should not pity you in the least ! I should 
 say that though you be a bit of a clever woman , you be much more of 
 a fool ! so you would gain nothing that way ! you see , I be sane and 
 sensible -- you be not . you be excited and hysterical -- and do not know 
 what you be talk about . yes , child!--that be the fact ! " he pat 
 the hand he hold consolingly , and then let they go . " I wish you would get 
 up from the floor and be reasonable ! the position be quite simple and 
 clear . we have have an ideal time of it together -- but be not it Shakespeare 
 who say ' these violent delight have violent end ' ? my work call I 
 to Algiers -- yours keep you in London -- therefore we must part -- but we 
 shall meet again -- some day -- I hope ... " 

 she slowly rise to she feet,--her sob cease . 

 " then -- you never love I ? " she said--"It be all a lie ? " 

 " I never lie , " he answer , coldly--"I love you -- for the time be . 
 you amuse I . " 

 " and for your ' amusement ' you have ruin I ? " 

 " ruin you ? " he turn upon she in indignant protest--"you must be 
 mad ! you have be as safe with I as in the arm of your mother-- " 

 at this she laughed,--a shrill little laugh with tear submerge it . 

 " you may laugh , but it be true ! " he go on , in a righteously aggrieve 
 tone--"i have do you no harm,--on the contrary , you have to thank I 
 for a great deal of happiness-- " 

 she give a tragic gesture of eloquent despair . 

 " oh , yes , I have to thank you ! " she say , and her voice now vibrate 
 with intense and passionate sorrow--"i have to thank you for so 
 much -- for so very much indeed ! you have be so kind and good ! yes ! and 
 you have never think of yourself or your own pleasure at all -- but 
 only of I ! and I have be as safe with you as in my mother 's arm , 
 ... yes!--you have be quite as careful of I as she be ! " and a wan 
 smile flit over her agonise face--"all this I have to thank you 
 for!--but you have ruin I just the same -- not my body , but my soul ! " 

 he look at her,--she return his gaze unflinchingly with eye that 
 glow like burn star -- and he think she be , as he put it to 
 himself , " calm down . " he laugh , a little uneasily . 

 " soul be an unknown quantity , " he said--"It do not count . " 

 she seem not to hear he . 

 " you have ruin my soul ! " she repeat steadily--"you have steal it 
 from God -- you have make it all your own -- for your ' amusement ' ! what 
 remainder of life have you leave to I ? nothing ! I have no hope , no 
 faith , no power to work -- no ambition to fulfil -- no dream to realise ! 
 you give I love -- as I thought!--and I live ; you take love from I , 
 and I die ! " 

 he bend his eye upon she with a kind , almost condescend 
 gentleness,--his personal vanity be immense , and the utter humiliation 
 of her love for he flatter the deep sense he have of his own value . 

 " dear little goose , you will not die ! " he said--"For heaven 's sake have 
 do with all this sentimental talk!--I be not a man who can tolerate 
 it . you be such a pleasant creature when you be cheerful and 
 self - possessed,--so bright and clever and companionable -- and there be 
 no reason why we should not make love to each other again as often as we 
 like,--but change and novelty be good for both of we . Come!--kiss 
 me!--be a good child -- and let we part friend ! " 

 he approach her,--there be a smile on his lip -- a smile in which 
 lurk a suspicion of mockery as well as victorious self - satisfaction . 
 she see it -- and swiftly there come swoop over her brain the horrible 
 realisation of the truth -- that it be all over!--that never , never 
 again would she be able to dwell on the amorous look and word and 
 love - phrase of she " Amadis de Jocelyn!"--that no happy future be in 
 store for she with he -- that he have no interest whatever in her 
 cherish memory of Briar Farm , and that he would never care to 
 accept the right of dwell there even if she secure it for 
 him,--moreover , that he view she very work with indifference , and have 
 no concern as to her name or fame -- so that everything -- every pretty 
 fancy , every radiant hope , every happy possibility be at an end . life 
 stretch before her dreary as the dreary desert -- for she , whose 
 nature be to love but once , there be no gleam of light in all the 
 world 's cruel darkness ! a red mist swam before her eye -- black cloud 
 seem descend upon she and whirl round about she -- she look 
 wildly from right to left , as though seek to escape from some 
 invisible pursuer . startle at her expression Jocelyn try to hold 
 she -- but she shake he off . she make a few unsteady step along the 
 floor . 

 " what be it ? " he said--"innocent -- don't stare like that ! " 

 she smile strangely and nod at he -- she be finger the plant of 
 marguerite daisy that stand in its accustomed place between the easel 
 and the wall . she pluck a flower and begin hurriedly strip off 
 its petal . 

 " ' Il m'aime -- un peu!--beaucoup -- passionement -- pas du tout ! ' Pas du 
 tout ! " she cried--"Amadis ! Amadis de Jocelyn ! you hear what it say ? 
 Pas du tout ! you promise it should never come to that!--but it have 
 come ! " 

 she throw away the strip flower , ... there be a quick hot throbbing 
 behind her temple -- she put up her hand -- then all suddenly a sharp 
 involuntary scream break from her lip . he spring towards she to seize 
 and silence she -- she stuff her handkerchief into her mouth . 

 " I be sorry ! " she panted--"Forgive!--I could not help 
 it!--amadi -- Amadis!-- " 

 and she fling herself against his breast . her eye , large and 
 feverishly brilliant , search his face for any sign of tenderness , and 
 search in vain . 

 " say it be not true ! " she whispered--"Amadis -- oh my love , say it be not 
 true ! " her little hand caress he -- she draw his head down towards 
 she and her plead kiss touch his lip . " say that you do not really 
 mean it!--that you love I still -- Amadis!--you could not be cruel!--you 
 will not break my heart!-- " 

 but he be too angry to be pitiful . her scream have infuriate he -- he 
 think it would alarm the street , bring up the servant , and give rise 
 to all sort of scandal in which he might be implicate , and he roughly 
 loosen she cling arm from his neck and push she from he . 

 " break your heart ! " he exclaim , bitterly--"i wish I could break your 
 temper ! you behave like a madwoman ; I shall go away to my room ! when I 
 come back I expect to find you calm , and reasonable -- or else , go ! 
 remember ! " 

 she stand gaze at he as though petrify . he swing past she rapidly , 
 and open the principal door of the studio pass through it and 
 disappear . she run to it -- try to open it -- it be lock on the 
 other side . she be alone . 

 she look about she bewildered , like a child that have lose its way . 
 she see she pretty little velvet hat on the settee where she have leave 
 it , and in a trembling hurry she put it on -- then pause . go on 
 tip - toe to the easel , she look vaguely at her own portrait and smile . 

 " you must be good and reasonable ! " she say , wave her hand to 
 it--"When you have lose every thing in the world , you must be calm ! you 
 must not think of love any more!--that be only a fancy!--you mustn't -- no , 
 you must not have any fancy or your dove will fly away ! you be 
 hold it to your heart just now -- and it seem quite safe -- but it will 
 fly away presently -- yes!--it will fly away ! " 

 she lift the painter 's palette and look curiously at it,--then take 
 up the brush , moist with colour , which Jocelyn have lately use . softly 
 she kiss its handle and lay it down again . then she wait , with a 
 puzzled air , and listen . there be no sound . another moment , and she 
 move noiselessly , almost creepingly to the little private door by 
 which she have always enter the studio , and unlock it , slip out 
 leave the key in the lock . it be rain heavily , but she be not 
 conscious of this,--she have no very clear idea what she be do . 
 there be a curious calm upon her,--a kind of cold assertiveness , like 
 that of a die person who have strength enough to ask for some dear 
 friend 's presence before depart from life . she walk steadily to 
 the place where her motor - brougham wait for she , and enter it . the 
 chauffeur look at she for order . 

 " to Paddington Station , " she said--"i be go out of town . stop at the 
 first telegraph office on your way . " 

 the man touch his hat . he think she seem very ill , but it be his 
 place to obey instruction , not to proffer sympathy . at the telegraph 
 office she get out , move like one in a dream and send a wire to Miss 
 Leigh . 

 " be stay with friend out of town . do not wait up for I . " 

 back to the brougham she go , still in a dream - like apathy , and at 
 Paddington dismiss the chauffeur . 

 " if I want you in the morning , I will let you know , " she say , with 
 matter - of - fact composure , and turning , be lose at once in the crowd of 
 passenger pour into the station . 

 the man be for a moment puzzle by the paleness of her face and the 
 wildness of her eye , but like most of his class , make little effort to 
 think beyond the likelihood of everything be " all right to - morrow , " 
 and go his way . 

 meanwhile Miss Leigh have return to her house to find it bereft of its 
 living sunshine . there be two telegram await her,--one from Lord 
 Blythe , urge she to start at once with Innocent for Italy -- the other 
 from Innocent herself , which alarm she by its unusual purport . in all 
 the time she have live with her " god - mother " the girl have never stay 
 away a night , and that she be do so now worried and perplex the 
 old lady to an acute degree of nervous anxiety . John Harrington 
 happen to call that evening , and on hear what have occur , became 
 equally anxious with herself , and , move by some curious instinct , 
 go , on his way home , to Jocelyn 's studio to ascertain if Innocent have 
 be there that afternoon . but he knock and ring at the door in 
 vain,--all be dark and silent . Amadis de Jocelyn be a wise man in his 
 generation . when he have return to confront Innocent again and find 
 she , as he have suggest , either recover from her " temper " and " calm 
 and reasonable"--or else " gone"--he have rejoice to see that she have 
 accept the latter alternative . there be no trace of she save the 
 unlocked private door of the studio , which he now lock , put the 
 key in his pocket . he give a long breath of relief -- a sort of " thank 
 God that be over!"--and arrange his affair of both art and business 
 with such dispatch as to leave for Paris in peace and comfort by the 
 night boat - train . 




 CHAPTER XII 

 that evening the fitful and gusty wind increase to a gale which sweep 
 the land with devastating force , break down or uproot great tree 
 that have withstand the storm of century , and torrential rain fall , 
 lay whole tract of country under water . all round the coast the sea 
 be lash into a tossing tumult , the wave roll in like great green 
 wall of water streak with angry white as though flash with 
 lightning , and the weather report make the usual matter - of - fact 
 statement that " cross - channel steamer make rough passage . " wind and 
 wave , however , have no disturbing effect on the mental or physical 
 balance of Amadis de Jocelyn , who , wrap in a comfortable fur - line 
 overcoat , sit in a sheltered corner on the deck of the Calais boat , 
 smoke a good cigar and congratulate himself on the ease with which 
 he have slip out of what threaten to have be a very unpleasant 
 and embarrassing entanglement . 

 " if she be an ordinary sort of girl it would not matter so much , " he 
 thought--"she would be practical , with sufficient vanity not to 
 care,--she would see more comedy than tragedy in the whole thing . but 
 with her romantic idea about love , and her name in everybody 's mouth , 
 I might have get into the devil 's own mess ! I wonder where she go to 
 when she leave the studio ? straight home , I suppose , to Miss 
 leigh,--will she tell Miss Leigh ? no -- I think not!--she be not likely to 
 tell anybody . she will keep it all to herself . she be a silly little 
 fool!--but she's -- she be loyal ! " 

 yes , she be loyal ! of that there could be no manner of doubt . callous 
 and easy - go man of the world as he have ever be and ever would be , 
 the steadfast truth and tender devotion of the poor child move he to 
 a faint sense of sham admiration . on the inky blackness of the night 
 he see her face , float like a vision,--her little uplifted , pray 
 hands,--he hear her voice , piteously sweet , cry " Amadis ! Amadis ! 
 say you do not mean it!--say it be not true!--i think you love I , 
 dear!--you tell I so ! " 

 the wave hiss round the rolling steamer , and every now and again 
 white tongue of foam dart at he from the crest of the heaving 
 water , yet amid all the shatter roar and turbulence of the storm , 
 he could not get the sound of that plead voice out of his ear . 

 " silly little fool ! " he repeat over and over again with inward 
 vexation--"nothing could be more absurd than her way of look at life 
 as though it be only make for love ! yet -- she suit her name!--she be 
 really the most ' innocent ' creature I have ever know ! and -- and -- she 
 love I ! " 

 the sea and the wind shriek at he as the vessel plunge heavily on 
 her difficult way -- his nerve , cool as they be , seem to himself on 
 edge : and at certain moment during that Channel passage he feel a pang 
 of remorse and pity for the young life on which he have cast an 
 ineffaceable shadow,--a life instinct with truth , beauty , and 
 brightness , just open out as it be into the bloom of fulfilled 
 promise . he have not " betray " she in the world 's vulgar sense of 
 betrayal,--he have not wrong her body -- but he have do far worse,--he 
 have rob she of her peace of mind . little by little he have steal 
 from the flower of her life its honey of sweet content,--he have check 
 the active impulse of her ambition , and as they soar upwards like 
 bright bird to the sun , have bring they down , to the ground , slay 
 with a mere word of light mockery,--he have lead she to judge all thing 
 of no value save himself,--and when he have attain to this end he have 
 destroy her last dream of happiness by voluntarily prove his own 
 insincerity and worthlessness . 

 " it have all be her own fault , " he muse , try to excuse and to 
 console himself--"She fall into my arm as easily as a ripe peach fall 
 at a touch -- that childish fancy about ' Amadis de Jocelin ' do the 
 trick ! curious!--very curious that a sixteenth - century member of my own 
 family tree should be mix up in my affair with this girl ! of course 
 she will say nothing,--there be nothing to say ! we have keep our secret very 
 well , and except for a few playful suggestion and hint drop here 
 and there , nobody know we be in love with each other . then -- she be 
 get her work to do,--it be not as if she be an idle woman without an 
 occupation,--and she will think it down and live it down . of course she 
 will ! I be worry myself quite needlessly ! it will be all right . and 
 as she do not go to her Briar Farm now , I daresay she will even forget 
 her fetish of a knight , the ' Sieur Amadis de Jocelin ' ! " 

 he laugh idly , amuse as he always have be at the romantic ideal she 
 have make of the old french knight who have so strangely turn out to be 
 the brother of his own far - away ancestor,--and then , on land at 
 Calais , be soon absorb in numerous other thought and interest , and 
 gradually dismiss the whole subject from his mind . after all , for he 
 it be only one " little affair " out of at least a dozen or more , which 
 from time to time have serve to entertain he and provide a certain 
 stimulus for his artistic emotion . 

 the storm have it all its own way in the fair English country,--sweeping 
 in from the sea it tear over hill and dale with haste and fury , working 
 terrible havoc among the luxuriant autumnal foliage and bring down 
 whirling wet shower of gold and crimson leaf . Round Briar Farm it 
 rag all day long , tear away from the wall one giant branch of the 
 old " glory " rise and snap it off at its stem . Robin Clifford , 
 come home from the field in the late afternoon , see the fall bough 
 cover with a scented splendour of late rose , and lift it tenderly 
 carry it into the house , think somewhat sadly that in the old day 
 Innocent would have be grieve have she see such havoc make . set 
 it in a big brown jar full of water , he put it in the entrance hall 
 where its shoot reach nearly to the ceiling , and Priscilla Priday 
 exclaim at the sight of it-- 

 " eh , eh , be the old rose - tree break , Mister Robin ! that be never 
 happen before in all the time I have be ' ere ! I do not like the look 
 of it!--no , Mister Robin , I do not ! " 

 " it be only one of the big branch , " answer Robin soothingly . " the 
 rose - tree itself be all right -- I do not think any storm can hurt 
 that -- it be too deeply rooted . this be certainly a very fine branch , 
 but it must have get loosen by the wind . " 

 even as he speak a fierce gust sweep over the old house with a sound 
 like a scream of wrath and agony , and a furious torrent of rain empty 
 itself as though from a cloud - burst , half drown the flower - bed and 
 for the moment make a pool of the court - yard . Priscilla hurry to 
 see that all the window be shut and the door well bar , and when 
 evening close in the picturesque gable of the roof be but a black 
 blur in the almost incessant whirl of rain . 

 as the night deepen the storm grow bad , and the howling of the wind 
 through the crack and cranny of the ancient building be like the 
 noise of wild animal clamour for food . Priscilla and Robin Clifford 
 sit together in the kitchen,--the most comfortable apartment to be in 
 on such an unkind night of elemental uproar . it have become more or less 
 their living - room since Innocent 's departure , for Robin could not bear 
 to sit in the " good parlour , " as it be call , now that there be no 
 one to share its old - world charm and comfort with him,--and when 
 Priscilla 's work be do , and everything be clear and the other 
 servant go to their bed , he prefer to bring his book and pipe 
 into the kitchen , and sit in an old cushion arm - chair on one side of 
 the fire - place , while Priscilla sit on the other , mend the 
 house - linen , both of they talk at interval of the past , and of the 
 happy and unthinke day when Farmer Jocelyn have be alive and well , 
 and when Innocent be like a fairy child flit over the meadow with 
 her light and joyous movement , her brown - gold hair fly loose like a 
 trail of sunbeam on the wind , her face blossom into rose - and - white 
 loveliness as a flower blossom on its slender stem,--her voice 
 carry sweet cadence through the air and make music wherever it 
 ring . latterly , however , they have not speak so much of her,--the fame 
 of her genius and the sudden leap she have make into a position of 
 public note and brilliancy have somewhat scar the simple soul of 
 Priscilla , who feel that the child she have rear from infancy have be 
 take by some strange and not to be contest fate away , far out of her 
 reach,--while Robin -- whose experience at Oxford have teach he that 
 person of his own sex attain to even a mild literary celebrity be 
 apt to become somewhat " touch - I - not " character -- almost persuade 
 himself that perhaps innocent , sweet and ideally simple of nature as he 
 have ever know she to be , might , under the influence of her rapid 
 success and prosperity , change a little ( and such change , he think , 
 would be surely natural!)--if only just as much as would lessen by ever 
 so slight a degree her former romantic passion for the home of her 
 childhood . and,--lurke sometimes at the back of all his thought 
 there creep the suggestive shadow of " Amadis de Jocelyn,"--not the 
 French Knight of old , but the french painter , of whom she have tell he 
 and of whose very existence he have a strange and secret distrust . 

 on this turbulent night the old kitchen look very peaceful and 
 home - like,--the open fire burn brightly , flash its flame - light 
 against the ceiling 's huge oak beam -- everything be sweep clean and 
 polished to the utmost point of perfection,--and the table on which 
 Robin rest the book he be read be cover with a tapestried 
 cloth , embroider in many colour , dark and bright contrast 
 cunningly , with an effect that be soothe and restful to the eye . in 
 the centre there be place a quaintly shape jar of old brown lustre 
 which hold a full tall bunch of golden - rod and deep wine - colour 
 dahlias,--a posy express autumn with a great sense of gain than 
 loss . Robin be read with exemplary patience and considerable 
 difficulty one of the old french poetry book belong to the " Sieur 
 Amadis de Jocelin , " and Priscilla 's small glitter needle fly in and 
 out the open - work stitchery of a linen pillow - slip she be mend as 
 deftly as any embroideress of Tudor time . over the old , crab yet 
 delicately fine writing of the " Sieur " whose influence on Innocent 's 
 young mind have be so pronounced and absolute , and in Robin 's opinion 
 so malign , he pore studiously , slowly master the meaning of the 
 verse , though write in a language he have never care to study . he 
 be conscious of a certain suave sweetness and melancholy in the swing 
 of the line , though they do not appeal to he very forcibly . 

   " En un cruel orage 
   on I laisse perir ; 
   En courant au naufrage 
   Je vois chacun I plaindre et mil I secourir , 
   Felicite passee 
   Qui ne peux revenir 
   Tourment de ma pensee 
   Que n'ai - je en te perdant perdu le souvenir ! 
   Le sort , plein d'injustice 
   m'ayant enfin rendu 
   Ce reste un pur supplice , 
   Je serais plus heureux si j'avais tout perdu ! " 

 a sudden swoop of the wind shake the very rafter of the house as 
 though some great bird have grasp it with beak and talon , and 
 Priscilla stop her swift needle , draw it out to its full length 
 of linen thread and hold it there . a strange puzzled look be on her 
 face -- she seem to be listen intently . presently , take off her 
 spectacle , she lay they down , and speak in a half whisper : 

 " Mister Robin ! Robin , my dear ! " 

 he look up , surprised at the grave wistfulness and wonder of her old 
 eye . 

 " yes , Priscilla ? " 

 " I be thinkin ' my time be drawin ' short , dear lad ! " she say , 
 slowly--"i've get a call , an ' I will not be much long here ! that be a 
 warnin ' for me-- " 

 " a warning ? Priscilla , what do you mean ? " 

 draw in her needle and thread , she prick it through the linen she 
 hold and look full at he . 

 " do not ye hear it ? " she ask . 

 a sudden chill creep through the young man 's blood,--there be 
 something so wan and mournful in her expression . 

 " Dear Priscilla , you be dream ! hear what ? " 

 she lift one brown wrinkle hand with a gesture of attention . 

 " the crying of the child ! " she answered--"crye , cry , cry ! 
 cry for I ! " 

 Robin hold his breath and listen . the wind have for the moment 
 lessen in violence , and its booming roar have drop to a moaning 
 sigh . now and again there be a pause that be almost silence , and 
 during one of these interval he fancy -- but surely it be only 
 fancy!--that he actually do hear a faint human cry . he look at 
 Priscilla questioningly and in doubt,--she meet his eye with a fix 
 and solemn resignation in her own . 

 " it be as I tell you , " she said--"my time have come ! it be for I the 
 child be call -- just as she use to call whenever she want 
 anything . " 

 Robin rise slowly and move a step or two towards the door . the storm 
 be gather fresh force , and heavy rain patter against the window 
 make a continuous steely sound like the clashing of sword . strain 
 his ear to close attention , he waited,--and all at once as he stand in 
 suspense and something of fear , a plaintive sobbing wail creep thinly 
 above the noise of the wind . 

 " Priscilla ! ... Priscilla ! " there be no mistaking the human voice this 
 time -- and Priscilla get up from where she sit , though tremble so much 
 that she have to lean one hand on the table to steady herself . 

 " Ye hear that , surely ! " she say . 

 Robin answer she by a look . his heart beat thickly,--an awful fear 
 beset he , paralyse his energy . be innocent dead ? be that pitiful 
 wail the voice of her depart spirit cry at the door of her 
 childhood 's home ? 

 " Priscilla ! ... oh , Priscilla ! " 

 the old woman straighten her bent figure and lift her head . 

 " Mister Robin , I must answer that call ! " she said--"storm or rain , 
 we have no right to sit here with the child 's voice cry and the old 
 house shut and bar against she ! we must open the door ! " 

 he could not speak -- but he obey her gesture , and go quickly out of 
 the kitchen into the adjacent hall,--there he unbar and unlock the 
 massive old entrance door and throw it open . a sheet of rain fling 
 itself in his face , and the wind be so furious that for a moment he 
 could scarcely stand . then , recover himself , he peer into the 
 darkness and could see nothing,--till all at once he become vaguely 
 aware of a small dark object crouch in one corner of the deep porch 
 like a frightened animal or a lost child . he stoop and touch it -- it 
 be wet and clammy -- he grasp it more firmly , and it move under his 
 hand shudderingly and lift itself , turn a white face up to the 
 light that stream out from the hall -- a face wan and death - like , but 
 still the face he have ever think the sweetest in the world -- the face 
 of Innocent ! with a loud cry of mingled terror and rapture , he catch 
 she up and hold she to his heart . 

 " innocent!--my little love!--innocent ! " 

 she make no answer -- no sort of resistance . her little body hang heavily 
 in his arm -- her head droop helplessly against his shoulder . 

 " Priscilla ! " he called--"Priscilla ! " 

 Priscilla be already beside he -- she have hurry into the hall 
 directly she hear his exclamation of fear and amazement , and now as 
 she see he carry the forlorn little burden tenderly along she throw 
 up her hand with a piteous , almost despairing gesture . 

 " God save we all!--It 's the child herself ! " she exclaimed--"Mercy on 
 the poor lamb!--what can have happen to her?--she 's half drown with 
 rain ! " 

 as quickly as Robin 's strong arm could bear she , she be carry 
 gently into the kitchen and lay in Robin 's own deep arm - chair by the 
 fire . rouse to immediate practical service and with all her 
 superstitious terror at an end , old Priscilla take off a soaked little 
 velvet hat and begin to unfasten a wet mass of soft silk that clung 
 round the fragile little figure . 

 " go and bar the door fast , Mister Robin , my dear ! " she say , look up 
 at the young man 's pale , agonised face,--"we do not want any one comin ' 
 in here to see the child in trouble!--beside , the wind 's enough to 
 scare a body to death ! poor lamb , poor lamb!--where she can have come 
 from the good Lord only know ! it be for all the world like the night 
 when she be leave here , long ago ! lock and bar the door , dearie , and 
 get I some of that precious old wine out of the cupboard in the good 
 parlour . " here her active finger come upon the glitter diamond 
 pendant in the shape of a dove that hang by its slender gold chain 
 round Innocent 's neck . she unclasp it , look at it 
 wonderingly -- then she hand it to Robin who regard it with sombre , 
 grudge eye . be it a love - gift?--and from whom ? 

 " and while you be about help I , " go on Priscilla--"you might go 
 to the child 's room and fetch I that old white woolly gown she use to 
 wear -- it be warm and soft , and we will put it on she and wrap she in a 
 blanket when she come to herself . she will be all right presently . " 

 like a man in a moving dream he obey , and while he go on his 
 errand Priscilla manage to get off some of the dripping garment 
 which clung to the girl 's slight form as closely as the wrapping of a 
 shroud . chafe the small icy hand , she smooth the drench fair 
 hair , loosen its pin and comb , and spread it out to dry , 
 murmur fond word of motherly pity and tenderness while the tear 
 trickle slowly down her furrow cheek . 

 " my poor baby!--my pretty child ! " she murmured--"What have break she 
 like this?--The world 's be too rough for she -- I misdoubt I if she 
 fancy about love an ' the like o ' that nonsense be not in the 
 mischief,--but praise the Lord that be bring she home again , an ' if so 
 be it please he we will keep her home ! " 

 as she think this , Innocent suddenly open her eye . beautiful , wild 
 eye that star at she wonderingly without recognition . 

 " Amadis ! " the voice be thin and faint , but exquisitely tender . 
 " Amadis ! how kind you be ! ah , yes!--at last!--i be sure you do not 
 mean to be cruel -- I know you would come back and be good to I again ! 
 my amadis!--you be good!--you could not be anything else but good and 
 true ! " she laugh weakly and go on more rapidly--"It be 
 rain -- yes ! oh , yes -- rain very much!--such a cold , sharp rain ! 
 I have walk quite a long way -- but I feel I must come back to you , 
 amadis!--just to ask you once more to say a kind word - to kiss I ... " 

 she close her eye again and her head fall back on the pillow of the 
 chair in which she lay . Priscilla 's heart sink . 

 " she do not know what she be talk about , poor lamb ! " she 
 thought,--"just wander and off her head!--and fancy thing about 
 that old french knight again ! " 

 here Robin enter , and stand a moment , lose in a maze of enchanted 
 misery at the sight of the pitiful little half - disrobe figure in the 
 chair , till Priscilla take the white garment he have be send to fetch 
 out of his passive hand . 

 " there , dear lad , do not look like that ! " she say . " go , and come back 
 in a few minute with the wine -- we'll be ready for you then . Cheer 
 up!--she 's open her pretty eye once -- she'll open they again directly 
 and smile at you ! " 

 he move away slowly with an aching heart , and a tightness in his 
 throat that impel he to cry like a woman . innocent!--little 
 Innocent!--she who have once be all brightness and gaiety,--wa this 
 desolate , half - die , stricken creature the same girl ? ah , no ! not the 
 same ! never the same any more ! some numb blow have smite her,--some 
 wither fire have sweep over she , and she be no long what she once 
 have be . this he feel by a lover 's intuition,--intuition keener and 
 surer than all positive knowledge ; and not the faint hope stir 
 within he that she would ever shake off the trance of that 
 death - in - life into which she have be plunge by some as yet unknown 
 disaster -- unknown to he , yet dimly guess . meanwhile Priscilla 's 
 love task be soon do , and Innocent be clothe , warm and dry , in 
 one of the old hand - weave woollen gown she have be accustom to wear 
 in former day , and a thick blanket be wrap cosily round she . she 
 be still more or less unconscious , but the revive heat gradually 
 penetrate her body , and she begin to sigh and move restlessly . she 
 open her eye again and fix they on the bright fire . Robin come in 
 with the glass of wine , and Priscilla hold it to her lip , force she 
 to swallow a few drop . 

 the strong cordial start a little pulse of warmth in her fail 
 blood , and she make an effort to sit up . she look vaguely round 
 her,--then her wander gaze fix itself on Priscilla 's anxious old 
 face , and a faint smile , more pitiful than tear , tremble on her lip . 

 " Priscilla ! " she said--"i believe it be Priscilla I oh , dear Priscilla ! 
 I call you but you would not hear or answer I ! " 

 " oh , my lamb , I hear ye right enough!"--and Priscilla fondle and 
 warm the girl 's passive hands--"but I could not think it be 
 yourself -- I think I be dreaming-- " 

 " so do I ! " she answer feebly--"i think I be dream ... yes!--I 
 have be dream such a long , long time ! all dream ! I have walk 
 through the rain -- it be very dark and the wind be cold and cruel -- but 
 I walk on and on -- I do not know how I come -- but I want to get home 
 to Briar Farm -- do you know Briar Farm ? " 

 Stricken to the soul by the look of the wistful eye express a mind 
 in chaos , Priscilla answer gently--"you're in Briar Farm now , 
 dearie!--surely you know you be ! this be your own old home -- don't you 
 know it?--don't you remember the old kitchen?--of course you do ! there , 
 there!--look up and see ! " 

 she lift her head and gaze about she in a lose way . 

 " no ! " she murmured--"i wish I could believe it , but I can not . I believe 
 nothing now . it be all strange to I -- I have lose the way home , and I 
 shall never find it -- never -- never ! " here she suddenly point to Robin 
 standing aloof in utter misery . 

 " who be that ? " she ask . 

 irresistibly impel by love , fear , and pity , he come and kneel beside 
 she . 

 " it be Robin ! " he said--"dear Innocent , do not you know I ? " 

 she touch his hair with one little hand , smile like a pleased child . 

 " Robin ? " she queried--"Oh , no!--you can not be Robin -- he be ever so many 
 mile away ! " she look at he curiously,--then laugh , a cold , 
 mirthless little laugh . " I think for a moment you might be 
 Amadis -- his hair be like your , thick and soft -- you know he , of 
 course -- he be the great painter , Amadis de Jocelyn -- all the world have 
 hear of he ! he go out just now and shut the door and lock it -- but 
 he will come back -- yes!--he will come back ! " 

 Robin hear and understand -- the whole explanation of her misery 
 suddenly flash on his mind , and inwardly he curse the man who have 
 wreak such havoc on her trusting soul . all at once she spring up with 
 a wild cry . 

 " he will come back -- he must come back ! Amadis!--Amadis!--you will not 
 leave I all alone?--No , no , you can not be so cruel ! " she stretch out 
 her arm as though to embrace some invisible treasure in the 
 air--"priscilla ! ... Priscilla ! " then as Priscilla take she gently 
 round the waist and try to calm she she begin to laugh again . " the 
 old motto!--you remember it?--the motto of the Sieur Amadis de 
 Jocelin!--'Mon coeur I soutien ! ' you know what it means--'my heart 
 sustain I . ' yes -- and you know why his heart be so strong ? because it 
 be make of stone ! a stone heart can sustain anything!--it be hard and 
 firm and cold -- no rain , no tear can soften it!--no flower ever grow 
 on it -- it do not beat -- it feel nothing -- nothing!"--and her hand 
 drop wearily at her side . " it be not like MY heart ! my heart burn 
 and ache -- it be a foolish heart , and my brain be a foolish brain -- I 
 can not think with it -- it be all dark and confused ! and I have no one to 
 help I -- I be all alone in the world ! " 

 " innocent ! " cry Robin passionately--"Oh , my love , my darling!--try to 
 recall your dear wandering mind ! you be here in the old home you use 
 to love so well -- you be not alone -- you never shall be alone any more . 
 I be with you to love you and take care of you -- I have love you 
 always -- I shall love you till I die ! " 

 she look at he with a sudden smile . 

 " Robin!--It be Robin!--you poor boy ! you always talk like that!--but 
 you must not love me,--I have no love to give you -- I would make you 
 happy if I could , but I can not ! " 

 a violent shudder as of icy cold shake her limb -- she stretch out her 
 hand pitifully . 

 " would you take I somewhere to sleep ? " she murmured--"i be very tired ! 
 and when he come you will wake I -- I will not keep he a moment 
 wait ! tell he I be quite well -- and that I know he do not mean to 
 be unkind-- " 

 her voice break -- she totter and nearly fall . Robin catch she in his 
 arm and lay she gently back in the chair , where she seem to lapse 
 into unconsciousness . he turn a white , desperate face on Priscilla . 

 " what be to be do ? " he asked,--"Shall I go for the doctor ? " 

 Priscilla shake her head . 

 " the doctor would be no use , " she answered--"she be just fairly wear out 
 and want rest . her little room be ready,--i've keep it air , and the 
 bed make warm and cosy ever since she go away -- lest she should ever 
 come back sudden like ... could you carry she up , d'ye think ? she will be 
 well in her bed -- and she would come to herself quick . " 

 gently and with infinite tenderness he lift the girl as though she 
 be a baby and carry she lightly up the broad oak staircase , 
 Priscilla lead the way -- and soon they bring she into her own room , 
 unchanged since she have occupy it , and keep by Priscilla 's love and 
 half superstitious care ready for her return at any moment . lay she 
 down on her little bed , Robin leave she , though hardly able to tear 
 himself away , and go downstairs again he fling himself into a chair 
 and weep like a child for the ruin and wreck of the fair young life 
 which might have be the joy and sunshine of his day ! 

 " Amadis de Jocelyn ! " he muttered--"a curse on he ! why should the 
 founder of this house bring evil on us?--rising up like a ghost to 
 overshadow we and spoil our happiness?--Let the house perish and all 
 its tradition if it must be so , rather than that she should 
 suffer!--for she be innocent ! " 

 yes -- she be quite innocent,--the little " base - bear " intruder on the 
 unbroken line and history of the Jocelyns!--and yet -- it be with a kind 
 of horror that the memory of that unbroken line and history recur to 
 he . be there -- could there be anything real in the long prevalent idea 
 that if the direct line of the Jocelyns be break , the peace and 
 prosperity so long attendant on the old farm would be at an end ? he put 
 the thought away with a sense of anger . 

 " no , no ! she could only bring joy wherever she go -- no matter who her 
 parent be , or how she be bear , my poor little one!--she have 
 suffer for no fault at all of her own ! " 

 he listen to the die clamour of the storm -- the wind still career 
 round the house , make a noise like the beat wing of a great bird , 
 but the rain be cease and there be a deep sense of quiet . an 
 approach step startle he -- he look up and see Priscilla . she 
 smile encouragingly . 

 " cheer up , Mister Robin ! " she say . ... " she be much well -- she know 
 where she be now , bless she heart!--and she be glad to be at home . let 
 she alone -- and if she ' as a good sleep she will be a'most herself again 
 in the morning . I will leave my bedroom door open all night -- an ' I will be 
 lookin ' in at ' er when she do not know it , watchin ' her lovin' like 
 for all I be worth ! ... so do not ye worry , my lad!--there be a good God 
 in Heaven an ' it will all come right ! " 

 Robin take her rough work - wear hand and clasp they in his own . 

 " bless you , you dear woman ! " he say , huskily . " do you really think so ? 
 will she be herself again?--our own dear little innocent ? " 

 " of course she will ! " and Priscilla blink away the tear in her 
 eyes--"An ' you will mebbe win ' er yet!--The Lord 's way be ever 
 wonderful an ' past findin ' out-- " 

 a clear voice call from the staircase interrupt they . 

 " Priscilla ! Robin ! " 

 run to answer the summon , they see Innocent at the top of the 
 stair , a little vision of pale , smile sweetness , in her white wool 
 wrapper -- her hair fall loose over her shoulder . she kiss she 
 hand to they . 

 " only to say good - night ! " she said,--"i know just where I be now!--it 
 be so foolish of I to forget ! I be at home -- and this be Briar 
 Farm -- and I feel almost well and -- happy ! Robin ! " 

 he spring up the stair and , kneeling , take one of her hand and kiss 
 it . 

 " that be my true knight ! " she say . " Dear Robin ! you deserve everything 
 good -- and if it will give you joy I will marry you ! " 

 " marry I ! " he cry , scarcely believe his ears--"innocent ! you 
 will?--Dearest little love , you will ? " 

 she look down upon he where he kneel , like some small compassionate 
 angel . 

 " yes -- I will!--to please you and dad!--tomorrow if you like ! but you 
 must say good - night now and let I sleep ! " 

 he kiss her hand again . 

 " good - night , sweet ! " 

 she start -- and draw her hand away . 

 " he say that once,--and once -- in a letter -- he write it . it seem to 
 I beautiful!--'Good - night , sweet ! ' " she wait as if to think a 
 moment , then-- 

 " good - night ! " again she said--"do not be anxious about I -- I shall 
 sleep well ! good - night ! " 

 she wave her hand once more , and disappear like a little white 
 phantom in the dark corridor . 

 " do she mean it , do you think ? " ask Robin , turn eagerly to 
 priscilla--"will she marry I , after all ? " 

 " I should not wonder ! " and the old woman nod sagaciously--"Let she 
 sleep on it , lad!--an ' you sleep on it , too!--the storm 's nigh 
 over -- an ' mebbe our dark cloud ' as a silver lining ! " 

 half - an - hour later on she go to her own bed -- and on the way think 
 she would peep into Innocent 's room and see how she fare -- but the 
 door be lock . vex at her own lack of foresight in not possess 
 herself of the key before the girl have be carry to her room , she 
 leave her own door open that she might be ready in case of any call -- and 
 for a long time she lie awake watchfully , think and wonder what 
 the next day would bring forth -- till at last anxiety and bewilderment 
 of mind be overcome by sheer fatigue and she sleep . not so Robin 
 Clifford . excited and full of new hope which he hardly dare breathe to 
 himself , he make no attempt to rest -- but pace his room up and down , up 
 and down , like a restless animal in a cage , wait with hardly 
 endurable impatience for the dawn . thought chase each other in his 
 brain too quickly to evolve any practical order out of them,--he try 
 to plan out what he would do with the come day -- how he would let the 
 farm people know that Innocent have return -- how he would send a 
 telegram to her friend Miss Leigh in London to say she be safe in her 
 old home -- and then the recollection of her literary success sweep over 
 his mind like a sort of cloud -- her fame!--the celebrity she have win in 
 that wide world outside Briar Farm -- be it fair or honest to she that 
 he should take advantage of her weak and half - distraught condition and 
 allow she to become his wife?--she , whose genius be already 
 acknowledge by a wide and discern public , and who might be 
 consider as only at the beginning of a brilliant and prosperous 
 career ? 

 " for , after all , I be only a farmer , " he said--"and with the friend 
 she have make for herself she might marry any one ! the good way for I 
 will be to give her time -- time to recover from this -- this terrible 
 trouble she seem to have on her mind -- this curse of that fancy for 
 Amadis de Jocelyn!--by Heaven , I would kill he without a minute 's grace if 
 I have he in my power ! " 

 still pace to and fro and think , he wear the slow hour away , and 
 at last the grey peep of a misty , silvery dawn peer through his 
 window . he throw the lattice open and lean out -- the scent of the wet 
 field and tree after the night 's storm be sweet and refreshing , and 
 copy his heated blood . he review the whole situation with great 
 calmness,--and decide that he must not be selfish enough to grasp at 
 the proffered joy of marriage with the only woman he have ever love 
 unless he could be make sure that it would be for her own happiness . 

 " just now she hardly know what she be say or do , " he muse , 
 sadly--"some great disappointment have break her spirit and she be 
 wound and in pain,--but when she be quite herself and have master 
 her grief , she will see thing in a different light -- she will realise 
 the fame she have won,--the brilliant name she have make -- yes!--she must 
 think of all this -- she must not wrong herself or injure her position by 
 marry I ! " 

 the silver - grey dawn brighten steadily , and in the eastern sky long 
 fold of silky mist begin to shred away in thin strip of delicate 
 vapour show peep of pale amber between,--fitful touch of faint 
 rose - colour flit here and there against the gold,--and with a sense 
 of relief that the day be at last breaking and that the sky show 
 promise of the sun , he leave his room , and step noiselessly into the 
 outside corridor , listen . Priscilla 's door be wide open -- and as he 
 pass he look in,--she be fast asleep . he could not hear a 
 sound,--and though he walk on cautious tip - toe along the little 
 passage which lead to the room where Innocent sleep and wait there a 
 minute or two , strain his ear for any little sigh , or sob , or 
 whisper , none came;--all be silent . quietly he go downstairs , and , 
 open the hall door , step out into the garden . every shrub and 
 plant be dripping with wet -- many be beat down and break by the 
 fury of the night 's storm , and there be more desolation than beauty in 
 the usually well - order and carefully - tend garden . the confusion of 
 fall flower and trailing stem make a melancholy impression on his 
 mind,--at another time he would scarcely have heed what be , after 
 all , only the natural havoc work by high wind and heavy rains,--but 
 this morning there seem to be more than the usual ruin . he walk 
 slowly round to the front of the house -- and there look up at the 
 project lattice window of Innocent 's room . it be wide open . 
 surprise , he stop underneath it and look up , half expect to 
 see her,--but only a filmy white curtain move gently with the first 
 stirring of the morning air . he stand a moment or two irresolute , 
 recall the night when he have climb up by the natural ladder of the 
 old wistaria and have hear she tell the plaintive little story of she 
 " base - bear " condition , with tear in her eye , and the pale moonshine 
 light up her face like the face of an angel in a dream . 

 " and she have write her first book already then ! " he thought--"she have 
 all that genius in she and I never know ! " 

 a deep brightness in the sky begin to glow , and a light spread itself 
 over the land -- the sun be rise . he look towards the low hill in 
 the east , and see the golden rim lift itself like the edge of a cup 
 above the horizon,--and as it ascend higher and high , some fleecy 
 white cloud roll softly away from its glitter splendour , show 
 glimpse of tender ethereal blue . a still and solemn beauty invest 
 all the visible scene,--a sacred peace -- the peace of an obedient and 
 law - abide nature wherein man alone create strange discord . Robin 
 look long and lovingly at the fair prospect,-the wide meadow , the 
 stately tree warmly tint with autumnal glory , and thought-- 

 " could she be happy than here?--safe in the arm of love?--safe and 
 shelter from all trouble in the home she once idolise ? " 

 he would not answer his own inward query -- and suddenly the fancy seize 
 he to call she by name , as he have call she on that moonlit night 
 long ago , and persuade she to look out on the familiar field shin 
 in the sunlight of the morning . 

 " innocent ! " 

 there be no answer . 

 he call a little louder-- 

 " innocent ! " 

 still silence . a robin hop out from the cover of wet leaf and 
 peer at he questioningly with its bold bright eye . act on an 
 irresistible impulse he set his foot on the gnarl root of the old 
 wistaria and start to climb to the window - sill . three minute 
 suffice he to reach it -- he look into the little room,--the room 
 which have formerly be the study of the " Sieur Amadis de Jocelin"--and 
 there seat at the old oak table with her head bow down upon her 
 hand and her hair cover she as with a veil , be innocent . the 
 sunlight flash brightly in upon she -- and immediately above her the 
 golden beam trace out as with a pencil of light the arm of the old 
 french knight with the fade rose and blue of his shield and motto 
 illumine with curiously mark distinctness the word he himself have 
 carve beneath his own heraldic emblem : 

 " who here seekynge Forgetfulness do here fynde peace ! " 

 she be very strangely still,--and a cold fear suddenly catch at 
 Robin 's heart and half choke his breath . 

 " innocent ! " he cry . then , leap into the room like a man in sudden 
 frenzy , he rush towards that motionless little figure -- throw his arm 
 about it -- lift it -- caress it ... 

 " innocent ! look at I ! speak to I ! " 

 the fair head fall passively back against his shoulder with all its 
 wealth of ripple hair -- the fragile form he clasp be helpless , 
 lifeless , breathless!--and with a great shuddering sob of agony , he 
 realise the full measure of his life 's despair . Innocent be 
 dead!--and for she , as for the " Sieur Amadis , " the quaint word shin 
 above she in the morning sunlight be aptly fitted-- 

 " who here seekynge Forgetfulness do here fynde peace ! " 

        .       .       .       .       .       .       . 

 many thing in life come too late to be of rescue or service , and 
 justice be always tardy in arrival . too late be Pierce Armitage , after 
 long year of absence , to give his innocent child the simple heritage 
 of a father 's acknowledgment ; he could but look upon her dead face and 
 lay flower on she in her little coffin . the world hear of the sudden 
 death of the young and brilliant writer with a faintly curious 
 concern -- but soon forget that she have ever exist . no one know , no one 
 guess the story of her love for the french painter , Amadis de 
 Jocelyn -- he be abroad at the time of her death , and only three person 
 secretly connect he with the sorrow of her end -- and these be Lord 
 Blythe , Miss Leigh and Robin Clifford . yet even these say nothing , 
 restrain by the thought of cast the small scandal on the sweet 
 lustre of her name . and Amadis de Jocelyn himself?--had he no 
 regret?--no pity ? if the truth must be tell , he be more relieved than 
 pained,--more flatter than sorry ! the girl have die for 
 him,--well!--that be more or less a pleasing result of his power ! she 
 be a silly child -- obsess by a " fancy"--it be not his fault if he 
 could not live up to that " fancy"--he liked " fact . " his picture of she 
 be the success of the Salon that year , and he be admire and 
 congratulated,--this be enough for he . 

 " one of your victim , Amadis ? " ask a vivacious society woman he know , 
 critically study the portrait on the first day of its exhibition . 

 he nod , smilingly . 

 " really ? and yet -- innocent ? " 

 he nod again . 

 " very much so ! she be dead ! " 

        .       .       .       .       .       .       . 

 sorrow and joy , strangely intermingle , divide the last year of life 
 for good Miss Leigh . the shock of the loss and death of the girl to 
 whom she have become profoundly attach , follow by the startling 
 discovery that her old lover Pierce Armitage be alive , prove almost 
 too much for her frail nerve -- but her gratitude to God for the joy of 
 see the beloved face once again , and hear the beloved voice , be 
 so touching and sincere that armitage , smite to the heart by the 
 story of her long fidelity and her tenderness for his forsaken 
 daughter , offer to marry she , earnestly pray she to let he share 
 life with she to the end . this she gently refused,--but for the rest of 
 her day she -- with he and Lord Blythe -- make a trio of friends,--a 
 compact of affection and true devotion such as be seldom know in this 
 work - a - day world . they be nearly always together,--and the memory of 
 Innocent , with her young life 's little struggle against fate end so 
 soon in disaster , be a link never to be break save by death , which 
 break all . 




 l'envoi 

 a few evening since , I who have write this true story of a young 
 girl 's romantic fancy , pass by Briar Farm . the air be very still , 
 and a red sun be sink in a wintry sky . the old Tudor farmhouse 
 look beautiful in the clear half - frosty light -- but the tree in the 
 old bye road be leafless , and though the courtyard gate stand open 
 there be no flower to be see beyond , and no dove fly to and fro 
 among the picturesque gable . I know , as I walk slowly along , that 
 just a mile distant , in the small churchyard of the village , Innocent , 
 the " base - bear " child of sorrow , lie asleep by she " Dad , " the last of 
 the Jocelyns,--I know also that not far off from their graf , the 
 mortal remain of the faithful Priscilla be also rest in 
 peace -- and I feel , with a heavy sadness at my heart , that the fame of 
 the old house be wear out and that presently its tradition , like 
 many legendary and romantic thing , would soon be forget . but just 
 at the turn of a path , where a low stile give access to the road , I 
 see a man stand , his arm fold and lean on the topmost bar of 
 the stile -- a man neither old nor young , with a strong quiet face , and 
 almost snow - white hair -- a man quite alone , whose attitude and bearing 
 express the very spirit of solitude . I know he for the master of the 
 farm -- a man greatly honour throughout the neighbourhood for justice 
 and kindness to all whom he employ , but also a man stricken by a 
 great sorrow for which there can be no remedy . 

 " will he never marry ? " I thought,--but as I put the question to myself 
 I dismiss it almost as a blasphemy . for Robin Clifford be one of 
 those rare soul among man who love but once , and when love be lose 
 find it not again . Except,--perhaps?--in a purer world than ours , 
 where our " fancy " may prove to have have a surer foundation than our 
 " fact . " 

 the END 
