bleak HOUSE 
 by Charles Dickens 
 PREFACE 
 a Chancery judge once have the kindness to inform I , as one of a 
 company of some hundred and fifty man and woman not labour under 
 any suspicion of lunacy , that the Court of Chancery , though the 
 shin subject of much popular prejudice   at which point I think 
 the judge 's eye have a cast in my direction , be almost immaculate . 
 there have be , he admit , a trivial blemish or so in its rate of 
 progress , but this be exaggerated and have be entirely owe to 
 the " parsimony of the public , " which guilty public , it appear , 
 have be until lately bent in the most determined manner on by no 
 mean enlarge the number of Chancery judge appoint - I believe 
 by Richard the Second , but any other king will do as well . 
 this seem to I too profound a joke to be insert in the body of 
 this book or I should have restore it to Conversation Kenge or to 
 Mr. Vholes , with one or other of whom I think it must have 
 originate . in such mouth I might have couple it with an apt 
 quotation from one of Shakespeare 's sonnet : 
 " my nature be subdue 
 to what it work in , like the dyer 's hand : 
 pity I , then , and wish I be renew ! " 
 but as it be wholesome that the parsimonious public should know 
 what have be do , and still be do , in this connexion , I 
 mention here that everything set forth in these page concern 
 the Court of Chancery be substantially true , and within the truth . 
 the case of Gridley be in no essential alter from one of actual 
 occurrence , make public by a disinterested person who be 
 professionally acquaint with the whole of the monstrous wrong 
 from begin to end . at the present moment   August , 1853   there 
 be a suit before the court which be commence nearly twenty year 
 ago , in which from thirty to forty counsel have be know to 
 appear at one time , in which cost have be incur to the amount 
 of seventy thousand pound , which be a friendly SUIT , and which be 
  I be assure   no nearer to its termination now than when it be 
 begin . there be another well - know suit in Chancery , not yet 
 decide , which be commence before the close of the last century 
 and in which more than double the amount of seventy thousand pound 
 have be swallow up in cost . if I want other authority for 
 Jarndyce and Jarndyce , I could rain they on these page , to the 
 shame of - a parsimonious public . 
 there be only one other point on which I offer a word of remark . 
 the possibility of what be call spontaneous combustion have be 
 deny since the death of Mr. Krook ; and my good friend Mr. Lewes 
  quite mistaken , as he soon find , in suppose the thing to have 
 be abandon by all authority   publish some ingenious letter 
 to I at the time when that event be chronicle , argue that 
 spontaneous combustion could not possibly be . I have no need to 
 observe that I do not wilfully or negligently mislead my reader 
 and that before I write that description I take pain to 
 investigate the subject . there be about thirty case on record , 
 of which the most famous , that of the Countess Cornelia de Baudi 
 Cesenate , be minutely investigate and describe by Giuseppe 
 Bianchini , a prebendary of Verona , otherwise distinguish in 
 letter , who publish an account of it at Verona in 1731 , which he 
 afterwards republish at Rome . the appearance , beyond all 
 rational doubt , observe in that case be the appearance observe 
 in Mr. Krook 's case . the next most famous instance happen at 
 Rheims six year early , and the historian in that case be Le Cat , 
 one of the most renowned surgeon produce by France . the subject 
 be a woman , whose husband be ignorantly convict of have 
 murder she ; but on solemn appeal to a high court , he be 
 acquit because it be show upon the evidence that she have die 
 the death of which this name of spontaneous combustion be give . I 
 do not think it necessary to add to these notable fact , and that 
 general reference to the authority which will be find at page 
 30 , vol . ii . ,   the record opinion and experience of 
 distinguish medical professor , French , English , and Scotch , in 
 more modern day , content myself with observe that I shall not 
 abandon the fact until there shall have be a considerable 
 spontaneous combustion of the testimony on which human occurrence 
 be usually receive . 
 in Bleak House I have purposely dwell upon the romantic side of 
 familiar thing . 
 1853 
   another case , very clearly describe by a dentist , occur at 
 the town of Columbus , in the United States of America , quite 
 recently . the subject be a German who keep a liquor - shop and be 
 an inveterate drunkard . 
 CHAPTER I 
 in Chancery 
 London . Michaelmas term lately over , and the Lord Chancellor 
 sit in Lincoln 's Inn Hall . implacable November weather . as 
 much mud in the street as if the water have but newly retire from 
 the face of the earth , and it would not be wonderful to meet a 
 Megalosaurus , forty foot long or so , waddle like an elephantine 
 lizard up Holborn Hill . smoke lower down from chimney - pot , 
 make a soft black drizzle , with flake of soot in it as big as 
 full - grow snowflake - go into mourning , one might imagine , for 
 the death of the sun . dog , undistinguishable in mire . horse , 
 scarcely well ; splash to their very blinker . foot passenger , 
 jostle one another 's umbrella in a general infection of ill 
 temper , and lose their foot - hold at street - corner , where ten of 
 thousand of other foot passenger have be slip and slide 
 since the day break   if this day ever break , add new deposit 
 to the crust upon crust of mud , stick at those point 
 tenaciously to the pavement , and accumulate at compound interest . 
 fog everywhere . fog up the river , where it flow among green ait 
 and meadow ; fog down the river , where it roll defile among the 
 tier of shipping and the waterside pollution of a great   and 
 dirty   city . fog on the Essex marsh , fog on the kentish height . 
 fog creep into the caboose of collier - brig ; fog lie out on 
 the yard and hover in the rigging of great ship ; fog drooping 
 on the gunwale of barge and small boat . fog in the eye and 
 throat of ancient Greenwich pensioner , wheeze by the fireside 
 of their ward ; fog in the stem and bowl of the afternoon pipe of 
 the wrathful skipper , down in his close cabin ; fog cruelly pinch 
 the toe and finger of his shiver little ' prentice boy on deck . 
 Chance people on the bridge peep over the parapet into a 
 nether sky of fog , with fog all round they , as if they be up in a 
 balloon and hang in the misty cloud . 
 gas loom through the fog in diver place in the street , much 
 as the sun may , from the spongey field , be see to loom by 
 husbandman and ploughboy . Most of the shop light two hour 
 before their time - as the gas seem to know , for it have a haggard 
 and unwilling look . 
 the raw afternoon be raw , and the dense fog be dense , and the 
 muddy street be muddy near that leaden - head old obstruction , 
 appropriate ornament for the threshold of a leaden - head old 
 corporation , Temple Bar . and hard by Temple Bar , in Lincoln 's Inn 
 Hall , at the very heart of the fog , sit the Lord High Chancellor 
 in his High Court of Chancery . 
 never can there come fog too thick , never can there come mud and 
 mire too deep , to assort with the groping and flounder condition 
 which this High Court of Chancery , most pestilent of hoary sinner , 
 hold this day in the sight of heaven and earth . 
 on such an afternoon , if ever , the Lord High Chancellor ought to be 
 sit here - as here he be - with a foggy glory round his head , 
 softly fence in with crimson cloth and curtain , address by a 
 large advocate with great whisker , a little voice , and an 
 interminable brief , and outwardly direct his contemplation to 
 the lantern in the roof , where he can see nothing but fog . on such 
 an afternoon some score of member of the High Court of Chancery 
 bar ought to be - as here they be - mistily engage in one of the 
 ten thousand stage of an endless cause , trip one another up on 
 slippery precedent , grope knee - deep in technicality , run 
 their goat - hair and horsehair ward head against wall of word 
 and make a pretence of equity with serious face , as player 
 might . on such an afternoon the various solicitor in the cause , 
 some two or three of whom have inherit it from their father , who 
 make a fortune by it , ought to be - as be they not ? - range in a 
 line , in a long matted well   but you might look in vain for truth 
 at the bottom of it   between the registrar 's red table and the silk 
 gown , with bill , cross - bill , answer , rejoinder , injunction , 
 affidavit , issue , reference to master , master ' report , 
 mountain of costly nonsense , pile before they . well may the 
 court be dim , with waste candle here and there ; well may the fog 
 hang heavy in it , as if it would never get out ; well may the 
 stain - glass window lose their colour and admit no light of day 
 into the place ; well may the uninitiate from the street , who peep 
 in through the glass pane in the door , be deter from entrance 
 by its owlish aspect and by the drawl , languidly echo to the 
 roof from the pad dais where the Lord High Chancellor look into 
 the lantern that have no light in it and where the attendant wig 
 be all stick in a fog - bank ! this be the Court of Chancery , which 
 have its decay house and its blighted land in every shire , 
 which have its wear - out lunatic in every madhouse and its dead in 
 every churchyard , which have its ruin suitor with his slipshod 
 heel and threadbare dress borrowing and beg through the round 
 of every man 's acquaintance , which give to monied might the mean 
 abundantly of weary out the right , which so exhaust finance , 
 patience , courage , hope , so overthrow the brain and break the 
 heart , that there be not an honourable man among its practitioner 
 who would not give - who do not often give - the warning , " suffer 
 any wrong that can be do you rather than come here ! " 
 who happen to be in the Lord Chancellor 's court this murky 
 afternoon besides the Lord Chancellor , the counsel in the cause , 
 two or three counsel who be never in any cause , and the well of 
 solicitor before mention ? there be the registrar below the 
 judge , in wig and gown ; and there be two or three mace , or petty- 
 bag , or privy purse , or whatever they may be , in legal court 
 suit . these be all yawn , for no crumb of amusement ever fall 
 from Jarndyce and Jarndyce   the cause in hand , which be squeeze 
 dry year upon year ago . the short - hand writer , the reporter of 
 the court , and the reporter of the newspaper invariably decamp 
 with the rest of the regular when Jarndyce and Jarndyce come on . 
 their place be a blank . stand on a seat at the side of the 
 hall , the well to peer into the curtain sanctuary , be a little 
 mad old woman in a squeeze bonnet who be always in court , from its 
 sit to its rise , and always expect some incomprehensible 
 judgment to be give in her favour . some say she really be , or 
 be , a party to a suit , but no one know for certain because no one 
 care . she carry some small litter in a reticule which she call 
 her document , principally consist of paper match and dry 
 lavender . a sallow prisoner have come up , in custody , for the half- 
 dozenth time to make a personal application " to purge himself of 
 his contempt , " which , be a solitary survive executor who have 
 fall into a state of conglomeration about account of which it be 
 not pretend that he have ever any knowledge , he be not at all 
 likely ever to do . in the meantime his prospect in life be 
 end . another ruin suitor , who periodically appear from 
 Shropshire and break out into effort to address the Chancellor at 
 the close of the day 's business and who can by no mean be make to 
 understand that the Chancellor be legally ignorant of his existence 
 after make it desolate for a quarter of a century , plant himself 
 in a good place and keep an eye on the judge , ready to call out 
 " my Lord ! " in a voice of sonorous complaint on the instant of his 
 rise . a few lawyer ' clerk and other who know this suitor by 
 sight linger on the chance of his furnish some fun and 
 enliven the dismal weather a little . 
 Jarndyce and Jarndyce drone on . this scarecrow of a suit have , in 
 course of time , become so complicated that no man alive know what 
 it mean . the party to it understand it least , but it have be 
 observe that no two Chancery lawyer can talk about it for five 
 minute without come to a total disagreement as to all the 
 premise . innumerable child have be bear into the cause ; 
 innumerable young people have marry into it ; innumerable old 
 people have die out of it . score of person have deliriously 
 find themselves make party in Jarndyce and Jarndyce without 
 know how or why ; whole family have inherit legendary hatred 
 with the suit . the little plaintiff or defendant who be promise 
 a new rock - horse when Jarndyce and Jarndyce should be settle 
 have grow up , possess himself of a real horse , and trot away 
 into the other world . fair ward of court have fade into mother 
 and grandmother ; a long procession of Chancellors have come in and 
 go out ; the legion of bill in the suit have be transform 
 into mere bill of mortality ; there be not three jarndyce leave 
 upon the earth perhaps since old Tom Jarndyce in despair blow his 
 brain out at a coffee - house in Chancery Lane ; but Jarndyce and 
 Jarndyce still drag its dreary length before the court , 
 perennially hopeless . 
 Jarndyce and Jarndyce have pass into a joke . that be the only 
 good that have ever come of it . it have be death to many , but it 
 be a joke in the profession . every master in Chancery have have a 
 reference out of it . every Chancellor be " in it , " for somebody or 
 other , when he be counsel at the bar . good thing have be say 
 about it by blue - nosed , bulbous - shoe old bencher in select port- 
 wine committee after dinner in hall . article clerk have be in 
 the habit of flesh their legal wit upon it . the last Lord 
 Chancellor handle it neatly , when , correct Mr. Blowers , the 
 eminent silk gown who say that such a thing might happen when the 
 sky rain potato , he observe , " or when we get through Jarndyce 
 and Jarndyce , Mr. Blowers " - a pleasantry that particularly tickle 
 the mace , bag , and purse . 
 how many people out of the suit Jarndyce and Jarndyce have stretch 
 forth its unwholesome hand to spoil and corrupt would be a very 
 wide question . from the master upon whose impale file ream of 
 dusty warrant in Jarndyce and Jarndyce have grimly writhe into 
 many shape , down to the copying - clerk in the six Clerks ' Office 
 who have copy his ten of thousand of Chancery folio - page under 
 that eternal heading , no man 's nature have be make well by it . 
 in trickery , evasion , procrastination , spoliation , botheration , 
 under false pretence of all sort , there be influence that can 
 never come to good . the very solicitor ' boy who have keep the 
 wretched suitor at bay , by protest time out of mind that Mr. 
 Chizzle , Mizzle , or otherwise be particularly engage and have 
 appointment until dinner , may have get an extra moral twist and 
 shuffle into themselves out of Jarndyce and Jarndyce . the receiver 
 in the cause have acquire a goodly sum of money by it but have 
 acquire too a distrust of his own mother and a contempt for his 
 own kind . Chizzle , Mizzle , and otherwise have lapse into a habit 
 of vaguely promise themselves that they will look into that 
 outstanding little matter and see what can be do for Drizzle - who 
 be not well use - when Jarndyce and Jarndyce shall be get out of 
 the office . shirk and shark in all their many variety have 
 be sow broadcast by the ill - fated cause ; and even those who have 
 contemplate its history from the outermost circle of such evil 
 have be insensibly tempt into a loose way of let bad thing 
 alone to take their own bad course , and a loose belief that if the 
 world go wrong it be in some off - hand manner never mean to go 
 right . 
 thus , in the midst of the mud and at the heart of the fog , sit the 
 Lord High Chancellor in his High Court of Chancery . 
 " Mr. Tangle , " say the Lord High Chancellor , latterly something 
 restless under the eloquence of that learn gentleman . 
 " Mlud , " say Mr. Tangle . Mr. Tangle know more of Jarndyce and 
 Jarndyce than anybody . he be famous for it - suppose never to have 
 read anything else since he leave school . 
 " have you nearly conclude your argument ? " 
 " Mlud , no - variety of point - feel it my duty tsubmit - ludship , " be 
 the reply that slide out of Mr. Tangle . 
 " several member of the bar be still to be hear , I believe ? " say 
 the Chancellor with a slight smile . 
 eighteen of Mr. Tangle 's learn friend , each arm with a little 
 summary of eighteen hundred sheet , bob up like eighteen hammer in 
 a pianoforte , make eighteen bow , and drop into their eighteen 
 place of obscurity . 
 " we will proceed with the hearing on Wednesday fortnight , " say the 
 Chancellor . for the question at issue be only a question of cost , 
 a mere bud on the forest tree of the parent suit , and really will 
 come to a settlement one of these day . 
 the Chancellor rise ; the bar rise ; the prisoner be bring 
 forward in a hurry ; the man from Shropshire cry , " my lord ! " 
 Maces , bag , and purse indignantly proclaim silence and frown at 
 the man from Shropshire . 
 " in reference , " proceed the Chancellor , still on Jarndyce and 
 Jarndyce , " to the young girl - " 
 " Begludship 's pardon - boy , " say Mr. Tangle prematurely . " in 
 reference , " proceed the Chancellor with extra distinctness , " to 
 the young girl and boy , the two young people " - Mr. Tangle crush - 
 " whom I direct to be in attendance to - day and who be now in my 
 private room , I will see they and satisfy myself as to the 
 expediency of make the order for their reside with their 
 uncle . " 
 Mr. Tangle on his leg again . " Begludship 's pardon - dead . " 
 " with their " - Chancellor look through his double eye - glass at the 
 paper on his desk - " grandfather . " 
 " Begludship 's pardon - victim of rash action - brain . " 
 suddenly a very little counsel with a terrific bass voice arise , 
 fully inflate , in the back settlement of the fog , and say , " will 
 your lordship allow I ? I appear for he . he be a cousin , several 
 time remove . I be not at the moment prepare to inform the court 
 in what exact remove he be a cousin , but he be a cousin . " 
 leave this address   deliver like a sepulchral message   ringing 
 in the rafter of the roof , the very little counsel drop , and the 
 fog know he no more . everybody look for he . nobody can see 
 he . 
 " I will speak with both the young people , " say the Chancellor 
 anew , " and satisfy myself on the subject of their reside with 
 their cousin . I will mention the matter to - morrow morning when I 
 take my seat . " 
 the Chancellor be about to bow to the bar when the prisoner be 
 present . nothing can possibly come of the prisoner 's 
 conglomeration but his be send back to prison , which be soon 
 do . the man from Shropshire venture another remonstrative " my 
 lord ! " but the Chancellor , be aware of he , have dexterously 
 vanish . everybody else quickly vanish too . a battery of blue 
 bag be load with heavy charge of paper and carry off by 
 clerk ; the little mad old woman march off with her document ; 
 the empty court be lock up . if all the injustice it have 
 commit and all the misery it have cause could only be lock up 
 with it , and the whole burn away in a great funeral pyre - why so 
 much the well for other party than the party in Jarndyce and 
 Jarndyce ! 
 CHAPTER II 
 in fashion 
 it be but a glimpse of the world of fashion that we want on this 
 same miry afternoon . it be not so unlike the Court of Chancery but 
 that we may pass from the one scene to the other , as the crow 
 fly . both the world of fashion and the Court of Chancery be 
 thing of precedent and usage : oversleep Rip Van Winkles who 
 have play at strange game through a deal of thundery weather ; 
 sleep beauty whom the knight will wake one day , when all the 
 stop spit in the kitchen shall begin to turn prodigiously ! 
 it be not a large world . relatively even to this world of our , 
 which have its limit too   as your Highness shall find when you have 
 make the tour of it and be come to the brink of the void beyond , 
 it be a very little speck . there be much good in it ; there be 
 many good and true people in it ; it have its appoint place . but 
 the evil of it be that it be a world wrap up in too much 
 jeweller 's cotton and fine wool , and can not hear the rushing of the 
 large world , and can not see they as they circle round the sun . 
 it be a deaden world , and its growth be sometimes unhealthy for 
 want of air . 
 my Lady Dedlock have return to her house in town for a few day 
 previous to her departure for Paris , where her ladyship intend to 
 stay some week , after which her movement be uncertain . the 
 fashionable intelligence say so for the comfort of the Parisians , 
 and it know all fashionable thing . to know thing otherwise be 
 to be unfashionable . my Lady Dedlock have be down at what she 
 call , in familiar conversation , her " place " in Lincolnshire . the 
 water be out in Lincolnshire . an arch of the bridge in the park 
 have be sap and sop away . the adjacent low - lie ground for 
 half a mile in breadth be a stagnant river with melancholy tree 
 for island in it and a surface puncture all over , all day long , 
 with fall rain . my Lady Dedlock 's place have be extremely 
 dreary . the weather for many a day and night have be so wet that 
 the tree seem wet through , and the soft lopping and pruning of 
 the woodman 's axe can make no crash or crackle as they fall . the 
 deer , look soak , leave quagmire where they pass . the shot of 
 a rifle lose its sharpness in the moist air , and its smoke move 
 in a tardy little cloud towards the green rise , coppice - top , 
 that make a background for the fall rain . the view from my 
 Lady Dedlock 's own window be alternately a lead - colour view and 
 a view in indian ink . the vas on the stone terrace in the 
 foreground catch the rain all day ; and the heavy drop fall - drip , 
 drip , drip - upon the broad flagged pavement , call from old time 
 the Ghost 's Walk , all night . on sunday the little church in the 
 park be mouldy ; the oaken pulpit break out into a cold sweat ; and 
 there be a general smell and taste as of the ancient dedlock in 
 their graf . my Lady Dedlock   who be childless , look out in 
 the early twilight from her boudoir at a keeper 's lodge and see 
 the light of a fire upon the latticed pane , and smoke rise from 
 the chimney , and a child , chase by a woman , run out into the 
 rain to meet the shin figure of a wrap - up man come through 
 the gate , have be put quite out of temper . my Lady Dedlock say 
 she have be " bored to death . " 
 therefore my Lady Dedlock have come away from the place in 
 Lincolnshire and have leave it to the rain , and the crow , and the 
 rabbit , and the deer , and the partridge and pheasant . the 
 picture of the dedlock past and go have seem to vanish into 
 the damp wall in mere lowness of spirit , as the housekeeper have 
 pass along the old room shut up the shutter . and when they 
 will next come forth again , the fashionable intelligence - which , 
 like the fiend , be omniscient of the past and present , but not the 
 future - can not yet undertake to say . 
 Sir Leicester Dedlock be only a baronet , but there be no mighty 
 baronet than he . his family be as old as the hill , and infinitely 
 more respectable . he have a general opinion that the world might 
 get on without hill but would be do up without dedlock . he 
 would on the whole admit nature to be a good idea   a little low , 
 perhaps , when not enclose with a park - fence , but an idea 
 dependent for its execution on your great county family . he be a 
 gentleman of strict conscience , disdainful of all littleness and 
 meanness and ready on the short notice to die any death you may 
 please to mention rather than give occasion for the least 
 impeachment of his integrity . he be an honourable , obstinate , 
 truthful , high - spirit , intensely prejudiced , perfectly 
 unreasonable man . 
 Sir Leicester be twenty year , full measure , old than my Lady . 
 he will never see sixty - five again , nor perhaps sixty - six , nor yet 
 sixty - seven . he have a twist of the gout now and then and walk a 
 little stiffly . he be of a worthy presence , with his light - grey 
 hair and whisker , his fine shirt - frill , his pure - white waistcoat , 
 and his blue coat with bright button always button . he be 
 ceremonious , stately , most polite on every occasion to my Lady , and 
 hold her personal attraction in the high estimation . his 
 gallantry to my Lady , which have never change since he court she , 
 be the one little touch of romantic fancy in he . 
 indeed , he marry she for love . a whisper still go about that 
 she have not even family ; howbeit , Sir Leicester have so much family 
 that perhaps he have enough and could dispense with any more . but 
 she have beauty , pride , ambition , insolent resolve , and sense enough 
 to portion out a legion of fine lady . wealth and station , add 
 to these , soon float she upward , and for year now my Lady 
 Dedlock have be at the centre of the fashionable intelligence and 
 at the top of the fashionable tree . 
 how Alexander weep when he have no more world to conquer , everybody 
 know - or have some reason to know by this time , the matter have 
 be rather frequently mention . my Lady Dedlock , have 
 conquer her world , fall not into the melting , but rather into the 
 freezing , mood . an exhausted composure , a wear - out placidity , an 
 equanimity of fatigue not to be ruffle by interest or satisfaction , 
 be the trophy of her victory . she be perfectly well - breed . 
 if she could be translate to heaven to - morrow , she might be 
 expect to ascend without any rapture . 
 she have beauty still , and if it be not in its heyday , it be not yet 
 in its autumn . she have a fine face - originally of a character that 
 would be rather call very pretty than handsome , but improve into 
 classicality by the acquire expression of her fashionable state . 
 her figure be elegant and have the effect of be tall . not that 
 she be so , but that " the most be make , " as the Honourable Bob 
 Stables have frequently assert upon oath , " of all her point . " 
 the same authority observe that she be perfectly get up and 
 remark in commendation of her hair especially that she be the 
 well - groom woman in the whole stud . 
 with all her perfection on her head , my Lady Dedlock have come up 
 from her place in Lincolnshire   hotly pursue by the fashionable 
 intelligence   to pass a few day at her house in town previous to 
 her departure for Paris , where her ladyship intend to stay some 
 week , after which her movement be uncertain . and at her house 
 in town , upon this muddy , murky afternoon , present himself an old- 
 fashioned old gentleman , attorney - at - law and eke solicitor of the 
 High Court of Chancery , who have the honour of act as legal 
 adviser of the Dedlocks and have as many cast - iron box in his 
 office with that name outside as if the present baronet be the 
 coin of the conjuror 's trick and be constantly be juggle 
 through the whole set . across the hall , and up the stair , and 
 along the passage , and through the room , which be very brilliant 
 in the season and very dismal out of it - fairy - land to visit , but a 
 desert to live in - the old gentleman be conduct by a Mercury in 
 powder to my Lady 's presence . 
 the old gentleman be rusty to look at , but be repute to have make 
 good thrift out of aristocratic marriage settlement and 
 aristocratic will , and to be very rich . he be surround by a 
 mysterious halo of family confidence , of which he be know to be 
 the silent depository . there be noble mausoleum root for 
 century in retire glade of park among the grow timber and 
 the fern , which perhaps hold few noble secret than walk abroad 
 among man , shut up in the breast of Mr. Tulkinghorn . he be of what 
 be call the old school - a phrase generally mean any school 
 that seem never to have be young - and wear knee - breech tie 
 with ribbon , and gaiter or stocking . one peculiarity of his 
 black clothe and of his black stocking , be they silk or worst , 
 be that they never shine . mute , close , irresponsive to any 
 glancing light , his dress be like himself . he never converse when 
 not professionaly consult . he be find sometimes , speechless but 
 quite at home , at corner of dinner - table in great country house 
 and near door of drawing - room , concern which the fashionable 
 intelligence be eloquent , where everybody know he and where half 
 the Peerage stop to say " how do you do , Mr. Tulkinghorn ? " he 
 receive these salutation with gravity and bury they along with 
 the rest of his knowledge . 
 Sir Leicester Dedlock be with my Lady and be happy to see Mr. 
 Tulkinghorn . there be an air of prescription about he which be 
 always agreeable to Sir Leicester ; he receive it as a kind of 
 tribute . he like Mr. Tulkinghorn 's dress ; there be a kind of 
 tribute in that too . it be eminently respectable , and likewise , in 
 a general way , retainer - like . it express , as it be , the 
 steward of the legal mystery , the butler of the legal cellar , of 
 the Dedlocks . 
 have Mr. Tulkinghorn any idea of this himself ? it may be so , or it 
 may not , but there be this remarkable circumstance to be note in 
 everything associate with my Lady Dedlock as one of a class - as 
 one of the leader and representative of her little world . she 
 suppose herself to be an inscrutable being , quite out of the reach 
 and ken of ordinary mortal - see herself in her glass , where 
 indeed she look so . yet every dim little star revolve about 
 she , from she maid to the manager of the Italian Opera , know she 
 weakness , prejudice , folly , haughtiness , and caprice and 
 live upon as accurate a calculation and as nice a measure of her 
 moral nature as her dressmaker take of her physical proportion . 
 be a new dress , a new custom , a new singer , a new dancer , a new 
 form of jewellery , a new dwarf or giant , a new chapel , a new 
 anything , to be set up ? there be deferential people in a dozen 
 calling whom my Lady Dedlock suspect of nothing but prostration 
 before she , who can tell you how to manage she as if she be a 
 baby , who do nothing but nurse she all their life , who , humbly 
 affect to follow with profound subservience , lead she and her 
 whole troop after they ; who , in hook one , hook all and bear they 
 off as Lemuel Gulliver bear away the stately fleet of the majestic 
 Lilliput . " if you want to address our people , sir , " say Blaze and 
 Sparkle , the jeweller - meaning by our people Lady Dedlock and the 
 rest - " you must remember that you be not deal with the general 
 public ; you must hit our people in their weak place , and their 
 weak place be such a place . " " to make this article go down , 
 gentleman , " say Sheen and Gloss , the mercer , to their friend the 
 manufacturer , " you must come to we , because we know where to have 
 the fashionable people , and we can make it fashionable . " " if you 
 want to get this print upon the table of my high connexion , sir , " 
 say Mr. Sladdery , the librarian , " or if you want to get this dwarf 
 or giant into the house of my high connexion , sir , or if you want 
 to secure to this entertainment the patronage of my high connexion , 
 sir , you must leave it , if you please , to I , for I have be 
 accustom to study the leader of my high connexion , sir , and I 
 may tell you without vanity that I can turn they round my finger " - 
 in which Mr. Sladdery , who be an honest man , do not exaggerate at 
 all . 
 therefore , while Mr. Tulkinghorn may not know what be pass in 
 the Dedlock mind at present , it be very possible that he may . 
 " my Lady 's cause have be again before the Chancellor , have it , Mr. 
 Tulkinghorn ? " say Sir Leicester , give he his hand . 
 " yes . it have be on again to - day , " Mr. Tulkinghorn reply , 
 make one of his quiet bow to my Lady , who be on a sofa near the 
 fire , shade her face with a hand - screen . 
 " it would be useless to ask , " say my Lady with the dreariness of 
 the place in Lincolnshire still upon she , " whether anything have 
 be do . " 
 " nothing that you would call anything have be do to - day , " 
 reply Mr. Tulkinghorn . 
 " nor ever will be , " say my Lady . 
 Sir Leicester have no objection to an interminable Chancery suit . 
 it be a slow , expensive , british , constitutional kind of thing . to 
 be sure , he have not a vital interest in the suit in question , her 
 part in which be the only property my Lady bring he ; and he have 
 a shadowy impression that for his name - the name of Dedlock - to be 
 in a cause , and not in the title of that cause , be a most 
 ridiculous accident . but he regard the Court of Chancery , even if 
 it should involve an occasional delay of justice and a trifling 
 amount of confusion , as a something devise in conjunction with a 
 variety of other something by the perfection of human wisdom for 
 the eternal settlement   humanly speak   of everything . and he be 
 upon the whole of a fix opinion that to give the sanction of his 
 countenance to any complaint respect it would be to encourage 
 some person in the low class to rise up somewhere - like Wat 
 Tyler . 
 " as a few fresh affidavit have be put upon the file , " say Mr. 
 Tulkinghorn , " and as they be short , and as I proceed upon the 
 troublesome principle of beg leave to possess my client with 
 any new proceeding in a cause " - cautious man Mr. Tulkinghorn , 
 take no more responsibility than necessary - " and far , as I 
 see you be go to Paris , I have bring they in my pocket . " 
  Sir Leicester be go to Paris too , by the by , but the delight 
 of the fashionable intelligence be in his Lady . 
 Mr. Tulkinghorn take out his paper , ask permission to place they 
 on a golden talisman of a table at my Lady 's elbow , put on his 
 spectacle , and begin to read by the light of a shaded lamp . 
 " ' in Chancery . between John Jarndyce - ' " 
 my Lady interrupt , request he to miss as many of the formal 
 horror as he can . 
 Mr. Tulkinghorn glance over his spectacle and begin again low 
 down . my Lady carelessly and scornfully abstract her attention . 
 Sir Leicester in a great chair look at the file and appear to 
 have a stately liking for the legal repetition and prolixity as 
 range among the national bulwark . it happen that the fire be 
 hot where my Lady sit and that the hand - screen be more beautiful 
 than useful , be priceless but small . my Lady , change she 
 position , see the paper on the table - look at they near - look 
 at they near still - ask impulsively , " who copy that ? " 
 Mr. Tulkinghorn stop short , surprise by my Lady 's animation and 
 her unusual tone . 
 " be it what you people call law - hand ? " she ask , look full at 
 he in her careless way again and toy with her screen . 
 " not quite . probably " - Mr. Tulkinghorn examine it as he speak - 
 " the legal character which it have be acquire after the original 
 hand be form . why do you ask ? " 
 " anything to vary this detestable monotony . oh , go on , do ! " 
 Mr. Tulkinghorn read again . the heat be great ; my Lady screen 
 her face . Sir Leicester doze , start up suddenly , and cry , " Eh ? 
 what do you say ? " 
 " I say I be afraid , " say Mr. Tulkinghorn , who have rise hastily , 
 " that Lady Dedlock be ill . " 
 " Faint , " my Lady murmur with white lip , " only that ; but it be 
 like the faintness of death . do not   speak to I . Ring , and take I 
 to my room ! " 
 Mr. Tulkinghorn retire into another chamber ; bell ring , foot 
 shuffle and patter , silence ensue . Mercury at last beg Mr. 
 Tulkinghorn to return . 
 " well now , " quoth Sir Leicester , motion the lawyer to sit down 
 and read to he alone . " I have be quite alarmed . I never know 
 my Lady swoon before . but the weather be extremely try , and she 
 really have be bore to death down at our place in Lincolnshire . " 
 CHAPTER III 
 A Progress 
 I have a great deal of difficulty in begin to write my portion 
 of these page , for I know I be not clever . I always know that . I 
 can remember , when I be a very little girl indeed , I use to say 
 to my doll when we be alone together , " now , dolly , I be not 
 clever , you know very well , and you must be patient with I , like a 
 dear ! " and so she use to sit prop up in a great arm - chair , 
 with her beautiful complexion and rosy lip , star at I - or not 
 so much at I , I think , as at nothing - while I busily stitch away 
 and tell she every one of my secret . 
 my dear old doll ! I be such a shy little thing that I seldom 
 dare to open my lip , and never dare to open my heart , to anybody 
 else . it almost make I cry to think what a relief it use to be 
 to I when I come home from school of a day to run upstairs to my 
 room and say , " oh , you dear faithful Dolly , I know you would be 
 expect I ! " and then to sit down on the floor , lean on the 
 elbow of her great chair , and tell she all I have notice since we 
 part . I have always rather a noticing way - not a quick way , oh , 
 no ! - a silent way of notice what pass before I and think I 
 should like to understand it well . I have not by any mean a 
 quick understanding . when I love a person very tenderly indeed , it 
 seem to brighten . but even that may be my vanity . 
 I be bring up , from my early remembrance - like some of the 
 princess in the fairy story , only I be not charming - by my 
 godmother . at least , I only know she as such . she be a good , 
 good woman ! she go to church three time every Sunday , and to 
 morning prayer on wednesday and Fridays , and to lecture whenever 
 there be lecture ; and never miss . she be handsome ; and if 
 she have ever smile , would have be   I use to think   like an 
 angel - but she never smile . she be always grave and strict . she 
 be so very good herself , I think , that the badness of other 
 people make she frown all her life . I feel so different from she , 
 even make every allowance for the difference between a child and 
 a woman ; I feel so poor , so trifling , and so far off that I never 
 could be unrestrained with she - no , could never even love she as I 
 wish . it make I very sorry to consider how good she be and how 
 unworthy of she I be , and I use ardently to hope that I might 
 have a well heart ; and I talk it over very often with the dear 
 old doll , but I never love my godmother as I ought to have love 
 she and as I feel I must have love she if I have be a well 
 girl . 
 this make I , I dare say , more timid and retire than I naturally 
 be and cast I upon dolly as the only friend with whom I feel at 
 ease . but something happen when I be still quite a little thing 
 that help it very much . 
 I have never hear my mama speak of . I have never hear of my papa 
 either , but I feel more interested about my mama . I have never wear 
 a black frock , that I could recollect . I have never be show my 
 mama 's grave . I have never be tell where it be . yet I have never 
 be teach to pray for any relation but my godmother . I have more 
 than once approach this subject of my thought with Mrs. Rachael , 
 our only servant , who take my light away when I be in bed   another 
 very good woman , but austere to I , and she have only say , 
 " Esther , good night ! " and go away and leave I . 
 although there be seven girl at the neighbouring school where I 
 be a day boarder , and although they call I little Esther 
 Summerson , I know none of they at home . all of they be old 
 than I , to be sure   I be the young there by a good deal , but 
 there seem to be some other separation between we besides that , 
 and besides their be far more clever than I be and know much 
 more than I do . one of they in the first week of my go to the 
 school   I remember it very well   invite I home to a little party , 
 to my great joy . but my godmother write a stiff letter decline 
 for I , and I never go . I never go out at all . 
 it be my birthday . there be holiday at school on other 
 birthday - none on mine . there be rejoicing at home on other 
 birthday , as I know from what I hear the girl relate to one 
 another - there be none on mine . my birthday be the most 
 melancholy day at home in the whole year . 
 I have mention that unless my vanity should deceive I   as I know 
 it may , for I may be very vain without suspect it , though indeed 
 I do not   , my comprehension be quicken when my affection be . my 
 disposition be very affectionate , and perhaps I might still feel 
 such a wound if such a wound could be receive more than once with 
 the quickness of that birthday . 
 Dinner be over , and my godmother and I be sit at the table 
 before the fire . the clock tick , the fire click ; not another 
 sound have be hear in the room or in the house for I do not   know 
 how long . I happen to look timidly up from my stitching , across 
 the table at my godmother , and I see in her face , look gloomily 
 at I , " it would have be far well , little Esther , that you have 
 have no birthday , that you have never be bear ! " 
 I break out cry and sobbing , and I say , " oh , dear godmother , 
 tell I , pray do tell I , do Mama die on my birthday ? " 
 " no , " she return . " ask I no more , child ! " 
 " oh , do pray tell I something of she . do now , at last , dear 
 godmother , if you please ! what do I do to she ? how do I lose 
 she ? why be I so different from other child , and why be it my 
 fault , dear godmother ? no , no , no , do not   go away . oh , speak to 
 I ! " 
 I be in a kind of fright beyond my grief , and I catch hold of her 
 dress and be kneel to she . she have be say all the while , 
 " let I go ! " but now she stand still . 
 her darken face have such power over I that it stop I in the 
 midst of my vehemence . I put up my trembling little hand to clasp 
 her or to beg her pardon with what earnestness I might , but 
 withdraw it as she look at I , and lay it on my flutter 
 heart . she raise I , sit in her chair , and stand I before 
 she , say slowly in a cold , low voice - I see her knit brow and 
 point finger - " your mother , Esther , be your disgrace , and you 
 be her . the time will come - and soon enough - when you will 
 understand this well and will feel it too , as no one save a woman 
 can . I have forgive she " - but her face do not relent - " the wrong 
 she do to I , and I say no more of it , though it be great than 
 you will ever know - than any one will ever know but I , the 
 sufferer . for yourself , unfortunate girl , orphan and degrade 
 from the first of these evil anniversary , pray daily that the 
 sin of other be not visit upon your head , accord to what be 
 write . forget your mother and leave all other people to forget 
 she who will do her unhappy child that great kindness . now , 
 go ! " 
 she check I , however , as I be about to depart from she - so 
 freeze as I be ! - and add this , " submission , self - denial , 
 diligent work , be the preparation for a life begin with such a 
 shadow on it . you be different from other child , Esther , 
 because you be not bear , like they , in common sinfulness and 
 wrath . you be set apart . " 
 I go up to my room , and creep to bed , and lay my doll 's cheek 
 against mine wet with tear , and hold that solitary friend upon 
 my bosom , cry myself to sleep . imperfect as my understanding of 
 my sorrow be , I know that I have bring no joy at any time to 
 anybody 's heart and that I be to no one upon earth what dolly be 
 to I . 
 dear , dear , to think how much time we pass alone together 
 afterwards , and how often I repeat to the doll the story of my 
 birthday and confide to she that I would try as hard as ever I 
 could to repair the fault I have be bear with   of which I 
 confessedly feel guilty and yet innocent   and would strive as I 
 grow up to be industrious , content , and kind - hearted and to do 
 some good to some one , and win some love to myself if I could . I 
 hope it be not self - indulgent to shed these tear as I think of it . 
 I be very thankful , I be very cheerful , but I can not quite help 
 their come to my eye . 
 there ! I have wipe they away now and can go on again properly . 
 I feel the distance between my godmother and myself so much more 
 after the birthday , and feel so sensible of fill a place in her 
 house which ought to have be empty , that I find she more 
 difficult of approach , though I be fervently grateful to she in my 
 heart , than ever . I feel in the same way towards my school 
 companion ; I feel in the same way towards Mrs. Rachael , who be a 
 widow ; and oh , towards her daughter , of whom she be proud , who 
 come to see she once a fortnight ! I be very retired and quiet , 
 and try to be very diligent . 
 one sunny afternoon when I have come home from school with my book 
 and portfolio , watch my long shadow at my side , and as I be 
 glide upstairs to my room as usual , my godmother look out of 
 the parlour - door and call I back . sit with she , I find - 
 which be very unusual indeed - a stranger . a portly , important- 
 look gentleman , dress all in black , with a white cravat , large 
 gold watch seal , a pair of gold eye - glass , and a large seal - ring 
 upon his little finger . 
 " this , " say my godmother in an undertone , " be the child . " then 
 she say in her naturally stern way of speak , " this be Esther , 
 sir . " 
 the gentleman put up his eye - glass to look at I and say , " come 
 here , my dear ! " he shake hand with I and ask I to take off my 
 bonnet , look at I all the while . when I have comply , he say , 
 " ah ! " and afterwards " yes ! " and then , take off his eye - glass 
 and fold they in a red case , and lean back in his arm - chair , 
 turn the case about in his two hand , he give my godmother a 
 nod . upon that , my godmother say , " you may go upstairs , Esther ! " 
 and I make he my curtsy and leave he . 
 it must have be two year afterwards , and I be almost fourteen , 
 when one dreadful night my godmother and I sit at the fireside . I 
 be read aloud , and she be listen . I have come down at nine 
 o'clock as I always do to read the Bible to she , and be read 
 from St. John how our Saviour stoop down , write with his finger 
 in the dust , when they bring the sinful woman to he . 
 " so when they continue ask he , he lift up himself and say 
 unto they , ' he that be without sin among you , let he first cast a 
 stone at she ! ' " 
 I be stop by my godmother 's rise , put her hand to her 
 head , and cry out in an awful voice from quite another part of 
 the book , " ' watch ye , therefore , lest come suddenly he find you 
 sleep . and what I say unto you , I say unto all , Watch ! ' " 
 in an instant , while she stand before I repeat these word , she 
 fall down on the floor . I have no need to cry out ; her voice have 
 sound through the house and be hear in the street . 
 she be lay upon her bed . for more than a week she lie there , 
 little alter outwardly , with her old handsome resolute frown that 
 I so well know carve upon her face . many and many a time , in the 
 day and in the night , with my head upon the pillow by she that my 
 whisper might be plainer to she , I kiss she , thank she , pray 
 for she , ask she for her blessing and forgiveness , entreat she 
 to give I the least sign that she know or hear I . no , no , no . 
 her face be immovable . to the very last , and even afterwards , she 
 frown remain unsoftened . 
 on the day after my poor good godmother be bury , the gentleman 
 in black with the white neckcloth reappear . I be send for by 
 Mrs. Rachael , and find he in the same place , as if he have never 
 go away . 
 " my name be kenge , " he say ; " you may remember it , my child ; Kenge 
 and Carboy , Lincoln 's Inn . " 
 I reply that I remember to have see he once before . 
 " pray be seat - here near I . do not   distress yourself ; it be of no 
 use . Mrs. Rachael , I need not   inform you who be acquaint with 
 the late Miss Barbary 's affair , that her mean die with she and 
 that this young lady , now her aunt be dead - " 
 " my aunt , sir ! " 
 " it be really of no use carry on a deception when no object be 
 to be gain by it , " say Mr. Kenge smoothly , " aunt in fact , though 
 not in law . do not   distress yourself ! do not   weep ! do not   tremble ! 
 Mrs. Rachael , our young friend have no doubt hear of - the - a - 
 Jarndyce and Jarndyce . " 
 " never , " say Mrs. Rachael . 
 " be it possible , " pursue Mr. Kenge , put up his eye - glass , 
 " that our young friend - I beg you will not   distress yourself ! - never 
 hear of Jarndyce and Jarndyce ! " 
 I shake my head , wonder even what it be . 
 " not of Jarndyce and Jarndyce ? " say Mr. Kenge , look over his 
 glass at I and softly turn the case about and about as if he 
 be pet something . " not of one of the great Chancery suit 
 know ? not of Jarndyce and Jarndyce - the - a - in itself a monument 
 of Chancery practice . in which   I would say   every difficulty , 
 every contingency , every masterly fiction , every form of procedure 
 know in that court , be represent over and over again ? it be a 
 cause that could not exist out of this free and great country . I 
 should say that the aggregate of cost in Jarndyce and Jarndyce , 
 Mrs. Rachael " - I be afraid he address himself to she because I 
 appear inattentive " - amount at the present hour to from SIX - ty 
 to seven - ty thousand pound ! " say Mr. Kenge , lean back in his 
 chair . 
 I feel very ignorant , but what could I do ? I be so entirely 
 unacquainted with the subject that I understand nothing about it 
 even then . 
 " and she really never hear of the cause ! " say Mr. Kenge . 
 " surprising ! " 
 " Miss Barbary , sir , " return Mrs. Rachael , " who be now among the 
 Seraphim - " 
 " I hope so , I be sure , " say Mr. Kenge politely . 
 " - Wished Esther only to know what would be serviceable to she . 
 and she know , from any teaching she have have here , nothing more . " 
 " well ! " say Mr. Kenge . " upon the whole , very proper . now to the 
 point , " address I . " Miss Barbary , your sole relation   in fact 
 that be , for I be bind to observe that in law you have none   be 
 deceased and it naturally not be to be expect that Mrs. 
 Rachael - " 
 " oh , dear no ! " say Mrs. Rachael quickly . 
 " quite so , " assent Mr. Kenge ; " - that Mrs. Rachael should charge 
 herself with your maintenance and support   I beg you will not   distress 
 yourself , you be in a position to receive the renewal of an offer 
 which I be instruct to make to Miss Barbary some two year ago 
 and which , though reject then , be understand to be renewable 
 under the lamentable circumstance that have since occur . now , 
 if I avow that I represent , in Jarndyce and Jarndyce and otherwise , 
 a highly humane , but at the same time singular , man , shall I 
 compromise myself by any stretch of my professional caution ? " say 
 Mr. Kenge , lean back in his chair again and look calmly at we 
 both . 
 he appear to enjoy beyond everything the sound of his own voice . 
 I could not   wonder at that , for it be mellow and full and give 
 great importance to every word he utter . he listen to himself 
 with obvious satisfaction and sometimes gently beat time to his own 
 music with his head or round a sentence with his hand . I be 
 very much impressed by he - even then , before I know that he form 
 himself on the model of a great lord who be his client and that he 
 be generally call Conversation Kenge . 
 " Mr. Jarndyce , " he pursue , " be aware of the - I would say , 
 desolate - position of our young friend , offer to place she at a 
 first - rate establishment where her education shall be complete , 
 where her comfort shall be secure , where her reasonable want 
 shall be anticipate , where she shall be eminently qualified to 
 discharge her duty in that station of life unto which it have 
 pleased - shall I say Providence ? - to call she . " 
 my heart be fill so full , both by what he say and by his 
 affect manner of say it , that I be not able to speak , though 
 I try . 
 " Mr. Jarndyce , " he go on , " make no condition beyond express 
 his expectation that our young friend will not at any time remove 
 herself from the establishment in question without his knowledge 
 and concurrence . that she will faithfully apply herself to the 
 acquisition of those accomplishment , upon the exercise of which 
 she will be ultimately dependent . that she will tread in the path 
 of virtue and honour , and - the - a - so forth . " 
 I be still less able to speak than before . 
 " now , what do our young friend say ? " proceed Mr. Kenge . " take 
 time , take time ! I pause for her reply . but take time ! " 
 what the destitute subject of such an offer try to say , I need 
 not repeat . what she do say , I could more easily tell , if it be 
 worth the telling . what she feel , and will feel to her die hour , 
 I could never relate . 
 this interview take place at Windsor , where I have pass   as far as 
 I know   my whole life . on that day week , amply provide with all 
 necessary , I leave it , inside the stagecoach , for Reading . 
 Mrs. Rachael be too good to feel any emotion at parting , but I be 
 not so good , and weep bitterly . I think that I ought to have 
 know she well after so many year and ought to have make myself 
 enough of a favourite with she to make she sorry then . when she 
 give I one cold parting kiss upon my forehead , like a thaw - drop 
 from the stone porch - it be a very frosty day - I feel so miserable 
 and self - reproachful that I cling to she and tell she it be my 
 fault , I know , that she could say good - bye so easily ! 
 " no , Esther ! " she return . " it be your misfortune ! " 
 the coach be at the little lawn - gate - we have not come out until we 
 hear the wheel - and thus I leave she , with a sorrowful heart . she 
 go in before my box be lift to the coach - roof and shut the 
 door . as long as I could see the house , I look back at it from 
 the window through my tear . my godmother have leave Mrs. Rachael 
 all the little property she possess ; and there be to be a sale ; 
 and an old hearth - rug with rose on it , which always seem to I 
 the first thing in the world I have ever see , be hang outside 
 in the frost and snow . a day or two before , I have wrap the dear 
 old doll in her own shawl and quietly lay she - I be half ashamed 
 to tell it - in the garden - earth under the tree that shade my old 
 window . I have no companion leave but my bird , and he I carry 
 with I in his cage . 
 when the house be out of sight , I sit , with my bird - cage in the 
 straw at my foot , forward on the low seat to look out of the high 
 window , watch the frosty tree , that be like beautiful piece 
 of spar , and the field all smooth and white with last night 's 
 snow , and the sun , so red but yield so little heat , and the ice , 
 dark like metal where the skater and slider have brush the snow 
 away . there be a gentleman in the coach who sit on the opposite 
 seat and look very large in a quantity of wrapping , but he sit 
 gaze out of the other window and take no notice of I . 
 I think of my dead godmother , of the night when I read to she , of 
 her frown so fixedly and sternly in her bed , of the strange 
 place I be go to , of the people I should find there , and what 
 they would be like , and what they would say to I , when a voice in 
 the coach give I a terrible start . 
 it say , " what the de - vil be you cry for ? " 
 I be so frightened that I lose my voice and could only answer in a 
 whisper , " Me , sir ? " for of course I know it must have be the 
 gentleman in the quantity of wrapping , though he be still look 
 out of his window . 
 " yes , you , " he say , turn round . 
 " I do not   know I be cry , sir , " I falter . 
 " but you be ! " say the gentleman . " look here ! " he come quite 
 opposite to I from the other corner of the coach , brush one of 
 his large furry cuff across my eye   but without hurt I , and 
 show I that it be wet . 
 " there ! now you know you be , " he say . " do not   you ? " 
 " yes , sir , " I say . 
 " and what be you cry for ? " say the gentleman , " do not   you want 
 to go there ? " 
 " where , sir ? " 
 " where ? why , wherever you be go , " say the gentleman . 
 " I be very glad to go there , sir , " I answer . 
 " well , then ! look glad ! " say the gentleman . 
 I think he be very strange , or at least that what I could see of 
 he be very strange , for he be wrap up to the chin , and his 
 face be almost hide in a fur cap with broad fur strap at the 
 side of his head fasten under his chin ; but I be compose again , 
 and not afraid of he . so I tell he that I think I must have 
 be cry because of my godmother 's death and because of Mrs. 
 Rachael be not be sorry to part with I . 
 " Confound Mrs. Rachael ! " say the gentleman . " let she fly away in 
 a high wind on a broomstick ! " 
 I begin to be really afraid of he now and look at he with the 
 great astonishment . but I think that he have pleasant eye , 
 although he keep on mutter to himself in an angry manner and 
 call Mrs. Rachael name . 
 after a little while he open his outer wrapper , which appear to 
 I large enough to wrap up the whole coach , and put his arm down 
 into a deep pocket in the side . 
 " now , look here ! " he say . " in this paper , " which be nicely 
 fold , " be a piece of the good plum - cake that can be get for 
 money - sugar on the outside an inch thick , like fat on mutton 
 chop . here be a little pie   a gem this be , both for size and 
 quality , make in France . and what do you suppose it be make of ? 
 liver of fat geese . there be a pie ! now let us see you eat them . " 
 " thank you , sir , " I reply ; " thank you very much indeed , but I 
 hope you will not   be offend - they be too rich for I . " 
 " floor again ! " say the gentleman , which I do not   at all 
 understand , and throw they both out of window . 
 he do not speak to I any more until he get out of the coach a 
 little way short of Reading , when he advise I to be a good girl 
 and to be studious , and shake hand with I . I must say I be 
 relieve by his departure . we leave he at a milestone . I often 
 walk past it afterwards , and never for a long time without 
 thinking of he and half expect to meet he . but I never do ; 
 and so , as time go on , he pass out of my mind . 
 when the coach stop , a very neat lady look up at the window 
 and say , " Miss Donny . " 
 " no , ma'am , Esther Summerson . " 
 " that be quite right , " say the lady , " Miss Donny . " 
 I now understand that she introduce herself by that name , and 
 beg Miss Donny 's pardon for my mistake , and point out my box 
 at her request . under the direction of a very neat maid , they be 
 put outside a very small green carriage ; and then Miss Donny , the 
 maid , and I get inside and be drive away . 
 " everything be ready for you , Esther , " say Miss Donny , " and the 
 scheme of your pursuit have be arrange in exact accordance with 
 the wish of your guardian , Mr. Jarndyce . " 
 " of - do you say , ma'am ? " 
 " of your guardian , Mr. Jarndyce , " say Miss Donny . 
 I be so bewildered that Miss Donny think the cold have be too 
 severe for I and lend I her smell - bottle . 
 " do you know my - guardian , Mr. Jarndyce , ma'am ? " I ask after a 
 good deal of hesitation . 
 " not personally , Esther , " say Miss Donny ; " merely through his 
 solicitor , Messrs. Kenge and Carboy , of London . a very superior 
 gentleman , Mr. Kenge . truly eloquent indeed . some of his period 
 quite majestic ! " 
 I feel this to be very true but be too confused to attend to it . 
 our speedy arrival at our destination , before I have time to recover 
 myself , increase my confusion , and I never shall forget the 
 uncertain and the unreal air of everything at Greenleaf   Miss 
 Donny 's house   that afternoon ! 
 but I soon become used to it . I be so adapt to the routine of 
 Greenleaf before long that I seem to have be there a great 
 while and almost to have dream rather than really live my old 
 life at my godmother 's . nothing could be more precise , exact , and 
 orderly than Greenleaf . there be a time for everything all round 
 the dial of the clock , and everything be do at its appoint 
 moment . 
 we be twelve boarder , and there be two Miss Donnys , twin . it 
 be understand that I would have to depend , by and by , on my 
 qualification as a governess , and I be not only instruct in 
 everything that be teach at Greenleaf , but be very soon engage 
 in help to instruct other . although I be treat in every 
 other respect like the rest of the school , this single difference 
 be make in my case from the first . as I begin to know more , I 
 teach more , and so in course of time I have plenty to do , which I 
 be very fond of do because it make the dear girl fond of I . 
 at last , whenever a new pupil come who be a little downcast and 
 unhappy , she be so sure - indeed I do not   know why - to make a friend 
 of I that all new - comer be confide to my care . they say I 
 be so gentle , but I be sure they be ! I often think of the 
 resolution I have make on my birthday to try to be industrious , 
 content , and true - hearted and to do some good to some one and win 
 some love if I could ; and indeed , indeed , I feel almost ashamed to 
 have do so little and have win so much . 
 I pass at Greenleaf six happy , quiet year . I never see in any 
 face there , thank heaven , on my birthday , that it would have be 
 well if I have never be bear . when the day come round , it 
 bring I so many token of affectionate remembrance that my room 
 be beautiful with they from New Year 's day to Christmas . 
 in those six year I have never be away except on visit at 
 holiday time in the neighbourhood . after the first six month or 
 so I have take Miss Donny 's advice in reference to the propriety of 
 write to Mr. Kenge to say that I be happy and grateful , and with 
 her approval I have write such a letter . I have receive a formal 
 answer acknowledge its receipt and say , " we note the content 
 thereof , which shall be duly communicate to our client . " after 
 that I sometimes hear Miss Donny and her sister mention how 
 regular my account be pay , and about twice a year I venture to 
 write a similar letter . I always receive by return of post 
 exactly the same answer in the same round hand , with the signature 
 of Kenge and Carboy in another writing , which I suppose to be Mr. 
 Kenge 's . 
 it seem so curious to I to be oblige to write all this about 
 myself ! as if this narrative be the narrative of MY life ! but 
 my little body will soon fall into the background now . 
 six quiet year   I find I be say it for the second time   I have 
 pass at Greenleaf , see in those around I , as it might be in a 
 look - glass , every stage of my own growth and change there , when , 
 one November morning , I receive this letter . I omit the date . 
 Old Square , Lincoln 's Inn 
 Madam , 
 Jarndyce and Jarndyce 
 our clt Mr. Jarndyce be abt to rece into his house , under an 
 order of the Ct of Chy , a Ward of the Ct in this cause , for whom he 
 wish to secure an elgble compn , direct we to inform you that he 
 will be glad of your serce in the afsd capacity . 
 we have arrngd for your be ford , carriage free , pr eight 
 o'clock coach from Reading , on Monday morning next , to White Horse 
 Cellar , Piccadilly , London , where one of our clk will be in 
 wait to convey you to our offe as above . 
 we be , Madam , your obedt servts , 
 Kenge and Carboy 
 Miss Esther Summerson 
 oh , never , never , never shall I forget the emotion this letter 
 cause in the house ! it be so tender in they to care so much for 
 I , it be so gracious in that father who have not forget I to 
 have make my orphan way so smooth and easy and to have incline so 
 many youthful nature towards I , that I could hardly bear it . not 
 that I would have have they less sorry - I be afraid not ; but the 
 pleasure of it , and the pain of it , and the pride and joy of it , 
 and the humble regret of it be so blend that my heart seem 
 almost break while it be full of rapture . 
 the letter give I only five day ' notice of my removal . when 
 every minute add to the proof of love and kindness that be 
 give I in those five day , and when at last the morning come and 
 when they take I through all the room that I might see they for 
 the last time , and when some cry , " Esther , dear , say good - bye to 
 I here at my bedside , where you first speak so kindly to I ! " and 
 when other ask I only to write their name , " with Esther 's 
 love , " and when they all surround I with their parting present 
 and clung to I weep and cry , " what shall we do when dear , 
 dear Esther 's go ! " and when I try to tell they how forbear 
 and how good they have all be to I and how I bless and thank 
 they every one , what a heart I have ! 
 and when the two Miss Donnys grieve as much to part with I as the 
 least among they , and when the maid say , " bless you , miss , 
 wherever you go ! " and when the ugly lame old gardener , who I 
 think have hardly notice I in all those year , come pant 
 after the coach to give I a little nosegay of geranium and tell 
 I I have be the light of his eye - indeed the old man say so ! - 
 what a heart I have then ! 
 and could I help it if with all this , and the come to the little 
 school , and the unexpected sight of the poor child outside 
 wave their hat and bonnet to I , and of a grey - haired gentleman 
 and lady whose daughter I have help to teach and at whose house I 
 have visit   who be say to be the proud people in all that 
 country , care for nothing but call out , " good - bye , Esther . 
 may you be very happy ! " - could I help it if I be quite bow down 
 in the coach by myself and say " oh , I be so thankful , I be so 
 thankful ! " many time over ! 
 but of course I soon consider that I must not take tear where I 
 be go after all that have be do for I . therefore , of 
 course , I make myself sob less and persuade myself to be quiet by 
 say very often , " Esther , now you really must ! this will not 
 do ! " I cheer myself up pretty well at last , though I be afraid I 
 be long about it than I ought to have be ; and when I have 
 cool my eye with lavender water , it be time to watch for 
 London . 
 I be quite persuade that we be there when we be ten mile 
 off , and when we really be there , that we should never get there . 
 however , when we begin to jolt upon a stone pavement , and 
 particularly when every other conveyance seem to be run into 
 we , and we seem to be run into every other conveyance , I 
 begin to believe that we really be approach the end of our 
 journey . very soon afterwards we stop . 
 a young gentleman who have ink himself by accident address I 
 from the pavement and say , " I be from Kenge and Carboy 's , miss , of 
 Lincoln 's Inn . " 
 " if you please , sir , " say I. 
 he be very obliging , and as he hand I into a fly after 
 superintend the removal of my box , I ask he whether there 
 be a great fire anywhere ? for the street be so full of dense 
 brown smoke that scarcely anything be to be see . 
 " oh , dear no , miss , " he say . " this be a London particular . " 
 I have never hear of such a thing . 
 " a fog , miss , " say the young gentleman . 
 " oh , indeed ! " say I. 
 we drive slowly through the dirty and darkest street that ever 
 be see in the world   I think   and in such a distracting state 
 of confusion that I wonder how the people keep their sens , 
 until we pass into sudden quietude under an old gateway and drive 
 on through a silent square until we come to an odd nook in a 
 corner , where there be an entrance up a steep , broad flight of 
 stair , like an entrance to a church . and there really be a 
 churchyard outside under some cloister , for I see the gravestone 
 from the staircase window . 
 this be Kenge and Carboy 's . the young gentleman show I through 
 an outer office into Mr. Kenge 's room - there be no one in it - and 
 politely put an arm - chair for I by the fire . he then call my 
 attention to a little look - glass hang from a nail on one side 
 of the chimney - piece . 
 " in case you should wish to look at yourself , miss , after the 
 journey , as you be go before the Chancellor . not that it be 
 requisite , I be sure , " say the young gentleman civilly . 
 " go before the Chancellor ? " I say , startle for a moment . 
 " only a matter of form , miss , " return the young gentleman . " Mr. 
 Kenge be in court now . he leave his compliment , and would you 
 partake of some refreshment " - there be biscuit and a decanter of 
 wine on a small table - " and look over the paper , " which the young 
 gentleman give I as he speak . he then stir the fire and leave 
 I . 
 everything be so strange - the stranger from its being night in the 
 day - time , the candle burn with a white flame , and look raw 
 and cold - that I read the word in the newspaper without know 
 what they mean and find myself read the same word repeatedly . 
 as it be of no use go on in that way , I put the paper down , 
 take a peep at my bonnet in the glass to see if it be neat , and 
 look at the room , which be not half light , and at the shabby , 
 dusty table , and at the pile of writing , and at a bookcase full 
 of the most inexpressive - look book that ever have anything to 
 say for themselves . then I go on , thinking , thinking , thinking ; 
 and the fire go on , burning , burning , burning ; and the candle 
 go on flickering and guttering , and there be no snuffer - until 
 the young gentleman by and by bring a very dirty pair - for two 
 hour . 
 at last Mr. Kenge come . he be not alter , but he be surprised 
 to see how altered I be and appear quite pleased . " as you be 
 go to be the companion of the young lady who be now in the 
 Chancellor 's private room , Miss Summerson , " he say , " we think it 
 well that you should be in attendance also . you will not be 
 discompose by the Lord Chancellor , I dare say ? " 
 " no , sir , " I say , " I do not   think I shall , " really not see on 
 consideration why I should be . 
 so Mr. Kenge give I his arm and we go round the corner , under a 
 colonnade , and in at a side door . and so we come , along a passage , 
 into a comfortable sort of room where a young lady and a young 
 gentleman be stand near a great , loud - roar fire . a screen 
 be interpose between they and it , and they be lean on the 
 screen , talk . 
 they both look up when I come in , and I see in the young lady , 
 with the fire shin upon she , such a beautiful girl ! with such 
 rich golden hair , such soft blue eye , and such a bright , innocent , 
 trusting face ! 
 " Miss Ada , " say Mr. Kenge , " this be Miss Summerson . " 
 she come to meet I with a smile of welcome and her hand extend , 
 but seem to change her mind in a moment and kiss I . in short , 
 she have such a natural , captivate , win manner that in a few 
 minute we be sit in the window - seat , with the light of the 
 fire upon we , talk together as free and happy as could be . 
 what a load off my mind ! it be so delightful to know that she 
 could confide in I and like I ! it be so good of she , and so 
 encouraging to I ! 
 the young gentleman be her distant cousin , she tell I , and his 
 name Richard Carstone . he be a handsome youth with an ingenuous 
 face and a most engaging laugh ; and after she have call he up to 
 where we sit , he stand by we , in the light of the fire , talk 
 gaily , like a light - hearted boy . he be very young , not more than 
 nineteen then , if quite so much , but nearly two year old than 
 she be . they be both orphan and   what be very unexpected and 
 curious to I   have never meet before that day . our all three come 
 together for the first time in such an unusual place be a thing to 
 talk about , and we talk about it ; and the fire , which have leave 
 off roar , wink its red eye at we - as Richard say - like a 
 drowsy old Chancery lion . 
 we converse in a low tone because a full - dress gentleman in a 
 bag wig frequently come in and out , and when he do so , we could 
 hear a drawling sound in the distance , which he say be one of the 
 counsel in our case address the Lord Chancellor . he tell Mr. 
 Kenge that the Chancellor would be up in five minute ; and 
 presently we hear a bustle and a tread of foot , and Mr. Kenge say 
 that the Court have rise and his lordship be in the next room . 
 the gentleman in the bag wig open the door almost directly and 
 request Mr. Kenge to come in . upon that , we all go into the 
 next room , Mr. Kenge first , with my darling - it be so natural to I 
 now that I can not   help write it ; and there , plainly dress in 
 black and sit in an arm - chair at a table near the fire , be his 
 lordship , whose robe , trim with beautiful gold lace , be throw 
 upon another chair . he give we a search look as we enter , but 
 his manner be both courtly and kind . 
 the gentleman in the bag wig lay bundle of paper on his 
 lordship 's table , and his lordship silently select one and turn 
 over the leaf . 
 " Miss Clare , " say the Lord Chancellor . " Miss Ada Clare ? " 
 Mr. Kenge present she , and his lordship beg she to sit down 
 near he . that he admire she and be interested by she even I 
 could see in a moment . it touch I that the home of such a 
 beautiful young creature should be represent by that dry , 
 official place . the Lord High Chancellor , at his good , appear so 
 poor a substitute for the love and pride of parent . 
 " the Jarndyce in question , " say the Lord Chancellor , still turn 
 over leaf , " be Jarndyce of Bleak House . " 
 " Jarndyce of Bleak House , my lord , " say Mr. Kenge . 
 " a dreary name , " say the Lord Chancellor . 
 " but not a dreary place at present , my lord , " say Mr. Kenge . 
 " and Bleak House , " say his lordship , " be in - " 
 " Hertfordshire , my lord . " 
 " Mr. Jarndyce of Bleak House be not marry ? " say his lordship . 
 " he be not , my lord , " say Mr. Kenge . 
 a pause . 
 " Young Mr. Richard Carstone be present ? " say the Lord Chancellor , 
 glance towards he . 
 Richard bow and step forward . 
 " Hum ! " say the Lord Chancellor , turn over more leaf . 
 " Mr. Jarndyce of Bleak House , my lord , " Mr. Kenge observe in a low 
 voice , " if I may venture to remind your lordship , provide a 
 suitable companion for - " 
 " for Mr. Richard Carstone ? " I think   but I be not quite sure   I 
 hear his lordship say in an equally low voice and with a smile . 
 " for Miss Ada Clare . this be the young lady . Miss Summerson . " 
 his lordship give I an indulgent look and acknowledge my curtsy 
 very graciously . 
 " Miss Summerson be not relate to any party in the cause , I think ? " 
 " no , my lord . " 
 Mr. Kenge leant over before it be quite say and whisper . his 
 lordship , with his eye upon his paper , listen , nod twice or 
 thrice , turn over more leaf , and do not look towards I again 
 until we be go away . 
 Mr. Kenge now retire , and Richard with he , to where I be , near 
 the door , leave my pet   it be so natural to I that again I can not 
 help it !   sit near the Lord Chancellor , with whom his lordship 
 speak a little part , ask she , as she tell I afterwards , whether 
 she have well reflect on the propose arrangement , and if she 
 think she would be happy under the roof of Mr. Jarndyce of Bleak 
 House , and why she think so ? presently he rise courteously and 
 release she , and then he speak for a minute or two with Richard 
 Carstone , not seat , but stand , and altogether with more ease 
 and less ceremony , as if he still know , though he be Lord 
 Chancellor , how to go straight to the candour of a boy . 
 " very well ! " say his lordship aloud . " I shall make the order . 
 Mr. Jarndyce of Bleak House have choose , so far as I may judge , " and 
 this be when he look at I , " a very good companion for the young 
 lady , and the arrangement altogether seem the good of which the 
 circumstance admit . " 
 he dismiss we pleasantly , and we all go out , very much oblige 
 to he for be so affable and polite , by which he have certainly 
 lose no dignity but seem to we to have gain some . 
 when we get under the colonnade , Mr. Kenge remember that he must 
 go back for a moment to ask a question and leave we in the fog , with 
 the Lord Chancellor 's carriage and servant wait for he to come 
 out . 
 " well ! " say Richard Carstone . " that be over ! and where do we go 
 next , Miss Summerson ? " 
 " do not   you know ? " I say . 
 " not in the least , " say he . 
 " and do not   you know , my love ? " I ask Ada . 
 " no ! " say she . " do not   you ? " 
 " not at all ! " say I. 
 we look at one another , half laugh at our be like the 
 child in the wood , when a curious little old woman in a squeeze 
 bonnet and carry a reticule come curtsy and smile up to we 
 with an air of great ceremony . 
 " oh ! " say she . " the ward in Jarndyce ! Ve - ry happy , I be sure , 
 to have the honour ! it be a good omen for youth , and hope , and 
 beauty when they find themselves in this place , and do not   know 
 what be to come of it . " 
 " mad ! " whisper Richard , not think she could hear he . 
 " right ! mad , young gentleman , " she return so quickly that he be 
 quite abash . " I be a ward myself . I be not mad at that time , " 
 curtsy low and smile between every little sentence . " I have 
 youth and hope . I believe , beauty . it matter very little now . 
 neither of the three serve or save I . I have the honour to 
 attend court regularly . with my document . I expect a judgment . 
 shortly . on the Day of Judgment . I have discover that the sixth 
 seal mention in the Revelations be the Great Seal . it have be 
 open a long time ! pray accept my blessing . " 
 as Ada be a little frightened , I say , to humour the poor old 
 lady , that we be much oblige to she . 
 " Ye - es ! " she say mincingly . " I imagine so . and here be 
 Conversation Kenge . with his document ! how do your honourable 
 worship do ? " 
 " quite well , quite well ! now do not   be troublesome , that be a good 
 soul ! " say Mr. Kenge , lead the way back . 
 " by no mean , " say the poor old lady , keep up with Ada and I . 
 " anything but troublesome . I shall confer estate on both - which 
 be not be troublesome , I trust ? I expect a judgment . shortly . 
 on the Day of Judgment . this be a good omen for you . accept my 
 blessing ! " 
 she stop at the bottom of the steep , broad flight of stair ; but 
 we look back as we go up , and she be still there , say , 
 still with a curtsy and a smile between every little sentence , 
 " Youth . and hope . and beauty . and Chancery . and Conversation 
 Kenge ! ha ! pray accept my blessing ! " 
 CHAPTER IV 
 Telescopic Philanthropy 
 we be to pass the night , Mr. Kenge tell we when we arrive in his 
 room , at Mrs. Jellyby 's ; and then he turn to I and say he take 
 it for grant I know who Mrs. Jellyby be . 
 " I really do not , sir , " I return . " perhaps Mr. Carstone - or Miss 
 Clare - " 
 but no , they know nothing whatever about Mrs. Jellyby . " in - deed ! 
 Mrs. Jellyby , " say Mr. Kenge , stand with his back to the fire 
 and cast his eye over the dusty hearth - rug as if it be Mrs. 
 Jellyby 's biography , " be a lady of very remarkable strength of 
 character who devote herself entirely to the public . she have 
 devote herself to an extensive variety of public subject at 
 various time and be at present   until something else attract 
 her   devoted to the subject of Africa , with a view to the general 
 cultivation of the coffee berry - and the native - and the happy 
 settlement , on the bank of the african river , of our superabundant 
 home population . Mr. Jarndyce , who be desirous to aid any work 
 that be consider likely to be a good work and who be much seek 
 after by philanthropist , have , I believe , a very high opinion of 
 Mrs. Jellyby . " 
 Mr. Kenge , adjust his cravat , then look at we . 
 " and Mr. Jellyby , sir ? " suggest Richard . 
 " ah ! Mr. Jellyby , " say Mr. Kenge , " be - a - I do not   know that I can 
 describe he to you well than by say that he be the husband of 
 Mrs. Jellyby . " 
 " a nonentity , sir ? " say Richard with a droll look . 
 " I do not   say that , " return Mr. Kenge gravely . " I can not   say that , 
 indeed , for I know nothing whatever of Mr. Jellyby . I never , to my 
 knowledge , have the pleasure of see Mr. Jellyby . he may be a 
 very superior man , but he be , so to speak , merge - merge - in the 
 more shining quality of his wife . " Mr. Kenge proceed to tell 
 we that as the road to Bleak House would have be very long , dark , 
 and tedious on such an evening , and as we have be travel 
 already , Mr. Jarndyce have himself propose this arrangement . a 
 carriage would be at Mrs. Jellyby 's to convey we out of town early 
 in the forenoon of to - morrow . 
 he then ring a little bell , and the young gentleman come in . 
 address he by the name of Guppy , Mr. Kenge inquire whether 
 Miss Summerson 's box and the rest of the baggage have be ' send 
 round . " Mr. Guppy say yes , they have be send round , and a coach 
 be wait to take we round too as soon as we please . 
 " then it only remain , " say Mr. Kenge , shake hand with we , " for 
 I to express my lively satisfaction in   good day , Miss Clare !   the 
 arrangement this day conclude and my   good - bye to you , Miss 
 Summerson !   lively hope that it will conduce to the happiness , the 
  glad to have have the honour of make your acquaintance , Mr. 
 Carstone !   welfare , the advantage in all point of view , of all 
 concern ! Guppy , see the party safely there . " 
 " where be ' there , ' Mr. Guppy ? " say Richard as we go downstairs . 
 " no distance , " say Mr. Guppy ; " round in Thavies Inn , you know . " 
 " I can not   say I know where it be , for I come from Winchester and be 
 strange in London . " 
 " only round the corner , " say Mr. Guppy . " we just twist up 
 Chancery Lane , and cut along Holborn , and there we be in four 
 minute ' time , as near as a toucher . this be about a London 
 particular NOW , be not   it , miss ? " he seem quite delighted with it 
 on my account . 
 " the fog be very dense indeed ! " say I. 
 " not that it affect you , though , I be sure , " say Mr. Guppy , 
 put up the step . " on the contrary , it seem to do you good , 
 miss , judge from your appearance . " 
 I know he mean well in pay I this compliment , so I laugh at 
 myself for blush at it when he have shut the door and get upon 
 the box ; and we all three laugh and chat about our 
 inexperience and the strangeness of London until we turn up under 
 an archway to our destination - a narrow street of high house like 
 an oblong cistern to hold the fog . there be a confused little 
 crowd of people , principally child , gather about the house at 
 which we stop , which have a tarnish brass plate on the door 
 with the inscription JELLYBY . 
 " do not   be frighten ! " say Mr. Guppy , look in at the coach- 
 window . " one of the young Jellybys be and get his head through 
 the area railing ! " 
 " oh , poor child , " say I ; " let I out , if you please ! " 
 " pray be careful of yourself , miss . the young Jellybys be always 
 up to something , " say Mr. Guppy . 
 I make my way to the poor child , who be one of the dirty little 
 unfortunate I ever see , and find he very hot and frightened and 
 cry loudly , fix by the neck between two iron railing , while a 
 milkman and a beadle , with the kind intention possible , be 
 endeavour to drag he back by the leg , under a general 
 impression that his skull be compressible by those mean . as I 
 find   after pacify he   that he be a little boy with a 
 naturally large head , I think that perhaps where his head could 
 go , his body could follow , and mention that the good mode of 
 extrication might be to push he forward . this be so favourably 
 receive by the milkman and beadle that he would immediately have 
 be push into the area if I have not hold his pinafore while 
 Richard and Mr. Guppy run down through the kitchen to catch he 
 when he should be release . at last he be happily get down 
 without any accident , and then he begin to beat Mr. Guppy with a 
 hoop - stick in quite a frantic manner . 
 nobody have appear belong to the house except a person in 
 patten , who have be poke at the child from below with a broom ; 
 I do not   know with what object , and I do not   think she do . I 
 therefore suppose that Mrs. Jellyby be not at home , and be quite 
 surprised when the person appear in the passage without the 
 patten , and go up to the back room on the first floor before 
 Ada and I , announce we as , " they two young lady , Missis 
 Jellyby ! " we pass several more child on the way up , whom it 
 be difficult to avoid treading on in the dark ; and as we come into 
 Mrs. Jellyby 's presence , one of the poor little thing fall 
 downstairs - down a whole flight   as it sound to I , with a great 
 noise . 
 Mrs. Jellyby , whose face reflect none of the uneasiness which we 
 could not help show in our own face as the dear child 's head 
 record its passage with a bump on every stair - Richard afterwards 
 say he count seven , besides one for the landing - receive we 
 with perfect equanimity . she be a pretty , very diminutive , plump 
 woman of from forty to fifty , with handsome eye , though they have a 
 curious habit of seem to look a long way off . as if - I be 
 quote Richard again - they could see nothing near than Africa ! 
 " I be very glad indeed , " say Mrs. Jellyby in an agreeable voice , 
 " to have the pleasure of receive you . I have a great respect for 
 Mr. Jarndyce , and no one in whom he be interested can be an object 
 of indifference to I . " 
 we express our acknowledgment and sit down behind the door , 
 where there be a lame invalid of a sofa . Mrs. Jellyby have very 
 good hair but be too much occupy with her african duty to 
 brush it . the shawl in which she have be loosely muffle drop 
 onto her chair when she advance to we ; and as she turn to resume 
 her seat , we could not help notice that her dress do not   nearly 
 meet up the back and that the open space be rail across with a 
 lattice - work of stay - lace - like a summer - house . 
 the room , which be strew with paper and nearly fill by a great 
 writing - table cover with similar litter , be , I must say , not 
 only very untidy but very dirty . we be oblige to take notice of 
 that with our sense of sight , even while , with our sense of 
 hearing , we follow the poor child who have tumble downstairs : I 
 think into the back kitchen , where somebody seem to stifle he . 
 but what principally strike we be a jaded and unhealthy - look 
 though by no mean plain girl at the writing - table , who sit bite 
 the feather of her pen and star at we . I suppose nobody ever 
 be in such a state of ink . and from her tumbled hair to she 
 pretty foot , which be disfigure with fray and broken satin 
 slipper trodden down at heel , she really seem to have no article 
 of dress upon she , from a pin upwards , that be in its proper 
 condition or its right place . 
 " you find I , my dear , " say Mrs. Jellyby , snuff the two great 
 office candle in tin candlestick , which make the room taste 
 strongly of hot tallow   the fire have go out , and there be 
 nothing in the grate but ash , a bundle of wood , and a poker , 
 " you find I , my dear , as usual , very busy ; but that you will 
 excuse . the african project at present employ my whole time . it 
 involve I in correspondence with public body and with private 
 individual anxious for the welfare of their specie all over the 
 country . I be happy to say it be advance . we hope by this time 
 next year to have from a hundred and fifty to two hundred healthy 
 family cultivate coffee and educate the native of 
 Borrioboola - Gha , on the left bank of the Niger . " 
 as Ada say nothing , but look at I , I say it must be very 
 gratifying . 
 " it be gratify , " say Mrs. Jellyby . " it involve the devotion 
 of all my energy , such as they be ; but that be nothing , so that 
 it succeed ; and I be more confident of success every day . do you 
 know , Miss Summerson , I almost wonder that you never turn your 
 thought to Africa . " 
 this application of the subject be really so unexpected to I that 
 I be quite at a loss how to receive it . I hint that the 
 climate - 
 " the fine climate in the world ! " say Mrs. Jellyby . 
 " indeed , ma'am ? " 
 " certainly . with precaution , " say Mrs. Jellyby . " you may go into 
 Holborn , without precaution , and be run over . you may go into 
 Holborn , with precaution , and never be run over . just so with 
 Africa . " 
 I say , " no doubt . " I mean as to Holborn . 
 " if you would like , " say Mrs. Jellyby , put a number of paper 
 towards we , " to look over some remark on that head , and on the 
 general subject , which have be extensively circulate , while I 
 finish a letter I be now dictate to my eld daughter , who be my 
 amanuensis - " 
 the girl at the table leave off bite her pen and make a return to 
 our recognition , which be half bashful and half sulky . 
 " - I shall then have finish for the present , " proceed Mrs. 
 Jellyby with a sweet smile , " though my work be never do . where 
 be you , Caddy ? " 
 " ' present her compliment to Mr. Swallow , and beg - ' " say Caddy . 
 " ' and beg , ' " say Mrs. Jellyby , dictate , " ' to inform he , in 
 reference to his letter of inquiry on the african project - ' no , 
 Peepy ! not on my account ! " 
 Peepy   so self - name   be the unfortunate child who have fall 
 downstair , who now interrupt the correspondence by present 
 himself , with a strip of plaster on his forehead , to exhibit his 
 wound knee , in which Ada and I do not know which to pity most - 
 the bruise or the dirt . Mrs. Jellyby merely add , with the 
 serene composure with which she say everything , " go along , you 
 naughty Peepy ! " and fix her fine eye on Africa again . 
 however , as she at once proceed with her dictation , and as I 
 interrupt nothing by do it , I venture quietly to stop poor 
 Peepy as he be go out and to take he up to nurse . he look 
 very much astonish at it and at Ada 's kiss he , but soon fall 
 fast asleep in my arm , sob at long and long interval , 
 until he be quiet . I be so occupy with Peepy that I lose the 
 letter in detail , though I derive such a general impression from 
 it of the momentous importance of Africa , and the utter 
 insignificance of all other place and thing , that I feel quite 
 ashamed to have think so little about it . 
 " six o'clock ! " say Mrs. Jellyby . " and our dinner hour be 
 nominally   for we dine at all hour   five ! Caddy , show Miss Clare 
 and Miss Summerson their room . you will like to make some change , 
 perhaps ? you will excuse I , I know , be so much occupy . oh , 
 that very bad child ! pray put he down , Miss Summerson ! " 
 I beg permission to retain he , truly say that he be not at 
 all troublesome , and carry he upstairs and lay he on my bed . 
 Ada and I have two upper room with a door of communication between . 
 they be excessively bare and disorderly , and the curtain to my 
 window be fasten up with a fork . 
 " you would like some hot water , would not   you ? " say Miss Jellyby , 
 look round for a jug with a handle to it , but look in vain . 
 " if it be not be troublesome , " say we . 
 " oh , it be not the trouble , " return Miss Jellyby ; " the question 
 be , if there be any . " 
 the evening be so very cold and the room have such a marshy smell 
 that I must confess it be a little miserable , and Ada be half 
 cry . we soon laugh , however , and be busily unpack when 
 Miss Jellyby come back to say that she be sorry there be no hot 
 water , but they could not   find the kettle , and the boiler be out of 
 order . 
 we beg she not to mention it and make all the haste we could to 
 get down to the fire again . but all the little child have come 
 up to the landing outside to look at the phenomenon of Peepy lie 
 on my bed , and our attention be distract by the constant 
 apparition of nose and finger in situation of danger between the 
 hinge of the door . it be impossible to shut the door of either 
 room , for my lock , with no knob to it , look as if it want to be 
 wind up ; and though the handle of Ada 's go round and round with 
 the great smoothness , it be attend with no effect whatever on 
 the door . therefore I propose to the child that they should 
 come in and be very good at my table , and I would tell they the 
 story of Little Red Riding Hood while I dress ; which they do , 
 and be as quiet as mouse , include Peepy , who awake opportunely 
 before the appearance of the wolf . 
 when we go downstairs we find a mug with " a Present from 
 Tunbridge Wells " on it light up in the staircase window with a 
 float wick , and a young woman , with a swell face bind up in a 
 flannel bandage blow the fire of the drawing - room   now connect 
 by an open door with Mrs. Jellyby 's room   and choke dreadfully . 
 it smoke to that degree , in short , that we all sit cough and 
 cry with the window open for half an hour , during which Mrs. 
 Jellyby , with the same sweetness of temper , direct letter about 
 Africa . her be so employ be , I must say , a great relief to 
 I , for Richard tell we that he have wash his hand in a pie - dish 
 and that they have find the kettle on his dressing - table , and he 
 make Ada laugh so that they make I laugh in the most ridiculous 
 manner . 
 soon after seven o'clock we go down to dinner , carefully , by Mrs. 
 Jellyby 's advice , for the stair - carpet , besides be very 
 deficient in stair - wire , be so tear as to be absolute trap . we 
 have a fine cod - fish , a piece of roast beef , a dish of cutlet , and 
 a pudding ; an excellent dinner , if it have have any cooking to speak 
 of , but it be almost raw . the young woman with the flannel 
 bandage wait , and drop everything on the table wherever it 
 happen to go , and never move it again until she put it on the 
 stair . the person I have see in patten , who I suppose to have 
 be the cook , frequently come and skirmish with she at the door , 
 and there appear to be ill will between they . 
 all through dinner - which be long , in consequence of such 
 accident as the dish of potato be mislay in the coal skuttle 
 and the handle of the corkscrew come off and strike the young 
 woman in the chin - Mrs. Jellyby preserve the evenness of her 
 disposition . she tell we a great deal that be interesting about 
 Borrioboola - Gha and the native , and receive so many letter that 
 Richard , who sit by she , see four envelope in the gravy at once . 
 some of the letter be proceeding of lady ' committee or 
 resolution of lady ' meeting , which she read to we ; other be 
 application from people excited in various way about the 
 cultivation of coffee , and native ; other require answer , and 
 these she send her eld daughter from the table three or four 
 time to write . she be full of business and undoubtedly be , as 
 she have tell we , devote to the cause . 
 I be a little curious to know who a mild bald gentleman in 
 spectacle be , who drop into a vacant chair   there be no top 
 or bottom in particular   after the fish be take away and seem 
 passively to submit himself to Borrioboola - Gha but not to be 
 actively interested in that settlement . as he never speak a word , 
 he might have be a native but for his complexion . it be not 
 until we leave the table and he remain alone with Richard that the 
 possibility of his be Mr. Jellyby ever enter my head . but he 
 be Mr. Jellyby ; and a loquacious young man call Mr. Quale , with 
 large shin knob for temple and his hair all brush to the 
 back of his head , who come in the evening , and tell Ada he be a 
 philanthropist , also inform she that he call the matrimonial 
 alliance of Mrs. Jellyby with Mr. Jellyby the union of mind and 
 matter . 
 this young man , besides have a great deal to say for himself 
 about Africa and a project of his for teach the coffee colonist 
 to teach the native to turn piano - forte leg and establish an 
 export trade , delighted in draw Mrs. Jellyby out by save , " I 
 believe now , Mrs. Jellyby , you have receive as many as from one 
 hundred and fifty to two hundred letter respect Africa in a 
 single day , have you not ? " or , " if my memory do not deceive I , 
 Mrs. Jellyby , you once mention that you have send off five 
 thousand circular from one post - office at one time ? " - always 
 repeat Mrs. Jellyby 's answer to we like an interpreter . during 
 the whole evening , Mr. Jellyby sit in a corner with his head 
 against the wall as if he be subject to low spirit . it seem 
 that he have several time open his mouth when alone with Richard 
 after dinner , as if he have something on his mind , but have always 
 shut it again , to Richard 's extreme confusion , without say 
 anything . 
 Mrs. Jellyby , sit in quite a nest of waste paper , drink coffee 
 all the evening and dictate at interval to her eld daughter . 
 she also hold a discussion with Mr. Quale , of which the subject 
 seem to be - if I understand it - the brotherhood of humanity , and 
 give utterance to some beautiful sentiment . I be not so 
 attentive an auditor as I might have wish to be , however , for 
 Peepy and the other child come flock about Ada and I in a 
 corner of the drawing - room to ask for another story ; so we sit down 
 among they and tell they in whisper " Puss in Boots " and I do not 
 know what else until Mrs. Jellyby , accidentally remember they , 
 send they to bed . as Peepy cry for I to take he to bed , I 
 carry he upstairs , where the young woman with the flannel 
 bandage charge into the midst of the little family like a dragon 
 and overturn they into crib . 
 after that I occupy myself in make our room a little tidy and 
 in coax a very cross fire that have be light to burn , which 
 at last it do , quite brightly . on my return downstairs , I feel 
 that Mrs. Jellyby look down upon I rather for be so 
 frivolous , and I be sorry for it , though at the same time I know 
 that I have no high pretension . 
 it be nearly midnight before we find an opportunity of go to 
 bed , and even then we leave Mrs. Jellyby among her paper drink 
 coffee and Miss Jellyby bite the feather of her pen . 
 " what a strange house ! " say Ada when we get upstairs . " how 
 curious of my cousin Jarndyce to send we here ! " 
 " my love , " say I , " it quite confuse I . I want to understand it , 
 and I can not   understand it at all . " 
 " what ? " ask Ada with her pretty smile . 
 " all this , my dear , " say I. " it must be very good of Mrs. Jellyby 
 to take such pain about a scheme for the benefit of native - and 
 yet - Peepy and the housekeeping ! " 
 Ada laugh and put her arm about my neck as I stand look at the 
 fire , and tell I I be a quiet , dear , good creature and have win 
 her heart . " you be so thoughtful , Esther , " she say , " and yet so 
 cheerful ! and you do so much , so unpretendingly ! you would make a 
 home out of even this house . " 
 my simple darling ! she be quite unconscious that she only praise 
 herself and that it be in the goodness of her own heart that she 
 make so much of I ! 
 " may I ask you a question ? " say I when we have sit before the fire 
 a little while . 
 " five hundred , " say Ada . 
 " your cousin , Mr. Jarndyce . I owe so much to he . would you mind 
 describe he to I ? " 
 shake her golden hair , Ada turn her eye upon I with such 
 laughing wonder that I be full of wonder too , partly at her 
 beauty , partly at her surprise . 
 " Esther ! " she cry . 
 " my dear ! " 
 " you want a description of my cousin Jarndyce ? " 
 " my dear , I never see he . " 
 " and I never see he ! " return Ada . 
 well , to be sure ! 
 no , she have never see he . young as she be when her mama die , 
 she remember how the tear would come into her eye when she 
 speak of he and of the noble generosity of his character , which 
 she have say be to be trust above all earthly thing ; and Ada 
 trust it . her cousin Jarndyce have write to she a few month 
 ago - " a plain , honest letter , " Ada say - propose the arrangement 
 we be now to enter on and tell she that " in time it might heal 
 some of the wound make by the miserable Chancery suit . " she have 
 reply , gratefully accept his proposal . Richard have receive a 
 similar letter and have make a similar response . he have see Mr. 
 Jarndyce once , but only once , five year ago , at Winchester school . 
 he have tell Ada , when they be lean on the screen before the 
 fire where I find they , that he recollect he as " a bluff , rosy 
 fellow . " this be the utmost description Ada could give I . 
 it set I think so that when Ada be asleep , I still remain 
 before the fire , wonder and wonder about Bleak House , and 
 wonder and wonder that yesterday morning should seem so long 
 ago . I do not   know where my thought have wander when they be 
 recall by a tap at the door . 
 I open it softly and find Miss Jellyby shiver there with a 
 break candle in a broken candlestick in one hand and an egg - cup in 
 the other . 
 " good night ! " she say very sulkily . 
 " good night ! " say I. 
 " may I come in ? " she shortly and unexpectedly ask I in the same 
 sulky way . 
 " certainly , " say I. " do not   wake Miss Clare . " 
 she would not sit down , but stand by the fire dip her inky 
 middle finger in the egg - cup , which contain vinegar , and smear 
 it over the ink stain on her face , frown the whole time and 
 look very gloomy . 
 " I wish Africa be dead ! " she say on a sudden . 
 I be go to remonstrate . 
 " I do ! " she say " do not   talk to I , Miss Summerson . I hate it and 
 detest it . it be a beast ! " 
 I tell she she be tired , and I be sorry . I put my hand upon her 
 head , and touch her forehead , and say it be hot now but would 
 be cool to - morrow . she still stand pout and frown at I , but 
 presently put down her egg - cup and turn softly towards the bed 
 where Ada lie . 
 " she be very pretty ! " she say with the same knit brow and in 
 the same uncivil manner . 
 I assent with a smile . 
 " an orphan . ai not   she ? " 
 " yes . " 
 " but know a quantity , I suppose ? can dance , and play music , and 
 sing ? she can talk French , I suppose , and do geography , and 
 globe , and needlework , and everything ? " 
 " no doubt , " say I. 
 " I can not , " she return . " I can not   do anything hardly , except 
 write . I be always write for Ma . I wonder you two be not 
 ashamed of yourself to come in this afternoon and see I able to 
 do nothing else . it be like your ill nature . yet you think 
 yourself very fine , I dare say ! " 
 I could see that the poor girl be near crying , and I resume my 
 chair without speak and look at her   I hope   as mildly as I 
 feel towards she . 
 " it be disgraceful , " she say . " you know it be . the whole house be 
 disgraceful . the child be disgraceful . i'm disgraceful . Pa 's 
 miserable , and no wonder ! Priscilla drink - she be always drink . 
 it be a great shame and a great story of you if you say you do not 
 smell she to - day . it be as bad as a public - house , wait at 
 dinner ; you know it be ! " 
 " my dear , I do not   know it , " say I. 
 " you do , " she say very shortly . " you shall not   say you do not . you 
 do ! " 
 " oh , my dear ! " say I. " if you will not   let I speak - " 
 " you be speak now . you know you be . do not   tell story , Miss 
 Summerson . " 
 " my dear , " say I , " as long as you will not   hear I out - " 
 " I do not   want to hear you out . " 
 " oh , yes , I think you do , " say I , " because that would be so very 
 unreasonable . I do not know what you tell I because the servant 
 do not come near I at dinner ; but I do not   doubt what you tell I , 
 and I be sorry to hear it . " 
 " you need not   make a merit of that , " say she . 
 " no , my dear , " say i. " that would be very foolish . " 
 she be still stand by the bed , and now stoop down   but still 
 with the same discontent face   and kiss Ada . that do , she 
 come softly back and stand by the side of my chair . her bosom be 
 heave in a distressful manner that I greatly pity , but I 
 think it well not to speak . 
 " I wish I be dead ! " she break out . " I wish we be all dead . it 
 would be a great deal well for we . " 
 in a moment afterwards , she kneel on the ground at my side , hide she 
 face in my dress , passionately beg my pardon , and weep . I 
 comfort she and would have raise she , but she cry no , no ; she 
 want to stay there ! 
 " you use to teach girl , " she say , " if you could only have teach 
 I , I could have learn from you ! I be so very miserable , and I 
 like you so much ! " 
 I could not persuade she to sit by I or to do anything but move a 
 ragged stool to where she be kneeling , and take that , and still 
 hold my dress in the same manner . by degree the poor tired girl 
 fall asleep , and then I contrive to raise her head so that it 
 should rest on my lap , and to cover we both with shawl . the fire 
 go out , and all night long she slumber thus before the ashy 
 grate . at first I be painfully awake and vainly try to lose 
 myself , with my eye close , among the scene of the day . at 
 length , by slow degree , they become indistinct and mingle . I 
 begin to lose the identity of the sleeper resting on I . now it 
 be Ada , now one of my old reading friend from whom I could not 
 believe I have so recently part . now it be the little mad woman 
 wear out with curtsying and smile , now some one in authority at 
 Bleak House . lastly , it be no one , and I be no one . 
 the purblind day be feebly struggle with the fog when I open 
 my eye to encounter those of a dirty - face little spectre fix 
 upon I . Peepy have scale his crib , and creep down in his bed - gown 
 and cap , and be so cold that his tooth be chatter as if he 
 have cut they all . 
 CHAPTER V 
 A Morning Adventure 
 although the morning be raw , and although the fog still seem 
 heavy - I say seem , for the window be so encrusted with dirt 
 that they would have make midsummer sunshine dim - I be 
 sufficiently forewarned of the discomfort within door at that 
 early hour and sufficiently curious about London to think it a good 
 idea on the part of Miss Jellyby when she propose that we should 
 go out for a walk . 
 " Ma will not   be down for ever so long , " she say , " and then it be a 
 chance if breakfast be ready for an hour afterwards , they dawdle so . 
 as to Pa , he get what he can and go to the office . he never have 
 what you would call a regular breakfast . Priscilla leave he out 
 the loaf and some milk , when there be any , overnight . sometimes 
 there be not   any milk , and sometimes the cat drink it . but I be 
 afraid you must be tired , Miss Summerson , and perhaps you would 
 rather go to bed . " 
 " I be not at all tired , my dear , " say I , " and would much prefer to 
 go out . " 
 " if you be sure you would , " return Miss Jellyby , " I will get my 
 thing on . " 
 Ada say she would go too , and be soon astir . I make a proposal 
 to Peepy , in default of be able to do anything well for he , 
 that he should let I wash he and afterwards lie he down on my 
 bed again . to this he submit with the good grace possible , 
 star at I during the whole operation as if he never have be , 
 and never could again be , so astonished in his life - look very 
 miserable also , certainly , but make no complaint , and go 
 snugly to sleep as soon as it be over . at first I be in two 
 mind about take such a liberty , but I soon reflect that nobody 
 in the house be likely to notice it . 
 what with the bustle of dispatch Peepy and the bustle of get 
 myself ready and help Ada , I be soon quite in a glow . we find 
 Miss Jellyby try to warm herself at the fire in the writing- 
 room , which Priscilla be then light with a smutty parlour 
 candlestick , throw the candle in to make it burn well . 
 everything be just as we have leave it last night and be evidently 
 intend to remain so . below - stair the dinner - cloth have not be 
 take away , but have be leave ready for breakfast . Crumbs , dust , 
 and waste - paper be all over the house . some pewter pot and a 
 milk - can hang on the area railing ; the door stand open ; and we meet 
 the cook round the corner come out of a public - house , wipe her 
 mouth . she mention , as she pass we , that she have be to see 
 what o'clock it be . 
 but before we meet the cook , we meet Richard , who be dance up and 
 down Thavies Inn to warm his foot . he be agreeably surprised to 
 see we stir so soon and say he would gladly share our walk . 
 so he take care of Ada , and Miss Jellyby and I go first . I may 
 mention that Miss Jellyby have relapse into her sulky manner and 
 that I really should not have think she like I much unless she 
 have tell I so . 
 " where would you wish to go ? " she ask . 
 " anywhere , my dear , " I reply . 
 " Anywhere be nowhere , " say Miss Jellyby , stop perversely . 
 " let we go somewhere at any rate , " say I. 
 she then walk I on very fast . 
 " I do not   care ! " she say . " now , you be my witness , Miss 
 Summerson , I say I do not   care - but if he be to come to our house 
 with his great , shin , lumpy forehead night after night till he 
 be as old as Methuselah , I would not   have anything to say to he . 
 such ass as he and Ma make of themselves ! " 
 " my dear ! " I remonstrate , in allusion to the epithet and the 
 vigorous emphasis Miss Jellyby set upon it . " your duty as a child - " 
 " oh ! do not   talk of duty as a child , Miss Summerson ; where be Ma 's 
 duty as a parent ? all make over to the public and Africa , I 
 suppose ! then let the public and Africa show duty as a child ; it be 
 much more their affair than mine . you be shocked , I dare say ! 
 very well , so be I shock too ; so we be both shock , and there be 
 an end of it ! " 
 she walk I on fast yet . 
 " but for all that , I say again , he may come , and come , and come , 
 and I will not   have anything to say to he . I can not   bear he . if 
 there be any stuff in the world that I hate and detest , it be the 
 stuff he and Ma talk . I wonder the very pave - stone opposite our 
 house can have the patience to stay there and be a witness of such 
 inconsistency and contradiction as all that sound nonsense , 
 and Ma 's management ! " 
 I could not but understand she to refer to Mr. Quale , the young 
 gentleman who have appear after dinner yesterday . I be save the 
 disagreeable necessity of pursue the subject by Richard and Ada 
 come up at a round pace , laugh and ask we if we mean to 
 run a race . thus interrupt , Miss Jellyby become silent and 
 walk moodily on at my side while I admire the long succession 
 and variety of street , the quantity of people already go to 
 and fro , the number of vehicle pass and repasse , the busy 
 preparation in the setting forth of shop window and the sweep 
 out of shop , and the extraordinary creature in rag secretly 
 groping among the sweep - out rubbish for pin and other refuse . 
 " so , cousin , " say the cheerful voice of Richard to Ada behind I . 
 " we be never to get out of Chancery ! we have come by another way 
 to our place of meeting yesterday , and - by the Great Seal , here be 
 the old lady again ! " 
 truly , there she be , immediately in front of we , curtsying , and 
 smile , and say with her yesterday 's air of patronage , " the 
 ward in Jarndyce ! Ve - ry happy , I be sure ! " 
 " you be out early , ma'am , " say I as she curtsy to I . 
 " Ye - es ! I usually walk here early . before the court sit . it be 
 retire . I collect my thought here for the business of the day , " 
 say the old lady mincingly . " the business of the day require a 
 great deal of thought . chancery justice be so ve - ry difficult to 
 follow . " 
 " who be this , Miss Summerson ? " whisper Miss Jellyby , draw my 
 arm tight through her own . 
 the little old lady 's hearing be remarkably quick . she answer 
 for herself directly . 
 " a suitor , my child . at your service . I have the honour to attend 
 court regularly . with my document . have I the pleasure of 
 address another of the youthful party in Jarndyce ? " say the 
 old lady , recover herself , with her head on one side , from a 
 very low curtsy . 
 Richard , anxious to atone for his thoughtlessness of yesterday , 
 good - naturedly explain that Miss Jellyby be not connect with 
 the suit . 
 " ha ! " say the old lady . " she do not expect a judgment ? she 
 will still grow old . but not so old . oh , dear , no ! this be the 
 garden of Lincoln 's Inn . I call it my garden . it be quite a bower 
 in the summer - time . where the bird sing melodiously . I pass the 
 great part of the long vacation here . in contemplation . you 
 find the long vacation exceedingly long , do not   you ? " 
 we say yes , as she seem to expect we to say so . 
 " when the leaf be fall from the tree and there be no more 
 flower in bloom to make up into nosegay for the Lord Chancellor 's 
 court , " say the old lady , " the vacation be fulfil and the sixth 
 seal , mention in the revelation , again prevail . pray come and 
 see my lodging . it will be a good omen for I . Youth , and hope , 
 and beauty be very seldom there . it be a long , long time since I 
 have a visit from either . " 
 she have take my hand , and lead I and Miss Jellyby away , 
 beckon Richard and Ada to come too . I do not know how to excuse 
 myself and look to Richard for aid . as he be half amused and 
 half curious and all in doubt how to get rid of the old lady 
 without offence , she continue to lead we away , and he and Ada 
 continue to follow , our strange conductress inform we all the 
 time , with much smile condescension , that she live close by . 
 it be quite true , as it soon appear . she live so close by that 
 we have not time to have do humour she for a few moment before 
 she be at home . slip we out at a little side gate , the old 
 lady stop most unexpectedly in a narrow back street , part of 
 some court and lane immediately outside the wall of the inn , and 
 say , " this be my lodging . pray walk up ! " 
 she have stop at a shop over which be write KROOK , RAG and 
 BOTTLE WAREHOUSE . also , in long thin letter , KROOK , dealer in 
 MARINE STORES . in one part of the window be a picture of a red 
 paper mill at which a cart be unload a quantity of sack of old 
 rag . in another be the inscription BONES BOUGHT . in another , 
 KITCHEN - stuff BOUGHT . in another , OLD IRON BOUGHT . in another , 
 WASTE - paper BOUGHT . in another , lady ' and GENTLEMEN 's WARDROBES 
 BOUGHT . everything seem to be buy and nothing to be sell 
 there . in all part of the window be quantity of dirty 
 bottle - black bottle , medicine bottle , ginger - beer and soda- 
 water bottle , pickle bottle , wine bottle , ink bottle ; I be 
 remind by mention the latter that the shop have in several 
 little particular the air of be in a legal neighbourhood and of 
 be , as it be , a dirty hanger - on and disown relation of the 
 law . there be a great many ink bottle . there be a little 
 tottering bench of shabby old volume outside the door , label 
 " Law Books , all at 9d . " some of the inscription I have enumerate 
 be write in law - hand , like the paper I have see in Kenge and 
 Carboy 's office and the letter I have so long receive from the 
 firm . among they be one , in the same writing , have nothing to 
 do with the business of the shop , but announce that a respectable 
 man age forty - five want engross or copy to execute with 
 neatness and dispatch : address to Nemo , care of Mr. Krook , within . 
 there be several second - hand bag , blue and red , hang up . a 
 little way within the shop - door lie heap of old crackled parchment 
 scroll and discolour and dog's - eare law - paper . I could have 
 fancy that all the rusty key , of which there must have be 
 hundred huddle together as old iron , have once belong to door 
 of room or strong chest in lawyer ' office . the litter of rag 
 tumble partly into and partly out of a one - legged wooden scale , 
 hang without any counterpoise from a beam , might have be 
 counsellor ' band and gown tear up . one have only to fancy , as 
 Richard whisper to Ada and I while we all stand look in , that 
 yonder bone in a corner , pile together and pick very clean , 
 be the bone of client , to make the picture complete . 
 as it be still foggy and dark , and as the shop be blind besides 
 by the wall of Lincoln 's Inn , intercept the light within a 
 couple of yard , we should not have see so much but for a light 
 lantern that an old man in spectacle and a hairy cap be carry 
 about in the shop . turn towards the door , he now catch sight 
 of we . he be short , cadaverous , and wither , with his head sink 
 sideway between his shoulder and the breath issue in visible 
 smoke from his mouth as if he be on fire within . his throat , 
 chin , and eyebrow be so frosted with white hair and so gnarl 
 with vein and pucker skin that he look from his breast upward 
 like some old root in a fall of snow . 
 " hi , hi ! " say the old man , come to the door . " have you anything 
 to sell ? " 
 we naturally draw back and glance at our conductress , who have be 
 try to open the house - door with a key she have take from her 
 pocket , and to whom Richard now say that as we have have the 
 pleasure of see where she live , we would leave she , be 
 press for time . but she be not to be so easily leave . she 
 become so fantastically and pressingly earnest in her entreaty 
 that we would walk up and see her apartment for an instant , and be 
 so bent , in her harmless way , on lead I in , as part of the good 
 omen she desire , that I   whatever the other might do   see nothing 
 for it but to comply . I suppose we be all more or less curious ; 
 at any rate , when the old man add his persuasion to hers and 
 say , " aye , aye ! please she ! it will not   take a minute ! come in , 
 come in ! come in through the shop if t'other door 's out of order ! " 
 we all go in , stimulate by Richard 's laugh encouragement and 
 rely on his protection . 
 " my landlord , Krook , " say the little old lady , condescend to 
 he from her lofty station as she present he to we . " he be 
 call among the neighbour the Lord Chancellor . his shop be 
 call the Court of Chancery . he be a very eccentric person . he 
 be very odd . oh , I assure you he be very odd ! " 
 she shake her head a great many time and tap her forehead with 
 her finger to express to we that we must have the goodness to 
 excuse he , " for he be a little - you know - M ! " say the old lady 
 with great stateliness . the old man overhear , and laugh . 
 " it be true enough , " he say , go before we with the lantern , 
 " that they call I the Lord Chancellor and call my shop Chancery . 
 and why do you think they call I the Lord Chancellor and my shop 
 Chancery ? " 
 " I do not   know , I be sure ! " say Richard rather carelessly . 
 " you see , " say the old man , stop and turn round , " they - Hi ! 
 here 's lovely hair ! I have get three sack of lady ' hair below , 
 but none so beautiful and fine as this . what colour , and what 
 texture ! " 
 " that will do , my good friend ! " say Richard , strongly disapprove 
 of his have draw one of Ada 's tress through his yellow hand . 
 " you can admire as the rest of we do without take that liberty . " 
 the old man dart at he a sudden look which even call my 
 attention from Ada , who , startle and blushing , be so remarkably 
 beautiful that she seem to fix the wandering attention of the 
 little old lady herself . but as Ada interpose and laughingly say 
 she could only feel proud of such genuine admiration , Mr. Krook 
 shrink into his former self as suddenly as he have leap out of it . 
 " you see , I have so many thing here , " he resume , hold up the 
 lantern , " of so many kind , and all as the neighbour think   but 
 they know nothing , waste away and go to rack and ruin , that 
 that be why they have give I and my place a christening . and I 
 have so many old parchmentse and paper in my stock . and I have a 
 liking for rust and must and cobwebs . and all 's fish that come to 
 my net . and I can not   abear to part with anything I once lie hold of 
  or so my neighbour think , but what do they know ?   or to alter 
 anything , or to have any sweeping , nor scour , nor cleaning , nor 
 repair go on about I . that be the way I have   get the ill name 
 of Chancery . I do not   mind . I go to see my noble and learn 
 brother pretty well every day , when he sit in the Inn . he do not 
 notice I , but I notice he . there be no great odd betwixt we . we 
 both grub on in a muddle . hi , Lady Jane ! " 
 a large grey cat leap from some neighbour shelf on his 
 shoulder and startle we all . 
 " hi ! show them how you scratch . hi ! Tear , my lady ! " say she 
 master . 
 the cat leap down and rip at a bundle of rag with her 
 tigerish claw , with a sound that it set my tooth on edge to hear . 
 " she would do as much for any one I be to set she on , " say the old 
 man . " I deal in cat - skin among other general matter , and her 
 be offer to I . it be a very fine skin , as you may see , but I 
 do not   have it strip off ! that warn't   like Chancery practice 
 though , say you ! " 
 he have by this time lead we across the shop , and now open a door 
 in the back part of it , lead to the house - entry . as he stand 
 with his hand upon the lock , the little old lady graciously 
 observe to he before pass out , " that will do , Krook . you mean 
 well , but be tiresome . my young friend be press for time . I 
 have none to spare myself , have to attend court very soon . my 
 young friend be the ward in Jarndyce . " 
 " Jarndyce ! " say the old man with a start . 
 " Jarndyce and Jarndyce . the great suit , Krook , " return his 
 lodger . 
 " Hi ! " exclaim the old man in a tone of thoughtful amazement and 
 with a wide stare than before . " think of it ! " 
 he seem so rapt all in a moment and look so curiously at we 
 that Richard say , " why , you appear to trouble yourself a good deal 
 about the cause before your noble and learn brother , the other 
 Chancellor ! " 
 " yes , " say the old man abstractedly . " sure ! your name now will 
 be - " 
 " Richard Carstone . " 
 " carstone , " he repeat , slowly check off that name upon his 
 forefinger ; and each of the other he go on to mention upon a 
 separate finger . " yes . there be the name of Barbary , and the 
 name of Clare , and the name of Dedlock , too , I think . " 
 " he know as much of the cause as the real salaried Chancellor ! " 
 say Richard , quite astonished , to Ada and I . 
 " Aye ! " say the old man , come slowly out of his abstraction . 
 " yes ! Tom Jarndyce - you will excuse I , be relate ; but he be 
 never know about court by any other name , and be as well know 
 there as - she be now , " nod slightly at his lodger . " Tom 
 Jarndyce be often in here . he get into a restless habit of 
 stroll about when the cause be on , or expect , talk to the 
 little shopkeeper and tell them to keep out of Chancery , 
 whatever they do . ' for , ' say he , ' it be be grind to bit in a 
 slow mill ; it be be roast at a slow fire ; it be be sting to 
 death by single bee ; it be be drown by drop ; it be go mad 
 by grain . ' he be as near make away with himself , just where 
 the young lady stand , as near could be . " 
 we listen with horror . 
 " he come in at the door , " say the old man , slowly point an 
 imaginary track along the shop , " on the day he do it - the whole 
 neighbourhood have say for month before that he would do it , of a 
 certainty soon or later - he come in at the door that day , and 
 walk along there , and sit himself on a bench that stand there , 
 and ask I   you will judge I be a mortal sight young then   to 
 fetch he a pint of wine . ' for , ' say he , ' Krook , I be much 
 depressed ; my cause be on again , and I think I be near judgment 
 than I ever be . ' I have not   a mind to leave he alone ; and I 
 persuade he to go to the tavern over the way there , t'other side 
 my lane   I mean Chancery Lane ; and I follow and look in at the 
 window , and see he , comfortable as I think , in the arm - chair by 
 the fire , and company with he . I have not   hardly get back here when 
 I hear a shot go echo and rattle right away into the inn . I 
 run out - neighbour run out - twenty of we cry at once , ' Tom 
 Jarndyce ! ' " 
 the old man stop , look hard at we , look down into the 
 lantern , blow the light out , and shut the lantern up . 
 " we be right , I need not   tell the present hearer . hi ! to be 
 sure , how the neighbourhood pour into court that afternoon while 
 the cause be on ! how my noble and learn brother , and all the 
 rest of them , grub and muddle away as usual and try to look as 
 if they have not   hear a word of the last fact in the case or as if 
 they have - oh , dear I ! - nothing at all to do with it if they have 
 hear of it by any chance ! " 
 Ada 's colour have entirely leave she , and Richard be scarcely less 
 pale . nor could I wonder , judge even from my emotion , and I be 
 no party in the suit , that to heart so untried and fresh it be a 
 shock to come into the inheritance of a protract misery , attend 
 in the mind of many people with such dreadful recollection . I 
 have another uneasiness , in the application of the painful story to 
 the poor half - witte creature who have bring we there ; but , to my 
 surprise , she seem perfectly unconscious of that and only lead the 
 way upstairs again , inform we with the toleration of a superior 
 creature for the infirmity of a common mortal that her landlord 
 be " a little M , you know ! " 
 she live at the top of the house , in a pretty large room , from 
 which she have a glimpse of Lincoln 's Inn Hall . this seem to have 
 be her principal inducement , originally , for take up her 
 residence there . she could look at it , she say , in the night , 
 especially in the moonshine . her room be clean , but very , very 
 bare . I notice the scanty necessary in the way of furniture ; 
 a few old print from book , of chancellor and barrister , wafere 
 against the wall ; and some half - dozen reticle and work - bag , 
 " contain document , " as she inform we . there be neither 
 coal nor ash in the grate , and I see no article of clothing 
 anywhere , nor any kind of food . upon a shelf in an open cupboard 
 be a plate or two , a cup or two , and so forth , but all dry and 
 empty . there be a more affect meaning in her pinch 
 appearance , I think as I look round , than I have understand 
 before . 
 " extremely honour , I be sure , " say our poor hostess with the 
 great suavity , " by this visit from the ward in Jarndyce . and 
 very much indebted for the oman . it be a retired situation . 
 consider . I be limit as to situation . in consequence of the 
 necessity of attend on the Chancellor . I have live here many 
 year . I pass my day in court , my evening and my night here . I 
 find the night long , for I sleep but little and think much . that 
 be , of course , unavoidable , be in Chancery . I be sorry I can not 
 offer chocolate . I expect a judgment shortly and shall then place 
 my establishment on a superior footing . at present , I do not   mind 
 confess to the ward in Jarndyce   in strict confidence   that I 
 sometimes find it difficult to keep up a genteel appearance . I 
 have feel the cold here . I have feel something sharp than cold . 
 it matter very little . pray excuse the introduction of such mean 
 topic . " 
 she partly draw aside the curtain of the long , low garret window 
 and call our attention to a number of bird - cage hang there , 
 some contain several bird . there be lark , linnet , and 
 goldfinche - I should think at least twenty . 
 " I begin to keep the little creature , " she say , " with an object 
 that the ward will readily comprehend . with the intention of 
 restore they to liberty . when my judgment should be give . ye- 
 es ! they die in prison , though . their life , poor silly thing , 
 be so short in comparison with Chancery proceeding that , one by 
 one , the whole collection have die over and over again . I doubt , 
 do you know , whether one of these , though they be all young , will 
 live to be free ! ve - ry mortifying , be it not ? " 
 although she sometimes ask a question , she never seem to expect 
 a reply , but ramble on as if she be in the habit of do so 
 when no one but herself be present . 
 " indeed , " she pursue , " I positively doubt sometimes , I do assure 
 you , whether while matter be still unsettled , and the sixth or 
 Great Seal still prevail , I may not one day be find lie stark 
 and senseless here , as I have find so many bird ! " 
 Richard , answer what he see in Ada 's compassionate eye , take 
 the opportunity of lay some money , softly and unobserve , on the 
 chimney - piece . we all draw near to the cage , feign to 
 examine the bird . 
 " I can not   allow they to sing much , " say the little old lady , " for 
  you will think this curious   I find my mind confuse by the idea 
 that they be sing while I be follow the argument in court . 
 and my mind require to be so very clear , you know ! another time , 
 I will tell you their name . not at present . on a day of such good 
 oman , they shall sing as much as they like . in honour of youth , " a 
 smile and curtsy , " hope , " a smile and curtsy , " and beauty , " a smile 
 and curtsy . " there ! we will let in the full light . " 
 the bird begin to stir and chirp . 
 " I can not admit the air freely , " say the little old lady - the room 
 be close , and would have be the well for it - " because the cat 
 you see downstair , call Lady Jane , be greedy for their life . 
 she crouch on the parapet outside for hour and hour . I have 
 discover , " whisper mysteriously , " that her natural cruelty be 
 sharpen by a jealous fear of their regain their liberty . in 
 consequence of the judgment I expect be shortly give . she be 
 sly and full of malice . I half believe , sometimes , that she be no 
 cat , but the wolf of the old saying . it be so very difficult to 
 keep she from the door . " 
 some neighbouring bell , remind the poor soul that it be half- 
 past nine , do more for we in the way of bring our visit to an 
 end than we could easily have do for ourselves . she hurriedly 
 take up her little bag of document , which she have lay upon the 
 table on come in , and ask if we be also go into court . on 
 our answer no , and that we would on no account detain she , she 
 open the door to attend we downstairs . 
 " with such an omen , it be even more necessary than usual that I 
 should be there before the Chancellor come in , " say she , " for he 
 might mention my case the first thing . I have a presentiment that 
 he will mention it the first thing this morning " 
 she stop to tell we in a whisper as we be go down that the 
 whole house be fill with strange lumber which her landlord have 
 buy piecemeal and have no wish to sell , in consequence of be a 
 little M. this be on the first floor . but she have make a 
 previous stoppage on the second floor and have silently point at a 
 dark door there . 
 " the only other lodger , " she now whisper in explanation , " a law- 
 writer . the child in the lane here say he have sell himself to 
 the devil . I do not   know what he can have do with the money . 
 hush ! " 
 she appear to mistrust that the lodger might hear she even there , 
 and repeat " Hush ! " go before we on tiptoe as though even the 
 sound of her footstep might reveal to he what she have say . 
 pass through the shop on our way out , as we have pass through 
 it on our way in , we find the old man store a quantity of 
 packet of waste - paper in a kind of well in the floor . he seem 
 to be work hard , with the perspiration stand on his forehead , 
 and have a piece of chalk by he , with which , as he put each 
 separate package or bundle down , he make a crooked mark on the 
 panelling of the wall . 
 Richard and Ada , and Miss Jellyby , and the little old lady have go 
 by he , and I be go when he touch I on the arm to stay I , 
 and chalk the letter J upon the wall - in a very curious manner , 
 begin with the end of the letter and shape it backward . it 
 be a capital letter , not a print one , but just such a letter as 
 any clerk in Messrs. Kenge and Carboy 's office would have make . 
 " can you read it ? " he ask I with a keen glance . 
 " surely , " say I. " it be very plain . " 
 " what be it ? " 
 " J. " 
 with another glance at I , and a glance at the door , he rub it 
 out and turn an " a " in its place   not a capital letter this 
 time , and say , " what be that ? " 
 I tell he . he then rub that out and turn the letter " r , " and 
 ask I the same question . he go on quickly until he have form 
 in the same curious manner , begin at the end and bottom of 
 the letter , the word Jarndyce , without once leave two letter on 
 the wall together . 
 " what do that spell ? " he ask I . 
 when I tell he , he laugh . in the same odd way , yet with the 
 same rapidity , he then produce singly , and rub out singly , the 
 letter form the word Bleak House . these , in some astonishment , 
 I also read ; and he laugh again . 
 " Hi ! " say the old man , lay aside the chalk . " I have a turn for 
 copying from memory , you see , miss , though I can neither read nor 
 write . " 
 he look so disagreeable and his cat look so wickedly at I , as 
 if I be a blood - relation of the bird upstairs , that I be quite 
 relieve by Richard 's appear at the door and say , " Miss 
 Summerson , I hope you be not bargaining for the sale of your hair . 
 do not   be tempt . three sack below be quite enough for Mr. Krook ! " 
 I lose no time in wish Mr. Krook good morning and join my 
 friend outside , where we part with the little old lady , who give 
 we her blessing with great ceremony and renew her assurance of 
 yesterday in reference to her intention of settle estate on Ada 
 and I . before we finally turn out of those lane , we look 
 back and see Mr. Krook stand at his shop - door , in his 
 spectacle , look after we , with his cat upon his shoulder , and 
 her tail stick up on one side of his hairy cap like a tall 
 feather . 
 " quite an adventure for a morning in London ! " say Richard with a 
 sigh . " ah , cousin , cousin , it be a weary word this Chancery ! " 
 " it be to I , and have be ever since I can remember , " return 
 Ada . " I be grieve that I should be the enemy - as I suppose I be 
  - of a great number of relation and other , and that they should be 
 my enemy - as I suppose they be - and that we should all be 
 ruin one another without know how or why and be in constant 
 doubt and discord all our life . it seem very strange , as there 
 must be right somewhere , that an honest judge in real earnest have 
 not be able to find out through all these year where it be . " 
 " ah , cousin ! " say Richard . " strange , indeed ! all this wasteful , 
 wanton chess - playing be very strange . to see that compose court 
 yesterday jog on so serenely and to think of the wretchedness 
 of the piece on the board give I the headache and the heartache 
 both together . my head ache with wonder how it happen , if 
 man be neither fool nor rascal ; and my heart ache to think 
 they could possibly be either . but at all event , Ada - I may call 
 you Ada ? " 
 " of course you may , cousin Richard . " 
 " at all event , Chancery will work none of its bad influence on 
 US . we have happily be bring together , thank to our good 
 kinsman , and it can not   divide we now ! " 
 " never , I hope , cousin Richard ! " say Ada gently . 
 Miss Jellyby give my arm a squeeze and I a very significant look . 
 I smile in return , and we make the rest of the way back very 
 pleasantly . 
 in half an hour after our arrival , Mrs. Jellyby appear ; and in 
 the course of an hour the various thing necessary for breakfast 
 straggle one by one into the dining - room . I do not doubt that 
 Mrs. Jellyby have go to bed and get up in the usual manner , but 
 she present no appearance of have change her dress . she be 
 greatly occupy during breakfast , for the morning 's post bring a 
 heavy correspondence relative to Borrioboola - Gha , which would 
 occasion she   she say   to pass a busy day . the child tumble 
 about , and notch memoranda of their accident in their leg , 
 which be perfect little calendar of distress ; and Peepy be lose 
 for an hour and a half , and bring home from newgate market by a 
 policeman . the equable manner in which Mrs. Jellyby sustain both 
 his absence and his restoration to the family circle surprise we 
 all . 
 she be by that time perseveringly dictate to Caddy , and Caddy 
 be fast relapse into the inky condition in which we have find 
 she . at one o'clock an open carriage arrive for we , and a cart 
 for our luggage . Mrs. Jellyby charge we with many remembrance to 
 her good friend Mr. Jarndyce ; Caddy leave her desk to see we depart , 
 kiss I in the passage , and stand bite her pen and sob on 
 the step ; Peepy , I be happy to say , be asleep and spar the pain 
 of separation   I be not without misgiving that he have go to 
 newgate market in search of I ; and all the other child get up 
 behind the barouche and fall off , and we see they , with great 
 concern , scatter over the surface of Thavies Inn as we roll out 
 of its precinct . 
 CHAPTER VI 
 quite at home 
 the day have brighten very much , and still brighten as we go 
 westward . we go our way through the sunshine and the fresh air , 
 wonder more and more at the extent of the street , the 
 brilliancy of the shop , the great traffic , and the crowd of 
 people whom the pleasanter weather seem to have bring out like 
 many - colour flower . by and by we begin to leave the wonderful 
 city and to proceed through suburb which , of themselves , would 
 have make a pretty large town in my eye ; and at last we get into a 
 real country road again , with windmill , rick - yard , milestone , 
 farmer ' waggon , scent of old hay , swing sign , and horse 
 trough : tree , field , and hedge - row . it be delightful to see 
 the green landscape before we and the immense metropolis behind ; 
 and when a waggon with a train of beautiful horse , furnish with 
 red trapping and clear - sound bell , come by we with its music , 
 I believe we could all three have sing to the bell , so cheerful 
 be the influence around . 
 " the whole road have be remind I of my namesake Whittington , " 
 say Richard , " and that waggon be the finish touch . Halloa ! 
 what be the matter ? " 
 we have stop , and the waggon have stop too . its music change 
 as the horse come to a stand , and subside to a gentle tinkling , 
 except when a horse toss his head or shake himself and sprinkle 
 off a little shower of bell - ringing . 
 " our postilion be look after the waggoner , " say Richard , " and 
 the waggoner be come back after we . good day , friend ! " the 
 waggoner be at our coach - door . " why , here be an extraordinary 
 thing ! " add Richard , look closely at the man . " he have get 
 your name , Ada , in his hat ! " 
 he have all our name in his hat . tuck within the band be three 
 small note - one address to Ada , one to Richard , one to I . 
 these the waggoner deliver to each of we respectively , read 
 the name aloud first . in answer to Richard 's inquiry from whom 
 they come , he briefly answer , " Master , sir , if you please " ; and 
 put on his hat again   which be like a soft bowl , crack his 
 whip , re - awaken his music , and go melodiously away . 
 " be that Mr. Jarndyce 's waggon ? " say Richard , call to our post- 
 boy . 
 " yes , sir , " he reply . " go to London . " 
 we open the note . each be a counterpart of the other and 
 contain these word in a solid , plain hand . 
 " I look forward , my dear , to our meeting easily and without 
 constraint on either side . I therefore have to propose that we 
 meet as old friend and take the past for grant . it will be a 
 relief to you possibly , and to I certainly , and so my love to you . 
 " John Jarndyce " 
 I have perhaps less reason to be surprised than either of my 
 companion , have never yet enjoy an opportunity of thank one 
 who have be my benefactor and sole earthly dependence through so 
 many year . I have not consider how I could thank he , my 
 gratitude lie too deep in my heart for that ; but I now begin to 
 consider how I could meet he without thank he , and feel it 
 would be very difficult indeed . 
 the note revive in Richard and Ada a general impression that they 
 both have , without quite know how they come by it , that their 
 cousin Jarndyce could never bear acknowledgment for any kindness 
 he perform and that soon than receive any he would resort to 
 the most singular expedient and evasion or would even run away . 
 Ada dimly remember to have hear her mother tell , when she be a 
 very little child , that he have once do she an act of uncommon 
 generosity and that on she go to his house to thank he , he 
 happen to see she through a window come to the door , and 
 immediately escape by the back gate , and be not hear of for 
 three month . this discourse lead to a great deal more on the same 
 theme , and indeed it last we all day , and we talk of scarcely 
 anything else . if we do by any chance diverge into another 
 subject , we soon return to this , and wonder what the house 
 would be like , and when we should get there , and whether we should 
 see Mr. Jarndyce as soon as we arrive or after a delay , and what 
 he would say to we , and what we should say to he . all of which we 
 wonder about , over and over again . 
 the road be very heavy for the horse , but the pathway be 
 generally good , so we alight and walk up all the hill , and 
 like it so well that we prolong our walk on the level ground 
 when we get to the top . at Barnet there be other horse wait 
 for we , but as they have only just be feed , we have to wait for they 
 too , and get a long fresh walk over a common and an old battle- 
 field before the carriage come up . these delay so protract the 
 journey that the short day be spend and the long night have close 
 in before we come to St. Albans , near to which town Bleak House 
 be , we know . 
 by that time we be so anxious and nervous that even Richard 
 confess , as we rattle over the stone of the old street , to 
 feel an irrational desire to drive back again . as to Ada and 
 I , whom he have wrap up with great care , the night be sharp 
 and frosty , we tremble from head to foot . when we turn out of 
 the town , round a corner , and Richard tell we that the post - boy , 
 who have for a long time sympathize with our heightened 
 expectation , be look back and nodding , we both stand up in the 
 carriage   Richard hold Ada lest she should be jolt down   and 
 gaze round upon the open country and the starlight night for our 
 destination . there be a light sparkle on the top of a hill 
 before we , and the driver , point to it with his whip and crying , 
 " that be Bleak House ! " put his horse into a canter and take we 
 forward at such a rate , uphill though it be , that the wheel send 
 the road drift fly about our head like spray from a water - mill . 
 presently we lose the light , presently see it , presently lose it , 
 presently see it , and turn into an avenue of tree and canter 
 up towards where it be beam brightly . it be in a window of 
 what seem to be an old - fashioned house with three peak in the 
 roof in front and a circular sweep lead to the porch . a bell 
 be ring as we draw up , and amidst the sound of its deep voice in 
 the still air , and the distant barking of some dog , and a gush of 
 light from the open door , and the smoking and steaming of the 
 heated horse , and the quickened beating of our own heart , we 
 alight in no inconsiderable confusion . 
 " Ada , my love , Esther , my dear , you be welcome . I rejoice to see 
 you ! Rick , if I have a hand to spare at present , I would give it 
 you ! " 
 the gentleman who say these word in a clear , bright , hospitable 
 voice have one of his arm round Ada 's waist and the other round 
 mine , and kiss we both in a fatherly way , and bear we across the 
 hall into a ruddy little room , all in a glow with a blaze fire . 
 here he kiss we again , and open his arm , make we sit down 
 side by side on a sofa ready draw out near the hearth . I feel 
 that if we have be at all demonstrative , he would have run away in 
 a moment . 
 " now , Rick ! " say he . " I have a hand at liberty . a word in 
 earnest be as good as a speech . I be heartily glad to see you . 
 you be at home . warm yourself ! " 
 Richard shake he by both hand with an intuitive mixture of 
 respect and frankness , and only say   though with an earnestness 
 that rather alarm I , I be so afraid of Mr. Jarndyce 's suddenly 
 disappear , " you be very kind , sir ! we be very much oblige 
 to you ! " lay aside his hat and coat and come up to the fire . 
 " and how do you like the ride ? and how do you like Mrs. Jellyby , 
 my dear ? " say Mr. Jarndyce to Ada . 
 while Ada be speak to he in reply , I glance   I need not say 
 with how much interest   at his face . it be a handsome , lively , 
 quick face , full of change and motion ; and his hair be a silvered 
 iron - grey . I take he to be near sixty than fifty , but he be 
 upright , hearty , and robust . from the moment of his first speaking 
 to we his voice have connect itself with an association in my mind 
 that I could not define ; but now , all at once , a something sudden 
 in his manner and a pleasant expression in his eye recall the 
 gentleman in the stagecoach six year ago on the memorable day of 
 my journey to read . I be certain it be he . I never be so 
 frightened in my life as when I make the discovery , for he catch 
 my glance , and appear to read my thought , give such a look at 
 the door that I think we have lose he . 
 however , I be happy to say he remain where he be , and ask I 
 what I think of Mrs. Jellyby . 
 " she exert herself very much for Africa , sir , " I say . 
 " nobly ! " return Mr. Jarndyce . " but you answer like Ada . " whom I 
 have not hear . " you all think something else , I see . " 
 " we rather think , " say I , glance at Richard and Ada , who 
 entreat I with their eye to speak , " that perhaps she be a 
 little unmindful of her home . " 
 " floor ! " cry Mr. Jarndyce . 
 I be rather alarmed again . 
 " well ! I want to know your real thought , my dear . I may have 
 send you there on purpose . " 
 " we think that , perhaps , " say I , hesitating , " it be right to 
 begin with the obligation of home , sir ; and that , perhaps , while 
 those be overlook and neglect , no other duty can possibly be 
 substitute for they . " 
 " the little Jellybys , " say Richard , come to my relief , " be 
 really - I can not   help express myself strongly , sir - in a devil of 
 a state . " 
 " she mean well , " say Mr. Jarndyce hastily . " the wind be in the 
 east . " 
 " it be in the north , sir , as we come down , " observe Richard . 
 " my dear Rick , " say Mr. Jarndyce , poke the fire , " I will take an 
 oath it be either in the east or go to be . I be always conscious 
 of an uncomfortable sensation now and then when the wind be blow 
 in the east . " 
 " Rheumatism , sir ? " say Richard . 
 " I dare say it be , Rick . I believe it be . and so the little Jell 
  - I have my doubt about them - be in a - oh , Lord , yes , it be 
 easterly ! " say Mr. Jarndyce . 
 he have take two or three undecided turn up and down while 
 utter these broken sentence , retain the poker in one hand 
 and rub his hair with the other , with a good - natured vexation 
 at once so whimsical and so lovable that I be sure we be more 
 delighted with he than we could possibly have express in any 
 word . he give an arm to Ada and an arm to I , and bid Richard 
 bring a candle , be lead the way out when he suddenly turn we 
 all back again . 
 " those little Jellybys . could not   you - do not   you - now , if it have 
 rain sugar - plum , or three - cornered raspberry tart , or anything 
 of that sort ! " say Mr. Jarndyce . 
 " oh , cousin - " Ada hastily begin . 
 " good , my pretty pet . I like cousin . Cousin John , perhaps , be 
 well . " 
 " then , cousin John - " Ada laughingly begin again . 
 " ha , ha ! very good indeed ! " say Mr. Jarndyce with great 
 enjoyment . " sound uncommonly natural . yes , my dear ? " 
 " it do well than that . it rain Esther . " 
 " aye ? " say Mr. Jarndyce . " what do Esther do ? " 
 " why , cousin John , " say Ada , clasp her hand upon his arm and 
 shake her head at I across he - for I want she to be quiet - 
 " Esther be their friend directly . Esther nurse they , coax they 
 to sleep , wash and dress they , tell they story , keep they 
 quiet , buy they keepsake " - my dear girl ! I have only go out 
 with Peepy after he be find and give he a little , tiny horse ! - 
 " and , cousin John , she soften poor Caroline , the eld one , so 
 much and be so thoughtful for I and so amiable ! no , no , I will not 
 be contradict , Esther dear ! you know , you know , it be true ! " 
 the warm - hearted darling lean across her cousin John and kiss 
 I , and then look up in his face , boldly say , " at all event , 
 cousin John , I will thank you for the companion you have give I . " 
 I feel as if she challenge he to run away . but he do not . 
 " where do you say the wind be , Rick ? " ask Mr. Jarndyce . 
 " in the north as we come down , sir . " 
 " you be right . there be no east in it . a mistake of mine . come , 
 girl , come and see your home ! " 
 it be one of those delightfully irregular house where you go up 
 and down step out of one room into another , and where you come 
 upon more room when you think you have see all there be , and 
 where there be a bountiful provision of little hall and passage , 
 and where you find still old cottage - room in unexpected place 
 with lattice window and green growth press through they . mine , 
 which we enter first , be of this kind , with an up - and - down roof 
 that have more corner in it than I ever count afterwards and a 
 chimney   there be a wood fire on the hearth   pave all around with 
 pure white tile , in every one of which a bright miniature of the 
 fire be blaze . out of this room , you go down two step into a 
 charming little sitting - room look down upon a flower - garden , 
 which room be henceforth to belong to Ada and I . out of this you 
 go up three step into Ada 's bedroom , which have a fine broad 
 window command a beautiful view   we see a great expanse of 
 darkness lie underneath the star , to which there be a hollow 
 window - seat , in which , with a spring - lock , three dear Adas might 
 have be lose at once . out of this room you pass into a little 
 gallery , with which the other good room   only two   communicate , 
 and so , by a little staircase of shallow step with a number of 
 corner stair in it , consider its length , down into the hall . 
 but if instead of go out at Ada 's door you come back into my 
 room , and go out at the door by which you have enter it , and 
 turn up a few crooked step that branch off in an unexpected 
 manner from the stair , you lose yourself in passage , with mangle 
 in they , and three - cornered table , and a native Hindu chair , which 
 be also a sofa , a box , and a bedstead , and look in every form 
 something between a bamboo skeleton and a great bird - cage , and have 
 be bring from India nobody know by whom or when . from these 
 you come on Richard 's room , which be part library , part sitting- 
 room , part bedroom , and seem indeed a comfortable compound of 
 many room . out of that you go straight , with a little interval 
 of passage , to the plain room where Mr. Jarndyce sleep , all the 
 year round , with his window open , his bedstead without any 
 furniture stand in the middle of the floor for more air , and his 
 cold bath gap for he in a small room adjoining . out of that 
 you come into another passage , where there be back - stair and 
 where you could hear the horse be rub down outside the 
 stable and be tell to " hold up " and " get over , " as they slip 
 about very much on the uneven stone . or you might , if you come 
 out at another door   every room have at least two door , go 
 straight down to the hall again by half - a - dozen step and a low 
 archway , wonder how you get back there or have ever get out of 
 it . 
 the furniture , old - fashioned rather than old , like the house , be 
 as pleasantly irregular . Ada 's sleep - room be all flower - in 
 chintz and paper , in velvet , in needlework , in the brocade of two 
 stiff courtly chair which stand , each attend by a little page of 
 a stool for great state , on either side of the fire - place . our 
 sitting - room be green and have frame and glaze upon the wall 
 number of surprising and surprised bird , star out of picture 
 at a real trout in a case , as brown and shin as if it have be 
 serve with gravy ; at the death of Captain Cook ; and at the whole 
 process of prepare tea in China , as depict by chinese artist . 
 in my room there be oval engraving of the month - lady 
 haymake in short waist and large hat tie under the chin , for 
 June ; smooth - legged nobleman point with cock - hat to village 
 steeple , for October . half - length portrait in crayon abound 
 all through the house , but be so dispersed that I find the 
 brother of a youthful officer of mine in the china - closet and the 
 grey old age of my pretty young bride , with a flower in her bodice , 
 in the breakfast - room . as substitute , I have four angel , of Queen 
 Anne 's reign , take a complacent gentleman to heaven , in festoon , 
 with some difficulty ; and a composition in needlework represent 
 fruit , a kettle , and an alphabet . all the movable , from the 
 wardrobe to the chair and table , hanging , glass , even to the 
 pincushion and scent - bottle on the dressing - table , display the 
 same quaint variety . they agree in nothing but their perfect 
 neatness , their display of the white linen , and their storing - up , 
 wheresoever the existence of a drawer , small or large , render it 
 possible , of quantity of rose - leaf and sweet lavender . such , 
 with its illuminated window , soften here and there by shadow of 
 curtain , shin out upon the starlight night ; with its light , and 
 warmth , and comfort ; with its hospitable jingle , at a distance , of 
 preparation for dinner ; with the face of its generous master 
 brighten everything we see ; and just wind enough without to 
 sound a low accompaniment to everything we hear , be our first 
 impression of Bleak House . 
 " I be glad you like it , " say Mr. Jarndyce when he have bring we 
 round again to Ada 's sitting - room . " it make no pretension , but 
 it be a comfortable little place , I hope , and will be more so with 
 such bright young look in it . you have barely half an hour before 
 dinner . there be no one here but the fine creature upon earth - a 
 child . " 
 " More child , Esther ! " say Ada . 
 " I do not   mean literally a child , " pursue Mr. Jarndyce ; " not a 
 child in year . he be grow up - he be at least as old as I be - but 
 in simplicity , and freshness , and enthusiasm , and a fine guileless 
 inaptitude for all worldly affair , he be a perfect child . " 
 we feel that he must be very interesting . 
 " he know Mrs. Jellyby , " say Mr. Jarndyce . " he be a musical man , 
 an amateur , but might have be a professional . he be an artist 
 too , an amateur , but might have be a professional . he be a man 
 of attainment and of captivate manner . he have be unfortunate 
 in his affair , and unfortunate in his pursuit , and unfortunate in 
 his family ; but he do not   care - he be a child ! " 
 " do you imply that he have child of his own , sir ? " inquire 
 Richard . 
 " yes , Rick ! half - a - dozen . More ! nearer a dozen , I should think . 
 but he have never look after they . how could he ? he want 
 somebody to look after HIM . he be a child , you know ! " say Mr. 
 Jarndyce . 
 " and have the child look after themselves at all , sir ? " 
 inquire Richard . 
 " why , just as you may suppose , " say Mr. Jarndyce , his countenance 
 suddenly fall . " it be say that the child of the very poor 
 be not bring up , but drag up . Harold Skimpole 's child 
 have tumble up somehow or other . the wind 's get round again , 
 I be afraid . I feel it rather ! " 
 Richard observe that the situation be expose on a sharp night . 
 " it be expose , " say Mr. Jarndyce . " no doubt that be the cause . 
 Bleak House have an expose sound . but you be come my way . come 
 along ! " 
 our luggage have arrive and be all at hand , I be dress in 
 a few minute and engage in put my worldly good away when a 
 maid   not the one in attendance upon Ada , but another , whom I have 
 not see   bring a basket into my room with two bunch of key in 
 it , all label . 
 " for you , miss , if you please , " say she . 
 " for I ? " say I. 
 " the housekeeping key , miss . " 
 I show my surprise , for she add with some little surprise on 
 her own part , " I be tell to bring they as soon as you be alone , 
 miss . Miss Summerson , if I do not   deceive myself ? " 
 " yes , " say I. " that be my name . " 
 " the large bunch be the housekeeping , and the little bunch be the 
 cellar , miss . any time you be pleased to appoint to - morrow 
 morning , I be to show you the press and thing they belong to . " 
 I say I would be ready at half - past six , and after she be go , 
 stand look at the basket , quite lose in the magnitude of my 
 trust . Ada find I thus and have such a delightful confidence in 
 I when I show she the key and tell she about they that it would 
 have be insensibility and ingratitude not to feel encouraged . I 
 know , to be sure , that it be the dear girl 's kindness , but I like 
 to be so pleasantly cheat . 
 when we go downstairs , we be present to Mr. Skimpole , who be 
 stand before the fire tell Richard how fond he use to be , in 
 his school - time , of football . he be a little bright creature with 
 a rather large head , but a delicate face and a sweet voice , and 
 there be a perfect charm in he . all he say be so free from 
 effort and spontaneous and be say with such a captivate gaiety 
 that it be fascinating to hear he talk . be of a more slender 
 figure than Mr. Jarndyce and have a rich complexion , with 
 browner hair , he look young . indeed , he have more the 
 appearance in all respect of a damage young man than a well- 
 preserve elderly one . there be an easy negligence in his manner 
 and even in his dress   his hair carelessly dispose , and his 
 neckkerchief loose and flow , as I have see artist paint their 
 own portrait   which I could not separate from the idea of a 
 romantic youth who have undergo some unique process of 
 depreciation . it strike I as be not at all like the manner or 
 appearance of a man who have advance in life by the usual road of 
 year , care , and experience . 
 I gather from the conversation that Mr. Skimpole have be 
 educate for the medical profession and have once live , in his 
 professional capacity , in the household of a german prince . he 
 tell we , however , that as he have always be a mere child in point 
 of weight and measure and have never know anything about they 
  except that they disgust he , he have never be able to 
 prescribe with the requisite accuracy of detail . in fact , he say , 
 he have no head for detail . and he tell we , with great humour , that 
 when he be want to bleed the prince or physic any of his people , 
 he be generally find lie on his back in bed , read the 
 newspaper or make fancy - sketch in pencil , and could not   come . 
 the prince , at last , object to this , " in which , " say Mr. 
 Skimpole , in the frank manner , " he be perfectly right , " the 
 engagement terminate , and Mr. Skimpole have   as he add with 
 delightful gaiety   " nothing to live upon but love , fall in love , 
 and marry , and surround himself with rosy cheek . " his good 
 friend Jarndyce and some other of his good friend then help he , 
 in quick or slow succession , to several opening in life , but 
 to no purpose , for he must confess to two of the old infirmity 
 in the world : one be that he have no idea of time , the other that 
 he have no idea of money . in consequence of which he never keep an 
 appointment , never could transact any business , and never know the 
 value of anything ! well ! so he have get on in life , and here he 
 be ! he be very fond of read the paper , very fond of make 
 fancy - sketch with a pencil , very fond of nature , very fond of 
 art . all he ask of society be to let he live . that be not 
 much . his want be few . give he the paper , conversation , 
 music , mutton , coffee , landscape , fruit in the season , a few sheet 
 of Bristol - board , and a little claret , and he ask no more . he 
 be a mere child in the world , but he do not   cry for the moon . he 
 say to the world , " go your several way in peace ! wear red coat , 
 blue coat , lawn sleeve ; put pen behind your ear , wear apron ; 
 go after glory , holiness , commerce , trade , any object you prefer ; 
 only - let Harold Skimpole live ! " 
 all this and a great deal more he tell we , not only with the utmost 
 brilliancy and enjoyment , but with a certain vivacious candour - 
 speaking of himself as if he be not at all his own affair , as if 
 Skimpole be a third person , as if he know that Skimpole have his 
 singularity but still have his claim too , which be the general 
 business of the community and must not be slight . he be quite 
 enchanting . if I feel at all confuse at that early time in 
 endeavour to reconcile anything he say with anything I have 
 think about the duty and accountability of life   which I be 
 far from sure of , I be confuse by not exactly understand why 
 he be free of they . that he be free of they , I scarcely doubt ; 
 he be so very clear about it himself . 
 " I covet nothing , " say Mr. Skimpole in the same light way . 
 " possession be nothing to I . here be my friend Jarndyce 's 
 excellent house . I feel obliged to he for possess it . I can 
 sketch it and alter it . I can set it to music . when I be here , I 
 have sufficient possession of it and have neither trouble , cost , 
 nor responsibility . my steward 's name , in short , be Jarndyce , and 
 he can not   cheat I . we have be mention Mrs. Jellyby . there be 
 a bright - eyed woman , of a strong will and immense power of business 
 detail , who throw herself into object with surprising ardour ! I 
 do not   regret that I have not a strong will and an immense power of 
 business detail to throw myself into object with surprising 
 ardour . I can admire she without envy . I can sympathize with the 
 object . I can dream of they . I can lie down on the grass - in 
 fine weather - and float along an african river , embrace all the 
 native I meet , as sensible of the deep silence and sketch the 
 dense overhang tropical growth as accurately as if I be there . 
 I do not   know that it be of any direct use my doing so , but it be all 
 I can do , and I do it thoroughly . then , for heaven 's sake , have 
 Harold Skimpole , a confide child , petition you , the world , an 
 agglomeration of practical people of business habit , to let he 
 live and admire the human family , do it somehow or other , like good 
 soul , and suffer he to ride his rock - horse ! " 
 it be plain enough that Mr. Jarndyce have not be neglectful of 
 the adjuration . Mr. Skimpole 's general position there would have 
 render it so without the addition of what he presently say . 
 " it be only you , the generous creature , whom I envy , " say Mr. 
 Skimpole , address we , his new friend , in an impersonal manner . 
 " I envy you your power of do what you do . it be what I should 
 revel in myself . I do not   feel any vulgar gratitude to you . I 
 almost feel as if you ought to be grateful to I for give you the 
 opportunity of enjoy the luxury of generosity . I know you like 
 it . for anything I can tell , I may have come into the world 
 expressly for the purpose of increase your stock of happiness . I 
 may have be bear to be a benefactor to you by sometimes give 
 you an opportunity of assist I in my little perplexity . why 
 should I regret my incapacity for detail and worldly affair when 
 it lead to such pleasant consequence ? I do not   regret it 
 therefore . " 
 of all his playful speech   playful , yet always fully mean what 
 they express   none seem to be more to the taste of Mr. Jarndyce 
 than this . I have often new temptation , afterwards , to wonder 
 whether it be really singular , or only singular to I , that he , 
 who be probably the most grateful of mankind upon the least 
 occasion , should so desire to escape the gratitude of other . 
 we be all enchant . I feel it a merit tribute to the engage 
 quality of Ada and Richard that Mr. Skimpole , see they for the 
 first time , should he so unreserved and should lay himself out to 
 be so exquisitely agreeable . they   and especially Richard   be 
 naturally please , for similar reason , and consider it no common 
 privilege to be so freely confide in by such an attractive man . 
 the more we listen , the more gaily Mr. Skimpole talk . and what 
 with his fine hilarious manner and his engage candour and his 
 genial way of lightly toss his own weakness about , as if he 
 have say , " I be a child , you know ! you be design people 
 compare with I "   he really make I consider myself in that light 
 " but I be gay and innocent ; forget your worldly art and play with 
 I ! " the effect be absolutely dazzling . 
 he be so full of feeling too and have such a delicate sentiment for 
 what be beautiful or tender that he could have win a heart by that 
 alone . in the evening , when I be prepare to make tea and Ada 
 be touch the piano in the adjoining room and softly hum a 
 tune to her cousin Richard , which they have happen to mention , he 
 come and sit down on the sofa near I and so speak of Ada that I 
 almost love he . 
 " she be like the morning , " he say . " with that golden hair , those 
 blue eye , and that fresh bloom on her cheek , she be like the 
 summer morning . the bird here will mistake she for it . we will 
 not call such a lovely young creature as that , who be a joy to all 
 mankind , an orphan . she be the child of the universe . " 
 Mr. Jarndyce , I find , be stand near we with his hand behind 
 he and an attentive smile upon his face . 
 " the universe , " he observe , " make rather an indifferent parent , I 
 be afraid . " 
 " oh ! I do not   know ! " cry Mr. Skimpole buoyantly . 
 " I think I do know , " say Mr. Jarndyce . 
 " well ! " cry Mr. Skimpole . " you know the world   which in your 
 sense be the universe , and I know nothing of it , so you shall have 
 your way . but if I have mine , " glance at the cousin , " there 
 should be no bramble of sordid reality in such a path as that . 
 it should be strew with rose ; it should lie through bower , where 
 there be no spring , autumn , nor winter , but perpetual summer . Age 
 or change should never wither it . the base word money should never 
 be breathe near it ! " 
 Mr. Jarndyce pat he on the head with a smile , as if he have be 
 really a child , and pass a step or two on , and stop a 
 moment , glance at the young cousin . his look be thoughtful , but 
 have a benignant expression in it which I often   how often !   see 
 again , which have long be engraven on my heart . the room in which 
 they be , communicate with that in which he stand , be only 
 light by the fire . Ada sit at the piano ; Richard stand beside 
 she , bend down . upon the wall , their shadow blend together , 
 surround by strange form , not without a ghostly motion catch 
 from the unsteady fire , though reflect from motionless object . 
 Ada touch the note so softly and sing so low that the wind , 
 sigh away to the distant hill , be as audible as the music . 
 the mystery of the future and the little clue afford to it by the 
 voice of the present seem express in the whole picture . 
 but it be not to recall this fancy , well as I remember it , that I 
 recall the scene . first , I be not quite unconscious of the 
 contrast in respect of meaning and intention between the silent 
 look direct that way and the flow of word that have precede it . 
 secondly , though Mr. Jarndyce 's glance as he withdraw it rest for 
 but a moment on I , I feel as if in that moment he confide to I - 
 and know that he confide to I and that I receive the confidence 
  - his hope that Ada and Richard might one day enter on a dearer 
 relationship . 
 Mr. Skimpole could play on the piano and the violoncello , and he 
 be a composer - have compose half an opera once , but get tired of 
 it - and play what he compose with taste . after tea we have quite 
 a little concert , in which Richard - who be enthral by Ada 's 
 singing and tell I that she seem to know all the song that ever 
 be write - and Mr. Jarndyce , and I be the audience . after a 
 little while I miss first Mr. Skimpole and afterwards Richard , 
 and while I be think how could Richard stay away so long and 
 lose so much , the maid who have give I the key look in at the 
 door , say , " if you please , miss , could you spare a minute ? " 
 when I be shut out with she in the hall , she say , hold up her 
 hand , " oh , if you please , miss , Mr. Carstone say would you come 
 upstairs to Mr. Skimpole 's room . he have be take , miss ! " 
 " Took ? " say I. 
 " Took , miss . sudden , " say the maid . 
 I be apprehensive that his illness might be of a dangerous kind , 
 but of course I beg she to be quiet and not disturb any one and 
 collect myself , as I follow she quickly upstairs , sufficiently 
 to consider what be the good remedy to be apply if it should 
 prove to be a fit . she throw open a door and I go into a 
 chamber , where , to my unspeakable surprise , instead of find Mr. 
 Skimpole stretch upon the bed or prostrate on the floor , I find 
 he stand before the fire smile at Richard , while Richard , 
 with a face of great embarrassment , look at a person on the sofa , 
 in a white great - coat , with smooth hair upon his head and not much 
 of it , which he be wipe smooth and make less of with a 
 pocket - handkerchief . 
 " Miss Summerson , " say Richard hurriedly , " I be glad you be come . 
 you will be able to advise we . our friend Mr. Skimpole - do not   be 
 alarm ! - be arrest for debt . " 
 " and really , my dear Miss Summerson , " say Mr. Skimpole with his 
 agreeable candour , " I never be in a situation in which that 
 excellent sense and quiet habit of method and usefulness , which 
 anybody must observe in you who have the happiness of be a 
 quarter of an hour in your society , be more need . " 
 the person on the sofa , who appear to have a cold in his head , 
 give such a very loud snort that he startle I . 
 " be you arrest for much , sir ? " I inquire of Mr. Skimpole . 
 " my dear Miss Summerson , " say he , shake his head pleasantly , " I 
 do not   know . some pound , odd shilling , and halfpence , I think , 
 be mention . " 
 " it be twenty - four pound , sixteen , and sevenpence ha'penny , " 
 observe the stranger . " that be wot it be . " 
 " and it sound - somehow it sound , " say Mr. Skimpole , " like a 
 small sum ? " 
 the strange man say nothing but make another snort . it be such a 
 powerful one that it seem quite to lift he out of his seat . 
 " Mr. Skimpole , " say Richard to I , " have a delicacy in apply to 
 my cousin Jarndyce because he have lately - I think , sir , I 
 understand you that you have lately - " 
 " oh , yes ! " return Mr. Skimpole , smile . " though I forget how 
 much it be and when it be . Jarndyce would readily do it again , 
 but I have the epicure - like feeling that I would prefer a novelty 
 in help , that I would rather , " and he look at Richard and I , 
 " develop generosity in a new soil and in a new form of flower . " 
 " what do you think will be good , Miss Summerson ? " say Richard , 
 aside . 
 I venture to inquire , generally , before reply , what would 
 happen if the money be not produce . 
 " jail , " say the strange man , coolly put his handkerchief into 
 his hat , which be on the floor at his foot . " or coavinse . " 
 " may I ask , sir , what be - " 
 " coavinse ? " say the strange man . " a ' ouse . " 
 Richard and I look at one another again . it be a most singular 
 thing that the arrest be our embarrassment and not Mr. Skimpole 's . 
 he observe we with a genial interest , but there seem , if I may 
 venture on such a contradiction , nothing selfish in it . he have 
 entirely wash his hand of the difficulty , and it have become 
 our . 
 " I think , " he suggest , as if good - naturedly to help we out , 
 " that be party in a Chancery suit concern   as people say   a 
 large amount of property , Mr. Richard or his beautiful cousin , or 
 both , could sign something , or make over something , or give some 
 sort of undertaking , or pledge , or bond ? I do not   know what the 
 business name of it may be , but I suppose there be some instrument 
 within their power that would settle this ? " 
 " not a bit on it , " say the strange man . 
 " really ? " return Mr. Skimpole . " that seem odd , now , to one who 
 be no judge of these thing ! " 
 " odd or even , " say the stranger gruffly , " I tell you , not a bit on 
 it ! " 
 " keep your temper , my good fellow , keep your temper ! " Mr. Skimpole 
 gently reason with he as he make a little drawing of his head on 
 the fly - leaf of a book . " do not   be ruffle by your occupation . we 
 can separate you from your office ; we can separate the individual 
 from the pursuit . we be not so prejudiced as to suppose that in 
 private life you be otherwise than a very estimable man , with a 
 great deal of poetry in your nature , of which you may not be 
 conscious . " 
 the stranger only answer with another violent snort , whether in 
 acceptance of the poetry - tribute or in disdainful rejection of it , 
 he do not express to I . 
 " now , my dear Miss Summerson , and my dear Mr. Richard , " say Mr. 
 Skimpole gaily , innocently , and confidingly as he look at his 
 drawing with his head on one side , " here you see I utterly 
 incapable of help myself , and entirely in your hand ! I only 
 ask to be free . the butterfly be free . mankind will surely not 
 deny to Harold Skimpole what it concede to the butterfly ! " 
 " my dear Miss Summerson , " say Richard in a whisper , " I have ten 
 pound that I receive from Mr. Kenge . I must try what that will 
 do . " 
 I possess fifteen pound , odd shilling , which I have save from 
 my quarterly allowance during several year . I have always think 
 that some accident might happen which would throw I suddenly , 
 without any relation or any property , on the world and have always 
 try to keep some little money by I that I might not be quite 
 penniless . I tell Richard of my have this little store and 
 have no present need of it , and I ask he delicately to inform 
 Mr. Skimpole , while I should be go to fetch it , that we would 
 have the pleasure of pay his debt . 
 when I come back , Mr. Skimpole kiss my hand and seem quite 
 touch . not on his own account   I be again aware of that 
 perplexing and extraordinary contradiction , but on ours , as if 
 personal consideration be impossible with he and the 
 contemplation of our happiness alone affect he . Richard , 
 beg I , for the great grace of the transaction , as he say , 
 to settle with Coavinses   as Mr. Skimpole now jocularly call 
 he , I count out the money and receive the necessary 
 acknowledgment . this , too , delight Mr. Skimpole . 
 his compliment be so delicately administer that I blush less 
 than I might have do and settle with the stranger in the white 
 coat without make any mistake . he put the money in his pocket 
 and shortly say , " well , then , I will wish you a good evening , miss . 
 " my friend , " say Mr. Skimpole , stand with his back to the fire 
 after give up the sketch when it be half finish , " I should 
 like to ask you something , without offence . " 
 I think the reply be , " cut away , then ! " 
 " do you know this morning , now , that you be come out on this 
 errand ? " say Mr. Skimpole . 
 " know'd it yes'day aft'noon at tea - time , " say coavinse . 
 " it do not   affect your appetite ? do not   make you at all uneasy ? " 
 " not a bit , " say coavinse . " I know'd if you wos miss to - day , 
 you would not   be miss to - morrow . a day make no such odd . " 
 " but when you come down here , " proceed Mr. Skimpole , " it be a 
 fine day . the sun be shin , the wind be blow , the light 
 and shadow be pass across the field , the bird be 
 sing . " 
 " nobody say they warn't , in MY hearing , " return coavinse . 
 " no , " observe Mr. Skimpole . " but what do you think upon the 
 road ? " 
 " wot do you mean ? " growl Coavinses with an appearance of strong 
 resentment . " think ! I have   get enough to do , and little enough to 
 get for it without think . think ! "   with profound contempt . 
 " then you do not   think , at all event , " proceed Mr. Skimpole , " to 
 this effect : ' Harold Skimpole love to see the sun shine , love to 
 hear the wind blow , love to watch the change light and shadow , 
 love to hear the bird , those chorister in Nature 's great 
 cathedral . and do it seem to I that I be about to deprive 
 Harold Skimpole of his share in such possession , which be his 
 only birthright ! ' you think nothing to that effect ? " 
 " I - certainly - do - not , " say Coavinses , whose doggedness in 
 utterly renounce the idea be of that intense kind that he could 
 only give adequate expression to it by put a long interval 
 between each word , and accompany the last with a jerk that might 
 have dislocate his neck . 
 " very odd and very curious , the mental process be , in you man of 
 business ! " say Mr. Skimpole thoughtfully . " thank you , my friend . 
 good night . " 
 as our absence have be long enough already to seem strange 
 downstair , I return at once and find Ada sit at work by the 
 fireside talk to her cousin John . Mr. Skimpole presently 
 appear , and Richard shortly after he . I be sufficiently 
 engage during the remainder of the evening in take my first 
 lesson in backgammon from Mr. Jarndyce , who be very fond of the 
 game and from whom I wish of course to learn it as quickly as I 
 could in order that I might be of the very small use of be able 
 to play when he have no well adversary . but I think , 
 occasionally , when Mr. Skimpole play some fragment of his own 
 composition or when , both at the piano and the violoncello , and at 
 our table , he preserve with an absence of all effort his 
 delightful spirit and his easy flow of conversation , that Richard 
 and I seem to retain the transfer impression of have be 
 arrest since dinner and that it be very curious altogether . 
 it be late before we separate , for when Ada be go at eleven 
 o'clock , Mr. Skimpole go to the piano and rattle hilariously 
 that the good of all way to lengthen our day be to steal a few 
 hour from night , my dear ! it be past twelve before he take his 
 candle and his radiant face out of the room , and I think he might 
 have keep we there , if he have see fit , until daybreak . Ada and 
 Richard be linger for a few moment by the fire , wonder 
 whether Mrs. Jellyby have yet finish her dictation for the day , 
 when Mr. Jarndyce , who have be out of the room , return . 
 " oh , dear I , what be this , what be this ! " he say , rub his head 
 and walk about with his good - humour vexation . " what be this 
 they tell I ? Rick , my boy , Esther , my dear , what have you be 
 do ? why do you do it ? how could you do it ? how much apiece 
 be it ? the wind 's round again . I feel it all over I ! " 
 we neither of we quite know what to answer . 
 " Come , Rick , come ! I must settle this before I sleep . how much 
 be you out of pocket ? you two make the money up , you know ! why 
 do you ? how could you ? oh , Lord , yes , it be due east - must be ! " 
 " really , sir , " say Richard , " I do not   think it would be honourable 
 in I to tell you . Mr. Skimpole rely upon we - " 
 " Lord bless you , my dear boy ! he rely upon everybody ! " say Mr. 
 Jarndyce , give his head a great rub and stop short . 
 " indeed , sir ? " 
 " everybody ! and he will be in the same scrape again next week ! " say 
 Mr. Jarndyce , walk again at a great pace , with a candle in his 
 hand that have go out . " he be always in the same scrape . he be 
 bear in the same scrape . I verily believe that the announcement in 
 the newspaper when his mother be confine be ' on Tuesday last , 
 at her residence in Botheration Buildings , Mrs. Skimpole of a son 
 in difficulty . ' " 
 Richard laugh heartily but add , " still , sir , I do not   want to 
 shake his confidence or to break his confidence , and if I submit to 
 your well knowledge again , that I ought to keep his secret , I 
 hope you will consider before you press I any more . of course , if 
 you do press I , sir , I shall know I be wrong and will tell you . " 
 " well ! " cry Mr. Jarndyce , stop again , and make several 
 absent endeavour to put his candlestick in his pocket . " I - here ! 
 take it away , my dear . I do not   know what I be about with it ; it be 
 all the wind - invariably have that effect - I will not   press you , Rick ; 
 you may be right . but really - to get hold of you and Esther - and 
 to squeeze you like a couple of tender young Saint Michael 's 
 orange ! it will blow a gale in the course of the night ! " 
 he be now alternately put his hand into his pocket as if he 
 be go to keep they there a long time , and take they out 
 again and vehemently rub they all over his head . 
 I venture to take this opportunity of hint that Mr. Skimpole , 
 be in all such matter quite a child - 
 " eh , my dear ? " say Mr. Jarndyce , catch at the word . 
 " be quite a child , sir , " say I , " and so different from other 
 people - " 
 " you be right ! " say Mr. Jarndyce , brightening . " your woman 's wit 
 hit the mark . he be a child - an absolute child . I tell you he 
 be a child , you know , when I first mention he . " 
 certainly ! certainly ! we say . 
 " and he be a child . now , be not   he ? " ask Mr. Jarndyce , 
 brighten more and more . 
 he be indeed , we say . 
 " when you come to think of it , it be the height of childishness in 
 you - I mean I - " say Mr. Jarndyce , " to regard he for a moment as 
 a man . you can not   make HIM responsible . the idea of Harold 
 Skimpole with design or plan , or knowledge of consequence ! ha , 
 ha , ha ! " 
 it be so delicious to see the cloud about his bright face 
 clearing , and to see he so heartily pleased , and to know , as it 
 be impossible not to know , that the source of his pleasure be the 
 goodness which be torture by condemn , or mistrust , or 
 secretly accuse any one , that I see the tear in Ada 's eye , 
 while she echo his laugh , and feel they in my own . 
 " why , what a cod 's head and shoulder I be , " say Mr. Jarndyce , " to 
 require reminding of it ! the whole business show the child from 
 begin to end . nobody but a child would have think of 
 single you two out for party in the affair ! nobody but a child 
 would have think of your have the money ! if it have be a 
 thousand pound , it would have be just the same ! " say Mr. 
 Jarndyce with his whole face in a glow . 
 we all confirm it from our night 's experience . 
 " to be sure , to be sure ! " say Mr. Jarndyce . " however , Rick , 
 Esther , and you too , Ada , for I do not   know that even your little 
 purse be safe from his inexperience - I must have a promise all 
 round that nothing of this sort shall ever be do any more . no 
 advance ! not even sixpence . " 
 we all promise faithfully , Richard with a merry glance at I 
 touch his pocket as if to remind I that there be no danger of 
 OUR transgressing . 
 " as to Skimpole , " say Mr. Jarndyce , " a habitable doll 's house with 
 good board and a few tin people to get into debt with and borrow 
 money of would set the boy up in life . he be in a child 's sleep by 
 this time , I suppose ; it be time I should take my craftier head to 
 my more worldly pillow . good night , my dear . God bless you ! " 
 he peep in again , with a smile face , before we have light our 
 candle , and say , " oh ! I have be look at the weather - cock . I 
 find it be a false alarm about the wind . it be in the south ! " and 
 go away singing to himself . 
 Ada and I agree , as we talk together for a little while upstairs , 
 that this caprice about the wind be a fiction and that he use the 
 pretence to account for any disappointment he could not conceal , 
 rather than he would blame the real cause of it or disparage or 
 depreciate any one . we think this very characteristic of his 
 eccentric gentleness and of the difference between he and those 
 petulant people who make the weather and the wind   particularly 
 that unlucky wind which he have choose for such a different purpose 
 the stalk - horse of their splenetic and gloomy humour . 
 indeed , so much affection for he have be add in this one 
 evening to my gratitude that I hop I already begin to understand 
 he through that mingled feeling . any seeming inconsistency in 
 Mr. Skimpole or in Mrs. Jellyby I could not expect to be able to 
 reconcile , have so little experience or practical knowledge . 
 neither do I try , for my thought be busy when I be alone , with 
 Ada and Richard and with the confidence I have seem to receive 
 concern they . my fancy , make a little wild by the wind perhaps , 
 would not consent to be all unselfish , either , though I would have 
 persuade it to be so if I could . it wander back to my 
 godmother 's house and come along the intervene track , raise up 
 shadowy speculation which have sometimes tremble there in the dark 
 as to what knowledge Mr. Jarndyce have of my early history - even 
 as to the possibility of his be my father , though that idle 
 dream be quite go now . 
 it be all go now , I remember , get up from the fire . it be 
 not for I to muse over bygone , but to act with a cheerful spirit 
 and a grateful heart . so I say to myself , " Esther , Esther , Esther ! 
 Duty , my dear ! " and give my little basket of housekeep key such 
 a shake that they sound like little bell and ring I hopefully to 
 bed . 
 CHAPTER VII 
 the Ghost 's Walk 
 while Esther sleep , and while Esther wake , it be still wet weather 
 down at the place in Lincolnshire . the rain be ever fall - drip , 
 drip , drip - by day and night upon the broad flagged terrace- 
 pavement , the Ghost 's Walk . the weather be so very bad down in 
 Lincolnshire that the lively imagination can scarcely apprehend 
 its ever be fine again . not that there be any superabundant life 
 of imagination on the spot , for Sir Leicester be not here   and , 
 truly , even if he be , would not do much for it in that 
 particular , but be in Paris with my Lady ; and solitude , with dusky 
 wing , sit brood upon Chesney Wold . 
 there may be some motion of fancy among the low animal at 
 Chesney Wold . the horse in the stable - the long stable in a 
 barren , red - brick court - yard , where there be a great bell in a 
 turret , and a clock with a large face , which the pigeon who live 
 near it and who love to perch upon its shoulder seem to be always 
 consult - they may contemplate some mental picture of fine 
 weather on occasion , and may be well artist at they than the 
 groom . the old roan , so famous for cross - country work , turn his 
 large eyeball to the grated window near his rack , may remember the 
 fresh leaf that glisten there at other time and the scent that 
 stream in , and may have a fine run with the hound , while the human 
 helper , clear out the next stall , never stir beyond his 
 pitchfork and birch - broom . the grey , whose place be opposite the 
 door and who with an impatient rattle of his halter prick his ear 
 and turn his head so wistfully when it be open , and to whom the 
 opener say , " woa grey , then , steady ! noabody want you to - day ! " 
 may know it quite as well as the man . the whole seemingly 
 monotonous and uncompanionable half - dozen , stable together , may 
 pass the long wet hour when the door be shut in lively 
 communication than be hold in the servant ' hall or at the Dedlock 
 arm , or may even beguile the time by improve   perhaps corrupt 
 the pony in the loose - box in the corner . 
 so the mastiff , doze in his kennel in the court - yard with his 
 large head on his paw , may think of the hot sunshine when the 
 shadow of the stable - building tire his patience out by change 
 and leave he at one time of the day no broad refuge than the 
 shadow of his own house , where he sit on end , pant and growling 
 short , and very much want something to worry besides himself and 
 his chain . so now , half - waking and all - wink , he may recall the 
 house full of company , the coach - house full of vehicle , the 
 stable full of horse , and the out - building full of attendant 
 upon horse , until he be undecided about the present and come forth 
 to see how it be . then , with that impatient shake of himself , he 
 may growl in the spirit , " rain , rain , rain ! nothing but rain - and 
 no family here ! " as he go in again and lie down with a gloomy 
 yawn . 
 so with the dog in the kennel - building across the park , who have 
 their restless fit and whose doleful voice when the wind have be 
 very obstinate have even make it know in the house itself - 
 upstairs , downstair , and in my Lady 's chamber . they may hunt the 
 whole country - side , while the raindrop be patter round their 
 inactivity . so the rabbit with their self - betray tail , 
 frisk in and out of hole at root of tree , may be lively with 
 idea of the breezy day when their ear be blow about or of those 
 season of interest when there be sweet young plant to gnaw . the 
 turkey in the poultry - yard , always trouble with a class - grievance 
  probably Christmas , may be reminiscent of that summer morning 
 wrongfully take from he when he get into the lane among the felled 
 tree , where there be a barn and barley . the discontent goose , 
 who stoop to pass under the old gateway , twenty foot high , may 
 gabble out , if we only know it , a waddle preference for weather 
 when the gateway cast its shadow on the ground . 
 be this as it may , there be not much fancy otherwise stir at 
 Chesney Wold . if there be a little at any odd moment , it go , 
 like a little noise in that old echo place , a long way and 
 usually lead off to ghost and mystery . 
 it have rain so hard and rain so long down in Lincolnshire that 
 Mrs. Rouncewell , the old housekeeper at Chesney Wold , have several 
 time take off her spectacle and clean they to make certain 
 that the drop be not upon the glass . Mrs. Rouncewell might 
 have be sufficiently assure by hear the rain , but that she be 
 rather deaf , which nothing will induce she to believe . she be a 
 fine old lady , handsome , stately , wonderfully neat , and have such a 
 back and such a stomacher that if her stay should turn out when 
 she die to have be a broad old - fashioned family fire - grate , 
 nobody who know she would have cause to be surprised . weather 
 affect Mrs. Rouncewell little . the house be there in all 
 weather , and the house , as she express it , " be what she look 
 at . " she sit in her room   in a side passage on the ground floor , 
 with an arched window command a smooth quadrangle , adorn at 
 regular interval with smooth round tree and smooth round block 
 of stone , as if the tree be go to play at bowl with the 
 stone , and the whole house repose on her mind . she can open it 
 on occasion and be busy and flutter , but it be shut up now and 
 lie on the breadth of Mrs. Rouncewell 's iron - bind bosom in a 
 majestic sleep . 
 it be the next difficult thing to an impossibility to imagine 
 Chesney Wold without Mrs. Rouncewell , but she have only be here 
 fifty year . ask she how long , this rainy day , and she shall 
 answer " fifty year , three month , and a fortnight , by the blessing 
 of heaven , if I live till Tuesday . " Mr. Rouncewell die some time 
 before the decease of the pretty fashion of pig - tail , and modestly 
 hide his own   if he take it with he   in a corner of the churchyard 
 in the park near the mouldy porch . he be bear in the market - town , 
 and so be his young widow . her progress in the family begin in 
 the time of the last Sir Leicester and originate in the still - room . 
 the present representative of the Dedlocks be an excellent master . 
 he suppose all his dependent to be utterly bereft of individual 
 character , intention , or opinion , and be persuade that he be 
 bear to supersede the necessity of their have any . if he be to 
 make a discovery to the contrary , he would be simply stunned - would 
 never recover himself , most likely , except to gasp and die . but he 
 be an excellent master still , hold it a part of his state to be 
 so . he have a great liking for Mrs. Rouncewell ; he say she be a 
 most respectable , creditable woman . he always shake hand with 
 she when he come down to Chesney Wold and when he go away ; and 
 if he be very ill , or if he be knock down by accident , or run 
 over , or place in any situation expressive of a Dedlock at a 
 disadvantage , he would say if he could speak , " leave I , and send 
 Mrs. Rouncewell here ! " feel his dignity , at such a pass , safe 
 with she than with anybody else . 
 Mrs. Rouncewell have know trouble . she have have two son , of whom 
 the young run wild , and go for a soldier , and never come back . 
 even to this hour , Mrs. Rouncewell 's calm hand lose their 
 composure when she speak of he , and unfold themselves from her 
 stomacher , hover about she in an agitated manner as she say what a 
 likely lad , what a fine lad , what a gay , good - humour , clever lad 
 he be ! her second son would have be provide for at Chesney 
 Wold and would have be make steward in due season , but he take , 
 when he be a schoolboy , to construct steam - engine out of 
 saucepan and set bird to draw their own water with the least 
 possible amount of labour , so assist they with artful 
 contrivance of hydraulic pressure that a thirsty canary have only , 
 in a literal sense , to put his shoulder to the wheel and the job 
 be do . this propensity give Mrs. Rouncewell great uneasiness . 
 she feel it with a mother 's anguish to be a move in the Wat Tyler 
 direction , well know that Sir Leicester have that general 
 impression of an aptitude for any art to which smoke and a tall 
 chimney might be consider essential . but the doomed young rebel 
  otherwise a mild youth , and very persevering , show no sign of 
 grace as he get old but , on the contrary , construct a model of 
 a power - loom , she be fain , with many tear , to mention his 
 backsliding to the baronet . " Mrs. Rouncewell , " say Sir 
 Leicester , " I can never consent to argue , as you know , with any one 
 on any subject . you have well get rid of your boy ; you have well 
 get he into some work . the iron country far north be , I 
 suppose , the congenial direction for a boy with these tendency . " 
 far north he go , and far north he grow up ; and if Sir 
 Leicester Dedlock ever see he when he come to Chesney Wold to 
 visit his mother , or ever think of he afterwards , it be certain 
 that he only regard he as one of a body of some odd thousand 
 conspirator , swarthy and grim , who be in the habit of turn 
 out by torchlight two or three night in the week for unlawful 
 purpose . 
 nevertheless , Mrs. Rouncewell 's son have , in the course of nature 
 and art , grow up , and establish himself , and marry , and call 
 unto he Mrs. Rouncewell 's grandson , who , be out of his 
 apprenticeship , and home from a journey in far country , whither 
 he be send to enlarge his knowledge and complete his preparation 
 for the venture of this life , stand lean against the chimney- 
 piece this very day in Mrs. Rouncewell 's room at Chesney Wold . 
 " and , again and again , I be glad to see you , Watt ! and , once 
 again , I be glad to see you , Watt ! " say Mrs. Rouncewell . " you be 
 a fine young fellow . you be like your poor uncle George . ah ! " 
 Mrs. Rouncewell 's hand unquiet , as usual , on this reference . 
 " they say I be like my father , grandmother . " 
 " like he , also , my dear - but most like your poor uncle George ! 
 and your dear father . " Mrs. Rouncewell fold her hand again . " he 
 be well ? " 
 " thriving , grandmother , in every way . " 
 " I be thankful ! " Mrs. Rouncewell be fond of her son but have a 
 plaintive feeling towards he , much as if he be a very honourable 
 soldier who have go over to the enemy . 
 " he be quite happy ? " say she . 
 " quite . " 
 " I be thankful ! so he have bring you up to follow in his way and 
 have send you into foreign country and the like ? well , he know 
 well . there may be a world beyond Chesney Wold that I do not 
 understand . though I be not young , either . and I have see a 
 quantity of good company too ! " 
 " Grandmother , " say the young man , change the subject , " what a 
 very pretty girl that be I find with you just now . you call 
 her Rosa ? " 
 " yes , child . she be daughter of a widow in the village . maid be 
 so hard to teach , now - a - day , that I have put she about I young . 
 she be an apt scholar and will do well . she show the house 
 already , very pretty . she live with I at my table here . " 
 " I hope I have not drive she away ? " 
 " she suppose we have family affair to speak about , I dare say . 
 she be very modest . it be a fine quality in a young woman . and 
 scarcer , " say Mrs. Rouncewell , expand her stomacher to its 
 utmost limit , " than it formerly be ! " 
 the young man incline his head in acknowledgment of the precept 
 of experience . Mrs. Rouncewell listen . 
 " Wheels ! " say she . they have long be audible to the young 
 ear of her companion . " what wheel on such a day as this , for 
 gracious sake ? " 
 after a short interval , a tap at the door . " come in ! " a dark- 
 eye , dark - haire , shy , village beauty come in - so fresh in her 
 rosy and yet delicate bloom that the drop of rain which have 
 beat on her hair look like the dew upon a flower fresh gather . 
 " what company be this , Rosa ? " say Mrs. Rouncewell . 
 " it be two young man in a gig , ma'am , who want to see the house - 
 yes , and if you please , I tell they so ! " in quick reply to a 
 gesture of dissent from the housekeeper . " I go to the hall - door 
 and tell they it be the wrong day and the wrong hour , but the 
 young man who be drive take off his hat in the wet and beg I 
 to bring this card to you . " 
 " read it , my dear Watt , " say the housekeeper . 
 Rosa be so shy as she give it to he that they drop it between 
 they and almost knock their forehead together as they pick it up . 
 Rosa be shyer than before . 
 " Mr. Guppy " be all the information the card yield . 
 " Guppy ! " repeat Mrs. Rouncewell , " MR . Guppy ! nonsense , I never 
 hear of he ! " 
 " if you please , he tell I that ! " say Rosa . " but he say that he 
 and the other young gentleman come from London only last night by 
 the mail , on business at the magistrate ' meeting , ten mile off , 
 this morning , and that as their business be soon over , and they 
 have hear a great deal say of Chesney Wold , and really do not   know 
 what to do with themselves , they have come through the wet to see 
 it . they be lawyer . he say he be not in Mr. Tulkinghorn 's 
 office , but he be sure he may make use of Mr. Tulkinghorn 's name if 
 necessary . " finding , now she leave off , that she have be make 
 quite a long speech , Rosa be shyer than ever . 
 now , Mr. Tulkinghorn be , in a manner , part and parcel of the place , 
 and besides , be suppose to have make Mrs. Rouncewell 's will . the 
 old lady relaxe , consent to the admission of the visitor as a 
 favour , and dismiss Rosa . the grandson , however , be smite 
 by a sudden wish to see the house himself , propose to join the 
 party . the grandmother , who be pleased that he should have that 
 interest , accompany he - though to do he justice , he be 
 exceedingly unwilling to trouble she . 
 " much oblige to you , ma'am ! " say Mr. Guppy , divest himself of 
 his wet dreadnought in the hall . " Us London lawyer do not   often 
 get an out , and when we do , we like to make the most of it , you 
 know . " 
 the old housekeeper , with a gracious severity of deportment , wave 
 her hand towards the great staircase . Mr. Guppy and his friend 
 follow Rosa ; Mrs. Rouncewell and her grandson follow they ; a young 
 gardener go before to open the shutter . 
 as be usually the case with people who go over house , Mr. Guppy 
 and his friend be dead beat before they have well begin . they 
 straggle about in wrong place , look at wrong thing , do not   care 
 for the right thing , gape when more room be open , exhibit 
 profound depression of spirit , and be clearly knock up . in 
 each successive chamber that they enter , Mrs. Rouncewell , who be as 
 upright as the house itself , rest apart in a window - seat or other 
 such nook and listen with stately approval to Rosa 's exposition . 
 her grandson be so attentive to it that Rosa be shyer than ever - 
 and pretty . thus they pass on from room to room , raise the 
 picture dedlock for a few brief minute as the young gardener 
 admit the light , and reconsigne they to their graf as he shut 
 it out again . it appear to the afflict Mr. Guppy and his 
 inconsolable friend that there be no end to the Dedlocks , whose 
 family greatness seem to consist in their never have do 
 anything to distinguish themselves for seven hundred year . 
 even the long drawing - room of Chesney Wold can not revive Mr. 
 Guppy 's spirit . he be so low that he droop on the threshold and 
 have hardly strength of mind to enter . but a portrait over the 
 chimney - piece , paint by the fashionable artist of the day , act 
 upon he like a charm . he recover in a moment . he star at it 
 with uncommon interest ; he seem to be fix and fascinate by it . 
 " dear I ! " say Mr. Guppy . " who be that ? " 
 " the picture over the fire - place , " say Rosa , " be the portrait of 
 the present Lady Dedlock . it be consider a perfect likeness , and 
 the good work of the master . " 
 " Blest , " say Mr. Guppy , star in a kind of dismay at his 
 friend , " if I can ever have see she . yet I know she ! have the 
 picture be engrave , miss ? " 
 " the picture have never be engrave . Sir Leicester have always 
 refuse permission . " 
 " well ! " say Mr. Guppy in a low voice . " I will be shoot if it be not 
 very curious how well I know that picture ! so that be Lady Dedlock , 
 be it ! " 
 " the picture on the right be the present Sir Leicester Dedlock . 
 the picture on the left be his father , the late Sir Leicester . " 
 Mr. Guppy have no eye for either of these magnate . " it be 
 unaccountable to I , " he say , still star at the portrait , " how 
 well I know that picture ! I be dash , " add Mr. Guppy , look 
 round , " if I do not   think I must have have a dream of that picture , 
 you know ! " 
 as no one present take any especial interest in Mr. Guppy 's 
 dream , the probability be not pursue . but he still remain so 
 absorb by the portrait that he stand immovable before it until 
 the young gardener have close the shutter , when he come out of 
 the room in a daze state that be an odd though a sufficient 
 substitute for interest and follow into the succeed room with 
 a confused stare , as if he be look everywhere for Lady Dedlock 
 again . 
 he see no more of she . he see her room , which be the last 
 show , as be very elegant , and he look out of the window from 
 which she look out , not long ago , upon the weather that bore she 
 to death . all thing have an end , even house that people take 
 infinite pain to see and be tired of before they begin to see 
 they . he have come to the end of the sight , and the fresh village 
 beauty to the end of her description ; which be always this : " the 
 terrace below be much admire . it be call , from an old story in 
 the family , the Ghost 's Walk . " 
 " no ? " say Mr. Guppy , greedily curious . " what be the story , miss ? 
 be it anything about a picture ? " 
 " pray tell we the story , " say Watt in a half whisper . 
 " I do not   know it , sir . " Rosa be shyer than ever . 
 " it be not relate to visitor ; it be almost forget , " say the 
 housekeeper , advance . " it have never be more than a family 
 anecdote . " 
 " you will excuse my asking again if it have anything to do with a 
 picture , ma'am , " observe Mr. Guppy , " because I do assure you that 
 the more I think of that picture the well I know it , without 
 know how I know it ! " 
 the story have nothing to do with a picture ; the housekeeper can 
 guarantee that . Mr. Guppy be oblige to she for the information 
 and be , moreover , generally oblige . he retire with his friend , 
 guide down another staircase by the young gardener , and presently 
 be hear to drive away . it be now dusk . Mrs. Rouncewell can trust 
 to the discretion of her two young hearer and may tell they how 
 the terrace come to have that ghostly name . 
 she seat herself in a large chair by the fast - darken window and 
 tell they : " in the wicked day , my dear , of King Charles the 
 First - I mean , of course , in the wicked day of the rebel who 
 league themselves against that excellent king - Sir Morbury Dedlock 
 be the owner of Chesney Wold . whether there be any account of a 
 ghost in the family before those day , I can not   say . I should think 
 it very likely indeed . " 
 Mrs. Rouncewell hold this opinion because she consider that a 
 family of such antiquity and importance have a right to a ghost . 
 she regard a ghost as one of the privilege of the upper class , 
 a genteel distinction to which the common people have no claim . 
 " Sir Morbury Dedlock , " say Mrs. Rouncewell , " be , I have no 
 occasion to say , on the side of the blessed martyr . but it be 
 suppose that his Lady , who have none of the family blood in her 
 vein , favour the bad cause . it be say that she have relation 
 among King Charles 's enemy , that she be in correspondence with 
 they , and that she give they information . when any of the country 
 gentleman who follow his Majesty 's cause meet here , it be say 
 that my Lady be always near to the door of their council - room 
 than they suppose . do you hear a sound like a footstep passing 
 along the terrace , Watt ? " 
 Rosa draw near to the housekeeper . 
 " I hear the rain - drip on the stone , " reply the young man , " and I 
 hear a curious echo - I suppose an echo - which be very like a 
 halting step . " 
 the housekeeper gravely nod and continue : " partly on account of 
 this division between they , and partly on other account , Sir 
 Morbury and his Lady lead a troubled life . she be a lady of a 
 haughty temper . they be not well suited to each other in age or 
 character , and they have no child to moderate between they . 
 after her favourite brother , a young gentleman , be kill in the 
 civil war   by Sir Morbury 's near kinsman , her feeling be so 
 violent that she hat the race into which she have marry . when 
 the dedlock be about to ride out from Chesney Wold in the king 's 
 cause , she be suppose to have more than once steal down into the 
 stable in the dead of night and lam their horse ; and the story 
 be that once at such an hour , her husband see she glide down the 
 stair and follow she into the stall where his own favourite 
 horse stand . there he seize she by the wrist , and in a struggle 
 or in a fall or through the horse be frightened and lash out , 
 she be lamed in the hip and from that hour begin to pine away . " 
 the housekeeper have drop her voice to a little more than a 
 whisper . 
 " she have be a lady of a handsome figure and a noble carriage . 
 she never complain of the change ; she never speak to any one of 
 be crippled or of be in pain , but day by day she try to 
 walk upon the terrace , and with the help of the stone balustrade , 
 go up and down , up and down , up and down , in sun and shadow , with 
 great difficulty every day . at last , one afternoon her husband 
  to whom she have never , on any persuasion , open her lip since 
 that night , stand at the great south window , see her drop upon 
 the pavement . he hasten down to raise she , but she repulse he 
 as he bend over she , and look at he fixedly and coldly , say , 
 ' I will die here where I have walk . and I will walk here , though 
 I be in my grave . I will walk here until the pride of this house 
 be humble . and when calamity or when disgrace be come to it , 
 let the dedlock listen for my step ! ' " 
 Watt look at Rosa . Rosa in the deepening gloom look down upon 
 the ground , half frightened and half shy . 
 " there and then she die . and from those day , " say Mrs. 
 Rouncewell , " the name have come down - the Ghost 's Walk . if the 
 tread be an echo , it be an echo that be only hear after dark , and 
 be often unheard for a long while together . but it come back from 
 time to time ; and so sure as there be sickness or death in the 
 family , it will be hear then . " 
 " and disgrace , grandmother - " say Watt . 
 " Disgrace never come to Chesney Wold , " return the housekeeper . 
 her grandson apologize with " true . true . " 
 " that be the story . whatever the sound be , it be a worrying 
 sound , " say Mrs. Rouncewell , get up from her chair ; " and what 
 be to be notice in it be that it must be hear . my Lady , who be 
 afraid of nothing , admit that when it be there , it must be hear . 
 you can not shut it out . Watt , there be a tall french clock behind 
 you   place there , ' a purpose   that have a loud beat when it be in 
 motion and can play music . you understand how those thing be 
 manage ? " 
 " pretty well , grandmother , I think . " 
 " set it a - going . " 
 Watt set it a - go - music and all . 
 " now , come hither , " say the housekeeper . " Hither , child , towards 
 my Lady 's pillow . I be not sure that it be dark enough yet , but 
 listen ! can you hear the sound upon the terrace , through the 
 music , and the beat , and everything ? " 
 " I certainly can ! " 
 " so my Lady say . " 
 CHAPTER VIII 
 cover a Multitude of Sins 
 it be interesting when I dress before daylight to peep out of 
 window , where my candle be reflect in the black pane like two 
 beacon , and find all beyond still enshroud in the 
 indistinctness of last night , to watch how it turn out when the 
 day come on . as the prospect gradually reveal itself and 
 disclose the scene over which the wind have wander in the dark , 
 like my memory over my life , I have a pleasure in discover the 
 unknown object that have be around I in my sleep . at first they 
 be faintly discernible in the mist , and above they the later 
 star still glimmer . that pale interval over , the picture begin 
 to enlarge and fill up so fast that at every new peep I could have 
 find enough to look at for an hour . imperceptibly my candle 
 become the only incongruous part of the morning , the dark place in 
 my room all melt away , and the day shine bright upon a cheerful 
 landscape , prominent in which the old Abbey Church , with its 
 massive tower , throw a soft train of shadow on the view than 
 seem compatible with its rugged character . but so from rough 
 outside   I hope I have learn , serene and gentle influence often 
 proceed . 
 every part of the house be in such order , and every one be so 
 attentive to I , that I have no trouble with my two bunch of key , 
 though what with try to remember the content of each little 
 store - room drawer and cupboard ; and what with make note on a 
 slate about jam , and pickle , and preserve , and bottle , and 
 glass , and china , and a great many other thing ; and what with 
 be generally a methodical , old - maidish sort of foolish little 
 person , I be so busy that I could not believe it be breakfast- 
 time when I hear the bell ring . away I run , however , and make 
 tea , as I have already be instal into the responsibility of the 
 tea - pot ; and then , as they be all rather late and nobody be down 
 yet , I think I would take a peep at the garden and get some 
 knowledge of that too . I find it quite a delightful place - in 
 front , the pretty avenue and drive by which we have approach   and 
 where , by the by , we have cut up the gravel so terribly with our 
 wheel that I ask the gardener to roll it ; at the back , the 
 flower - garden , with my darling at her window up there , throw it 
 open to smile out at I , as if she would have kiss I from that 
 distance . beyond the flower - garden be a kitchen - garden , and then 
 a paddock , and then a snug little rick - yard , and then a dear little 
 farm - yard . as to the house itself , with its three peak in the 
 roof ; its various - shape window , some so large , some so small , and 
 all so pretty ; its trellis - work , against the southfront for rose 
 and honey - suckle , and its homely , comfortable , welcome look - it 
 be , as Ada say when she come out to meet I with her arm through 
 that of its master , worthy of her cousin John , a bold thing to say , 
 though he only pinch her dear cheek for it . 
 Mr. Skimpole be as agreeable at breakfast as he have be 
 overnight . there be honey on the table , and it lead he into a 
 discourse about bee . he have no objection to honey , he say   and I 
 should think he have not , for he seem to like it , but he 
 protest against the overweene assumption of bee . he do not 
 at all see why the busy bee should be propose as a model to he ; 
 he suppose the bee like to make honey , or he would not   do it - 
 nobody ask he . it be not necessary for the bee to make such a 
 merit of his taste . if every confectioner go buzz about the 
 world bang against everything that come in his way and 
 egotistically call upon everybody to take notice that he be 
 go to his work and must not be interrupt , the world would be 
 quite an unsupportable place . then , after all , it be a ridiculous 
 position to be smoke out of your fortune with brimstone as soon as 
 you have make it . you would have a very mean opinion of a 
 Manchester man if he spin cotton for no other purpose . he must say 
 he think a drone the embodiment of a pleasanter and wise idea . 
 the drone say unaffectedly , " you will excuse I ; I really can not 
 attend to the shop ! I find myself in a world in which there be so 
 much to see and so short a time to see it in that I must take the 
 liberty of look about I and beg to be provide for by 
 somebody who do not   want to look about he . " this appear to Mr. 
 Skimpole to be the drone philosophy , and he think it a very good 
 philosophy , always suppose the drone to be willing to be on good 
 term with the bee , which , so far as he know , the easy fellow 
 always be , if the consequential creature would only let he , and 
 not be so conceited about his honey ! 
 he pursue this fancy with the light foot over a variety of 
 ground and make we all merry , though again he seem to have as 
 serious a meaning in what he say as he be capable of have . I 
 leave they still listen to he when I withdraw to attend to my 
 new duty . they have occupy I for some time , and I be pass 
 through the passage on my return with my basket of key on my arm 
 when Mr. Jarndyce call I into a small room next his bed - chamber , 
 which I find to be in part a little library of book and paper 
 and in part quite a little museum of his boot and shoe and hat- 
 box . 
 " sit down , my dear , " say Mr. Jarndyce . " this , you must know , be 
 the growlery . when I be out of humour , I come and growl here . " 
 " you must be here very seldom , sir , " say I. 
 " oh , you do not   know I ! " he return . " when I be deceive or 
 disappoint in - the wind , and it be easterly , I take refuge here . 
 the growlery be the well - use room in the house . you be not aware 
 of half my humour yet . my dear , how you be tremble ! " 
 I could not help it ; I try very hard , but be alone with that 
 benevolent presence , and meet his kind eye , and feel so 
 happy and so honoured there , and my heart so full - 
 I kiss his hand . I do not   know what I say , or even that I speak . 
 he be disconcert and walk to the window ; I almost believe 
 with an intention of jump out , until he turn and I be 
 reassure by see in his eye what he have go there to hide . he 
 gently pat I on the head , and I sit down . 
 " there ! there ! " he say . " that be over . Pooh ! do not   be foolish . " 
 " it shall not happen again , sir , " I return , " but at first it be 
 difficult - " 
 " nonsense ! " he say . " it be easy , easy . why not ? I hear of a good 
 little orphan girl without a protector , and I take it into my head 
 to be that protector . she grow up , and more than justify my 
 good opinion , and I remain her guardian and her friend . what be 
 there in all this ? so , so ! now , we have clear off old score , 
 and I have before I thy pleasant , trusting , trusty face again . " 
 I say to myself , " Esther , my dear , you surprise I ! this really 
 be not what I expect of you ! " and it have such a good effect that 
 I fold my hand upon my basket and quite recover myself . Mr. 
 Jarndyce , express his approval in his face , begin to talk to I 
 as confidentially as if I have be in the habit of converse with 
 he every morning for I do not   know how long . I almost feel as if I 
 have . 
 " of course , Esther , " he say , " you do not   understand this Chancery 
 business ? " 
 and of course I shake my head . 
 " I do not   know who do , " he return . " the lawyer have twist it 
 into such a state of bedevilment that the original merit of the 
 case have long disappear from the face of the earth . it be about 
 a will and the trust under a will - or it be once . it be about 
 nothing but cost now . we be always appear , and disappear , 
 and swearing , and interrogating , and filing , and cross - filing , and 
 arguing , and sealing , and motioning , and refer , and reporting , 
 and revolve about the Lord Chancellor and all his satellite , and 
 equitably waltz ourselves off to dusty death , about cost . 
 that be the great question . all the rest , by some extraordinary 
 mean , have melt away . " 
 " but it be , sir , " say I , to bring he back , for he begin to rub 
 his head , " about a will ? " 
 " why , yes , it be about a will when it be about anything , " he 
 return . " a certain Jarndyce , in an evil hour , make a great 
 fortune , and make a great will . in the question how the trust 
 under that will are to be administer , the fortune leave by the 
 will be squander away ; the legatee under the will be reduce to 
 such a miserable condition that they would be sufficiently punish 
 if they have commit an enormous crime in have money leave they , 
 and the will itself be make a dead letter . all through the 
 deplorable cause , everything that everybody in it , except one man , 
 know already be refer to that only one man who do not   know , it to 
 find out - all through the deplorable cause , everybody must have 
 copy , over and over again , of everything that have accumulate 
 about it in the way of cartload of paper   or must pay for they 
 without have they , which be the usual course , for nobody want 
 they   and must go down the middle and up again through such an 
 infernal country - dance of cost and fee and nonsense and 
 corruption as be never dream of in the wild vision of a 
 witch 's Sabbath . equity send question to law , law send 
 question back to equity ; law find it can not   do this , equity find 
 it can not   do that ; neither can so much as say it can not   do anything , 
 without this solicitor instructing and this counsel appear for 
 A , and that solicitor instructing and that counsel appear for b ; 
 and so on through the whole alphabet , like the history of the apple 
 pie . and thus , through year and year , and life and life , 
 everything go on , constantly begin over and over again , and 
 nothing ever end . and we can not   get out of the suit on any term , 
 for we be make party to it , and must be party to it , whether 
 we like it or not . but it will not   do to think of it ! when my great 
 uncle , poor Tom Jarndyce , begin to think of it , it be the 
 beginning of the end ! " 
 " the Mr. Jarndyce , sir , whose story I have hear ? " 
 he nod gravely . " I be his heir , and this be his house , 
 Esther . when I come here , it be bleak indeed . he have leave the 
 sign of his misery upon it . " 
 " how change it must be now ! " I say . 
 " it have be call , before his time , the Peaks . he give it its 
 present name and live here shut up , day and night pore over the 
 wicked heap of paper in the suit and hop against hope to 
 disentangle it from its mystification and bring it to a close . in 
 the meantime , the place become dilapidate , the wind whistle 
 through the crack wall , the rain fall through the broken roof , 
 the weed choke the passage to the rotting door . when I bring 
 what remain of he home here , the brain seem to I to have 
 be blow out of the house too , it be so shattered and ruin . " 
 he walk a little to and fro after say this to himself with a 
 shudder , and then look at I , and brighten , and come and sit 
 down again with his hand in his pocket . 
 " I tell you this be the growlery , my dear . where be I ? " 
 I remind he , at the hopeful change he have make in Bleak House . 
 " Bleak House ; true . there be , in that city of London there , some 
 property of ours which be much at this day what Bleak House be 
 then ; I say property of our , meaning of the suit 's , but I ought to 
 call it the property of cost , for cost be the only power on earth 
 that will ever get anything out of it now or will ever know it for 
 anything but an eyesore and a heartsore . it be a street of 
 perish blind house , with their eye stone out , without a pane 
 of glass , without so much as a window - frame , with the bare blank 
 shutter tumble from their hinge and fall asunder , the iron 
 rail peel away in flake of rust , the chimney sink in , the 
 stone step to every door   and every door might be death 's door 
 turn stagnant green , the very crutch on which the ruin be 
 prop decaying . although Bleak House be not in Chancery , its 
 master be , and it be stamp with the same seal . these be the 
 Great Seal 's impression , my dear , all over England - the child 
 know they ! " 
 " how change it be ! " I say again . 
 " why , so it be , " he answer much more cheerfully ; " and it be 
 wisdom in you to keep I to the bright side of the picture . "   the 
 idea of my wisdom !   " these be thing I never talk about or even 
 think about , except in the growlery here . if you consider it 
 right to mention they to Rick and Ada , " look seriously at I , 
 " you can . I leave it to your discretion , Esther . " 
 " I hope , sir - " say I. 
 " I think you have well call I guardian , my dear . " 
 I feel that I be choke again - I tax myself with it , " Esther , 
 now , you know you be ! " - when he feign to say this slightly , as 
 if it be a whim instead of a thoughtful tenderness . but I give 
 the housekeeping key the least shake in the world as a reminder to 
 myself , and fold my hand in a still more determined manner on 
 the basket , look at he quietly . 
 " I hope , guardian , " say I , " that you may not trust too much to my 
 discretion . I hope you may not mistake I . I be afraid it will be 
 a disappointment to you to know that I be not clever , but it really 
 be the truth , and you would soon find it out if I have not the 
 honesty to confess it . " 
 he do not seem at all disappoint ; quite the contrary . he tell 
 I , with a smile all over his face , that he know I very well 
 indeed and that I be quite clever enough for he . 
 " I hope I may turn out so , " say I , " but I be much afraid of it , 
 guardian . " 
 " you be clever enough to be the good little woman of our life 
 here , my dear , " he return playfully ; " the little old woman of the 
 child 's   I do not   mean Skimpole 's   rhyme : 
 " ' little old woman , and whither so high ? ' 
 ' to sweep the cobwebs out of the sky . ' 
 " you will sweep they so neatly out of our sky in the course of your 
 housekeeping , Esther , that one of these day we shall have to 
 abandon the growlery and nail up the door . " 
 this be the beginning of my be call Old Woman , and Little Old 
 Woman , and Cobweb , and Mrs. Shipton , and Mother Hubbard , and Dame 
 Durden , and so many name of that sort that my own name soon become 
 quite lose among they . 
 " however , " say Mr. Jarndyce , " to return to our gossip . here 's 
 Rick , a fine young fellow full of promise . what be to be do with 
 he ? " 
 oh , my goodness , the idea of ask my advice on such a point ! 
 " here he be , Esther , " say Mr. Jarndyce , comfortably put his 
 hand into his pocket and stretch out his leg . " he must have 
 a profession ; he must make some choice for himself . there will be 
 a world more wiglomeration about it , I suppose , but it must be 
 do . " 
 " more what , guardian ? " say I. 
 " More wiglomeration , " say he . " it be the only name I know for the 
 thing . he be a ward in Chancery , my dear . Kenge and Carboy will 
 have something to say about it ; Master Somebody - a sort of 
 ridiculous sexton , dig graf for the merit of cause in a 
 back room at the end of Quality Court , Chancery Lane - will have 
 something to say about it ; counsel will have something to say about 
 it ; the Chancellor will have something to say about it ; the 
 satellite will have something to say about it ; they will all have 
 to be handsomely feed , all round , about it ; the whole thing will be 
 vastly ceremonious , wordy , unsatisfactory , and expensive , and I 
 call it , in general , wiglomeration . how mankind ever come to be 
 afflict with wiglomeration , or for whose sin these young people 
 ever fall into a pit of it , I do not   know ; so it be . " 
 he begin to rub his head again and to hint that he feel the wind . 
 but it be a delightful instance of his kindness towards I that 
 whether he rub his head , or walk about , or do both , his face 
 be sure to recover its benignant expression as it look at mine ; 
 and he be sure to turn comfortable again and put his hand in his 
 pocket and stretch out his leg . 
 " perhaps it would be good , first of all , " say I , " to ask Mr. 
 Richard what he incline to himself . " 
 " exactly so , " he return . " that be what I mean ! you know , just 
 accustom yourself to talk it over , with your tact and in your quiet 
 way , with he and Ada , and see what you all make of it . we be 
 sure to come at the heart of the matter by your mean , little 
 woman . " 
 I really be frighten at the thought of the importance I be 
 attain and the number of thing that be be confide to I . 
 I have not mean this at all ; I have mean that he should speak to 
 Richard . but of course I say nothing in reply except that I would 
 do my good , though I fear   I realty feel it necessary to repeat 
 this   that he think I much more sagacious than I be . at which 
 my guardian only laugh the pleasantest laugh I ever hear . 
 " come ! " he say , rise and push back his chair . " I think we 
 may have do with the growlery for one day ! only a concluding 
 word . Esther , my dear , do you wish to ask I anything ? " 
 he look so attentively at I that I look attentively at he and 
 feel sure I understand he . 
 " about myself , sir ? " say I. 
 " yes . " 
 " Guardian , " say I , venture to put my hand , which be suddenly 
 cold than I could have wish , in his , " nothing ! I be quite sure 
 that if there be anything I ought to know or have any need to 
 know , I should not have to ask you to tell it to I . if my whole 
 reliance and confidence be not place in you , I must have a hard 
 heart indeed . I have nothing to ask you , nothing in the world . " 
 he draw my hand through his arm and we go away to look for Ada . 
 from that hour I feel quite easy with he , quite unreserved , quite 
 content to know no more , quite happy . 
 we live , at first , rather a busy life at Bleak House , for we have 
 to become acquainted with many resident in and out of the 
 neighbourhood who know Mr. Jarndyce . it seem to Ada and I that 
 everybody know he who want to do anything with anybody else 's 
 money . it amaze we when we begin to sort his letter and to 
 answer some of they for he in the growlery of a morning to find 
 how the great object of the life of nearly all his correspondent 
 appear to be to form themselves into committee for get in 
 and lay out money . the lady be as desperate as the 
 gentleman ; indeed , I think they be even more so . they throw 
 themselves into committee in the most impassioned manner and 
 collect subscription with a vehemence quite extraordinary . it 
 appear to we that some of they must pass their whole life in 
 deal out subscription - card to the whole post - office directory - 
 shilling card , half - crown card , half - sovereign card , penny 
 card . they want everything . they want wear apparel , they 
 want linen rag , they want money , they want coal , they 
 want soup , they want interest , they want autograph , they 
 want flannel , they want whatever Mr. Jarndyce have - or have not . 
 their object be as various as their demand . they be go to 
 raise new building , they be go to pay off debt on old 
 building , they be go to establish in a picturesque building 
  engraving of propose west elevation attach   the Sisterhood of 
 Mediaeval Marys , they be go to give a testimonial to Mrs. 
 Jellyby , they be go to have their secretary 's portrait paint 
 and present to his mother - in - law , whose deep devotion to he be 
 well know , they be go to get up everything , I really believe , 
 from five hundred thousand tract to an annuity and from a marble 
 monument to a silver tea - pot . they take a multitude of title . 
 they be the Women of England , the Daughters of Britain , the 
 Sisters of all the cardinal virtue separately , the Females of 
 America , the Ladies of a hundred denomination . they appear to 
 be always excited about canvass and electing . they seem to 
 our poor wit , and accord to their own account , to be 
 constantly poll people by ten of thousand , yet never bring 
 their candidate in for anything . it make our head ache to think , 
 on the whole , what feverish life they must lead . 
 among the lady who be most distinguished for this rapacious 
 benevolence   if I may use the expression   be a Mrs. Pardiggle , who 
 seem , as I judge from the number of her letter to Mr. Jarndyce , 
 to be almost as powerful a correspondent as Mrs. Jellyby herself . 
 we observe that the wind always change when Mrs. Pardiggle become 
 the subject of conversation and that it invariably interrupt Mr. 
 Jarndyce and prevent his go any far , when he have remark 
 that there be two class of charitable people ; one , the people 
 who do a little and make a great deal of noise ; the other , the 
 people who do a great deal and make no noise at all . we be 
 therefore curious to see Mrs. Pardiggle , suspect she to be a 
 type of the former class , and be glad when she call one day 
 with her five young son . 
 she be a formidable style of lady with spectacle , a prominent 
 nose , and a loud voice , who have the effect of want a great deal 
 of room . and she really do , for she knock down little chair 
 with her skirt that be quite a great way off . as only Ada and I 
 be at home , we receive she timidly , for she seem to come in 
 like cold weather and to make the little Pardiggles blue as they 
 follow . 
 " these , young lady , " say Mrs. Pardiggle with great volubility 
 after the first salutation , " be my five boy . you may have see 
 their name in a print subscription list   perhaps more than one 
 in the possession of our esteemed friend Mr. Jarndyce . Egbert , my 
 eld   twelve , be the boy who send out his pocket - money , to the 
 amount of five and threepence , to the Tockahoopo Indians . Oswald , 
 my second   ten and a half , be the child who contribute two and 
 nine - pence to the Great National Smithers Testimonial . Francis , my 
 third   nine , one and sixpence halfpenny ; Felix , my fourth   seven , 
 eightpence to the Superannuated widow ; Alfred , my young   five , 
 have voluntarily enrol himself in the Infant Bonds of Joy , and be 
 pledge never , through life , to use tobacco in any form . " 
 we have never see such dissatisfied child . it be not merely 
 that they be weazened and shrivel - though they be certainly 
 that too - but they look absolutely ferocious with discontent . at 
 the mention of the Tockahoopo Indians , I could really have suppose 
 Egbert to be one of the most baleful member of that tribe , he give 
 I such a savage frown . the face of each child , as the amount of 
 his contribution be mention , darken in a peculiarly vindictive 
 manner , but his be by far the bad . I must except , however , the 
 little recruit into the Infant Bonds of Joy , who be stolidly and 
 evenly miserable . 
 " you have be visit , I understand , " say Mrs. Pardiggle , " at 
 Mrs. Jellyby 's ? " 
 we say yes , we have pass one night there . 
 " Mrs. Jellyby , " pursue the lady , always speak in the same 
 demonstrative , loud , hard tone , so that her voice impress my 
 fancy as if it have a sort of spectacle on too - and I may take the 
 opportunity of remark that her spectacle be make the less 
 engage by her eye be what Ada call " choke eye , " mean 
 very prominent - " Mrs. Jellyby be a benefactor to society and 
 deserve a help hand . my boy have contribute to the african 
 project - Egbert , one and six , be the entire allowance of nine 
 week ; Oswald , one and a penny halfpenny , be the same ; the rest , 
 accord to their little mean . nevertheless , I do not go with 
 Mrs. Jellyby in all thing . I do not go with Mrs. Jellyby in her 
 treatment of her young family . it have be notice . it have be 
 observe that her young family be exclude from participation in 
 the object to which she be devoted . she may be right , she may be 
 wrong ; but , right or wrong , this be not my course with MY young 
 family . I take they everywhere . " 
 I be afterwards convince   and so be Ada   that from the ill- 
 condition eld child , these word extort a sharp yell . he 
 turn it off into a yawn , but it begin as a yell . 
 " they attend matin with I   very prettily do   at half - past six 
 o'clock in the morning all the year round , include of course the 
 depth of winter , " say Mrs. Pardiggle rapidly , " and they be with 
 I during the revolve duty of the day . I be a School lady , I 
 be a Visiting lady , I be a reading lady , I be a Distributing lady ; 
 I be on the local Linen Box Committee and many general committee ; 
 and my canvassing alone be very extensive - perhaps no one 's more 
 so . but they be my companion everywhere ; and by these mean they 
 acquire that knowledge of the poor , and that capacity of do 
 charitable business in general - in short , that taste for the sort 
 of thing - which will render they in after life a service to their 
 neighbour and a satisfaction to themselves . my young family be 
 not frivolous ; they expend the entire amount of their allowance in 
 subscription , under my direction ; and they have attend as many 
 public meeting and listen to as many lecture , oration , and 
 discussion as generally fall to the lot of few grown people . 
 Alfred   five , who , as I mention , have of his own election join 
 the Infant Bonds of Joy , be one of the very few child who 
 manifest consciousness on that occasion after a fervid address of 
 two hour from the chairman of the evening . " 
 Alfred glower at we as if he never could , or would , forgive the 
 injury of that night . 
 " you may have observe , Miss Summerson , " say Mrs. Pardiggle , " in 
 some of the list to which I have refer , in the possession of 
 our esteemed friend Mr. Jarndyce , that the name of my young family 
 be conclude with the name of O. A. Pardiggle , F.R.S. , one pound . 
 that be their father . we usually observe the same routine . I put 
 down my mite first ; then my young family enrol their contribution , 
 accord to their age and their little mean ; and then Mr. 
 Pardiggle bring up the rear . Mr. Pardiggle be happy to throw in 
 his limited donation , under my direction ; and thus thing be make 
 not only pleasant to ourselves , but , we trust , improve to 
 other . " 
 suppose Mr. Pardiggle be to dine with Mr. Jellyby , and suppose 
 Mr. Jellyby be to relieve his mind after dinner to Mr. Pardiggle , 
 would Mr. Pardiggle , in return , make any confidential communication 
 to Mr. Jellyby ? I be quite confused to find myself think this , 
 but it come into my head . 
 " you be very pleasantly situated here ! " say Mrs. Pardiggle . 
 we be glad to change the subject , and go to the window , 
 point out the beauty of the prospect , on which the spectacle 
 appear to I to rest with curious indifference . 
 " you know Mr. Gusher ? " say our visitor . 
 we be oblige to say that we have not the pleasure of Mr. Gusher 's 
 acquaintance . 
 " the loss be your , I assure you , " say Mrs. Pardiggle with she 
 commanding deportment . " he be a very fervid , impassioned speaker - 
 full of fire ! station in a waggon on this lawn , now , which , from 
 the shape of the land , be naturally adapt to a public meeting , he 
 would improve almost any occasion you could mention for hour and 
 hour ! by this time , young lady , " say Mrs. Pardiggle , move 
 back to her chair and overturning , as if by invisible agency , a 
 little round table at a considerable distance with my work - basket 
 on it , " by this time you have find I out , I dare say ? " 
 this be really such a confusing question that Ada look at I in 
 perfect dismay . as to the guilty nature of my own consciousness 
 after what I have be think , it must have be express in the 
 colour of my cheek . 
 " find out , I mean , " say Mrs. Pardiggle , " the prominent point in 
 my character . I be aware that it be so prominent as to be 
 discoverable immediately . I lie myself open to detection , I know . 
 well ! I freely admit , I be a woman of business . I love hard work ; 
 I enjoy hard work . the excitement do I good . I be so 
 accustomed and inure to hard work that I do not   know what fatigue 
 be . " 
 we murmur that it be very astonishing and very gratifying , or 
 something to that effect . I do not   think we know what it be 
 either , but this be what our politeness express . 
 " I do not understand what it be to be tired ; you can not tire I if 
 you try ! " say Mrs. Pardiggle . " the quantity of exertion   which be 
 no exertion to I , the amount of business   which I regard as 
 nothing , that I go through sometimes astonish myself . I have 
 see my young family , and Mr. Pardiggle , quite wear out with 
 witness it , when I may truly say I have be as fresh as a 
 lark ! " 
 if that dark - visage eld boy could look more malicious than he 
 have already look , this be the time when he do it . I observe 
 that he double his right fist and deliver a secret blow into the 
 crown of his cap , which be under his left arm . 
 " this give I a great advantage when I be make my round , " say 
 Mrs. Pardiggle . " if I find a person unwilling to hear what I have 
 to say , I tell that person directly , ' I be incapable of fatigue , my 
 good friend , I be never tired , and I mean to go on until I have 
 do . ' it answer admirably ! Miss Summerson , I hope I shall have 
 your assistance in my visit round immediately , and Miss Clare 's 
 very soon . " 
 at first I try to excuse myself for the present on the general 
 ground of have occupation to attend to which I must not neglect . 
 but as this be an ineffectual protest , I then say , more 
 particularly , that I be not sure of my qualification . that I be 
 inexperienced in the art of adapt my mind to mind very 
 differently situate , and address they from suitable point of 
 view . that I have not that delicate knowledge of the heart which 
 must be essential to such a work . that I have much to learn , 
 myself , before I could teach other , and that I could not confide 
 in my good intention alone . for these reason I think it well 
 to be as useful as I could , and to render what kind service I 
 could to those immediately about I , and to try to let that circle 
 of duty gradually and naturally expand itself . all this I say 
 with anything but confidence , because Mrs. Pardiggle be much old 
 than I , and have great experience , and be so very military in her 
 manner . 
 " you be wrong , Miss Summerson , " say she , " but perhaps you be not 
 equal to hard work or the excitement of it , and that make a vast 
 difference . if you would like to see how I go through my work , I 
 be now about - with my young family - to visit a brickmaker in the 
 neighbourhood   a very bad character   and shall be glad to take you 
 with I . Miss Clare also , if she will do I the favour . " 
 Ada and I interchange look , and as we be go out in any case , 
 accept the offer . when we hastily return from put on our 
 bonnet , we find the young family languish in a corner and Mrs. 
 Pardiggle sweep about the room , knock down nearly all the 
 light object it contain . Mrs. Pardiggle take possession of Ada , 
 and I follow with the family . 
 Ada tell I afterwards that Mrs. Pardiggle talk in the same loud 
 tone   that , indeed , I overhear   all the way to the brickmaker 's 
 about an exciting contest which she have for two or three year 
 wag against another lady relative to the bringing in of their 
 rival candidate for a pension somewhere . there have be a 
 quantity of printing , and promising , and proxying , and polling , and 
 it appear to have impart great liveliness to all concern , 
 except the pensioner - who be not elect yet . 
 I be very fond of be confide in by child and be happy in 
 be usually favour in that respect , but on this occasion it 
 give I great uneasiness . as soon as we be out of door , Egbert , 
 with the manner of a little footpad , demand a shilling of I on 
 the ground that his pocket - money be " bone " from he . on my 
 point out the great impropriety of the word , especially in 
 connexion with his parent   for he add sulkily " by she ! " , he 
 pinch I and say , " oh , then ! now ! who be you ! you would not 
 like it , I think ? what do she make a sham for , and pretend to 
 give I money , and take it away again ? why do you call it my 
 allowance , and never let I spend it ? " these exasperating 
 question so inflame his mind and the mind of Oswald and Francis 
 that they all pinch I at once , and in a dreadfully expert way - 
 screw up such little piece of my arm that I could hardly 
 forbear cry out . Felix , at the same time , stamp upon my toe . 
 and the Bond of Joy , who on account of always have the whole of 
 his little income anticipate stand in fact pledge to abstain from 
 cake as well as tobacco , so swell with grief and rage when we 
 pass a pastry - cook 's shop that he terrify I by become 
 purple . I never undergo so much , both in body and mind , in the 
 course of a walk with young people as from these unnaturally 
 constrain child when they pay I the compliment of be 
 natural . 
 I be glad when we come to the brickmaker 's house , though it be 
 one of a cluster of wretched hovel in a brick - field , with pigsty 
 close to the break window and miserable little garden before the 
 door grow nothing but stagnant pool . here and there an old 
 tub be put to catch the dropping of rain - water from a roof , or 
 they be bank up with mud into a little pond like a large dirt- 
 pie . at the door and window some man and woman lounge or 
 prowl about , and take little notice of we except to laugh to one 
 another or to say something as we pass about gentlefolk mind 
 their own business and not trouble their head and muddy their 
 shoe with come to look after other people 's . 
 Mrs. Pardiggle , lead the way with a great show of moral 
 determination and talk with much volubility about the untidy 
 habit of the people   though I doubt if the good of we could have 
 be tidy in such a place , conduct we into a cottage at the 
 farth corner , the ground - floor room of which we nearly fill . 
 besides ourselves , there be in this damp , offensive room a woman 
 with a black eye , nurse a poor little gasp baby by the fire ; a 
 man , all stain with clay and mud and look very dissipate , 
 lie at full length on the ground , smoke a pipe ; a powerful 
 young man fasten a collar on a dog ; and a bold girl do some 
 kind of washing in very dirty water . they all look up at we as 
 we come in , and the woman seem to turn her face towards the fire 
 as if to hide her bruised eye ; nobody give we any welcome . 
 " well , my friend , " say Mrs. Pardiggle , but her voice have not a 
 friendly sound , I think ; it be much too business - like and 
 systematic . " how do you do , all of you ? I be here again . I tell 
 you , you could not   tire I , you know . I be fond of hard work , and 
 be true to my word . " 
 " there an't , " growl the man on the floor , whose head rest on 
 his hand as he star at we , " any more on you to come in , be 
 there ? " 
 " no , my friend , " say Mrs. Pardiggle , seat herself on one stool 
 and knock down another . " we be all here . " 
 " because I think there warn't   enough of you , perhaps ? " say the 
 man , with his pipe between his lip as he look round upon we . 
 the young man and the girl both laugh . two friend of the young 
 man , whom we have attract to the doorway and who stand there with 
 their hand in their pocket , echo the laugh noisily . 
 " you can not   tire I , good people , " say Mrs. Pardiggle to these 
 latter . " I enjoy hard work , and the hard you make mine , the 
 well I like it . " 
 " then make it easy for she ! " growl the man upon the floor . " I 
 want it do , and over . I want a end of these liberty take 
 with my place . I want an end of be draw like a badger . now 
 you be a - go to poll - pry and question accord to custom - I know 
 what you be a - go to be up to . well ! you have not   get no 
 occasion to be up to it . I will save you the trouble . be my 
 daughter a - washin ? yes , she be a - washin . look at the water . 
 smell it ! that be wot we drink . how do you like it , and what do 
 you think of gin instead ! An't   my place dirty ? yes , it be dirty - 
 it be nat'rally dirty , and it be nat'rally onwholesome ; and we have   have 
 five dirty and onwholesome child , as be all dead infant , and so 
 much the well for they , and for we besides . have I read the 
 little book wot you leave ? no , I an't   read the little book wot you 
 leave . there an't   nobody here as know how to read it ; and if there 
 wo , it would not   be suitable to I . it be a book fit for a babby , 
 and I be not a babby . if you be to leave I a doll , I should not 
 nuss it . how have I be conduct of myself ? why , I have   be 
 drunk for three day ; and I'da be drunk four if I'da have the 
 money . do not   I never mean for to go to church ? no , I do not   never 
 mean for to go to church . I should not   be expect there , if I do ; 
 the beadle 's too gen - teel for I . and how do my wife get that 
 black eye ? why , I give it she ; and if she say I do not , she be a 
 lie ! " 
 he have pull his pipe out of his mouth to say all this , and he now 
 turn over on his other side and smoke again . Mrs. Pardiggle , 
 who have be regard he through her spectacle with a forcible 
 composure , calculate , I could not help think , to increase his 
 antagonism , pull out a good book as if it be a constable 's 
 staff and take the whole family into custody . I mean into 
 religious custody , of course ; but she really do it as if she be 
 an inexorable moral policeman carry they all off to a station- 
 house . 
 Ada and I be very uncomfortable . we both feel intrusive and out 
 of place , and we both think that Mrs. Pardiggle would have get on 
 infinitely well if she have not have such a mechanical way of 
 take possession of people . the child sulk and star ; the 
 family take no notice of we whatever , except when the young man 
 make the dog bark , which he usually do when Mrs. Pardiggle be 
 most emphatic . we both feel painfully sensible that between we and 
 these people there be an iron barrier which could not be remove 
 by our new friend . by whom or how it could be remove , we do not 
 know , but we know that . even what she read and say seem to we 
 to be ill - choose for such auditor , if it have be impart ever so 
 modestly and with ever so much tact . as to the little book to 
 which the man on the floor have refer , we acquire a knowledge of 
 it afterwards , and Mr. Jarndyce say he doubt if Robinson Crusoe 
 could have read it , though he have have no other on his desolate 
 island . 
 we be much relieved , under these circumstance , when Mrs. 
 Pardiggle leave off . 
 the man on the floor , then turn his head round again , say 
 morosely , " well ! you have   do , have you ? " 
 " for to - day , I have , my friend . but I be never fatigued . I shall 
 come to you again in your regular order , " return Mrs. Pardiggle 
 with demonstrative cheerfulness . 
 " so long as you go now , " say he , fold his arm and shut 
 his eye with an oath , " you may do wot you like ! " 
 Mrs. Pardiggle accordingly rise and make a little vortex in the 
 confine room from which the pipe itself very narrowly escape . 
 take one of her young family in each hand , and tell the other 
 to follow closely , and express her hope that the brickmaker and 
 all his house would be improve when she see they next , she then 
 proceed to another cottage . I hope it be not unkind in I to say 
 that she certainly do make , in this as in everything else , a show 
 that be not conciliatory of do charity by wholesale and of 
 deal in it to a large extent . 
 she suppose that we be follow she , but as soon as the space 
 be leave clear , we approach the woman sit by the fire to ask 
 if the baby be ill . 
 she only look at it as it lie on her lap . we have observe before 
 that when she look at it she cover her discolour eye with her 
 hand , as though she wish to separate any association with noise 
 and violence and ill treatment from the poor little child . 
 Ada , whose gentle heart be move by its appearance , bend down to 
 touch its little face . as she do so , I see what happen and draw 
 she back . the child die . 
 " oh , Esther ! " cry Ada , sink on her knee beside it . " look 
 here ! oh , Esther , my love , the little thing ! the suffering , 
 quiet , pretty little thing ! I be so sorry for it . I be so sorry 
 for the mother . I never see a sight so pitiful as this before ! 
 oh , baby , baby ! " 
 such compassion , such gentleness , as that with which she bend down 
 weeping and put her hand upon the mother 's might have soften any 
 mother 's heart that ever beat . the woman at first gaze at she in 
 astonishment and then burst into tear . 
 presently I take the light burden from her lap , do what I could to 
 make the baby 's rest the pretty and gentle , lay it on a shelf , 
 and cover it with my own handkerchief . we try to comfort the 
 mother , and we whisper to she what our Saviour say of child . 
 she answer nothing , but sit weeping - weep very much . 
 when I turn , I find that the young man have take out the dog and 
 be stand at the door look in upon we with dry eye , but 
 quiet . the girl be quiet too and sit in a corner look on the 
 ground . the man have rise . he still smoke his pipe with an air 
 of defiance , but he be silent . 
 an ugly woman , very poorly clothe , hurry in while I be glance 
 at they , and come straight up to the mother , say , " Jenny ! 
 Jenny ! " the mother rise on be so address and fall upon the 
 woman 's neck . 
 she also have upon her face and arm the mark of ill usage . she 
 have no kind of grace about she , but the grace of sympathy ; but when 
 she condole with the woman , and her own tear fall , she want no 
 beauty . I say condole , but her only word be " Jenny ! Jenny ! " 
 all the rest be in the tone in which she say they . 
 I think it very touching to see these two woman , coarse and 
 shabby and beat , so united ; to see what they could be to one 
 another ; to see how they feel for one another , how the heart of 
 each to each be soften by the hard trial of their life . I 
 think the good side of such people be almost hide from we . what 
 the poor be to the poor be little know , except to themselves 
 and God . 
 we feel it well to withdraw and leave they uninterrupted . we 
 steal out quietly and without notice from any one except the man . 
 he be lean against the wall near the door , and find that 
 there be scarcely room for we to pass , go out before we . he 
 seem to want to hide that he do this on our account , but we 
 perceive that he do , and thank he . he make no answer . 
 Ada be so full of grief all the way home , and Richard , whom we 
 find at home , be so distressed to see she in tear   though he 
 say to I , when she be not present , how beautiful it be too ! , 
 that we arrange to return at night with some little comfort and 
 repeat our visit at the brick - maker 's house . we say as little as 
 we could to Mr. Jarndyce , but the wind change directly . 
 Richard accompany we at night to the scene of our morning 
 expedition . on our way there , we have to pass a noisy drinking- 
 house , where a number of man be flock about the door . among 
 they , and prominent in some dispute , be the father of the little 
 child . at a short distance , we pass the young man and the dog , 
 in congenial company . the sister be stand laugh and talk 
 with some other young woman at the corner of the row of cottage , 
 but she seem ashamed and turn away as we go by . 
 we leave our escort within sight of the brickmaker 's dwelling and 
 proceed by ourselves . when we come to the door , we find the 
 woman who have bring such consolation with her stand there 
 look anxiously out . 
 " it be you , young lady , be it ? " she say in a whisper . " I be a- 
 watch for my master . my heart be in my mouth . if he be to 
 catch I away from home , he would pretty near murder I . " 
 " do you mean your husband ? " say I. 
 " yes , miss , my master . Jenny 's asleep , quite wear out . she be 
 scarcely have the child off her lap , poor thing , these seven day 
 and night , except when I have   be able to take it for a minute or 
 two . " 
 as she give way for we , she go softly in and put what we have 
 bring near the miserable bed on which the mother sleep . no 
 effort have be make to clean the room - it seem in its nature 
 almost hopeless of be clean ; but the small waxen form from which 
 so much solemnity diffuse itself have be compose afresh , and 
 wash , and neatly dress in some fragment of white linen ; and on 
 my handkerchief , which still cover the poor baby , a little bunch 
 of sweet herb have be lay by the same rough , scarred hand , so 
 lightly , so tenderly ! 
 " may heaven reward you ! " we say to she . " you be a good woman . " 
 " I , young lady ? " she return with surprise . " hush ! Jenny , 
 Jenny ! " 
 the mother have moan in her sleep and move . the sound of the 
 familiar voice seem to calm she again . she be quiet once more . 
 how little I think , when I raise my handkerchief to look upon 
 the tiny sleeper underneath and seem to see a halo shine around 
 the child through Ada 's droop hair as her pity bend her head - 
 how little I think in whose unquiet bosom that handkerchief would 
 come to lie after cover the motionless and peaceful breast ! I 
 only think that perhaps the Angel of the child might not be all 
 unconscious of the woman who replace it with so compassionate a 
 hand ; not all unconscious of she presently , when we have take 
 leave , and leave she at the door , by turn look , and listen in 
 terror for herself , and say in her old soothing manner , " Jenny , 
 Jenny ! " 
 CHAPTER ix 
 Signs and Tokens 
 I do not   know how it be I seem to be always write about myself . I 
 mean all the time to write about other people , and I try to think 
 about myself as little as possible , and I be sure , when I find 
 myself come into the story again , I be really vex and say , 
 " dear , dear , you tiresome little creature , I wish you would not ! " 
 but it be all of no use . I hope any one who may read what I write 
 will understand that if these page contain a great deal about I , 
 I can only suppose it must be because I have really something to do 
 with they and can not   be keep out . 
 my darling and I read together , and work , and practise , and 
 find so much employment for our time that the winter day fly by 
 we like bright - wing bird . generally in the afternoon , and 
 always in the evening , Richard give we his company . although he 
 be one of the most restless creature in the world , he certainly 
 be very fond of our society . 
 he be very , very , very fond of Ada . I mean it , and I have well 
 say it at once . I have never see any young people fall in love 
 before , but I find they out quite soon . I could not say so , of 
 course , or show that I know anything about it . on the contrary , I 
 be so demure and use to seem so unconscious that sometimes I 
 consider within myself while I be sit at work whether I be 
 not grow quite deceitful . 
 but there be no help for it . all I have to do be to be quiet , and 
 I be as quiet as a mouse . they be as quiet as mouse too , so far 
 as any word be concern , but the innocent manner in which they 
 rely more and more upon I as they take more and more to one 
 another be so charming that I have great difficulty in not show 
 how it interest I . 
 " our dear little old woman be such a capital old woman , " Richard 
 would say , come up to meet I in the garden early , with his 
 pleasant laugh and perhaps the least tinge of a blush , " that I 
 can not   get on without she . before I begin my harum - scarum day - 
 grind away at those book and instrument and then gallop up 
 hill and down dale , all the country round , like a highwayman - it 
 do I so much good to come and have a steady walk with our 
 comfortable friend , that here I be again ! " 
 " you know , Dame Durden , dear , " Ada would say at night , with she 
 head upon my shoulder and the firelight shin in her thoughtful 
 eye , " I do not   want to talk when we come upstairs here . only to 
 sit a little while think , with your dear face for company , and 
 to hear the wind and remember the poor sailor at sea - " 
 ah ! perhaps Richard be go to be a sailor . we have talk it 
 over very often now , and there be some talk of gratify the 
 inclination of his childhood for the sea . Mr. Jarndyce have write 
 to a relation of the family , a great Sir Leicester Dedlock , for his 
 interest in Richard 's favour , generally ; and Sir Leicester have 
 reply in a gracious manner that he would be happy to advance the 
 prospect of the young gentleman if it should ever prove to be 
 within his power , which be not at all probable , and that my Lady 
 send her compliment to the young gentleman   to whom she perfectly 
 remember that she be ally by remote consanguinity   and trust 
 that he would ever do his duty in any honourable profession to 
 which he might devote himself . 
 " so I apprehend it be pretty clear , " say Richard to I , " that I 
 shall have to work my own way . never mind ! plenty of people have 
 have to do that before now , and have do it . I only wish I have the 
 command of a clip privateer to begin with and could carry off 
 the Chancellor and keep he on short allowance until he give 
 judgment in our cause . he would find himself grow thin , if he 
 do not   look sharp ! " 
 with a buoyancy and hopefulness and a gaiety that hardly ever 
 flag , Richard have a carelessness in his character that quite 
 perplex I , principally because he mistake it , in such a very odd 
 way , for prudence . it enter into all his calculation about 
 money in a singular manner which I do not   think I can well explain 
 than by revert for a moment to our loan to Mr. Skimpole . 
 Mr. Jarndyce have ascertain the amount , either from Mr. Skimpole 
 himself or from Coavinses , and have place the money in my hand 
 with instruction to I to retain my own part of it and hand the 
 rest to Richard . the number of little act of thoughtless 
 expenditure which Richard justify by the recovery of his ten 
 pound , and the number of time he talk to I as if he have save 
 or realize that amount , would form a sum in simple addition . 
 " my prudent Mother Hubbard , why not ? " he say to I when he want , 
 without the least consideration , to bestow five pound on the 
 brickmaker . " I make ten pound , clear , out of Coavinses ' 
 business . " 
 " how be that ? " say I. 
 " why , I get rid of ten pound which I be quite content to get rid 
 of and never expect to see any more . you do not   deny that ? " 
 " no , " say I. 
 " very well ! then I come into possession of ten pound - " 
 " the same ten pound , " I hint . 
 " that have nothing to do with it ! " return Richard . " I have get 
 ten pound more than I expect to have , and consequently I can 
 afford to spend it without be particular . " 
 in exactly the same way , when he be persuade out of the sacrifice 
 of these five pound by be convince that it would do no good , 
 he carry that sum to his credit and draw upon it . 
 " let I see ! " he would say . " I save five pound out of the 
 brickmaker 's affair , so if I have a good rattle to London and back 
 in a post - chaise and put that down at four pound , I shall have 
 save one . and it be a very good thing to save one , let I tell 
 you : a penny save be a penny get ! " 
 I believe Richard 's be as frank and generous a nature as there 
 possibly can be . he be ardent and brave , and in the midst of all 
 his wild restlessness , be so gentle that I know he like a brother 
 in a few week . his gentleness be natural to he and would have 
 show itself abundantly even without Ada 's influence ; but with it , 
 he become one of the most winning of companion , always so ready to 
 be interested and always so happy , sanguine , and light - hearted . I 
 be sure that I , sit with they , and walk with they , and 
 talk with they , and notice from day to day how they go on , 
 fall deep and deep in love , and say nothing about it , and 
 each shyly think that this love be the great of secret , 
 perhaps not yet suspect even by the other - I be sure that I be 
 scarcely less enchant than they be and scarcely less pleased 
 with the pretty dream . 
 we be go on in this way , when one morning at breakfast Mr. 
 Jarndyce receive a letter , and look at the superscription , 
 say , " from Boythorn ? Aye , aye ! " and open and read it with 
 evident pleasure , announce to we in a parenthesis when he be 
 about half - way through , that Boythorn be " come down " on a visit . 
 now who be Boythorn , we all think . and I dare say we all 
 think too - I be sure I do , for one - would boythorn at all 
 interfere with what be go forward ? 
 " I go to school with this fellow , Lawrence Boythorn , " say Mr. 
 Jarndyce , tap the letter as he lay it on the table , " more than 
 five and forty year ago . he be then the most impetuous boy in 
 the world , and he be now the most impetuous man . he be then the 
 loud boy in the world , and he be now the loud man . he be 
 then the heartiest and sturdy boy in the world , and he be now 
 the heartiest and sturdy man . he be a tremendous fellow . " 
 " in stature , sir ? " ask Richard . 
 " pretty well , Rick , in that respect , " say Mr. Jarndyce ; " be 
 some ten year old than I and a couple of inch tall , with his 
 head throw back like an old soldier , his stalwart chest square , 
 his hand like a clean blacksmith 's , and his lung ! there be no 
 simile for his lung . talk , laughing , or snore , they make the 
 beam of the house shake . " 
 as Mr. Jarndyce sit enjoy the image of his friend Boythorn , we 
 observe the favourable omen that there be not the least 
 indication of any change in the wind . 
 " but it be the inside of the man , the warm heart of the man , the 
 passion of the man , the fresh blood of the man , Rick - and Ada , and 
 little Cobweb too , for you be all interested in a visitor - that I 
 speak of , " he pursue . " his language be as sound as his voice . 
 he be always in extreme , perpetually in the superlative degree . 
 in his condemnation he be all ferocity . you might suppose he to 
 be an ogre from what he say , and I believe he have the reputation 
 of one with some people . there ! I tell you no more of he 
 beforehand . you must not be surprised to see he take I under his 
 protection , for he have never forget that I be a low boy at 
 school and that our friendship begin in his knock two of my head 
 tyrant 's tooth out   he say six   before breakfast . boythorn and 
 his man , " to I , " will be here this afternoon , my dear . " 
 I take care that the necessary preparation be make for Mr. 
 Boythorn 's reception , and we look forward to his arrival with 
 some curiosity . the afternoon wear away , however , and he do not 
 appear . the dinner - hour arrive , and still he do not appear . the 
 dinner be put back an hour , and we be sit round the fire 
 with no light but the blaze when the hall - door suddenly burst open 
 and the hall resound with these word , utter with the great 
 vehemence and in a stentorian tone : " we have be misdirect , 
 Jarndyce , by a most abandon ruffian , who tell we to take the 
 turn to the right instead of to the left . he be the most 
 intolerable scoundrel on the face of the earth . his father must 
 have be a most consummate villain , ever to have such a son . I 
 would have have that fellow shot without the least remorse ! " 
 " do he do it on purpose ? " Mr. Jarndyce inquire . 
 " I have not the slight doubt that the scoundrel have pass his 
 whole existence in misdirect traveller ! " return the other . 
 " by my soul , I think he the worst - look dog I have ever beheld 
 when he be tell I to take the turning to the right . and yet I 
 stand before that fellow face to face and do not   knock his brain 
 out ! " 
 " Teeth , you mean ? " say Mr. Jarndyce . 
 " ha , ha , ha ! " laugh Mr. Lawrence Boythorn , really make the 
 whole house vibrate . " what , you have not forget it yet ! ha , 
 ha , ha ! and that be another most consummate vagabond ! by my 
 soul , the countenance of that fellow when he be a boy be the 
 black image of perfidy , cowardice , and cruelty ever set up as a 
 scarecrow in a field of scoundrel . if I be to meet that most 
 unparalleled despot in the street to - morrow , I would fall he like 
 a rotten tree ! " 
 " I have no doubt of it , " say Mr. Jarndyce . " now , will you come 
 upstairs ? " 
 " by my soul , Jarndyce , " return his guest , who seem to refer to 
 his watch , " if you have be marry , I would have turn back at 
 the garden - gate and go away to the remotest summit of the 
 Himalaya Mountains soon than I would have present myself at 
 this unseasonable hour . " 
 " not quite so far , I hope ? " say Mr. Jarndyce . 
 " by my life and honour , yes ! " cry the visitor . " I would not   be 
 guilty of the audacious insolence of keep a lady of the house 
 wait all this time for any earthly consideration . I would 
 infinitely rather destroy myself - infinitely rather ! " 
 talk thus , they go upstairs , and presently we hear he in his 
 bedroom thunder " ha , ha , ha ! " and again " ha , ha , ha ! " until the 
 flat echo in the neighbourhood seem to catch the contagion 
 and to laugh as enjoyingly as he do or as we do when we hear he 
 laugh . 
 we all conceive a prepossession in his favour , for there be a 
 sterling quality in this laugh , and in his vigorous , healthy voice , 
 and in the roundness and fullness with which he utter every word 
 he speak , and in the very fury of his superlative , which seem to 
 go off like blank cannon and hurt nothing . but we be hardly 
 prepared to have it so confirm by his appearance when Mr. 
 Jarndyce present he . he be not only a very handsome old 
 gentleman - upright and stalwart as he have be describe to we - 
 with a massive grey head , a fine composure of face when silent , a 
 figure that might have become corpulent but for his be so 
 continually in earnest that he give it no rest , and a chin that 
 might have subside into a double chin but for the vehement 
 emphasis in which it be constantly require to assist ; but he be 
 such a true gentleman in his manner , so chivalrously polite , his 
 face be light by a smile of so much sweetness and tenderness , 
 and it seem so plain that he have nothing to hide , but show 
 himself exactly as he be - incapable , as Richard say , of anything 
 on a limited scale , and fire away with those blank great gun 
 because he carry no small arm whatever - that really I could not 
 help look at he with equal pleasure as he sit at dinner , 
 whether he smilingly converse with Ada and I , or be lead by Mr. 
 Jarndyce into some great volley of superlative , or throw up his 
 head like a bloodhound and give out that tremendous " ha , ha , ha ! " 
 " you have bring your bird with you , I suppose ? " say Mr. 
 Jarndyce . 
 " by heaven , he be the most astonishing bird in Europe ! " reply the 
 other . " he be the most wonderful creature ! I would not   take ten 
 thousand guineas for that bird . I have leave an annuity for his 
 sole support in case he should outlive I . he be , in sense and 
 attachment , a phenomenon . and his father before he be one of the 
 most astonishing bird that ever live ! " 
 the subject of this laudation be a very little canary , who be so 
 tame that he be bring down by Mr. Boythorn 's man , on his 
 forefinger , and after take a gentle flight round the room , 
 alight on his master 's head . to hear Mr. Boythorn presently 
 express the most implacable and passionate sentiment , with this 
 fragile mite of a creature quietly perch on his forehead , be to 
 have a good illustration of his character , I think . 
 " by my soul , Jarndyce , " he say , very gently hold up a bit of 
 bread to the canary to peck at , " if I be in your place I would 
 seize every master in Chancery by the throat to - morrow morning and 
 shake he until his money roll out of his pocket and his bone 
 rattle in his skin . I would have a settlement out of somebody , by 
 fair mean or by foul . if you would empower I to do it , I would 
 do it for you with the great satisfaction ! "   all this time the 
 very small canary be eat out of his hand . 
 " I thank you , Lawrence , but the suit be hardly at such a point at 
 present , " return Mr. Jarndyce , laugh , " that it would be 
 greatly advanced even by the legal process of shake the bench and 
 the whole bar . " 
 " there never be such an infernal cauldron as that Chancery on the 
 face of the earth ! " say Mr. Boythorn . " nothing but a mine below 
 it on a busy day in term time , with all its record , rule , and 
 precedent collect in it and every functionary belong to it 
 also , high and low , upward and downward , from its son the 
 Accountant - General to its father the Devil , and the whole blow to 
 atom with ten thousand hundredweight of gunpowder , would reform it 
 in the least ! " 
 it be impossible not to laugh at the energetic gravity with which 
 he recommend this strong measure of reform . when we laugh , he 
 throw up his head and shake his broad chest , and again the whole 
 country seem to echo to his " ha , ha , ha ! " it have not the least 
 effect in disturb the bird , whose sense of security be complete 
 and who hop about the table with its quick head now on this side 
 and now on that , turn its bright sudden eye on its master as if 
 he be no more than another bird . 
 " but how do you and your neighbour get on about the dispute right 
 of way ? " say Mr. Jarndyce . " you be not free from the toil of 
 the law yourself ! " 
 " the fellow have bring action against I for trespass , and I have 
 bring action against HIM for trespass , " return Mr. Boythorn . 
 " by heaven , he be the proud fellow breathing . it be morally 
 impossible that his name can be Sir Leicester . it must be Sir 
 Lucifer . " 
 " complimentary to our distant relation ! " say my guardian 
 laughingly to Ada and Richard . 
 " I would beg Miss Clare 's pardon and Mr. Carstone 's pardon , " 
 resume our visitor , " if I be not reassure by see in the fair 
 face of the lady and the smile of the gentleman that it be quite 
 unnecessary and that they keep their distant relation at a 
 comfortable distance . " 
 " or he keep we , " suggest Richard . 
 " by my soul , " exclaim Mr. Boythorn , suddenly fire another 
 volley , " that fellow be , and his father be , and his grandfather 
 be , the most stiff - neck , arrogant imbecile , pig - head numskull , 
 ever , by some inexplicable mistake of Nature , bear in any station 
 of life but a walking - stick 's ! the whole of that family be the 
 most solemnly conceited and consummate blockhead ! but it be no 
 matter ; he should not shut up my path if he be fifty baronet 
 melt into one and live in a hundred Chesney Wolds , one within 
 another , like the ivory ball in a chinese carving . the fellow , by 
 his agent , or secretary , or somebody , write to I ' Sir Leicester 
 Dedlock , Baronet , present his compliment to Mr. Lawrence 
 Boythorn , and have to call his attention to the fact that the green 
 pathway by the old parsonage - house , now the property of Mr. 
 Lawrence Boythorn , be Sir Leicester 's right of way , be in fact a 
 portion of the park of chesney Wold , and that Sir Leicester find 
 it convenient to close up the same . ' I write to the fellow , ' Mr. 
 Lawrence Boythorn present his compliment to Sir Leicester 
 Dedlock , Baronet , and have to call his attention to the fact that he 
 totally deny the whole of Sir Leicester Dedlock 's position on 
 every possible subject and have to add , in reference to close up 
 the pathway , that he will be glad to see the man who may undertake 
 to do it . ' the fellow send a most abandon villain with one eye 
 to construct a gateway . I play upon that execrable scoundrel with 
 a fire - engine until the breath be nearly drive out of his body . 
 the fellow erect a gate in the night . I chop it down and burn it 
 in the morning . he send his myrmidon to come over the fence and 
 pass and repass . I catch they in humane man trap , fire split pea 
 at their leg , play upon they with the engine - resolve to free 
 mankind from the insupportable burden of the existence of those 
 lurk ruffian . he bring action for trespass ; I bring action 
 for trespass . he bring action for assault and battery ; I defend 
 they and continue to assault and batter . ha , ha , ha ! " 
 to hear he say all this with unimaginable energy , one might have 
 think he the angriest of mankind . to see he at the very same 
 time , look at the bird now perch upon his thumb and softly 
 smooth its feather with his forefinger , one might have think 
 he the gentle . to hear he laugh and see the broad good nature 
 of his face then , one might have suppose that he have not a care in 
 the world , or a dispute , or a dislike , but that his whole existence 
 be a summer joke . 
 " no , no , " he say , " no closing up of my path by any Dedlock ! 
 though I willingly confess , " here he soften in a moment , " that 
 Lady Dedlock be the most accomplished lady in the world , to whom I 
 would do any homage that a plain gentleman , and no baronet with a 
 head seven hundred year thick , may . a man who join his regiment 
 at twenty and within a week challenge the most imperious and 
 presumptuous coxcomb of a command officer that ever draw the 
 breath of life through a tight waist - and get break for it - be not 
 the man to be walk over by all the Sir Lucifers , dead or alive , 
 locked or unlocked . ha , ha , ha ! " 
 " nor the man to allow his junior to be walk over either ? " say my 
 guardian . 
 " most assuredly not ! " say Mr. Boythorn , clap he on the 
 shoulder with an air of protection that have something serious in 
 it , though he laugh . " he will stand by the low boy , always . 
 Jarndyce , you may rely upon he ! but speak of this trespass - 
 with apology to Miss Clare and Miss Summerson for the length at 
 which I have pursue so dry a subject - be there nothing for I from 
 your man Kenge and Carboy ? " 
 " I think not , Esther ? " say Mr. Jarndyce . 
 " nothing , guardian . " 
 " much oblige ! " say Mr. Boythorn . " have no need to ask , after even 
 my slight experience of Miss Summerson 's forethought for every one 
 about she . "   they all encourage I ; they be determined to do 
 it .   " I inquire because , come from Lincolnshire , I of course 
 have not yet be in town , and I think some letter might have 
 be send down here . I dare say they will report progress to- 
 morrow morning . " 
 I see he so often in the course of the evening , which pass very 
 pleasantly , contemplate Richard and Ada with an interest and a 
 satisfaction that make his fine face remarkably agreeable as he sit 
 at a little distance from the piano listen to the music - and he 
 have small occasion to tell we that he be passionately fond of 
 music , for his face show it - that I ask my guardian as we sit 
 at the backgammon board whether Mr. Boythorn have ever be marry . 
 " no , " say he . " no . " 
 " but he mean to be ! " say I. 
 " how do you find out that ? " he return with a smile . " why , 
 guardian , " I explain , not without redden a little at hazard 
 what be in my thought , " there be something so tender in his 
 manner , after all , and he be so very courtly and gentle to we , and 
  - " 
 Mr. Jarndyce direct his eye to where he be sit as I have 
 just describe he . 
 I say no more . 
 " you be right , little woman , " he answer . " he be all but 
 marry once . long ago . and once . " 
 " do the lady die ? " 
 " no - but she die to he . that time have have its influence on all 
 his later life . would you suppose he to have a head and a heart 
 full of romance yet ? " 
 " I think , guardian , I might have suppose so . but it be easy to 
 say that when you have tell I so . " 
 " he have never since be what he might have be , " say Mr. 
 Jarndyce , " and now you see he in his age with no one near he but 
 his servant and his little yellow friend . it be your throw , my 
 dear ! " 
 I feel , from my guardian 's manner , that beyond this point I could 
 not pursue the subject without change the wind . I therefore 
 forbore to ask any further question . I be interested , but not 
 curious . I think a little while about this old love story in the 
 night , when I be awaken by Mr. Boythorn 's lusty snoring ; and I 
 try to do that very difficult thing , imagine old people young 
 again and invest with the grace of youth . but I fall asleep 
 before I have succeed , and dream of the day when I live in my 
 godmother 's house . I be not sufficiently acquaint with such 
 subject to know whether it be at all remarkable that I almost 
 always dream of that period of my life . 
 with the morning there come a letter from Messrs. Kenge and Carboy 
 to Mr. Boythorn inform he that one of their clerk would wait 
 upon he at noon . as it be the day of the week on which I pay the 
 bill , and add up my book , and make all the household affair as 
 compact as possible , I remain at home while Mr. Jarndyce , Ada , and 
 Richard take advantage of a very fine day to make a little 
 excursion , Mr. Boythorn be to wait for Kenge and Carboy 's clerk and 
 then be to go on foot to meet they on their return . 
 well ! I be full of business , examine tradesman 's book , add 
 up column , pay money , filing receipt , and I dare say make a 
 great bustle about it when Mr. Guppy be announce and show in . I 
 have have some idea that the clerk who be to be send down might be 
 the young gentleman who have meet I at the coach - office , and I be 
 glad to see he , because he be associate with my present 
 happiness . 
 I scarcely know he again , he be so uncommonly smart . he have an 
 entirely new suit of glossy clothe on , a shin hat , lilac - kid 
 glove , a neckerchief of a variety of colour , a large hot - house 
 flower in his button - hole , and a thick gold ring on his little 
 finger . besides which , he quite scent the dining - room with 
 bear's - grease and other perfumery . he look at I with an 
 attention that quite confuse I when I beg he to take a seat 
 until the servant should return ; and as he sit there cross and 
 uncross his leg in a corner , and I ask he if he have have a 
 pleasant ride , and hop that Mr. Kenge be well , I never look at 
 he , but I find he look at I in the same scrutinizing and 
 curious way . 
 when the request be bring to he that he would go upstairs to 
 Mr. Boythorn 's room , I mention that he would find lunch prepare 
 for he when he come down , of which Mr. Jarndyce hop he would 
 partake . he say with some embarrassment , hold the handle of the 
 door , " shall I have the honour of find you here , miss ? " I 
 reply yes , I should be there ; and he go out with a bow and 
 another look . 
 I think he only awkward and shy , for he be evidently much 
 embarrassed ; and I fancy that the good thing I could do would be 
 to wait until I see that he have everything he want and then to 
 leave he to himself . the lunch be soon bring , but it remain 
 for some time on the table . the interview with Mr. Boythorn be a 
 long one , and a stormy one too , I should think , for although his 
 room be at some distance I hear his loud voice rise every now 
 and then like a high wind , and evidently blow perfect broadside 
 of denunciation . 
 at last Mr. Guppy come back , look something the bad for the 
 conference . " my eye , miss , " he say in a low voice , " he be a 
 Tartar ! " 
 " pray take some refreshment , sir , " say I. 
 Mr. Guppy sit down at the table and begin nervously sharpen the 
 carving - knife on the carving - fork , still look at I   as I feel 
 quite sure without look at he   in the same unusual manner . the 
 sharpening last so long that at last I feel a kind of obligation 
 on I to raise my eye in order that I might break the spell under 
 which he seem to labour , of not be able to leave off . 
 he immediately look at the dish and begin to carve . 
 " what will you take yourself , miss ? you will take a morsel of 
 something ? " 
 " no , thank you , " say I. 
 " shall not   I give you a piece of anything at all , miss ? " say Mr. 
 Guppy , hurriedly drink off a glass of wine . 
 " nothing , thank you , " say I. " I have only wait to see that you 
 have everything you want . be there anything I can order for you ? " 
 " no , I be much oblige to you , miss , I be sure . I have   everything that 
 I can require to make I comfortable - at least I - not comfortable - 
 I be never that . " he drink off two more glass of wine , one after 
 another . 
 I think I have well go . 
 " I beg your pardon , miss ! " say Mr. Guppy , rise when he see I 
 rise . " but would you allow I the favour of a minute 's private 
 conversation ? " 
 not know what to say , I sit down again . 
 " what follow be without prejudice , miss ? " say Mr. Guppy , anxiously 
 bring a chair towards my table . 
 " I do not   understand what you mean , " say I , wonder . 
 " it be one of our law term , miss . you will not   make any use of it to 
 my detriment at Kenge and Carboy 's or elsewhere . if our 
 conversation should not   lead to anything , I be to be as I be and be 
 not to be prejudice in my situation or worldly prospect . in 
 short , it be in total confidence . " 
 " I be at a loss , sir , " say I , " to imagine what you can have to 
 communicate in total confidence to I , whom you have never see but 
 once ; but I should be very sorry to do you any injury . " 
 " thank you , miss . I be sure of it - that be quite sufficient . " all 
 this time Mr. Guppy be either plan his forehead with his 
 handkerchief or tightly rub the palm of his left hand with the 
 palm of his right . " if you would excuse my take another glass of 
 wine , miss , I think it might assist I in get on without a 
 continual choke that can not fail to be mutually unpleasant . " 
 he do so , and come back again . I take the opportunity of move 
 well behind my table . 
 " you would not   allow I to offer you one , would you miss ? " say Mr. 
 Guppy , apparently refresh . 
 " not any , " say I. 
 " not half a glass ? " say Mr. Guppy . " Quarter ? no ! then , to 
 proceed . my present salary , Miss Summerson , at Kenge and Carboy 's , 
 be two pound a week . when I first have the happiness of look upon 
 you , it be one fifteen , and have stand at that figure for a 
 lengthen period . a rise of five have since take place , and a 
 further rise of five be guarantee at the expiration of a term not 
 exceed twelve month from the present date . my mother have a 
 little property , which take the form of a small life annuity , upon 
 which she live in an independent though unassuming manner in the 
 Old Street Road . she be eminently calculate for a mother - in - law . 
 she never interfere , be all for peace , and her disposition easy . 
 she have her failing - as who have not ? - but I never know she do it 
 when company be present , at which time you may freely trust she 
 with wine , spirit , or malt liquor . my own abode be lodging at 
 Penton Place , Pentonville . it be lowly , but airy , open at the back , 
 and consider one of the ' ealthiest outlet . Miss Summerson ! in 
 the mild language , I adore you . would you be so kind as to allow 
 I   as I may say   to file a declaration - to make an offer ! " 
 Mr. Guppy go down on his knee . I be well behind my table and 
 not much frightened . I say , " get up from that ridiculous position 
 immediately , sir , or you will oblige I to break my imply promise 
 and ring the bell ! " 
 " hear I out , miss ! " say Mr. Guppy , fold his hand . 
 " I can not consent to hear another word , sir , " I return , " unless 
 you get up from the carpet directly and go and sit down at the table 
 as you ought to do if you have any sense at all . " 
 he look piteously , but slowly rise and do so . 
 " yet what a mockery it be , miss , " he say with his hand upon his 
 heart and shake his head at I in a melancholy manner over the 
 tray , " to be station behind food at such a moment . the soul 
 recoil from food at such a moment , miss . " 
 " I beg you to conclude , " say I ; " you have ask I to hear you out , 
 and I beg you to conclude . " 
 " I will , miss , " say Mr. Guppy . " as I love and honour , so likewise 
 I obey . would that I could make thee the subject of that vow before 
 the shrine ! " 
 " that be quite impossible , " say I , " and entirely out of the 
 question . " 
 " I be aware , " say Mr. Guppy , lean forward over the tray and 
 regard I , as I again strangely feel , though my eye be not 
 direct to he , with his late intent look , " I be aware that in a 
 worldly point of view , accord to all appearance , my offer be a 
 poor one . but , Miss Summerson ! Angel ! no , do not   ring - I have be 
 bring up in a sharp school and be accustom to a variety of 
 general practice . though a young man , I have ferret out evidence , 
 get up case , and see lot of life . Blest with your hand , what 
 mean might I not find of advance your interest and push your 
 fortune ! what might I not get to know , nearly concern you ? I 
 know nothing now , certainly ; but what might I not if I have your 
 confidence , and you set I on ? " 
 I tell he that he address my interest or what he suppose to be 
 my interest quite as unsuccessfully as he address my inclination , 
 and he would now understand that I request he , if he please , to 
 go away immediately . 
 " Cruel miss , " say Mr. Guppy , " hear but another word ! I think you 
 must have see that I be strike with those charm on the day when I 
 wait at the Whytorseller . I think you must have remark that I 
 could not forbear a tribute to those charm when I put up the step 
 of the ' ackney - coach . it be a feeble tribute to thee , but it be 
 well mean . Thy image have ever since be fix in my breast . I 
 have walk up and down of an evening opposite Jellyby 's house only 
 to look upon the brick that once contain thee . this out of to- 
 day , quite an unnecessary out so far as the attendance , which be 
 its pretended object , go , be plan by I alone for thee alone . 
 if I speak of interest , it be only to recommend myself and my 
 respectful wretchedness . love be before it , and be before it . " 
 " I should be pain , Mr. Guppy , " say I , rise and put my hand 
 upon the bell - rope , " to do you or any one who be sincere the 
 injustice of slight any honest feeling , however disagreeably 
 express . if you have really mean to give I a proof of your good 
 opinion , though ill - time and misplace , I feel that I ought to 
 thank you . I have very little reason to be proud , and I be not 
 proud . I hope , " I think I add , without very well know what I 
 say , " that you will now go away as if you have never be so 
 exceedingly foolish and attend to Messrs. Kenge and Carboy 's 
 business . " 
 " half a minute , miss ! " cry Mr. Guppy , check I as I be about 
 to ring . " this have be without prejudice ? " 
 " I will never mention it , " say I , " unless you should give I future 
 occasion to do so . " 
 " a quarter of a minute , miss ! in case you should think well at 
 any time , however distant - that be no consequence , for my feeling 
 can never alter - of anything I have say , particularly what might I 
 not do , Mr. William Guppy , eighty - seven , Penton Place , or if 
 remove , or dead   of blighted hope or anything of that sort , care 
 of Mrs. Guppy , three hundred and two , Old Street Road , will be 
 sufficient . " 
 I ring the bell , the servant come , and Mr. Guppy , lay his write 
 card upon the table and make a dejected bow , depart . raise my 
 eye as he go out , I once more see he look at I after he have 
 pass the door . 
 I sit there for another hour or more , finish my book and 
 payment and get through plenty of business . then I arrange my 
 desk , and put everything away , and be so composed and cheerful that 
 I think I have quite dismiss this unexpected incident . but , when 
 I go upstairs to my own room , I surprise myself by begin to 
 laugh about it and then surprise myself still more by begin to 
 cry about it . in short , I be in a flutter for a little while and 
 feel as if an old chord have be more coarsely touch than it ever 
 have be since the day of the dear old doll , long bury in the 
 garden . 
 CHAPTER X 
 the Law - Writer 
 on the eastern border of Chancery Lane , that be to say , more 
 particularly in Cook 's Court , Cursitor Street , Mr. Snagsby , law- 
 stationer , pursue his lawful calling . in the shade of Cook 's 
 Court , at most time a shady place , Mr. Snagsby have deal in all 
 sort of blank form of legal process ; in skin and roll of 
 parchment ; in paper - foolscap , brief , draft , brown , white , whitey- 
 brown , and blot ; in stamp ; in office - quill , pen , ink , india- 
 rubber , pounce , pin , pencil , sealing - wax , and wafer ; in red tape 
 and green ferret ; in pocket - book , almanac , diary , and law list ; 
 in string box , ruler , inkstand - glass and leaden - pen - knife , 
 scissor , bodkin , and other small office - cutlery ; in short , in 
 article too numerous to mention , ever since he be out of his time 
 and go into partnership with Peffer . on that occasion , Cook 's 
 Court be in a manner revolutionize by the new inscription in fresh 
 paint , PEFFER and SNAGSBY , displace the time - honour and not 
 easily to be decipher legend PEFFER only . for smoke , which be the 
 London ivy , have so wreathe itself round Peffer 's name and clung to 
 his dwelling - place that the affectionate parasite quite overpowered 
 the parent tree . 
 Peffer be never see in Cook 's Court now . he be not expect there , 
 for he have be recumbent this quarter of a century in the 
 churchyard of St. Andrews , Holborn , with the waggon and hackney- 
 coach roar past he all the day and half the night like one 
 great dragon . if he ever steal forth when the dragon be at rest to 
 air himself again in Cook 's Court until admonish to return by the 
 crowing of the sanguine cock in the cellar at the little dairy in 
 Cursitor Street , whose idea of daylight it would be curious to 
 ascertain , since he know from his personal observation next to 
 nothing about it - if Peffer ever do revisit the pale glimpse of 
 Cook 's Court , which no law - stationer in the trade can positively 
 deny , he come invisibly , and no one be the bad or wiser . 
 in his lifetime , and likewise in the period of Snagsby 's " time " of 
 seven long year , there dwelt with Peffer in the same law- 
 stationering premise a niece - a short , shrewd niece , something too 
 violently compress about the waist , and with a sharp nose like a 
 sharp autumn evening , incline to be frosty towards the end . the 
 Cook 's Courtiers have a rumour fly among they that the mother of 
 this niece do , in her daughter 's childhood , move by too jealous a 
 solicitude that her figure should approach perfection , lace she up 
 every morning with her maternal foot against the bed - post for a 
 strong hold and purchase ; and far , that she exhibit 
 internally pint of vinegar and lemon - juice , which acid , they hold , 
 have mount to the nose and temper of the patient . with whichsoever 
 of the many tongue of Rumour this frothy report originate , it 
 either never reach or never influence the ear of young Snagsby , 
 who , have woo and win its fair subject on his arrival at man 's 
 estate , enter into two partnership at once . so now , in Cook 's 
 Court , Cursitor Street , Mr. Snagsby and the niece be one ; and the 
 niece still cherish her figure , which , however taste may differ , 
 be unquestionably so far precious that there be mighty little of it . 
 Mr. and Mrs. Snagsby be not only one bone and one flesh , but , to 
 the neighbour ' thinking , one voice too . that voice , appear to 
 proceed from Mrs. Snagsby alone , be hear in Cook 's Court very 
 often . Mr. Snagsby , otherwise than as he find expression through 
 these dulcet tone , be rarely hear . he be a mild , bald , timid man 
 with a shin head and a scrubby clump of black hair stick out 
 at the back . he tend to meekness and obesity . as he stand at his 
 door in Cook 's Court in his grey shop - coat and black calico sleeve , 
 look up at the cloud , or stand behind a desk in his dark shop 
 with a heavy flat ruler , snipping and slicing at sheepskin in 
 company with his two ' prentice , he be emphatically a retire and 
 unassuming man . from beneath his foot , at such time , as from a 
 shrill ghost unquiet in its grave , there frequently arise 
 complaining and lamentation in the voice already mention ; and 
 haply , on some occasion when these reach a sharp pitch than 
 usual , Mr. Snagsby mention to the ' prentice , " I think my little 
 woman be a - give it to Guster ! " 
 this proper name , so use by Mr. Snagsby , have before now sharpen 
 the wit of the Cook 's Courtiers to remark that it ought to be the 
 name of Mrs. Snagsby , see that she might with great force and 
 expression be term a Guster , in compliment to her stormy 
 character . it be , however , the possession , and the only possession 
 except fifty shilling per annum and a very small box indifferently 
 fill with clothing , of a lean young woman from a workhouse   by 
 some suppose to have be christen Augusta   who , although she be 
 farm or contract for during her grow time by an amiable 
 benefactor of his species resident at Tooting , and can not fail to 
 have be develop under the most favourable circumstance , " have 
 fit , " which the parish can not   account for . 
 Guster , really aged three or four and twenty , but look a round 
 ten year old , go cheap with this unaccountable drawback of 
 fit , and be so apprehensive of be return on the hand of her 
 patron saint that except when she be find with her head in the 
 pail , or the sink , or the copper , or the dinner , or anything else 
 that happen to be near she at the time of her seizure , she be 
 always at work . she be a satisfaction to the parent and guardian 
 of the ' prentice , who feel that there be little danger of she 
 inspire tender emotion in the breast of youth ; she be a 
 satisfaction to Mrs. Snagsby , who can always find fault with she ; 
 she be a satisfaction to Mr. Snagsby , who think it a charity to 
 keep she . the law - stationer 's establishment be , in Guster 's eye , a 
 temple of plenty and splendour . she believe the little drawing- 
 room upstairs , always keep , as one may say , with its hair in paper 
 and its pinafore on , to be the most elegant apartment in 
 Christendom . the view it command of Cook 's Court at one end   not 
 to mention a squint into Cursitor Street   and of Coavinses ' the 
 sheriff 's officer 's backyard at the other she regard as a prospect 
 of unequalled beauty . the portrait it display in oil - and plenty 
 of it too - of Mr. Snagsby look at Mrs. Snagsby and of Mrs. 
 Snagsby look at Mr. Snagsby be in her eye as achievement of 
 Raphael or Titian . Guster have some recompense for her many 
 privation . 
 Mr. Snagsby refer everything not in the practical mystery of the 
 business to Mrs. Snagsby . she manage the money , reproach the 
 tax - gatherer , appoint the time and place of devotion on Sundays , 
 license Mr. Snagsby 's entertainment , and acknowledge no 
 responsibility as to what she think fit to provide for dinner , 
 insomuch that she be the high standard of comparison among the 
 neighbouring wife a long way down Chancery Lane on both side , and 
 even out in Holborn , who in any domestic passage of arm habitually 
 call upon their husband to look at the difference between their 
  the wife '   position and Mrs. Snagsby 's , and their   the husband ' 
 behaviour and Mr. Snagsby 's . Rumour , always fly bat - like about 
 Cook 's Court and skim in and out at everybody 's window , do 
 say that Mrs. Snagsby be jealous and inquisitive and that Mr. 
 Snagsby be sometimes worry out of house and home , and that if he 
 have the spirit of a mouse he would not   stand it . it be even observe 
 that the wife who quote he to their self - willed husband as a 
 shin example in reality look down upon he and that nobody do 
 so with great superciliousness than one particular lady whose lord 
 be more than suspect of lay his umbrella on she as an 
 instrument of correction . but these vague whispering may arise 
 from Mr. Snagsby 's be in his way rather a meditative and poetical 
 man , love to walk in Staple Inn in the summer - time and to observe 
 how countrifie the sparrow and the leaf be , also to lounge 
 about the Rolls Yard of a Sunday afternoon and to remark   if in good 
 spirit   that there be old time once and that you would find a stone 
 coffin or two now under that chapel , he will be bind , if you be to 
 dig for it . he solace his imagination , too , by think of the 
 many Chancellors and vice , and Masters of the Rolls who be 
 deceased ; and he get such a flavour of the country out of tell 
 the two ' prentice how he have hear say that a brook " as clear as 
 crystial " once run right down the middle of Holborn , when Turnstile 
 really be a turnstile , lead slap away into the meadow - get 
 such a flavour of the country out of this that he never want to go 
 there . 
 the day be close in and the gas be light , but be not yet fully 
 effective , for it be not quite dark . Mr. Snagsby stand at his 
 shop - door look up at the cloud see a crow who be out late skim 
 westward over the slice of sky belong to Cook 's Court . the crow 
 fly straight across Chancery Lane and Lincoln 's Inn Garden into 
 Lincoln 's Inn Fields . 
 here , in a large house , formerly a house of state , live Mr. 
 Tulkinghorn . it be let off in set of chamber now , and in those 
 shrunken fragment of its greatness , lawyer lie like maggot in 
 nut . but its roomy staircase , passage , and antechamber still 
 remain ; and even its paint ceiling , where Allegory , in roman 
 helmet and celestial linen , sprawl among balustrade and pillar , 
 flower , cloud , and big - legged boy , and make the head ache - as 
 would seem to be Allegory 's object always , more or less . here , 
 among his many box label with transcendent name , live Mr. 
 Tulkinghorn , when not speechlessly at home in country - house where 
 the great one of the earth be bored to death . here he be to - day , 
 quiet at his table . an oyster of the old school whom nobody can 
 open . 
 like as he be to look at , so be his apartment in the dusk of the 
 present afternoon . Rusty , out of date , withdraw from attention , 
 able to afford it . heavy , broad - back , old - fashioned , mahogany- 
 and - horsehair chair , not easily lift ; obsolete table with 
 spindle - leg and dusty baize cover ; presentation print of the 
 holder of great title in the last generation or the last but one , 
 environ he . a thick and dingy Turkey - carpet muffle the floor 
 where he sit , attend by two candle in old - fashioned silver 
 candlestick that give a very insufficient light to his large room . 
 the title on the back of his book have retire into the bind ; 
 everything that can have a lock have get one ; no key be visible . 
 very few loose paper be about . he have some manuscript near he , 
 but be not refer to it . with the round top of an inkstand and 
 two broken bit of sealing - wax he be silently and slowly work out 
 whatever train of indecision be in his mind . now the inkstand top 
 be in the middle , now the red bit of sealing - wax , now the black bit . 
 that be not it . Mr. Tulkinghorn must gather they all up and begin 
 again . 
 here , beneath the paint ceiling , with foreshortened Allegory 
 star down at his intrusion as if it mean to swoop upon he , and 
 he cut it dead , Mr. Tulkinghorn have at once his house and 
 office . he keep no staff , only one middle - aged man , usually a 
 little out at elbow , who sit in a high pew in the hall and be 
 rarely overburden with business . Mr. Tulkinghorn be not in a 
 common way . he want no clerk . he be a great reservoir of 
 confidence , not to be so tap . his client want HIM ; he be all 
 in all . draft that he require to be draw be draw by special- 
 pleader in the temple on mysterious instruction ; fair copy that 
 he require to be make be make at the stationer ' , expense be no 
 consideration . the middle - aged man in the pew know scarcely more 
 of the affair of the peerage than any crossing - sweeper in Holborn . 
 the red bit , the black bit , the inkstand top , the other inkstand 
 top , the little sand - box . so ! you to the middle , you to the right , 
 you to the left . this train of indecision must surely be work out 
 now or never . now ! Mr. Tulkinghorn get up , adjust his 
 spectacle , put on his hat , put the manuscript in his pocket , go 
 out , tell the middle - aged man out at elbow , " I shall be back 
 presently . " very rarely tell he anything more explicit . 
 Mr. Tulkinghorn go , as the crow come - not quite so straight , but 
 nearly - to Cook 's Court , Cursitor Street . to Snagsby 's , Law- 
 Stationer 's , Deeds engross and copy , law - writing execute in all 
 its branch ,   c. ,   c. ,   c. 
 it be somewhere about five or six o'clock in the afternoon , and a 
 balmy fragrance of warm tea hover in Cook 's Court . it hover about 
 Snagsby 's door . the hour be early there : dinner at half - past one 
 and supper at half - past nine . Mr. Snagsby be about to descend into 
 the subterranean region to take tea when he look out of his door 
 just now and see the crow who be out late . 
 " Master at home ? " 
 Guster be mind the shop , for the ' prentice take tea in the 
 kitchen with Mr. and Mrs. Snagsby ; consequently , the robe - maker 's 
 two daughter , comb their curl at the two glass in the two 
 second - floor window of the opposite house , be not drive the two 
 ' prentice to distraction as they fondly suppose , but be merely 
 awaken the unprofitable admiration of Guster , whose hair will not 
 grow , and never would , and it be confidently think , never will . 
 " Master at home ? " say Mr. Tulkinghorn . 
 Master be at home , and Guster will fetch he . guster disappear , 
 glad to get out of the shop , which she regard with mingled dread 
 and veneration as a storehouse of awful implement of the great 
 torture of the law - a place not to be enter after the gas be 
 turn off . 
 Mr. Snagsby appear , greasy , warm , herbaceous , and chew . bolt a 
 bit of bread and butter . say , " bless my soul , sir ! Mr. 
 Tulkinghorn ! " 
 " I want half a word with you , Snagsby . " 
 " certainly , sir ! dear I , sir , why do not   you send your young man 
 round for I ? pray walk into the back shop , sir . " Snagsby have 
 brighten in a moment . 
 the confined room , strong of parchment - grease , be warehouse , 
 counting - house , and copying - office . Mr. Tulkinghorn sit , face 
 round , on a stool at the desk . 
 " Jarndyce and Jarndyce , Snagsby . " 
 " yes , sir . " Mr. Snagsby turn up the gas and cough behind his 
 hand , modestly anticipate profit . Mr. Snagsby , as a timid man , be 
 accustom to cough with a variety of expression , and so to save 
 word . 
 " you copy some affidavit in that cause for I lately . " 
 " yes , sir , we do . " 
 " there be one of they , " say Mr. Tulkinghorn , carelessly feel - 
 tight , unopenable oyster of the old school ! - in the wrong coat- 
 pocket , " the handwriting of which be peculiar , and I rather like . 
 as I happen to be pass , and think I have it about I , I look 
 in to ask you - but I have not   get it . no matter , any other time will 
 do . ah ! here it be ! I look in to ask you who copy this . " 
 " who copy this , sir ? " say Mr. Snagsby , take it , lay it flat 
 on the desk , and separate all the sheet at once with a twirl and 
 a twist of the left hand peculiar to lawstationer . " we give this 
 out , sir . we be give out rather a large quantity of work just 
 at that time . I can tell you in a moment who copy it , sir , by 
 refer to my book . " 
 Mr. Snagsby take his book down from the safe , make another bolt of 
 the bit of bread and butter which seem to have stop short , eye 
 the affidavit aside , and bring his right forefinger travel down 
 a page of the book , " Jewby - Packer - Jarndyce . " 
 " Jarndyce ! here we be , sir , " say Mr. Snagsby . " to be sure ! I 
 might have remember it . this be give out , sir , to a writer who 
 lodge just over on the opposite side of the lane . " 
 Mr. Tulkinghorn have see the entry , find it before the law- 
 stationer , read it while the forefinger be come down the hill . 
 " what do you call he ? nemo ? " say Mr. Tulkinghorn . " Nemo , sir . 
 here it be . forty - two folio . give out on the Wednesday night at 
 eight o'clock , bring in on the Thursday morning at half after 
 nine . " 
 " Nemo ! " repeat Mr. Tulkinghorn . " Nemo be Latin for no one . " 
 " it must be English for some one , sir , I think , " Mr. Snagsby submit 
 with his deferential cough . " it be a person 's name . here it be , 
 you see , sir ! forty - two folio . give out Wednesday night , eight 
 o'clock ; bring in Thursday morning , half after nine . " 
 the tail of Mr. Snagsby 's eye become conscious of the head of Mrs. 
 Snagsby look in at the shop - door to know what he mean by 
 desert his tea . Mr. Snagsby address an explanatory cough to 
 Mrs. Snagsby , as who should say , " my dear , a customer ! " 
 " half after nine , sir , " repeat Mr. Snagsby . " our law - writer , who 
 live by job - work , be a queer lot ; and this may not be his name , but 
 it be the name he go by . I remember now , sir , that he give it in 
 a write advertisement he stick up down at the Rule Office , and 
 the King 's Bench Office , and the Judges ' Chambers , and so forth . 
 you know the kind of document , sir - want employ ? " 
 Mr. Tulkinghorn glance through the little window at the back of 
 coavinse ' , the sheriff 's officer 's , where light shine in 
 Coavinses ' window . coavinse ' coffee - room be at the back , and the 
 shadow of several gentleman under a cloud loom cloudily upon the 
 blind . Mr. Snagsby take the opportunity of slightly turn his 
 head to glance over his shoulder at his little woman and to make 
 apologetic motion with his mouth to this effect : " tul - king - horn - 
 rich - in - flu - en - tial ! " 
 " have you give this man work before ? " ask Mr. Tulkinghorn . 
 " oh , dear , yes , sir ! work of your . " 
 " think of more important matter , I forget where you say he 
 live ? " 
 " across the lane , sir . in fact , he lodge at a - " Mr. Snagsby make 
 another bolt , as if the bit of bread and buffer be insurmountable 
 " - at a rag and bottle shop . " 
 " can you show I the place as I go back ? " 
 " with the great pleasure , sir ! " 
 Mr. Snagsby pull off his sleeve and his grey coat , pull on his 
 black coat , take his hat from its peg . " oh ! here be my little 
 woman ! " he say aloud . " my dear , will you be so kind as to tell one 
 of the lad to look after the shop while I step across the lane with 
 Mr. Tulkinghorn ? Mrs. Snagsby , sir - I shall not   be two minute , my 
 love ! " 
 Mrs. Snagsby bend to the lawyer , retire behind the counter , peep 
 at they through the window - blind , go softly into the back office , 
 refer to the entry in the book still lie open . be evidently 
 curious . 
 " you will find that the place be rough , sir , " say Mr. Snagsby , 
 walk deferentially in the road and leave the narrow pavement to 
 the lawyer ; " and the party be very rough . but they be a wild lot in 
 general , sir . the advantage of this particular man be that he never 
 want sleep . he will go at it right on end if you want he to , as 
 long as ever you like . " 
 it be quite dark now , and the gas - lamp have acquire their full 
 effect . jostle against clerk go to post the day 's letter , 
 and against counsel and attorney go home to dinner , and against 
 plaintiff and defendant and suitor of all sort , and against the 
 general crowd , in whose way the forensic wisdom of age have 
 interpose a million of obstacle to the transaction of the 
 commonest business of life ; diving through law and equity , and 
 through that kindre mystery , the street mud , which be make of 
 nobody know what and collect about we nobody know whence or how - 
 we only know in general that when there be too much of it we find 
 it necessary to shovel it away - the lawyer and the law - stationer 
 come to a rag and bottle shop and general emporium of much 
 disregarded merchandise , lie and be in the shadow of the wall 
 of Lincoln 's Inn , and keep , as be announce in paint , to all whom it 
 may concern , by one Krook . 
 " this be where he live , sir , " say the law - stationer . 
 " this be where he live , be it ? " say the lawyer unconcernedly . 
 " thank you . " 
 " be you not go in , sir ? " 
 " no , thank you , no ; I be go on to the Fields at present . good 
 evening . thank you ! " Mr. Snagsby lift his hat and return to his 
 little woman and his tea . 
 but Mr. Tulkinghorn do not go on to the Fields at present . he 
 go a short way , turn back , come again to the shop of Mr. Krook , 
 and enter it straight . it be dim enough , with a blot - head candle 
 or so in the window , and an old man and a cat sit in the back 
 part by a fire . the old man rise and come forward , with another 
 blot - head candle in his hand . 
 " pray be your lodger within ? " 
 " male or female , sir ? " say Mr. Krook . 
 " Male . the person who do copying . " 
 Mr. Krook have eye his man narrowly . know he by sight . have an 
 indistinct impression of his aristocratic repute . 
 " do you wish to see he , sir ? " 
 " yes . " 
 " it be what I seldom do myself , " say Mr. Krook with a grin . " shall 
 I call he down ? but it be a weak chance if he would come , sir ! " 
 " I will go up to he , then , " say Mr. Tulkinghorn . 
 " second floor , sir . take the candle . up there ! " Mr. Krook , with 
 his cat beside he , stand at the bottom of the staircase , look 
 after Mr. Tulkinghorn . " hi - hi ! " he say when Mr. Tulkinghorn have 
 nearly disappear . the lawyer look down over the hand - rail . the 
 cat expand her wicked mouth and snarl at he . 
 " Order , Lady Jane ! behave yourself to visitor , my lady ! you know 
 what they say of my lodger ? " whisper Krook , go up a step or two . 
 " what do they say of he ? " 
 " they say he have sell himself to the enemy , but you and I know 
 well - he do not   buy . I will tell you what , though ; my lodger be so 
 black - humour and gloomy that I believe he would as soon make that 
 bargain as any other . do not   put he out , sir . that be my advice ! " 
 Mr. Tulkinghorn with a nod go on his way . he come to the dark 
 door on the second floor . he knock , receive no answer , open it , 
 and accidentally extinguish his candle in do so . 
 the air of the room be almost bad enough to have extinguish it if 
 he have not . it be a small room , nearly black with soot , and grease , 
 and dirt . in the rusty skeleton of a grate , pinch at the middle 
 as if poverty have grip it , a red coke fire burn low . in the 
 corner by the chimney stand a deal table and a broken desk , a 
 wilderness mark with a rain of ink . in another corner a ragged 
 old portmanteau on one of the two chair serve for cabinet or 
 wardrobe ; no large one be need , for it collapse like the cheek 
 of a starve man . the floor be bare , except that one old mat , 
 trodden to shred of rope - yarn , lie perish upon the hearth . no 
 curtain veil the darkness of the night , but the discolour 
 shutter be draw together , and through the two gaunt hole pierce 
 in they , famine might be star in - the banshee of the man upon the 
 bed . 
 for , on a low bed opposite the fire , a confusion of dirty patchwork , 
 lean - rib ticking , and coarse sack , the lawyer , hesitate just 
 within the doorway , see a man . he lie there , dress in shirt and 
 trouser , with bare foot . he have a yellow look in the spectral 
 darkness of a candle that have gutter down until the whole length 
 of its wick   still burn   have double over and leave a tower of 
 winding - sheet above it . his hair be rag , mingle with his 
 whisker and his beard - the latter , rag too , and grow , like the 
 scum and mist around he , in neglect . foul and filthy as the room 
 be , foul and filthy as the air be , it be not easy to perceive what 
 fume those be which most oppress the sens in it ; but through the 
 general sickliness and faintness , and the odour of stale tobacco , 
 there come into the lawyer 's mouth the bitter , vapid taste of 
 opium . 
 " Hallo , my friend ! " he cry , and strike his iron candlestick 
 against the door . 
 he think he have awaken his friend . he lie a little turn away , 
 but his eye be surely open . 
 " Hallo , my friend ! " he cry again . " Hallo ! Hallo ! " 
 as he rattle on the door , the candle which have droop so long go 
 out and leave he in the dark , with the gaunt eye in the shutter 
 star down upon the bed . 
 CHAPTER XI 
 our Dear Brother 
 a touch on the lawyer 's wrinkle hand as he stand in the dark room , 
 irresolute , make he start and say , " what be that ? " 
 " it be I , " return the old man of the house , whose breath be in his 
 ear . " can not   you wake he ? " 
 " no . " 
 " what have you do with your candle ? " 
 " it be go out . here it be . " 
 Krook take it , go to the fire , stoop over the red ember , and 
 try to get a light . the die ash have no light to spare , and 
 his endeavour be vain . Muttering , after an ineffectual call to 
 his lodger , that he will go downstairs and bring a lighted candle 
 from the shop , the old man depart . Mr. Tulkinghorn , for some new 
 reason that he have , do not await his return in the room , but on 
 the stair outside . 
 the welcome light soon shin upon the wall , as Krook come slowly 
 up with his green - eyed cat follow at his heel . " do the man 
 generally sleep like this ? " inquire the lawyer in a low voice . 
 " hi ! I do not   know , " say Krook , shake his head and lift his 
 eyebrow . " I know next to nothing of his habit except that he 
 keep himself very close . " 
 thus whispering , they both go in together . as the light go in , 
 the great eye in the shutter , darken , seem to close . not so 
 the eye upon the bed . 
 " God save we ! " exclaim Mr. Tulkinghorn . " he be dead ! " Krook drop 
 the heavy hand he have take up so suddenly that the arm swing over 
 the bedside . 
 they look at one another for a moment . 
 " send for some doctor ! call for Miss Flite up the stair , sir . 
 here 's poison by the bed ! call out for Flite , will you ? " say 
 Krook , with his lean hand spread out above the body like a 
 vampire 's wing . 
 Mr. Tulkinghorn hurry to the landing and call , " Miss Flite ! 
 Flite ! make haste , here , whoever you be ! flite ! " Krook follow 
 he with his eye , and while he be call , find opportunity to 
 steal to the old portmanteau and steal back again . 
 " Run , Flite , run ! the near doctor ! run ! " so Mr. Krook 
 address a crazy little woman who be his female lodger , who appear 
 and vanishe in a breath , who soon return accompany by a testy 
 medical man bring from his dinner , with a broad , snuffy upper lip 
 and a broad Scotch tongue . 
 " Ey ! bless the heart o ' ye , " say the medical man , look up at 
 they after a moment 's examination . " he be just as dead as Phairy ! " 
 Mr. Tulkinghorn   standing by the old portmanteau   inquire if he have 
 be dead any time . 
 " any time , sir ? " say the medical gentleman . " it be probable he wull 
 have be dead aboot three hour . " 
 " about that time , I should say , " observe a dark young man on the 
 other side of the bed . 
 " air you in the maydickle prayfession yourself , sir ? " inquire the 
 first . 
 the dark young man say yes . 
 " then I will just tak ' my depairture , " reply the other , " for I be nae 
 gude here ! " with which remark he finish his brief attendance and 
 return to finish his dinner . 
 the dark young surgeon pass the candle across and across the face 
 and carefully examine the law - writer , who have establish his 
 pretension to his name by become indeed no one . 
 " I know this person by sight very well , " say he . " he have purchase 
 opium of I for the last year and a half . be anybody present 
 relate to he ? " glance round upon the three bystander . 
 " I be his landlord , " grimly answer Krook , take the candle from 
 the surgeon 's outstretche hand . " he tell I once I be the near 
 relation he have . " 
 " he have die , " say the surgeon , " of an over - dose of opium , there be 
 no doubt . the room be strongly flavour with it . there be enough 
 here now , " take an old tea - pot from Mr. Krook , " to kill a dozen 
 people . " 
 " do you think he do it on purpose ? " ask Krook . 
 " took the over - dose ? " 
 " yes ! " Krook almost smack his lip with the unction of a horrible 
 interest . 
 " I can not   say . I should think it unlikely , as he have be in the 
 habit of take so much . but nobody can tell . he be very poor , I 
 suppose ? " 
 " I suppose he be . his room - do not   look rich , " say Krook , who 
 might have change eye with his cat , as he cast his sharp glance 
 around . " but I have never be in it since he have it , and he be 
 too close to name his circumstance to I . " 
 " do he owe you any rent ? " 
 " six week . " 
 " he will never pay it ! " say the young man , resume his 
 examination . " it be beyond a doubt that he be indeed as dead as 
 Pharaoh ; and to judge from his appearance and condition , I should 
 think it a happy release . yet he must have be a good figure when 
 a youth , and I dare say , good - look . " he say this , not 
 unfeelingly , while sit on the bedstead 's edge with his face 
 towards that other face and his hand upon the region of the heart . 
 " I recollect once think there be something in his manner , 
 uncouth as it be , that denote a fall in life . be that so ? " he 
 continue , look round . 
 Krook reply , " you might as well ask I to describe the lady 
 whose head of hair I have get in sack downstairs . than that he 
 be my lodger for a year and a half and live - or do not   live - by 
 law - writing , I know no more of he . " 
 during this dialogue Mr. Tulkinghorn have stand aloof by the old 
 portmanteau , with his hand behind he , equally remove , to all 
 appearance , from all three kind of interest exhibit near the 
 bed - from the young surgeon 's professional interest in death , 
 noticeable as be quite apart from his remark on the deceased as 
 an individual ; from the old man 's unction ; and the little crazy 
 woman 's awe . his imperturbable face have be as inexpressive as 
 his rusty clothe . one could not even say he have be think all 
 this while . he have show neither patience nor impatience , nor 
 attention nor abstraction . he have show nothing but his shell . as 
 easily might the tone of a delicate musical instrument be infer 
 from its case , as the tone of Mr. Tulkinghorn from his case . 
 he now interpose , address the young surgeon in his unmoved , 
 professional way . 
 " I look in here , " he observe , " just before you , with the 
 intention of give this deceased man , whom I never see alive , some 
 employment at his trade of copying . I have hear of he from my 
 stationer - Snagsby of Cook 's Court . since no one here know 
 anything about he , it might be as well to send for Snagsby . ah ! " 
 to the little crazy woman , who have often see he in court , and 
 whom he have often see , and who propose , in frightened dumb - show , 
 to go for the law - stationer . " suppose you do ! " 
 while she be go , the surgeon abandon his hopeless investigation 
 and cover its subject with the patchwork counterpane . Mr. Krook 
 and he interchange a word or two . Mr. Tulkinghorn say nothing , 
 but stand , ever , near the old portmanteau . 
 Mr. Snagsby arrive hastily in his grey coat and his black sleeve . 
 " dear I , dear I , " he say ; " and it have come to this , have it ! 
 bless my soul ! " 
 " can you give the person of the house any information about this 
 unfortunate creature , Snagsby ? " inquire Mr. Tulkinghorn . " he be 
 in arrear with his rent , it seem . and he must be bury , you 
 know . " 
 " well , sir , " say Mr. Snagsby , cough his apologetic cough behind 
 his hand , " I really do not   know what advice I could offer , except 
 send for the beadle . " 
 " I do not   speak of advice , " return Mr. Tulkinghorn . " I could 
 advise - " 
 " no one well , sir , I be sure , " say Mr. Snagsby , with his 
 deferential cough . 
 " I speak of afford some clue to his connexion , or to where he 
 come from , or to anything concern he . " 
 " I assure you , sir , " say Mr. Snagsby after preface his reply 
 with his cough of general propitiation , " that I no more know where 
 he come from than I know - " 
 " where he have go to , perhaps , " suggest the surgeon to help he 
 out . 
 a pause . Mr. Tulkinghorn look at the law - stationer . Mr. Krook , 
 with his mouth open , look for somebody to speak next . 
 " as to his connexion , sir , " say Mr. Snagsby , " if a person be to 
 say to I , ' Snagsby , here 's twenty thousand pound down , ready for 
 you in the Bank of England if you will only name one of them , ' I 
 could not   do it , sir ! about a year and a half ago - to the good of my 
 belief , at the time when he first come to lodge at the present rag 
 and bottle shop - " 
 " that be the time ! " say Krook with a nod . 
 " about a year and a half ago , " say Mr. Snagsby , strengthen , " he 
 come into our place one morning after breakfast , and find my 
 little woman   which I name Mrs. Snagsby when I use that appellation 
 in our shop , produce a speciman of his handwriting and give she to 
 understand that he be in want of copy work to do and be , not to 
 put too fine a point upon it , " a favourite apology for plain 
 speak with Mr. Snagsby , which he always offer with a sort of 
 argumentative frankness , " hard up ! my little woman be not in 
 general partial to stranger , particular - not to put too fine a 
 point upon it - when they want anything . but she be rather take by 
 something about this person , whether by his be unshave , or by 
 his hair be in want of attention , or by what other lady ' 
 reason , I leave you to judge ; and she accept of the speciman , and 
 likewise of the address . my little woman have not   a good ear for 
 name , " proceed Mr. Snagsby after consult his cough of 
 consideration behind his hand , " and she consider Nemo equally the 
 same as Nimrod . in consequence of which , she get into a habit of 
 say to I at meal , ' Mr. Snagsby , you have not   find Nimrod any 
 work yet ! ' or ' Mr. Snagsby , why do not   you give that eight and 
 thirty Chancery folio in Jarndyce to Nimrod ? ' or such like . and 
 that be the way he gradually fall into job - work at our place ; and 
 that be the most I know of he except that he be a quick hand , and 
 a hand not spar of night - work , and that if you give he out , say , 
 five and forty folio on the Wednesday night , you would have it 
 bring in on the Thursday morning . all of which - " Mr. Snagsby 
 conclude by politely motion with his hat towards the bed , as 
 much as to add , " I have no doubt my honourable friend would confirm 
 if he be in a condition to do it . " 
 " had not   you well see , " say Mr. Tulkinghorn to Krook , " whether he 
 have any paper that may enlighten you ? there will be an inquest , 
 and you will be ask the question . you can read ? " 
 " no , I can not , " return the old man with a sudden grin . 
 " Snagsby , " say Mr. Tulkinghorn , " look over the room for he . he 
 will get into some trouble or difficulty otherwise . be here , 
 I will wait if you make haste , and then I can testify on his behalf , 
 if it should ever be necessary , that all be fair and right . if you 
 will hold the candle for Mr. Snagsby , my friend , he will soon see 
 whether there be anything to help you . " 
 " in the first place , here be an old portmanteau , sir , " say Snagsby . 
 ah , to be sure , so there be ! Mr. Tulkinghorn do not appear to 
 have see it before , though he be stand so close to it , and 
 though there be very little else , heaven know . 
 the marine - store merchant hold the light , and the law - stationer 
 conduct the search . the surgeon lean against the corner of the 
 chimney - piece ; Miss Flite peep and tremble just within the door . 
 the apt old scholar of the old school , with his dull black breech 
 tie with ribbon at the knee , his large black waistcoat , his long- 
 sleeve black coat , and his wisp of limp white neckerchief tie in 
 the bow the peerage know so well , stand in exactly the same place 
 and attitude . 
 there be some worthless article of clothing in the old 
 portmanteau ; there be a bundle of pawnbroker ' duplicate , those 
 turnpike ticket on the road of poverty ; there be a crumpled paper , 
 smelling of opium , on which be scrawl rough memoranda - as , take , 
 such a day , so many grain ; take , such another day , so many more - 
 begin some time ago , as if with the intention of be regularly 
 continue , but soon leave off . there be a few dirty scrap of 
 newspaper , all refer to coroner ' inquest ; there be nothing 
 else . they search the cupboard and the drawer of the ink - splash 
 table . there be not a morsel of an old letter or of any other 
 writing in either . the young surgeon examine the dress on the law- 
 writer . a knife and some odd halfpence be all he find . Mr. 
 Snagsby 's suggestion be the practical suggestion after all , and the 
 beadle must be call in . 
 so the little crazy lodger go for the beadle , and the rest come 
 out of the room . " do not   leave the cat there ! " say the surgeon ; 
 " that will not   do ! " Mr. Krook therefore drive she out before he , and 
 she go furtively downstairs , wind her lithe tail and lick 
 her lip . 
 " good night ! " say Mr. Tulkinghorn , and go home to Allegory and 
 meditation . 
 by this time the news have get into the court . group of its 
 inhabitant assemble to discuss the thing , and the outpost of the 
 army of observation   principally boy   be push forward to Mr. 
 Krook 's window , which they closely invest . a policeman have already 
 walk up to the room , and walk down again to the door , where he 
 stand like a tower , only condescend to see the boy at his base 
 occasionally ; but whenever he do see they , they quail and fall 
 back . Mrs. Perkins , who have not be for some week on speak 
 term with Mrs. Piper in consequence for an unpleasantness 
 originating in young Perkins ' have " fetched " young Piper " a 
 crack , " renew her friendly intercourse on this auspicious occasion . 
 the potboy at the corner , who be a privileged amateur , as possess 
 official knowledge of life and have to deal with drunken man 
 occasionally , exchange confidential communication with the 
 policeman and have the appearance of an impregnable youth , 
 unassailable by truncheon and unconfinable in station - house . 
 People talk across the court out of window , and bare - head scout 
 come hurry in from Chancery Lane to know what be the matter . the 
 general feeling seem to be that it be a blessing Mr. Krook warn't 
 make away with first , mingle with a little natural disappointment 
 that he be not . in the midst of this sensation , the beadle 
 arrive . 
 the beadle , though generally understand in the neighbourhood to be a 
 ridiculous institution , be not without a certain popularity for the 
 moment , if it be only as a man who be go to see the body . the 
 policeman consider he an imbecile civilian , a remnant of the 
 barbarous watchman time , but give he admission as something that 
 must be bear with until government shall abolish he . the 
 sensation be heighten as the tiding spread from mouth to mouth 
 that the beadle be on the ground and have go in . 
 by and by the beadle come out , once more intensify the 
 sensation , which have rather languish in the interval . he be 
 understand to be in want of witness for the inquest to - morrow who 
 can tell the coroner and jury anything whatever respect the 
 deceased . be immediately refer to innumerable people who can 
 tell nothing whatever . be make more imbecile by be constantly 
 inform that Mrs. Green 's son " be a law - writer his - self and know 
 he well than anybody , " which son of Mrs. Green 's appear , on 
 inquiry , to be at the present time aboard a vessel bind for China , 
 three month out , but consider accessible by telegraph on 
 application to the Lords of the Admiralty . beadle go into various 
 shop and parlour , examine the inhabitant , always shut the 
 door first , and by exclusion , delay , and general idiotcy 
 exasperate the public . Policeman see to smile to potboy . public 
 lose interest and undergoe reaction . taunt the beadle in shrill 
 youthful voice with have boil a boy , chorus fragment of a 
 popular song to that effect and import that the boy be make into 
 soup for the workhouse . Policeman at last find it necessary to 
 support the law and seize a vocalist , who be release upon the 
 flight of the rest on condition of his get out of this then , 
 come , and cut it - a condition he immediately observe . so the 
 sensation die off for the time ; and the unmoved policeman   to whom 
 a little opium , more or less , be nothing , with his shin hat , 
 stiff stock , inflexible great - coat , stout belt and bracelet , and all 
 thing fitting , pursue his lounge way with a heavy tread , beat 
 the palm of his white glove one against the other and stop now 
 and then at a street - corner to look casually about for anything 
 between a lost child and a murder . 
 under cover of the night , the feeble - minded beadle come flit 
 about Chancery Lane with his summons , in which every juror 's name 
 be wrongly spell , and nothing rightly spelt but the beadle 's own 
 name , which nobody can read or want to know . the summons serve 
 and his witness forewarn , the beadle go to Mr. Krook 's to keep 
 a small appointment he have make with certain pauper , who , presently 
 arrive , be conduct upstairs , where they leave the great eye in 
 the shutter something new to stare at , in that last shape which 
 earthly lodging take for no one - and for every one . 
 and all that night the coffin stand ready by the old portmanteau ; 
 and the lonely figure on the bed , whose path in life have lie 
 through five and forty year , lie there with no more track behind 
 he that any one can trace than a deserted infant . 
 next day the court be all alive - be like a fair , as Mrs. Perkins , 
 more than reconcile to Mrs. Piper , say in amicable conversation 
 with that excellent woman . the coroner be to sit in the first - floor 
 room at the Sol 's arm , where the Harmonic Meetings take place twice 
 a week and where the chair be fill by a gentleman of professional 
 celebrity , face by Little Swills , the comic vocalist , who hop 
  accord to the bill in the window   that his friend will rally 
 round he and support first - rate talent . the Sol 's arm do a 
 brisk stroke of business all the morning . even child so require 
 sustain under the general excitement that a pieman who have 
 establish himself for the occasion at the corner of the court say 
 his brandy - ball go off like smoke . what time the beadle , hover 
 between the door of Mr. Krook 's establishment and the door of the 
 Sol 's arm , show the curiosity in his keeping to a few discreet 
 spirit and accept the compliment of a glass of ale or so in 
 return . 
 at the appoint hour arrive the coroner , for whom the juryman be 
 wait and who be receive with a salute of skittle from the good 
 dry skittle - ground attach to the Sol 's arm . the coroner 
 frequent more public - house than any man alive . the smell of 
 sawdust , beer , tobacco - smoke , and spirit be inseparable in his 
 vocation from death in its most awful shape . he be conduct by 
 the beadle and the landlord to the Harmonic Meeting Room , where he 
 put his hat on the piano and take a Windsor - chair at the head of a 
 long table form of several short table put together and 
 ornament with glutinous ring in endless involution , make by pot 
 and glass . as many of the jury as can crowd together at the table 
 sit there . the rest get among the spittoon and pipe or lean 
 against the piano . over the coroner 's head be a small iron garland , 
 the pendant handle of a bell , which rather give the majesty of the 
 court the appearance of go to be hang presently . 
 call over and swear the jury ! while the ceremony be in progress , 
 sensation be create by the entrance of a chubby little man in a 
 large shirt - collar , with a moist eye and an inflame nose , who 
 modestly take a position near the door as one of the general 
 public , but seem familiar with the room too . a whisper circulate 
 that this be Little Swills . it be consider not unlikely that he 
 will get up an imitation of the coroner and make it the principal 
 feature of the Harmonic Meeting in the evening . 
 " well , gentleman - " the coroner begin . 
 " silence there , will you ! " say the beadle . not to the coroner , 
 though it might appear so . 
 " well , gentleman , " resume the coroner . " you be impanel here to 
 inquire into the death of a certain man . evidence will be give 
 before you as to the circumstance attend that death , and you 
 will give your verdict accord to the - skittle ; they must be 
 stop , you know , beadle ! - evidence , and not accord to anything 
 else . the first thing to be do be to view the body . " 
 " make way there ! " cry the beadle . 
 so they go out in a loose procession , something after the manner of 
 a straggling funeral , and make their inspection in Mr. Krook 's back 
 second floor , from which a few of the juryman retire pale and 
 precipitately . the beadle be very careful that two gentleman not 
 very neat about the cuff and button   for whose accommodation he 
 have provide a special little table near the coroner in the Harmonic 
 Meeting Room   should see all that be to be see . for they be the 
 public chronicler of such inquiry by the line ; and he be not 
 superior to the universal human infirmity , but hop to read in 
 print what " Mooney , the active and intelligent beadle of the 
 district , " say and do and even aspire to see the name of Mooney 
 as familiarly and patronizingly mention as the name of the hangman 
 be , accord to the late example . 
 Little Swills be wait for the coroner and jury on their return . 
 Mr. Tulkinghorn , also . Mr. Tulkinghorn be receive with distinction 
 and seat near the coroner between that high judicial officer , a 
 bagatelle - board , and the coal - box . the inquiry proceed . the jury 
 learn how the subject of their inquiry die , and learn no more about 
 he . " a very eminent solicitor be in attendance , gentleman , " say 
 the coroner , " who , I be inform , be accidentally present when 
 discovery of the death be make , but he could only repeat the 
 evidence you have already hear from the surgeon , the landlord , the 
 lodger , and the law - stationer , and it be not necessary to trouble 
 he . be anybody in attendance who know anything more ? " 
 Mrs. Piper push forward by Mrs. Perkins . Mrs. Piper swear . 
 Anastasia Piper , gentleman . married woman . now , Mrs. Piper , what 
 have you get to say about this ? 
 why , Mrs. Piper have a good deal to say , chiefly in parenthesis and 
 without punctuation , but not much to tell . Mrs. Piper live in the 
 court   which her husband be a cabinet - maker , and it have long be 
 well beknown among the neighbour   counting from the day next but 
 one before the half - baptizing of Alexander James Piper age eighteen 
 month and four day old on account of not be expect to live 
 such be the suffering gentleman of that child in his gum   as the 
 plaintive - so Mrs. Piper insist on call the deceased - be 
 report to have sell himself . think it be the plaintive 's air in 
 which that report originatinin . see the plaintive often and 
 consider as his air be feariocious and not to be allow to go 
 about some child be timid   and if doubt hop Mrs. Perkins 
 may be bring forard for she be here and will do credit to her 
 husband and herself and family . have see the plaintive wexe and 
 worrite by the child   for child they will ever be and you 
 can not expect they specially if of playful disposition to be 
 methoozeller which you be not yourself . on account of this and 
 his dark look have often dream as she see he take a pick - axe from 
 his pocket and split Johnny 's head   which the child know not fear 
 and have repeatually call after he close at his eel . never 
 however see the plaintive take a pick - axe or any other weppe far 
 from it . have see he hurry away when run and call after as if 
 not partial to child and never see he speak to neither child nor 
 grow person at any time   except the boy that sweep the crossing 
 down the lane over the way round the corner which if he be here 
 would tell you that he have be see a - speak to he frequent . 
 say the coroner , be that boy here ? say the beadle , no , sir , he be 
 not here . say the coroner , go and fetch he then . in the absence 
 of the active and intelligent , the coroner converse with Mr. 
 Tulkinghorn . 
 oh ! here be the boy , gentleman ! 
 here he be , very muddy , very hoarse , very ragged . now , boy ! but 
 stop a minute . caution . this boy must be put through a few 
 preliminary pace . 
 Name , Jo . nothing else that he know on . do not   know that everybody 
 have two name . never heerd of sich a think . do not   know that Jo be 
 short for a long name . think it long enough for HIM . he do not 
 find no fault with it . spell it ? no . he can not   spell it . no 
 father , no mother , no friend . never be to school . what be home ? 
 know a broom 's a broom , and know it be wicked to tell a lie . do not 
 recollect who tell he about the broom or about the lie , but know 
 both . can not   exactly say what will be do to he arter he be dead if 
 he tell a lie to the gentleman here , but believe it will be 
 something wery bad to punish he , and serve he right - and so he will 
 tell the truth . 
 " this will not   do , gentleman ! " say the coroner with a melancholy shake 
 of the head . 
 " do not   you think you can receive his evidence , sir ? " ask an 
 attentive juryman . 
 " out of the question , " say the coroner . " you have hear the boy . 
 ' can not   exactly say ' will not   do , you know . we can not   take that in a 
 court of justice , gentleman . it be terrible depravity . put the boy 
 aside . " 
 boy put aside , to the great edification of the audience , especially 
 of Little Swills , the comic vocalist . 
 now . be there any other witness ? no other witness . 
 very well , gentleman ! here be a man unknown , prove to have be in 
 the habit of take opium in large quantity for a year and a half , 
 find dead of too much opium . if you think you have any evidence to 
 lead you to the conclusion that he commit suicide , you will come 
 to that conclusion . if you think it be a case of accidental death , 
 you will find a verdict accordingly . 
 Verdict accordingly . accidental death . no doubt . gentleman , you 
 be discharge . good afternoon . 
 while the coroner button his great - coat , Mr. Tulkinghorn and he 
 give private audience to the reject witness in a corner . 
 that graceless creature only know that the dead man   whom he 
 recognize just now by his yellow face and black hair   be sometimes 
 hoot and pursue about the street . that one cold winter night 
 when he , the boy , be shiver in a doorway near his crossing , the 
 man turn to look at he , and come back , and have question he 
 and find that he have not a friend in the world , say , " neither have 
 I. not one ! " and give he the price of a supper and a night 's 
 lodge . that the man have often speak to he since and ask he 
 whether he sleep sound at night , and how he bear cold and hunger , 
 and whether he ever wish to die , and similar strange question . 
 that when the man have no money , he would say in pass , " I be as 
 poor as you to - day , Jo , " but that when he have any , he have always   as 
 the boy most heartily believe   be glad to give he some . 
 " he be wery good to I , " say the boy , wipe his eye with his 
 wretched sleeve . " Wen I see he a - layin ' so stritche out just now , 
 I wish he could have heerd I tell he so . he wo wery good to 
 I , he wo ! " 
 as he shuffle downstairs , Mr. Snagsby , lie in wait for he , put 
 a half - crown in his hand . " if you ever see I come past your 
 crossing with my little woman - I mean a lady - " say Mr. Snagsby 
 with his finger on his nose , " do not   allude to it ! " 
 for some little time the juryman hang about the Sol 's arm 
 colloquially . in the sequel , half - a - dozen be catch up in a cloud 
 of pipe - smoke that pervade the parlour of the Sol 's arm ; two 
 stroll to Hampstead ; and four engage to go half - price to the play at 
 night , and top up with oyster . Little Swills be treat on several 
 hand . be ask what he think of the proceeding , characterize 
 they   his strength lie in a slangular direction   as " a rummy 
 start . " the landlord of the Sol 's arm , find Little Swills so 
 popular , commend he highly to the juryman and public , observe 
 that for a song in character he do not   know his equal and that that 
 man 's character - wardrobe would fill a cart . 
 thus , gradually the Sol 's arm melt into the shadowy night and then 
 flare out of it strong in gas . the Harmonic Meeting hour arrive , 
 the gentleman of professional celebrity take the chair , be face 
  red - faced   by Little Swills ; their friend rally round they and 
 support first - rate talent . in the zenith of the evening , Little 
 Swills say , " gentleman , if you will permit I , I will attempt a short 
 description of a scene of real life that come off here to - day . " be 
 much applaud and encouraged ; go out of the room as Swills ; come 
 in as the coroner   not the least in the world like he ; describe 
 the inquest , with recreative interval of piano - forte accompaniment , 
 to the refrain : with his   the coroner 's   tippy tol li doll , tippy 
 tol lo doll , tippy tol li doll , Dee ! 
 the jingle piano at last be silent , and the harmonic friend rally 
 round their pillow . then there be rest around the lonely figure , 
 now lay in its last earthly habitation ; and it be watch by the 
 gaunt eye in the shutter through some quiet hour of night . if 
 this forlorn man could have be prophetically see lie here by 
 the mother at whose breast he nestle , a little child , with eye 
 upraised to her love face , and soft hand scarcely know how to 
 close upon the neck to which it creep , what an impossibility the 
 vision would have seem ! oh , if in bright day the now- 
 extinguish fire within he ever burn for one woman who hold he 
 in her heart , where be she , while these ash be above the ground ! 
 it be anything but a night of rest at Mr. Snagsby 's , in Cook 's 
 Court , where guster murder sleep by go , as Mr. Snagsby himself 
 allow - not to put too fine a point upon it - out of one fit into 
 twenty . the occasion of this seizure be that Guster have a tender 
 heart and a susceptible something that possibly might have be 
 imagination , but for Tooting and her patron saint . be it what it 
 may , now , it be so direfully impressed at tea - time by Mr. Snagsby 's 
 account of the inquiry at which he have assist that at supper - time 
 she project herself into the kitchen , precede by a fly Dutch 
 cheese , and fall into a fit of unusual duration , which she only come 
 out of to go into another , and another , and so on through a chain of 
 fit , with short interval between , of which she have pathetically 
 avail herself by consume they in entreaty to Mrs. Snagsby not 
 to give her warning " when she quite come to , " and also in appeal 
 to the whole establishment to lay she down on the stone and go to 
 bed . hence , Mr. Snagsby , at last hear the cock at the little 
 dairy in Cursitor Street go into that disintereste ecstasy of his 
 on the subject of daylight , say , draw a long breath , though the 
 most patient of man , " I think you be dead , I be sure ! " 
 what question this enthusiastic fowl suppose he settle when he 
 strain himself to such an extent , or why he should thus crow   so 
 man crow on various triumphant public occasion , however   about what 
 can not be of any moment to he , be his affair . it be enough that 
 daylight come , morning come , noon come . 
 then the active and intelligent , who have get into the morning paper 
 as such , come with his pauper company to Mr. Krook 's and bear off 
 the body of our dear brother here depart to a hem - in 
 churchyard , pestiferous and obscene , whence malignant disease be 
 communicate to the body of our dear brother and sister who have 
 not depart , while our dear brother and sister who hang about 
 official back - stair - would to heaven they had depart ! - be very 
 complacent and agreeable . into a beastly scrap of ground which a 
 Turk would reject as a savage abomination and a Caffre would shudder 
 at , they bring our dear brother here depart to receive Christian 
 burial . 
 with house look on , on every side , save where a reek little 
 tunnel of a court give access to the iron gate - with every villainy 
 of life in action close on death , and every poisonous element of 
 death in action close on life - here they lower our dear brother down 
 a foot or two , here sow he in corruption , to be raise in 
 corruption : an avenge ghost at many a sick - bedside , a shameful 
 testimony to future age how civilization and barbarism walk this 
 boastful island together . 
 come night , come darkness , for you can not come too soon or stay too 
 long by such a place as this ! come , straggle light into the 
 window of the ugly house ; and you who do iniquity therein , do it 
 at least with this dread scene shut out ! come , flame of gas , 
 burn so sullenly above the iron gate , on which the poison air 
 deposit its witch - ointment slimy to the touch ! it be well that you 
 should call to every passerby , " look here ! " 
 with the night come a slouching figure through the tunnel - court to 
 the outside of the iron gate . it hold the gate with its hand and 
 look in between the bar , stand look in for a little while . 
 it then , with an old broom it carry , softly sweep the step and 
 make the archway clean . it do so very busily and trimly , look 
 in again a little while , and so depart . 
 Jo , be it thou ? well , well ! though a reject witness , who " can not 
 exactly say " what will be do to he in great hand than man 's , 
 thou art not quite in outer darkness . there be something like a 
 distant ray of light in thy muttered reason for this : " he wo wery 
 good to I , he wo ! " 
 CHAPTER XII 
 on the Watch 
 it have leave off rain down in Lincolnshire at last , and Chesney 
 Wold have take heart . Mrs. Rouncewell be full of hospitable care , 
 for Sir Leicester and my Lady be come home from Paris . the 
 fashionable intelligence have find it out and communicate the glad 
 tiding to benighted England . it have also find out that they will 
 entertain a brilliant and distinguished circle of the elite of the 
 BEAU MONDE   the fashionable intelligence be weak in English , but a 
 giant refresh in French   at the ancient and hospitable family seat 
 in Lincolnshire . 
 for the great honour of the brilliant and distinguished circle , 
 and of Chesney Wold into the bargain , the break arch of the bridge 
 in the park be mend ; and the water , now retire within its proper 
 limit and again span gracefully , make a figure in the prospect 
 from the house . the clear , cold sunshine glance into the brittle 
 wood and approvingly behold the sharp wind scatter the leaf 
 and dry the moss . it glide over the park after the move 
 shadow of the cloud , and chase they , and never catch they , all 
 day . it look in at the window and touch the ancestral portrait 
 with bar and patch of brightness never contemplate by the 
 painter . athwart the picture of my Lady , over the great chimney- 
 piece , it throw a broad bend - sinister of light that strike down 
 crookedly into the hearth and seem to rend it . 
 through the same cold sunshine and the same sharp wind , my Lady and 
 Sir Leicester , in their travel chariot   my Lady 's woman and Sir 
 Leicester 's man affectionate in the rumble , start for home . with a 
 considerable amount of jingling and whip - crack , and many plunge 
 demonstration on the part of two bare - back horse and two 
 centaur with glaze hat , jack - boot , and flow mane and tail , 
 they rattle out of the yard of the Hotel Bristol in the Place 
 vendome and canter between the sun - and - shadow - chequer colonnade of 
 the Rue de Rivoli and the garden of the ill - fat palace of a 
 headless king and queen , off by the Place of Concord , and the 
 Elysian Fields , and the Gate of the Star , out of Paris . 
 Sooth to say , they can not go away too fast , for even here my Lady 
 Dedlock have be bore to death . Concert , assembly , opera , theatre , 
 drive , nothing be new to my Lady under the wear - out heaven . only 
 last Sunday , when poor wretch be gay - within the wall play 
 with child among the clip tree and the statue in the Palace 
 Garden ; walking , a score abreast , in the Elysian Fields , make more 
 Elysian by perform dog and wooden horse ; between while 
 filtering   a few   through the gloomy Cathedral of our Lady to say a 
 word or two at the base of a pillar within flare of a rusty little 
 gridiron - full of gusty little taper ; without the wall encompass 
 Paris with dancing , love - making , wine - drinking , tobacco - smoking , 
 tomb - visit , billiard card and domino playing , quack - doctoring , 
 and much murderous refuse , animate and inanimate - only last Sunday , 
 my Lady , in the desolation of Boredom and the clutch of Giant 
 despair , almost hat her own maid for be in spirit . 
 she can not , therefore , go too fast from Paris . weariness of soul 
 lie before she , as it lie behind - her Ariel have put a girdle of it 
 round the whole earth , and it can not be unclasp - but the imperfect 
 remedy be always to fly from the last place where it have be 
 experienced . Fling Paris back into the distance , then , exchange 
 it for endless avenue and cross - avenue of wintry tree ! and , when 
 next beheld , let it be some league away , with the Gate of the Star 
 a white speck glitter in the sun , and the city a mere mound in a 
 plain - two dark square tower rise out of it , and light and shadow 
 descend on it aslant , like the angel in Jacob 's dream ! 
 Sir Leicester be generally in a complacent state , and rarely bored . 
 when he have nothing else to do , he can always contemplate his own 
 greatness . it be a considerable advantage to a man to have so 
 inexhaustible a subject . after read his letter , he lean back 
 in his corner of the carriage and generally review his importance 
 to society . 
 " you have an unusual amount of correspondence this morning ? " say my 
 Lady after a long time . she be fatigue with reading . have almost 
 read a page in twenty mile . 
 " nothing in it , though . nothing whatever . " 
 " I see one of Mr. Tulkinghorn 's long effusion , I think ? " 
 " you see everything , " say Sir Leicester with admiration . 
 " ha ! " sigh my Lady . " he be the most tiresome of man ! " 
 " he send - I really beg your pardon - he send , " say Sir Leicester , 
 select the letter and unfold it , " a message to you . our 
 stop to change horse as I come to his postscript drive it out 
 of my memory . I beg you will excuse I . he say - " Sir Leicester be 
 so long in take out his eye - glass and adjust it that my Lady 
 look a little irritated . " he say ' in the matter of the right of 
 way - ' I beg your pardon , that be not the place . he say - yes ! 
 here I have it ! he say , ' I beg my respectful compliment to my 
 Lady , who , I hope , have benefit by the change . will you do I the 
 favour to mention   as it may interest she   that I have something to 
 tell she on her return in reference to the person who copy the 
 affidavit in the Chancery suit , which so powerfully stimulate her 
 curiosity . I have see he . ' " 
 my Lady , lean forward , look out of her window . 
 " that be the message , " observe Sir Leicester . 
 " I should like to walk a little , " say my Lady , still look out of 
 her window . 
 " Walk ? " repeat Sir Leicester in a tone of surprise . 
 " I should like to walk a little , " say my Lady with unmistakable 
 distinctness . " please to stop the carriage . " 
 the carriage be stop , the affectionate man alight from the 
 rumble , open the door , and let down the step , obedient to an 
 impatient motion of my Lady 's hand . my Lady alight so quickly and 
 walk away so quickly that Sir Leicester , for all his scrupulous 
 politeness , be unable to assist she , and be leave behind . a space of 
 a minute or two have elapse before he come up with she . she 
 smile , look very handsome , take his arm , lounge with he for a 
 quarter of a mile , be very much bored , and resume her seat in the 
 carriage . 
 the rattle and clatter continue through the great part of three 
 day , with more or less of bell - jingling and whip - crack , and more 
 or less plunging of centaur and bare - back horse . their courtly 
 politeness to each other at the hotel where they tarry be the theme 
 of general admiration . though my Lord be a little aged for my Lady , 
 say Madame , the hostess of the Golden Ape , and though he might be 
 her amiable father , one can see at a glance that they love each 
 other . one observe my Lord with his white hair , standing , hat in 
 hand , to help my Lady to and from the carriage . one observe my 
 Lady , how recognisant of my Lord 's politeness , with an inclination 
 of her gracious head and the concession of her so - genteel finger ! 
 it be ravish ! 
 the sea have no appreciation of great man , but knock they about like 
 the small fry . it be habitually hard upon Sir Leicester , whose 
 countenance it greenly mottle in the manner of sage - cheese and in 
 whose aristocratic system it effect a dismal revolution . it be the 
 Radical of Nature to he . nevertheless , his dignity get over it 
 after stop to refit , and he go on with my Lady for Chesney 
 Wold , lie only one night in London on the way to Lincolnshire . 
 through the same cold sunlight , cold as the day decline , and 
 through the same sharp wind , sharp as the separate shadow of bare 
 tree gloom together in the wood , and as the Ghost 's Walk , touch 
 at the western corner by a pile of fire in the sky , resign itself 
 to come night , they drive into the park . the rook , swing in 
 their lofty house in the elm - tree avenue , seem to discuss the 
 question of the occupancy of the carriage as it pass underneath , 
 some agree that Sir Leicester and my Lady be come down , some 
 argue with malcontent who will not   admit it , now all consent to 
 consider the question dispose of , now all break out again in 
 violent debate , incite by one obstinate and drowsy bird who will 
 persist in put in a last contradictory croak . leave they to 
 swing and caw , the travel chariot roll on to the house , where 
 fire gleam warmly through some of the window , though not through 
 so many as to give an inhabited expression to the darken mass of 
 front . but the brilliant and distinguished circle will soon do 
 that . 
 Mrs. Rouncewell be in attendance and receive Sir Leicester 's 
 customary shake of the hand with a profound curtsy . 
 " how do you do , Mrs. Rouncewell ? I be glad to see you . " 
 " I hope I have the honour of welcome you in good health , Sir 
 Leicester ? " 
 " in excellent health , Mrs. Rouncewell . " 
 " my Lady be look charmingly well , " say Mrs. Rouncewell with 
 another curtsy . 
 my Lady signify , without profuse expenditure of word , that she be 
 as wearily well as she can hope to be . 
 but Rosa be in the distance , behind the housekeeper ; and my Lady , 
 who have not subdue the quickness of her observation , whatever else 
 she may have conquer , ask , " who be that girl ? " 
 " a young scholar of mine , my Lady . Rosa . " 
 " come here , Rosa ! " Lady Dedlock beckon she , with even an 
 appearance of interest . " why , do you know how pretty you be , 
 child ? " she say , touch her shoulder with her two forefinger . 
 Rosa , very much abash , say , " no , if you please , my Lady ! " and 
 glance up , and glance down , and do not   know where to look , but 
 look all the pretty . 
 " how old be you ? " 
 " Nineteen , my Lady . " 
 " Nineteen , " repeat my Lady thoughtfully . " take care they do not 
 spoil you by flattery . " 
 " yes , my Lady . " 
 my Lady tap her dimpled cheek with the same delicate gloved finger 
 and go on to the foot of the oak staircase , where Sir Leicester 
 pause for she as her knightly escort . a star old Dedlock in a 
 panel , as large as life and as dull , look as if he do not   know what 
 to make of it , which be probably his general state of mind in the 
 day of Queen Elizabeth . 
 that evening , in the housekeeper 's room , Rosa can do nothing but 
 murmur Lady Dedlock 's praise . she be so affable , so graceful , so 
 beautiful , so elegant ; have such a sweet voice and such a thrilling 
 touch that Rosa can feel it yet ! Mrs. Rouncewell confirm all this , 
 not without personal pride , reserve only the one point of 
 affability . Mrs. Rouncewell be not quite sure as to that . Heaven 
 forbid that she should say a syllable in dispraise of any member of 
 that excellent family , above all , of my Lady , whom the whole world 
 admire ; but if my Lady would only be " a little more free , " not 
 quite so cold and distant , Mrs. Rouncewell think she would be more 
 affable . 
 " ' tis almost a pity , " Mrs. Rouncewell add - only " almost " because it 
 border on impiety to suppose that anything could be well than it 
 be , in such an express dispensation as the Dedlock affair - " that my 
 Lady have no family . if she have have a daughter now , a grown young 
 lady , to interest she , I think she would have have the only kind of 
 excellence she want . " 
 " might not that have make she still more proud , grandmother ? " say 
 Watt , who have be home and come back again , he be such a good 
 grandson . 
 " more and most , my dear , " return the housekeeper with dignity , " be 
 word it be not my place to use - nor so much as to hear - apply to 
 any drawback on my Lady . " 
 " I beg your pardon , grandmother . but she be proud , be she not ? " 
 " if she be , she have reason to be . the Dedlock family have always 
 reason to be . " 
 " well , " say Watt , " it be to be hop they line out of their prayer- 
 book a certain passage for the common people about pride and 
 vainglory . forgive I , grandmother ! only a joke ! " 
 " Sir Leicester and Lady Dedlock , my dear , be not fit subject for 
 joke . " 
 " Sir Leicester be no joke by any mean , " say Watt , " and I humbly 
 ask his pardon . I suppose , grandmother , that even with the family 
 and their guest down here , there be no objection to my prolong my 
 stay at the Dedlock Arms for a day or two , as any other traveller 
 might ? " 
 " surely , none in the world , child . " 
 " I be glad of that , " say Watt , " because I have an inexpressible 
 desire to extend my knowledge of this beautiful neighbourhood . " 
 he happen to glance at Rosa , who look down and be very shy indeed . 
 but accord to the old superstition , it should be Rosa 's ear that 
 burn , and not her fresh bright cheek , for my Lady 's maid be hold 
 forth about she at this moment with surpass energy . 
 my Lady 's maid be a Frenchwoman of two and thirty , from somewhere in 
 the southern country about Avignon and Marseilles , a large - eye 
 brown woman with black hair who would be handsome but for a certain 
 feline mouth and general uncomfortable tightness of face , render 
 the jaw too eager and the skull too prominent . there be something 
 indefinably keen and wan about her anatomy , and she have a watchful 
 way of look out of the corner of her eye without turn she 
 head which could be pleasantly dispense with , especially when she 
 be in an ill humour and near knife . through all the good taste of 
 her dress and little adornment , these objection so express 
 themselves that she seem to go about like a very neat she - wolf 
 imperfectly tame . besides be accomplish in all the knowledge 
 appertaining to her post , she be almost an Englishwoman in her 
 acquaintance with the language ; consequently , she be in no want of 
 word to shower upon Rosa for have attract my Lady 's attention , 
 and she pour they out with such grim ridicule as she sit at dinner 
 that her companion , the affectionate man , be rather relieved when 
 she arrive at the spoon stage of that performance . 
 ha , ha , ha ! she , Hortense , be in my Lady 's service since five 
 year and always keep at the distance , and this doll , this puppet , 
 caress - absolutely caress - by my Lady on the moment of she 
 arrive at the house ! ha , ha , ha ! " and do you know how pretty you 
 be , child ? " " no , my Lady . " you be right there ! " and how old be 
 you , child ! and take care they do not spoil you by flattery , 
 child ! " oh , how droll ! it be the BEST thing altogether . 
 in short , it be such an admirable thing that Mademoiselle Hortense 
 can not   forget it ; but at meal for day afterwards , even among her 
 countrywoman and other attach in like capacity to the troop of 
 visitor , relapse into silent enjoyment of the joke - an enjoyment 
 express , in her own convivial manner , by an additional tightness 
 of face , thin elongation of compress lip , and sidewise look , 
 which intense appreciation of humour be frequently reflect in my 
 Lady 's mirror when my Lady be not among they . 
 all the mirror in the house be bring into action now , many of 
 they after a long blank . they reflect handsome face , simper 
 face , youthful face , face of threescore and ten that will not 
 submit to be old ; the entire collection of face that have come to 
 pass a January week or two at Chesney Wold , and which the 
 fashionable intelligence , a mighty hunter before the Lord , hunt 
 with a keen scent , from their break cover at the Court of St. 
 James 's to their be run down to death . the place in Lincolnshire 
 be all alive . by day gun and voice be hear ring in the 
 wood , horseman and carriage enliven the park road , servant and 
 hanger - on pervade the village and the Dedlock Arms . see by night 
 from distant opening in the tree , the row of window in the long 
 drawing - room , where my Lady 's picture hang over the great chimney- 
 piece , be like a row of jewel set in a black frame . on Sunday the 
 chill little church be almost warm by so much gallant company , and 
 the general flavour of the Dedlock dust be quench in delicate 
 perfume . 
 the brilliant and distinguished circle comprehend within it no 
 contract amount of education , sense , courage , honour , beauty , and 
 virtue . yet there be something a little wrong about it in despite 
 of its immense advantage . what can it be ? 
 dandyism ? there be no King George the Fourth now   more the pity   to 
 set the dandy fashion ; there be no clear - starch jack - towel 
 neckcloth , no short - waiste coat , no false calf , no stay . 
 there be no caricature , now , of effeminate exquisite so arrayed , 
 swoon in opera box with excess of delight and be revive by 
 other dainty creature poke long - neck scent - bottle at their 
 nose . there be no beau whom it take four man at once to shake 
 into his buckskin , or who go to see all the execution , or who be 
 trouble with the self - reproach of have once consume a pea . but 
 be there dandyism in the brilliant and distinguished circle 
 notwithstanding , dandyism of a more mischievous sort , that have get 
 below the surface and be do less harmless thing than jack- 
 towel itself and stop its own digestion , to which no 
 rational person need particularly object ? 
 why , yes . it can not be disguise . there be at Chesney Wold this 
 January week some lady and gentleman of the new fashion , who 
 have set up a dandyism - in religion , for instance . who in mere 
 lackadaisical want of an emotion have agree upon a little dandy 
 talk about the vulgar want faith in thing in general , mean in 
 the thing that have be try and find wanting , as though a low 
 fellow should unaccountably lose faith in a bad shilling after 
 find it out ! who would make the vulgar very picturesque and 
 faithful by put back the hand upon the clock of time and 
 cancel a few hundred year of history . 
 there be also lady and gentleman of another fashion , not so new , 
 but very elegant , who have agree to put a smooth glaze on the world 
 and to keep down all its reality . for whom everything must be 
 languid and pretty . who have find out the perpetual stoppage . who 
 be to rejoice at nothing and be sorry for nothing . who be not to 
 be disturb by idea . on whom even the fine art , attend in 
 powder and walk backward like the Lord Chamberlain , must array 
 themselves in the milliner ' and tailor ' pattern of past 
 generation and be particularly careful not to be in earnest or to 
 receive any impress from the move age . 
 then there be my Lord Boodle , of considerable reputation with his 
 party , who have know what office be and who tell Sir Leicester 
 Dedlock with much gravity , after dinner , that he really do not see 
 to what the present age be tend . a debate be not what a debate 
 use to be ; the House be not what the House use to be ; even a 
 Cabinet be not what it formerly be . he perceive with astonishment 
 that suppose the present government to be overthrow , the limited 
 choice of the Crown , in the formation of a new ministry , would lie 
 between Lord Coodle and Sir Thomas Doodle - suppose it to be 
 impossible for the Duke of Foodle to act with Goodle , which may be 
 assume to be the case in consequence of the breach arise out of 
 that affair with Hoodle . then , give the Home Department and the 
 leadership of the House of Commons to Joodle , the Exchequer to 
 Koodle , the Colonies to Loodle , and the Foreign Office to Moodle , 
 what be you to do with Noodle ? you can not   offer he the Presidency 
 of the Council ; that be reserve for Poodle . you can not   put he in 
 the wood and forest ; that be hardly good enough for Quoodle . what 
 follow ? that the country be shipwreck , lose , and go to piece 
  as be make manifest to the patriotism of Sir Leicester Dedlock 
 because you can not   provide for Noodle ! 
 on the other hand , the right honourable William Buffy , M.P. , 
 contend across the table with some one else that the shipwreck of 
 the country - about which there be no doubt ; it be only the manner of 
 it that be in question - be attributable to Cuffy . if you have do 
 with Cuffy what you ought to have do when he first come into 
 Parliament , and have prevent he from go over to Duffy , you 
 would have get he into alliance with Fuffy , you would have have with 
 you the weight attach as a smart debater to Guffy , you would have 
 bring to bear upon the election the wealth of Huffy , you would 
 have get in for three county Juffy , Kuffy , and Luffy , and you 
 would have strengthen your administration by the official 
 knowledge and the business habit of Muffy . all this , instead of 
 be as you now be , dependent on the mere caprice of Puffy ! 
 as to this point , and as to some minor topic , there be difference 
 of opinion ; but it be perfectly clear to the brilliant and 
 distinguish circle , all round , that nobody be in question but 
 Boodle and his retinue , and Buffy and his retinue . these be the 
 great actor for whom the stage be reserve . a People there be , no 
 doubt - a certain large number of supernumerary , who be to be 
 occasionally address , and rely upon for shout and chorus , as 
 on the theatrical stage ; but Boodle and Buffy , their follower and 
 family , their heir , executor , administrator , and assign , be 
 the bear first - actor , manager , and leader , and no other can 
 appear upon the scene for ever and ever . 
 in this , too , there be perhaps more dandyism at Chesney Wold than 
 the brilliant and distinguished circle will find good for itself in 
 the long run . for it be , even with the stillest and politest 
 circle , as with the circle the necromancer draw around he - very 
 strange appearance may be see in active motion outside . with this 
 difference , that be reality and not phantom , there be the 
 great danger of their breaking in . 
 Chesney Wold be quite full anyhow , so full that a burn sense of 
 injury arise in the breast of ill - lodge ladies'-maid , and be not 
 to he extinguish . only one room be empty . it be a turret chamber 
 of the third order of merit , plainly but comfortably furnish and 
 have an old - fashioned business air . it be Mr. Tulkinghorn 's room , 
 and be never bestow on anybody else , for he may come at any time . 
 he be not come yet . it be his quiet habit to walk across the park 
 from the village in fine weather , to drop into this room as if he 
 have never be out of it since he be last see there , to request a 
 servant to inform Sir Leicester that he be arrive in case he should 
 be want , and to appear ten minute before dinner in the shadow of 
 the library - door . he sleep in his turret with a complaining flag- 
 staff over his head , and have some lead outside on which , any fine 
 morning when he be down here , his black figure may be see walk 
 before breakfast like a large specie of rook . 
 every day before dinner , my Lady look for he in the dusk of the 
 library , but he be not there . every day at dinner , my Lady glance 
 down the table for the vacant place that would be wait to receive 
 he if he have just arrive , but there be no vacant place . every 
 night my Lady casually ask she maid , " be Mr. Tulkinghorn come ? " 
 every night the answer be , " no , my Lady , not yet . " 
 one night , while have her hair undressed , my Lady lose herself in 
 deep thought after this reply until she see her own brood face 
 in the opposite glass , and a pair of black eye curiously observe 
 she . 
 " be so good as to attend , " say my Lady then , address the 
 reflection of Hortense , " to your business . you can contemplate your 
 beauty at another time . " 
 " Pardon ! it be your ladyship 's beauty . " 
 " that , " say my Lady , " you need not   contemplate at all . " 
 at length , one afternoon a little before sunset , when the bright 
 group of figure which have for the last hour or two enliven the 
 Ghost 's Walk be all disperse and only Sir Leicester and my Lady 
 remain upon the terrace , Mr. Tulkinghorn appear . he come towards 
 they at his usual methodical pace , which be never quicken , never 
 slacken . he wear his usual expressionless mask - if it be a mask 
  - and carry family secret in every limb of his body and every 
 crease of his dress . whether his whole soul be devoted to the great 
 or whether he yield they nothing beyond the service he sell be 
 his personal secret . he keep it , as he keep the secret of his 
 client ; he be his own client in that matter , and will never betray 
 himself . 
 " how do you do , Mr. Tulkinghorn ? " say Sir Leicester , give he his 
 hand . 
 Mr. Tulkinghorn be quite well . Sir Leicester be quite well . my 
 Lady be quite well . all highly satisfactory . the lawyer , with his 
 hand behind he , walk at Sir Leicester 's side along the terrace . 
 my Lady walk upon the other side . 
 " we expect you before , " say Sir Leicester . a gracious 
 observation . as much as to say , " Mr. Tulkinghorn , we remember your 
 existence when you be not here to remind we of it by your presence . 
 we bestow a fragment of our mind upon you , sir , you see ! " 
 Mr. Tulkinghorn , comprehend it , incline his head and say he be 
 much obliged . 
 " I should have come down soon , " he explain , " but that I have be 
 much engage with those matter in the several suit between 
 yourself and Boythorn . " 
 " a man of a very ill - regulated mind , " observe Sir Leicester with 
 severity . " an extremely dangerous person in any community . a man 
 of a very low character of mind . " 
 " he be obstinate , " say Mr. Tulkinghorn . 
 " it be natural to such a man to be so , " say Sir Leicester , look 
 most profoundly obstinate himself . " I be not at all surprised to 
 hear it . " 
 " the only question be , " pursue the lawyer , " whether you will give 
 up anything . " 
 " no , sir , " reply Sir Leicester . " nothing . I give up ? " 
 " I do not   mean anything of importance . that , of course , I know you 
 would not abandon . I mean any minor point . " 
 " Mr. Tulkinghorn , " return Sir Leicester , " there can be no minor 
 point between myself and Mr. Boythorn . if I go far , and observe 
 that I can not readily conceive how any right of mine can be a minor 
 point , I speak not so much in reference to myself as an individual 
 as in reference to the family position I have it in charge to 
 maintain . " 
 Mr. Tulkinghorn incline his head again . " I have now my 
 instruction , " he say . " Mr. Boythorn will give we a good deal of 
 trouble - " 
 " it be the character of such a mind , Mr. Tulkinghorn , " Sir Leicester 
 interrupt he , " to give trouble . an exceedingly ill - condition , 
 level person . a person who , fifty year ago , would probably 
 have be try at the Old Bailey for some demagogue proceeding , and 
 severely punish - if not , " add Sir Leicester after a moment 's 
 pause , " if not hang , draw , and quarter . " 
 Sir Leicester appear to discharge his stately breast of a burden in 
 pass this capital sentence , as if it be the next satisfactory 
 thing to have the sentence execute . 
 " but night be come on , " say he , " and my Lady will take cold . my 
 dear , let we go in . " 
 as they turn towards the hall - door , Lady Dedlock address Mr. 
 Tulkinghorn for the first time . 
 " you send I a message respect the person whose write I 
 happen to inquire about . it be like you to remember the 
 circumstance ; I have quite forget it . your message remind I of 
 it again . I can not   imagine what association I have with a hand like 
 that , but I surely have some . " 
 " you have some ? " Mr. Tulkinghorn repeat . 
 " oh , yes ! " return my Lady carelessly . " I think I must have have 
 some . and do you really take the trouble to find out the writer of 
 that actual thing - what be it ! - affidavit ? " 
 " yes . " 
 " how very odd ! " 
 they pass into a sombre breakfast - room on the ground floor , light 
 in the day by two deep window . it be now twilight . the fire glow 
 brightly on the panel wall and palely on the window - glass , where , 
 through the cold reflection of the blaze , the cold landscape 
 shudder in the wind and a grey mist creep along , the only 
 traveller besides the waste of cloud . 
 my Lady lounge in a great chair in the chimney - corner , and Sir 
 Leicester take another great chair opposite . the lawyer stand 
 before the fire with his hand out at arm 's length , shade his face . 
 he look across his arm at my Lady . 
 " yes , " he say , " I inquire about the man , and find he . and , what 
 be very strange , I find he - " 
 " not to be any out - of - the - way person , I be afraid ! " Lady Dedlock 
 languidly anticipate . 
 " I find he dead . " 
 " oh , dear I ! " remonstrate Sir Leicester . not so much shock by 
 the fact as by the fact of the fact be mention . 
 " I be direct to his lodging - a miserable , poverty - stricken place 
  - and I find he dead . " 
 " you will excuse I , Mr. Tulkinghorn , " observe Sir Leicester . " I 
 think the less say - " 
 " pray , Sir Leicester , let I hear the story out "   it be my Lady 
 speak . " it be quite a story for twilight . how very shocking ! 
 dead ? " 
 Mr. tulkinghorn re - assert it by another inclination of his head . 
 " whether by his own hand - " 
 " upon my honour ! " cry Sir Leicester . " really ! " 
 " do let I hear the story ! " say my Lady . 
 " whatever you desire , my dear . but , I must say - " 
 " no , you must not   say ! go on , Mr. Tulkinghorn . " 
 Sir Leicester 's gallantry concede the point , though he still feel 
 that to bring this sort of squalor among the upper class be 
 really - really - 
 " I be about to say , " resume the lawyer with undisturbed calmness , 
 " that whether he have die by his own hand or not , it be beyond my 
 power to tell you . I should amend that phrase , however , by say 
 that he have unquestionably die of his own act , though whether by 
 his own deliberate intention or by mischance can never certainly be 
 know . the coroner 's jury find that he take the poison 
 accidentally . " 
 " and what kind of man , " my Lady ask , " be this deplorable 
 creature ? " 
 " very difficult to say , " return the lawyer , shake his head . " he 
 have live so wretchedly and be so neglect , with his gipsy colour 
 and his wild black hair and beard , that I should have consider he 
 the commonest of the common . the surgeon have a notion that he have 
 once be something well , both in appearance and condition . " 
 " what do they call the wretched being ? " 
 " they call he what he have call himself , but no one know his 
 name . " 
 " not even any one who have attend on he ? " 
 " no one have attend on he . he be find dead . in fact , I find 
 he . " 
 " without any clue to anything more ? " 
 " without any ; there be , " say the lawyer meditatively , " an old 
 portmanteau , but - no , there be no paper . " 
 during the utterance of every word of this short dialogue , Lady 
 Dedlock and Mr. Tulkinghorn , without any other alteration in their 
 customary deportment , have look very steadily at one another - as 
 be natural , perhaps , in the discussion of so unusual a subject . 
 Sir Leicester have look at the fire , with the general expression of 
 the Dedlock on the staircase . the story be tell , he renew his 
 stately protest , say that as it be quite clear that no 
 association in my Lady 's mind can possibly be traceable to this poor 
 wretch   unless he be a beg - letter writer , he trust to hear no 
 more about a subject so far remove from my Lady 's station . 
 " certainly , a collection of horror , " say my Lady , gather up her 
 mantle and fur , " but they interest one for the moment ! have the 
 kindness , Mr. Tulkinghorn , to open the door for I . " 
 Mr. Tulkinghorn do so with deference and hold it open while she 
 pass out . she pass close to he , with her usual fatigued manner 
 and insolent grace . they meet again at dinner - again , next day - 
 again , for many day in succession . Lady Dedlock be always the same 
 exhausted deity , surround by worshipper , and terribly liable to 
 be bored to death , even while preside at her own shrine . Mr. 
 Tulkinghorn be always the same speechless repository of noble 
 confidence , so oddly but of place and yet so perfectly at home . 
 they appear to take as little note of one another as any two people 
 enclose within the same wall could . but whether each evermore 
 watch and suspect the other , evermore mistrustful of some great 
 reservation ; whether each be evermore prepared at all point for the 
 other , and never to be take unawares ; what each would give to know 
 how much the other know - all this be hide , for the time , in their 
 own heart . 
 CHAPTER XIII 
 Esther 's Narrative 
 we hold many consultation about what Richard be to be , first 
 without Mr. Jarndyce , as he have request , and afterwards with he , 
 but it be a long time before we seem to make progress . Richard 
 say he be ready for anything . when Mr. Jarndyce doubt whether 
 he might not already be too old to enter the Navy , Richard say he 
 have think of that , and perhaps he be . when Mr. Jarndyce ask 
 he what he think of the Army , Richard say he have think of 
 that , too , and it be not   a bad idea . when Mr. Jarndyce advise he 
 to try and decide within himself whether his old preference for the 
 sea be an ordinary boyish inclination or a strong impulse , Richard 
 answer , well he really had try very often , and he could not   make 
 out . 
 " how much of this indecision of character , " Mr. Jarndyce say to I , 
 " be chargeable on that incomprehensible heap of uncertainty and 
 procrastination on which he have be throw from his birth , I do not 
 pretend to say ; but that Chancery , among its other sin , be 
 responsible for some of it , I can plainly see . it have engender or 
 confirm in he a habit of put off - and trust to this , that , 
 and the other chance , without know what chance - and dismiss 
 everything as unsettled , uncertain , and confuse . the character of 
 much old and steady people may be even change by the 
 circumstance surround they . it would be too much to expect that 
 a boy 's , in its formation , should be the subject of such influence 
 and escape they . " 
 I feel this to be true ; though if I may venture to mention what I 
 think besides , I think it much to be regret that Richard 's 
 education have not counteract those influence or direct his 
 character . he have be eight year at a public school and have 
 learn , I understand , to make Latin verse of several sort in the 
 most admirable manner . but I never hear that it have be anybody 's 
 business to find out what his natural bent be , or where his 
 failing lay , or to adapt any kind of knowledge to HIM . he have be 
 adapt to the verse and have learn the art of make they to such 
 perfection that if he have remain at school until he be of age , I 
 suppose he could only have go on make they over and over again 
 unless he have enlarge his education by forget how to do it . 
 still , although I have no doubt that they be very beautiful , and 
 very improving , and very sufficient for a great many purpose of 
 life , and always remember all through life , I do doubt whether 
 Richard would not have profit by some one study he a little , 
 instead of his study they quite so much . 
 to be sure , I know nothing of the subject and do not even now know 
 whether the young gentleman of classic Rome or Greece make verse to 
 the same extent - or whether the young gentleman of any country ever 
 do . 
 " I have not   the least idea , " say Richard , musing , " what I have well 
 be . except that I be quite sure I do not   want to go into the Church , 
 it be a toss - up . " 
 " you have no inclination in Mr. Kenge 's way ? " suggest Mr. 
 Jarndyce . 
 " I do not   know that , sir ! " reply Richard . " I be fond of boat . 
 article clerk go a good deal on the water . it be a capital 
 profession ! " 
 " Surgeon - " suggest Mr. Jarndyce . 
 " that be the thing , sir ! " cry Richard . 
 I doubt if he have ever once think of it before . 
 " that be the thing , sir , " repeat Richard with the great 
 enthusiasm . " we have get it at last . M.R.C.S. ! " 
 he be not to be laugh out of it , though he laugh at it 
 heartily . he say he have choose his profession , and the more he 
 think of it , the more he feel that his destiny be clear ; the art 
 of healing be the art of all other for he . mistrust that he 
 only come to this conclusion because , have never have much chance 
 of find out for himself what he be fit for and have never 
 be guide to the discovery , he be take by the new idea and 
 be glad to get rid of the trouble of consideration , I wonder 
 whether the Latin verse often end in this or whether Richard 's 
 be a solitary case . 
 Mr. Jarndyce take great pain to talk with he seriously and to put 
 it to his good sense not to deceive himself in so important a 
 matter . Richard be a little grave after these interview , but 
 invariably tell Ada and I that it be all right , and then begin to 
 talk about something else . 
 " by heaven ! " cry Mr. Boythorn , who interest himself strongly in 
 the subject - though I need not say that , for he could do nothing 
 weakly ; " I rejoice to find a young gentleman of spirit and gallantry 
 devote himself to that noble profession ! the more spirit there be 
 in it , the well for mankind and the bad for those mercenary 
 task - master and low trickster who delight in put that 
 illustrious art at a disadvantage in the world . by all that be base 
 and despicable , " cry Mr. Boythorn , " the treatment of surgeon 
 aboard ship be such that I would submit the leg - both leg - of 
 every member of the Admiralty Board to a compound fracture and 
 render it a transportable offence in any qualified practitioner to 
 set they if the system be not wholly change in eight and forty 
 hour ! " 
 " would not   you give they a week ? " ask Mr. Jarndyce . 
 " no ! " cry Mr. Boythorn firmly . " not on any consideration ! eight 
 and forty hour ! as to corporation , parish , vestry - board , and 
 similar gathering of jolter - head clod who assemble to exchange 
 such speech that , by heaven , they ought to be work in 
 quicksilver mine for the short remainder of their miserable 
 existence , if it be only to prevent their detestable English from 
 contaminate a language speak in the presence of the sun - as to 
 those fellow , who meanly take advantage of the ardour of gentleman 
 in the pursuit of knowledge to recompense the inestimable service 
 of the good year of their life , their long study , and their 
 expensive education with pittance too small for the acceptance of 
 clerk , I would have the neck of every one of they wring and their 
 skull arrange in surgeon ' Hall for the contemplation of the whole 
 profession in order that its young member might understand from 
 actual measurement , in early life , how thick skull may become ! " 
 he wind up this vehement declaration by look round upon we with 
 a most agreeable smile and suddenly thunder , " ha , ha , ha ! " over 
 and over again , until anybody else might have be expect to be 
 quite subdue by the exertion . 
 as Richard still continue to say that he be fix in his choice 
 after repeat period for consideration have be recommend by Mr. 
 Jarndyce and have expire , and he still continue to assure Ada and 
 I in the same final manner that it be " all right , " it become 
 advisable to take Mr. Kenge into council . Mr. Kenge , therefore , 
 come down to dinner one day , and lean back in his chair , and 
 turn his eye - glass over and over , and speak in a sonorous voice , 
 and do exactly what I remember to have see he do when I be a 
 little girl . 
 " ah ! " say Mr. Kenge . " yes . well ! a very good profession , Mr. 
 Jarndyce , a very good profession . " 
 " the course of study and preparation require to be diligently 
 pursue , " observe my guardian with a glance at Richard . 
 " oh , no doubt , " say Mr. Kenge . " diligently . " 
 " but that be the case , more or less , with all pursuit that be 
 worth much , " say Mr. Jarndyce , " it be not a special consideration 
 which another choice would be likely to escape . " 
 " truly , " say Mr. Kenge . " and Mr. Richard Carstone , who have so 
 meritoriously acquit himself in the - shall I say the classic 
 shade ? - in which his youth have be pass , will , no doubt , apply 
 the habit , if not the principle and practice , of versification in 
 that tongue in which a poet be say   unless I mistake   to be bear , 
 not make , to the more eminently practical field of action on which 
 he enter . " 
 " you may rely upon it , " say Richard in his off - hand manner , " that I 
 shall go at it and do my good . " 
 " very well , Mr. Jarndyce ! " say Mr. Kenge , gently nod his head . 
 " really , when we be assure by Mr. Richard that he mean to go at 
 it and to do his good , " nod feelingly and smoothly over those 
 expression , " I would submit to you that we have only to inquire 
 into the good mode of carry out the object of his ambition . now , 
 with reference to place Mr. Richard with some sufficiently eminent 
 practitioner . be there any one in view at present ? " 
 " no one , Rick , I think ? " say my guardian . 
 " no one , sir , " say Richard . 
 " quite so ! " observe Mr. Kenge . " as to situation , now . be there 
 any particular feeling on that head ? " 
 " N - no , " say Richard . 
 " quite so ! " observe Mr. Kenge again . 
 " I should like a little variety , " say Richard ; " I mean a good range 
 of experience . " 
 " very requisite , no doubt , " return Mr. Kenge . " I think this may 
 be easily arrange , Mr. Jarndyce ? we have only , in the first place , 
 to discover a sufficiently eligible practitioner ; and as soon as we 
 make our want - and shall I add , our ability to pay a premium ? - 
 know , our only difficulty will be in the selection of one from a 
 large number . we have only , in the second place , to observe those 
 little formality which be render necessary by our time of life 
 and our be under the guardianship of the court . we shall soon 
 be - shall I say , in Mr. Richard 's own light - hearted manner , ' go 
 at it ' - to our heart 's content . it be a coincidence , " say Mr. 
 Kenge with a tinge of melancholy in his smile , " one of those 
 coincidence which may or may not require an explanation beyond our 
 present limited faculty , that I have a cousin in the medical 
 profession . he might be deem eligible by you and might be 
 dispose to respond to this proposal . I can answer for he as 
 little as for you , but he might ! " 
 as this be an opening in the prospect , it be arrange that Mr. 
 Kenge should see his cousin . and as Mr. Jarndyce have before 
 propose to take we to London for a few week , it be settle next 
 day that we should make our visit at once and combine Richard 's 
 business with it . 
 Mr. Boythorn leave we within a week , we take up our abode at a 
 cheerful lodging near Oxford Street over an upholsterer 's shop . 
 London be a great wonder to we , and we be out for hour and hour 
 at a time , see the sight , which appear to be less capable of 
 exhaustion than we be . we make the round of the principal 
 theatre , too , with great delight , and see all the play that be 
 worth see . I mention this because it be at the theatre that I 
 begin to be make uncomfortable again by Mr. Guppy . 
 I be sit in front of the box one night with Ada , and Richard 
 be in the place he like well , behind Ada 's chair , when , happen 
 to look down into the pit , I see Mr. Guppy , with his hair flatten 
 down upon his head and woe depict in his face , look up at I . 
 I feel all through the performance that he never look at the 
 actor but constantly look at I , and always with a carefully 
 prepared expression of the deep misery and the profound 
 dejection . 
 it quite spoil my pleasure for that night because it be so very 
 embarrassing and so very ridiculous . but from that time forth , we 
 never go to the play without my see Mr. Guppy in the pit , 
 always with his hair straight and flat , his shirt - collar turn 
 down , and a general feebleness about he . if he be not there when 
 we go in , and I begin to hope he would not come and yield myself 
 for a little while to the interest of the scene , I be certain to 
 encounter his languish eye when I least expect it and , from 
 that time , to be quite sure that they be fix upon I all the 
 evening . 
 I really can not express how uneasy this make I . if he would only 
 have brush up his hair or turn up his collar , it would have be 
 bad enough ; but to know that that absurd figure be always gaze at 
 I , and always in that demonstrative state of despondency , put such 
 a constraint upon I that I do not like to laugh at the play , or to 
 cry at it , or to move , or to speak . I seem able to do nothing 
 naturally . as to escape Mr. Guppy by go to the back of the 
 box , I could not bear to do that because I know Richard and Ada 
 rely on have I next they and that they could never have talk 
 together so happily if anybody else have be in my place . so there 
 I sit , not know where to look - for wherever I look , I know Mr. 
 Guppy 's eye be follow I - and thinking of the dreadful expense 
 to which this young man be put himself on my account . 
 sometimes I think of tell Mr. Jarndyce . then I fear that the 
 young man would lose his situation and that I might ruin he . 
 sometimes I think of confide in Richard , but be deter by the 
 possibility of his fight Mr. Guppy and give he black eye . 
 sometimes I think , should I frown at he or shake my head . then I 
 feel I could not do it . sometimes I consider whether I should 
 write to his mother , but that end in my being convince that to 
 open a correspondence would be to make the matter bad . I always 
 come to the conclusion , finally , that I could do nothing . Mr. 
 Guppy 's perseverance , all this time , not only produce he regularly 
 at any theatre to which we go , but cause he to appear in the 
 crowd as we be come out , and even to get up behind our fly - 
 where I be sure I see he , two or three time , struggle among the 
 most dreadful spike . after we get home , he haunt a post opposite 
 our house . the upholsterer 's where we lodge be at the corner of 
 two street , and my bedroom window be opposite the post , I be 
 afraid to go near the window when I go upstairs , lest I should see 
 he   as I do one moonlight night   lean against the post and 
 evidently catch cold . if Mr. Guppy have not be , fortunately for 
 I , engage in the daytime , I really should have have no rest from 
 he . 
 while we be make this round of gaiety , in which Mr. Guppy so 
 extraordinarily participate , the business which have help to bring 
 we to town be not neglect . Mr. Kenge 's cousin be a Mr. Bayham 
 Badger , who have a good practice at Chelsea and attend a large 
 public institution besides . he be quite willing to receive Richard 
 into his house and to superintend his study , and as it seem that 
 those could be pursue advantageously under Mr. Badger 's roof , and 
 Mr. Badger like Richard , and as Richard say he like Mr. Badger 
 " well enough , " an agreement be make , the Lord Chancellor 's consent 
 be obtain , and it be all settle . 
 on the day when matter be conclude between Richard and Mr. 
 Badger , we be all under engagement to dine at Mr. Badger 's house . 
 we be to be " merely a family party , " Mrs. Badger 's note say ; and 
 we find no lady there but Mrs. Badger herself . she be surround 
 in the drawing - room by various object , indicative of she paint a 
 little , play the piano a little , play the guitar a little , 
 play the harp a little , sing a little , work a little , 
 read a little , write poetry a little , and botanize a little . 
 she be a lady of about fifty , I should think , youthfully dress , 
 and of a very fine complexion . if I add to the little list of her 
 accomplishment that she rouge a little , I do not mean that there 
 be any harm in it . 
 Mr. Bayham Badger himself be a pink , fresh - faced , crisp - look 
 gentleman with a weak voice , white tooth , light hair , and surprised 
 eye , some year younger , I should say , than Mrs. Bayham Badger . he 
 admire she exceedingly , but principally , and to begin with , on the 
 curious ground   as it seem to we   of she have have three 
 husband . we have barely take our seat when he say to Mr. 
 Jarndyce quite triumphantly , " you would hardly suppose that I be 
 Mrs. Bayham Badger 's third ! " 
 " indeed ? " say Mr. Jarndyce . 
 " her third ! " say Mr. Badger . " Mrs. Bayham Badger have not the 
 appearance , Miss Summerson , of a lady who have have two former 
 husband ? " 
 I say " not at all ! " 
 " and most remarkable man ! " say Mr. Badger in a tone of confidence . 
 " Captain Swosser of the Royal Navy , who be Mrs. Badger 's first 
 husband , be a very distinguished officer indeed . the name of 
 Professor Dingo , my immediate predecessor , be one of european 
 reputation . " 
 Mrs. Badger overhear he and smile . 
 " yes , my dear ! " Mr. Badger reply to the smile , " I be observe to 
 Mr. Jarndyce and Miss Summerson that you have have two former 
 husband - both very distinguished man . and they find it , as people 
 generally do , difficult to believe . " 
 " I be barely twenty , " say Mrs. Badger , " when I marry Captain 
 Swosser of the Royal Navy . I be in the Mediterranean with he ; I 
 be quite a sailor . on the twelfth anniversary of my wedding - day , I 
 become the wife of Professor Dingo . " 
 " of european reputation , " add Mr. Badger in an undertone . 
 " and when Mr. Badger and myself be marry , " pursue Mrs. Badger , 
 " we be marry on the same day of the year . I have become attach 
 to the day . " 
 " so that Mrs. Badger have be marry to three husband - two of they 
 highly distinguished man , " say Mr. Badger , sum up the fact , 
 " and each time upon the twenty - first of March at eleven in the 
 forenoon ! " 
 we all express our admiration . 
 " but for Mr. Badger 's modesty , " say Mr. Jarndyce , " I would take 
 leave to correct he and say three distinguished man . " 
 " thank you , Mr. Jarndyce ! what I always tell he ! " observe Mrs. 
 Badger . 
 " and , my dear , " say Mr. Badger , " what do I always tell you ? that 
 without any affectation of disparage such professional distinction 
 as I may have attain   which our friend Mr. Carstone will have many 
 opportunity of estimate , I be not so weak - no , really , " say 
 Mr. Badger to we generally , ' so unreasonable - as to put my 
 reputation on the same footing with such first - rate man as Captain 
 Swosser and Professor Dingo . perhaps you may be interested , Mr. 
 Jarndyce , " continue Mr. Bayham Badger , lead the way into the 
 next drawing - room , " in this portrait of Captain Swosser . it be 
 take on his return home from the african station , where he have 
 suffer from the fever of the country . Mrs. Badger consider it 
 too yellow . but it be a very fine head . a very fine head ! " 
 we all echo , " a very fine head ! " 
 " I feel when I look at it , " say Mr. Badger , " ' that be a man I should 
 like to have see ! ' it strikingly bespeak the first - class man that 
 Captain Swosser pre - eminently be . on the other side , Professor 
 Dingo . I know he well - attend he in his last illness - a 
 speaking likeness ! over the piano , Mrs. Bayham Badger when Mrs. 
 Swosser . over the sofa , Mrs. Bayham Badger when Mrs. Dingo . of 
 Mrs. Bayham Badger in ESSE , I possess the original and have no 
 copy . " 
 Dinner be now announce , and we go downstairs . it be a very 
 genteel entertainment , very handsomely serve . but the captain and 
 the professor still run in Mr. Badger 's head , and as Ada and I have 
 the honour of be under his particular care , we have the full 
 benefit of they . 
 " Water , Miss Summerson ? allow I ! not in that tumbler , pray . 
 bring I the professor 's goblet , James ! " 
 Ada very much admire some artificial flower under a glass . 
 " astonishing how they keep ! " say Mr. Badger . " they be present 
 to Mrs. Bayham Badger when she be in the Mediterranean . " 
 he invite Mr. Jarndyce to take a glass of claret . 
 " not that claret ! " he say . " excuse I ! this be an occasion , and 
 on an occasion I produce some very special claret I happen to have . 
  James , Captain Swosser 's wine !   Mr. Jarndyce , this be a wine that 
 be import by the captain , we will not say how many year ago . 
 you will find it very curious . my dear , I shall he happy to take 
 some of this wine with you .   Captain Swosser 's claret to your 
 mistress , James !   my love , your health ! " 
 after dinner , when we lady retire , we take Mrs. Badger 's first 
 and second husband with we . Mrs. Badger give we in the drawing - room 
 a biographical sketch of the life and service of Captain Swosser 
 before his marriage and a more minute account of he date from the 
 time when he fall in love with she at a ball on board the Crippler , 
 give to the officer of that ship when she lie in Plymouth Harbour . 
 " the dear old Crippler ! " say Mrs. Badger , shake her head . " she 
 be a noble vessel . trim , ship - shape , all a taunto , as Captain 
 Swosser use to say . you must excuse I if I occasionally introduce 
 a nautical expression ; I be quite a sailor once . Captain Swosser 
 love that craft for my sake . when she be no long in commission , 
 he frequently say that if he be rich enough to buy her old hulk , 
 he would have an inscription let into the timber of the quarter- 
 deck where we stand as partner in the dance to mark the spot where 
 he fall - rake fore and aft   Captain Swosser use to say   by the 
 fire from my top . it be his naval way of mention my eye . " 
 Mrs. Badger shake her head , sigh , and look in the glass . 
 " it be a great change from Captain Swosser to Professor Dingo , " she 
 resume with a plaintive smile . " I feel it a good deal at first . 
 such an entire revolution in my mode of life ! but custom , combine 
 with science - particularly science - inure I to it . be the 
 professor 's sole companion in his botanical excursion , I almost 
 forget that I have ever be afloat , and become quite learn . it be 
 singular that the professor be the antipode of Captain Swosser and 
 that Mr. Badger be not in the least like either ! " 
 we then pass into a narrative of the death of Captain Swosser and 
 Professor Dingo , both of whom seem to have have very bad complaint . 
 in the course of it , Mrs. Badger signify to we that she have never 
 madly love but once and that the object of that wild affection , 
 never to be recall in its fresh enthusiasm , be Captain Swosser . 
 the professor be yet die by inch in the most dismal manner , and 
 Mrs. Badger be give we imitation of his way of say , with 
 great difficulty , " where be Laura ? let Laura give I my toast and 
 water ! " when the entrance of the gentleman consign he to the 
 tomb . 
 now , I observe that evening , as I have observe for some day past , 
 that Ada and Richard be more than ever attach to each other 's 
 society , which be but natural , see that they be go to be 
 separate so soon . I be therefore not very much surprised when we 
 get home , and Ada and I retire upstairs , to find Ada more silent 
 than usual , though I be not quite prepared for she come into my 
 arm and begin to speak to I , with her face hide . 
 " my darling Esther ! " murmur Ada . " I have a great secret to tell 
 you ! " 
 a mighty secret , my pretty one , no doubt ! 
 " what be it , Ada ? " 
 " oh , Esther , you would never guess ! " 
 " shall I try to guess ? " say I. 
 " oh , no ! do not ! pray do not ! " cry Ada , very much startle by the 
 idea of my do so . 
 " now , I wonder who it can be about ? " say I , pretend to consider . 
 " it be about - " say Ada in a whisper . " it be about - my cousin 
 Richard ! " 
 " well , my own ! " say I , kiss her bright hair , which be all I 
 could see . " and what about he ? " 
 " oh , Esther , you would never guess ! " 
 it be so pretty to have she cling to I in that way , hide she 
 face , and to know that she be not cry in sorrow but in a little 
 glow of joy , and pride , and hope , that I would not help she just 
 yet . 
 " he say - I know it be very foolish , we be both so young - but he 
 say , " with a burst of tear , " that he love I dearly , Esther . " 
 " do he indeed ? " say I. " I never hear of such a thing ! why , my 
 pet of pet , I could have tell you that week and week ago ! " 
 to see Ada lift up her flushed face in joyful surprise , and hold I 
 round the neck , and laugh , and cry , and blush , be so pleasant ! 
 " why , my darling , " say I , " what a goose you must take I for ! your 
 cousin Richard have be love you as plainly as he could for I 
 do not   know how long ! " 
 " and yet you never say a word about it ! " cry Ada , kiss I . 
 " no , my love , " say I. " I wait to be tell . " 
 " but now I have tell you , you do not   think it wrong of I , do you ? " 
 return Ada . she might have coax I to say no if I have be the 
 hard - hearte duenna in the world . not be that yet , I say no 
 very freely . 
 " and now , " say I , " I know the bad of it . " 
 " oh , that be not quite the bad of it , Esther dear ! " cry Ada , 
 hold I tight and lay down her face again upon my breast . 
 " no ? " say I. " not even that ? " 
 " no , not even that ! " say Ada , shake her head . 
 " why , you never mean to say - " I be begin in joke . 
 but Ada , look up and smile through her tear 's , cry , " yes , I 
 do ! you know , you know I do ! " and then sob out , " with all my 
 heart I do ! with all my whole heart , Esther ! " 
 I tell she , laughing , why I have know that , too , just as well as I 
 have know the other ! and we sit before the fire , and I have all the 
 talk to myself for a little while   though there be not much of 
 it ; and Ada be soon quiet and happy . 
 " do you think my cousin John know , dear Dame Durden ? " she ask . 
 " unless my cousin John be blind , my pet , " say I , " I should think my 
 cousin John know pretty well as much as we know . " 
 " we want to speak to he before Richard go , " say Ada timidly , 
 " and we want you to advise we , and to tell he so . perhaps you 
 would not   mind Richard 's come in , Dame Durden ? " 
 " oh ! Richard be outside , be he , my dear ? " say I. 
 " I be not quite certain , " return Ada with a bashful simplicity 
 that would have win my heart if she have not win it long before , " but 
 I think he be wait at the door . " 
 there he be , of course . they bring a chair on either side of I , 
 and put I between they , and really seem to have fall in love 
 with I instead of one another , they be so confiding , and so 
 trustful , and so fond of I . they go on in their own wild way for 
 a little while - I never stop they ; I enjoy it too much myself - 
 and then we gradually fall to consider how young they be , and 
 how there must be a lapse of several year before this early love 
 could come to anything , and how it could come to happiness only if 
 it be real and lasting and inspire they with a steady resolution 
 to do their duty to each other , with constancy , fortitude , and 
 perseverance , each always for the other 's sake . well ! Richard say 
 that he would work his finger to the bone for Ada , and Ada say 
 that she would work her finger to the bone for Richard , and they 
 call I all sort of endear and sensible name , and we sit 
 there , advise and talk , half the night . finally , before we 
 part , I give they my promise to speak to their cousin John to- 
 morrow . 
 so , when to - morrow come , I go to my guardian after breakfast , in 
 the room that be our town - substitute for the growlery , and tell he 
 that I have it in trust to tell he something . 
 " well , little woman , " say he , shut up his book , " if you have 
 accept the trust , there can be no harm in it . " 
 " I hope not , guardian , " say i. " I can guarantee that there be no 
 secrecy in it . for it only happen yesterday . " 
 " Aye ? and what be it , Esther ? " 
 " Guardian , " say I , " you remember the happy night when first we come 
 down to Bleak House ? when Ada be sing in the dark room ? " 
 I wish to call to his remembrance the look he have give I then . 
 unless I be much mistaken , I see that I do so . 
 " because - " say I with a little hesitation . 
 " yes , my dear ! " say he . " do not   hurry . " 
 " because , " say I , " Ada and Richard have fall in love . and have 
 tell each other so . " 
 " already ! " cry my guardian , quite astonished . 
 " yes ! " say I. " and to tell you the truth , guardian , I rather 
 expect it . " 
 " the deuce you do ! " say he . 
 he sit consider for a minute or two , with his smile , at once so 
 handsome and so kind , upon his change face , and then request I 
 to let they know that he wish to see they . when they come , he 
 encircle Ada with one arm in his fatherly way and address himself 
 to Richard with a cheerful gravity . 
 " Rick , " say Mr. Jarndyce , " I be glad to have win your confidence . 
 I hope to preserve it . when I contemplate these relation between 
 us four which have so brighten my life and so invest it with new 
 interest and pleasure , I certainly do contemplate , afar off , the 
 possibility of you and your pretty cousin here   do not   be shy , Ada , 
 do not   be shy , my dear !   be in a mind to go through life together . 
 I see , and do see , many reason to make it desirable . but that be 
 afar off , Rick , afar off ! " 
 " we look afar off , sir , " return Richard . 
 " well ! " say Mr. Jarndyce . " that be rational . now , hear I , my 
 dear ! I might tell you that you do not   know your own mind yet , 
 that a thousand thing may happen to divert you from one another , 
 that it be well this chain of flower you have take up be very 
 easily break , or it might become a chain of lead . but I will not 
 do that . such wisdom will come soon enough , I dare say , if it be to 
 come at all . I will assume that a few year hence you will be in 
 your heart to one another what you be to - day . all I say before 
 speak to you accord to that assumption be , if you do change - 
 if you do come to find that you be more commonplace cousin to each 
 other as man and woman than you be as boy and girl   your manhood 
 will excuse I , Rick !   - do not   be ashamed still to confide in I , for 
 there will be nothing monstrous or uncommon in it . I be only your 
 friend and distant kinsman . I have no power over you whatever . but 
 I wish and hope to retain your confidence if I do nothing to forfeit 
 it . " 
 " I be very sure , sir , " return Richard , " that I speak for Ada too 
 when I say that you have the strong power over we both - root in 
 respect , gratitude , and affection - strengthen every day . " 
 " dear cousin John , " say Ada , on his shoulder , " my father 's place 
 can never be empty again . all the love and duty I could ever have 
 render to he be transfer to you . " 
 " come ! " say Mr. Jarndyce . " now for our assumption . now we lift 
 our eye up and look hopefully at the distance ! Rick , the world be 
 before you ; and it be most probable that as you enter it , so it will 
 receive you . trust in nothing but in Providence and your own 
 effort . never separate the two , like the heathen waggoner . 
 Constancy in love be a good thing , but it mean nothing , and be 
 nothing , without constancy in every kind of effort . if you have the 
 ability of all the great man , past and present , you could do 
 nothing well without sincerely mean it and set about it . if 
 you entertain the supposition that any real success , in great thing 
 or in small , ever be or could be , ever will or can be , wrest from 
 Fortune by fit and start , leave that wrong idea here or leave your 
 cousin Ada here . " 
 " I will leave it here , sir , " reply Richard smiling , " if I bring 
 it here just now   but I hope I do not , and will work my way on to 
 my cousin Ada in the hopeful distance . " 
 " right ! " say Mr. Jarndyce . " if you be not to make she happy , why 
 should you pursue she ? " 
 " I would not   make her unhappy - no , not even for her love , " retort 
 Richard proudly . 
 " well say ! " cry Mr. Jarndyce . " that be well say ! she remain 
 here , in her home with I . love she , Rick , in your active life , no 
 less than in her home when you revisit it , and all will go well . 
 otherwise , all will go ill . that be the end of my preaching . I 
 think you and Ada have well take a walk . " 
 Ada tenderly embrace he , and Richard heartily shake hand with 
 he , and then the cousin go out of the room , look back again 
 directly , though , to say that they would wait for I . 
 the door stand open , and we both follow they with our eye as 
 they pass down the adjoining room , on which the sun be shin , 
 and out at its farth end . Richard with his head bent , and she 
 hand draw through his arm , be talk to she very earnestly ; and 
 she look up in his face , listen , and seem to see nothing 
 else . so young , so beautiful , so full of hope and promise , they 
 go on lightly through the sunlight as their own happy thought 
 might then be traverse the year to come and make they all 
 year of brightness . so they pass away into the shadow and be 
 go . it be only a burst of light that have be so radiant . the 
 room darken as they go out , and the sun be cloud over . 
 " be I right , Esther ? " say my guardian when they be go . 
 he be so good and wise to ask I whether he be right ! 
 " Rick may gain , out of this , the quality he want . want , at the 
 core of so much that be good ! " say Mr. Jarndyce , shake his head . 
 " I have say nothing to Ada , Esther . she have her friend and 
 counsellor always near . " and he lay his hand lovingly upon my 
 head . 
 I could not help show that I be a little move , though I do 
 all I could to conceal it . 
 " tut tut ! " say he . " but we must take care , too , that our little 
 woman 's life be not all consume in care for other . " 
 " Care ? my dear guardian , I believe I be the happy creature in 
 the world ! " 
 " I believe so , too , " say he . " but some one may find out what 
 Esther never will - that the little woman be to be hold in 
 remembrance above all other people ! " 
 I have omit to mention in its place that there be some one else 
 at the family dinner party . it be not a lady . it be a 
 gentleman . it be a gentleman of a dark complexion - a young 
 surgeon . he be rather reserved , but I think he very sensible 
 and agreeable . at least , Ada ask I if I do not , and I say 
 yes . 
 CHAPTER XIV 
 Deportment 
 Richard leave we on the very next evening to begin his new career , 
 and commit Ada to my charge with great love for she and great 
 trust in I . it touch I then to reflect , and it touch I now , 
 more nearly , to remember   have what I have to tell   how they both 
 think of I , even at that engrossing time . I be a part of all 
 their plan , for the present and the future . I be to write Richard 
 once a week , make my faithful report of Ada , who be to write to 
 he every alternate day . I be to be inform , under his own hand , 
 of all his labour and success ; I be to observe how resolute and 
 persevere he would be ; I be to be Ada 's bridesmaid when they 
 be marry ; I be to live with they afterwards ; I be to keep all 
 the key of their house ; I be to be make happy for ever and a day . 
 " and if the suit should make we rich , Esther - which it may , you 
 know ! " say Richard to crown all . 
 a shade cross Ada 's face . 
 " my dearest Ada , " ask Richard , " why not ? " 
 " it have well declare we poor at once , " say Ada . 
 " oh ! I do not   know about that , " return Richard , " but at all 
 event , it will not   declare anything at once . it have not   declare 
 anything in heaven know how many year . " 
 " too true , " say Ada . 
 " yes , but , " urge Richard , answer what her look suggest rather 
 than her word , " the long it go on , dear cousin , the nearer it 
 must be to a settlement one way or other . now , be not that 
 reasonable ? " 
 " you know well , Richard . but I be afraid if we trust to it , it 
 will make we unhappy . " 
 " but , my Ada , we be not go to trust to it ! " cry Richard 
 gaily . " we know it well than to trust to it . we only say that 
 if it should make we rich , we have no constitutional objection to 
 be rich . the court be , by solemn settlement of law , our grim 
 old guardian , and we be to suppose that what it give we   when it 
 give we anything   be our right . it be not necessary to quarrel 
 with our right . " 
 " no , " Said Ada , " but it may be well to forget all about it . " 
 " well , well , " cry Richard , " then we will forget all about it ! we 
 consign the whole thing to oblivion . Dame Durden put on her 
 approve face , and it be do ! " 
 " Dame Durden 's approve face , " say I , look out of the box in 
 which I be pack his book , " be not very visible when you 
 call it by that name ; but it do approve , and she think you 
 can not   do well . " 
 so , Richard say there be an end of it , and immediately begin , on 
 no other foundation , to build as many castle in the air as would 
 man the Great Wall of China . he go away in high spirit . Ada 
 and I , prepare to miss he very much , commence our quieter 
 career . 
 on our arrival in London , we have call with Mr. Jarndyce at Mrs. 
 Jellyby 's but have not be so fortunate as to find she at home . it 
 appear that she have go somewhere to a tea - drinking and have 
 take Miss Jellyby with she . besides the tea - drinking , there be 
 to be some considerable speech - making and letter - writing on the 
 general merit of the cultivation of coffee , conjointly with 
 native , at the Settlement of Borrioboola - Gha . all this involve , 
 no doubt , sufficient active exercise of pen and ink to make she 
 daughter 's part in the proceeding anything but a holiday . 
 it be now beyond the time appoint for Mrs. Jellyby 's return , 
 we call again . she be in town , but not at home , have go to 
 Mile end directly after breakfast on some borrioboolan business , 
 arise out of a society call the East London Branch Aid 
 Ramification . as I have not see Peepy on the occasion of our last 
 call   when he be not to be find anywhere , and when the cook 
 rather think he must have stroll away with the dustman 's cart , 
 I now inquire for he again . the oyster shell he have be 
 build a house with be still in the passage , but he be nowhere 
 discoverable , and the cook suppose that he have " go after the 
 sheep . " when we repeat , with some surprise , " the sheep ? " she 
 say , oh , yes , on market day he sometimes follow they quite out 
 of town and come back in such a state as never be ! 
 I be sit at the window with my guardian on the following 
 morning , and Ada be busy writing - of course to Richard - when Miss 
 Jellyby be announce , and enter , lead the identical Peepy , 
 whom she have make some endeavour to render presentable by wipe 
 the dirt into corner of his face and hand and make his hair 
 very wet and then violently frizzle it with her finger . 
 everything the dear child wear be either too large for he or too 
 small . among his other contradictory decoration he have the hat of 
 a bishop and the little glove of a baby . his boot be , on a 
 small scale , the boot of a ploughman , while his leg , so crossed 
 and recrosse with scratch that they look like map , be bare 
 below a very short pair of plaid drawer finish off with two 
 frill of perfectly different pattern . the deficient button on 
 his plaid frock have evidently be supply from one of Mr. 
 Jellyby 's coat , they be so extremely brazen and so much too 
 large . most extraordinary specimen of needlework appear on 
 several part of his dress , where it have be hastily mend , and I 
 recognize the same hand on Miss Jellyby 's . she be , however , 
 unaccountably improve in her appearance and look very pretty . 
 she be conscious of poor little Peepy be but a failure after 
 all her trouble , and she show it as she come in by the way in 
 which she glance first at he and then at we . 
 " oh , dear I ! " say my guardian . " due east ! " 
 Ada and I give she a cordial welcome and present she to Mr. 
 Jarndyce , to whom she say as she sit down , " Ma 's compliment , and 
 she hop you will excuse she , because she be correct proof of the 
 plan . she be go to put out five thousand new circular , and she 
 know you will be interested to hear that . I have bring one of 
 they with I . Ma 's compliment . " with which she present it 
 sulkily enough . 
 " thank you , " say my guardian . " I be much oblige to Mrs. Jellyby . 
 oh , dear I ! this be a very try wind ! " 
 we be busy with Peepy , take off his clerical hat , ask he if 
 he remember we , and so on . Peepy retire behind his elbow at 
 first , but relent at the sight of sponge - cake and allow I to 
 take he on my lap , where he sit munch quietly . Mr. Jarndyce 
 then withdraw into the temporary growlery , Miss Jellyby open a 
 conversation with her usual abruptness . 
 " we be go on just as bad as ever in Thavies Inn , " say she . " I 
 have no peace of my life . talk of Africa ! I could not   be bad off 
 if I be a what's - his - name - man and a brother ! " 
 I try to say something soothe . 
 " oh , it be of no use , Miss Summerson , " exclaim Miss Jellyby , 
 " though I thank you for the kind intention all the same . I know 
 how I be use , and I be not to be talk over . you would not   be 
 talk over if you be use so . Peepy , go and play at Wild Beasts 
 under the piano ! " 
 " I shall not ! " say Peepy . 
 " very well , you ungrateful , naughty , hard - hearted boy ! " return 
 Miss Jellyby with tear in her eye . " I will never take pain to 
 dress you any more . " 
 " yes , I will go , Caddy ! " cry Peepy , who be really a good child 
 and who be so move by his sister 's vexation that he go at once . 
 " it seem a little thing to cry about , " say poor Miss Jellyby 
 apologetically , " but I be quite wear out . I be direct the new 
 circular till two this morning . I detest the whole thing so that 
 that alone make my head ache till I can not   see out of my eye . and 
 look at that poor unfortunate child ! be there ever such a fright 
 as he be ! " 
 Peepy , happily unconscious of the defect in his appearance , sit on 
 the carpet behind one of the leg of the piano , look calmly out 
 of his den at we while he eat his cake . 
 " I have send he to the other end of the room , " observe Miss 
 Jellyby , draw her chair nearer our , " because I do not   want he 
 to hear the conversation . those little thing be so sharp ! I be 
 go to say , we really be go on bad than ever . Pa will be a 
 bankrupt before long , and then I hope Ma will be satisfied . 
 there will he nobody but Ma to thank for it . " 
 we say we hop Mr. Jellyby 's affair be not in so bad a state 
 as that . 
 " it be of no use hop , though it be very kind of you , " return 
 Miss Jellyby , shake her head . " Pa tell I only yesterday morning 
  and dreadfully unhappy he be   that he could not   weather the storm . 
 I should be surprised if he could . when all our tradesman send 
 into our house any stuff they like , and the servant do what they 
 like with it , and I have no time to improve thing if I know how , 
 and Ma do not   care about anything , I should like to make out how Pa 
 be to weather the storm . I declare if I be Pa , I would run away . " 
 " my dear ! " say I , smile . " your papa , no doubt , consider his 
 family . " 
 " oh , yes , his family be all very fine , Miss Summerson , " reply 
 Miss Jellyby ; " but what comfort be his family to he ? his family 
 be nothing but bill , dirt , waste , noise , tumble downstairs , 
 confusion , and wretchedness . his scramble home , from week 's end 
 to week 's end , be like one great washing - day - only nothing be 
 wash ! " 
 Miss Jellyby tap her foot upon the floor and wipe her eye . 
 " I be sure I pity Pa to that degree , " she say , " and be so angry 
 with Ma that I can not   find word to express myself ! however , I be 
 not go to bear it , I be determine . I will not   be a slave all my 
 life , and I will not   submit to be propose to by Mr. Quale . a pretty 
 thing , indeed , to marry a philanthropist . as if I have not   have enough 
 of that ! " say poor Miss Jellyby . 
 I must confess that I could not help feel rather angry with Mrs. 
 Jellyby myself , see and hear this neglect girl and know 
 how much of bitterly satirical truth there be in what she say . 
 " if it be not   that we have be intimate when you stop at our 
 house , " pursue Miss Jellyby , " I should have be ashamed to come 
 here to - day , for I know what a figure I must seem to you two . but 
 as it be , I make up my mind to call , especially as I be not likely 
 to see you again the next time you come to town . " 
 she say this with such great significance that Ada and I glance 
 at one another , foresee something more . 
 " no ! " say Miss Jellyby , shake her head . " not at all likely ! I 
 know I may trust you two . I be sure you will not   betray I . I be 
 engage . " 
 " without their knowledge at home ? " say I. 
 " why , good gracious I , Miss Summerson , " she return , justify 
 herself in a fretful but not angry manner , " how can it be 
 otherwise ? you know what Ma be - and I need not   make poor Pa more 
 miserable by tell HIM . " 
 " but would it not he add to his unhappiness to marry without his 
 knowledge or consent , my dear ? " say I. 
 " no , " say Miss Jellyby , soften . " I hope not . I should try to 
 make he happy and comfortable when he come to see I , and Peepy 
 and the other should take it in turn to come and stay with I , 
 and they should have some care take of they then . " 
 there be a good deal of affection in poor Caddy . she soften 
 more and more while say this and cry so much over the unwonted 
 little home - picture she have raise in her mind that Peepy , in his 
 cave under the piano , be touch , and turn himself over on his 
 back with loud lamentation . it be not until I have bring he to 
 kiss his sister , and have restore he to his place on my lap , and 
 have show he that Caddy be laugh   she laugh expressly for 
 the purpose , that we could recall his peace of mind ; even then it 
 be for some time conditional on his take we in turn by the chin 
 and smooth our face all over with his hand . at last , as his 
 spirit be not equal to the piano , we put he on a chair to look 
 out of window ; and Miss Jellyby , hold he by one leg , resume 
 her confidence . 
 " it begin in your come to our house , " she say . 
 we naturally ask how . 
 " I feel I be so awkward , " she reply , " that I make up my mind to 
 be improve in that respect at all event and to learn to dance . I 
 tell Ma I be ashamed of myself , and I must be teach to dance . Ma 
 look at I in that provoking way of hers as if I be not   in sight , 
 but I be quite determined to be teach to dance , and so I go to 
 Mr. Turveydrop 's Academy in Newman Street . " 
 " and be it there , my dear - " I begin . 
 " yes , it be there , " say Caddy , " and I be engage to Mr. 
 Turveydrop . there be two Mr. Turveydrops , father and son . my Mr. 
 Turveydrop be the son , of course . I only wish I have be well 
 bring up and be likely to make he a well wife , for I be very 
 fond of he . " 
 " I be sorry to hear this , " say I , " I must confess . " 
 " I do not   know why you should be sorry , " she retort a little 
 anxiously , " but I be engage to Mr. Turveydrop , whether or no , and 
 he be very fond of I . it be a secret as yet , even on his side , 
 because old Mr. Turveydrop have a share in the connexion and it 
 might break his heart or give he some other shock if he be tell 
 of it abruptly . old Mr. Turveydrop be a very gentlemanly man 
 indeed - very gentlemanly . " 
 " do his wife know of it ? " ask Ada . 
 " Old Mr. Turveydrop 's wife , Miss Clare ? " return Miss Jellyby , 
 open her eye . " there be no such person . he be a widower . " 
 we be here interrupt by Peepy , whose leg have undergo so much 
 on account of his sister 's unconsciously jerk it like a bell- 
 rope whenever she be emphatic that the afflicted child now 
 bemoan his suffering with a very low - spirited noise . as he 
 appeal to I for compassion , and as I be only a listener , I 
 undertake to hold he . Miss Jellyby proceed , after beg 
 Peepy 's pardon with a kiss and assure he that she have not   mean 
 to do it . 
 " that be the state of the case , " say Caddy . " if I ever blame 
 myself , I still think it be Ma 's fault . we be to be marry 
 whenever we can , and then I shall go to Pa at the office and write 
 to Ma . it will not   much agitate Ma ; I be only pen and ink to she . 
 one great comfort be , " say Caddy with a sob , " that I shall never 
 hear of Africa after I be marry . young Mr. Turveydrop hat it 
 for my sake , and if old Mr. Turveydrop know there be such a place , 
 it be as much as he do . " 
 " it be he who be very gentlemanly , I think ! " say I. 
 " very gentlemanly indeed , " say Caddy . " he be celebrate almost 
 everywhere for his deportment . " 
 " do he teach ? " ask Ada . 
 " no , he do not   teach anything in particular , " reply Caddy . " but 
 his deportment be beautiful . " 
 Caddy go on to say with considerable hesitation and reluctance 
 that there be one thing more she wish we to know , and feel we 
 ought to know , and which she hop would not offend we . it be 
 that she have improve her acquaintance with Miss Flite , the little 
 crazy old lady , and that she frequently go there early in the 
 morning and meet her lover for a few minute before breakfast - only 
 for a few minute . " I go there at other time , " say Caddy , " but 
 Prince do not come then . young Mr. Turveydrop 's name be Prince ; 
 I wish it be not , because it sound like a dog , but of course he 
 do not   christen himself . old Mr. Turveydrop have he christen 
 Prince in remembrance of the Prince Regent . old Mr. Turveydrop 
 adore the Prince Regent on account of his deportment . I hope you 
 will not   think the bad of I for have make these little 
 appointment at Miss Flite 's , where I first go with you , because 
 I like the poor thing for her own sake and I believe she like I . 
 if you could see young Mr. Turveydrop , I be sure you would think 
 well of he - at least , I be sure you could not   possibly think any 
 ill of he . I be go there now for my lesson . I could not   ask 
 you to go with I , Miss Summerson ; but if you would , " say Caddy , 
 who have say all this earnestly and tremblingly , " I should be very 
 glad - very glad . " 
 it happen that we have arrange with my guardian to go to Miss 
 Flite 's that day . we have tell he of our former visit , and our 
 account have interest he ; but something have always happen to 
 prevent our go there again . as I trust that I might have 
 sufficient influence with Miss Jellyby to prevent she take any 
 very rash step if I fully accept the confidence she be so 
 willing to place in I , poor girl , I propose that she and I and 
 Peepy should go to the academy and afterwards meet my guardian and 
 Ada at Miss Flite 's , whose name I now learn for the first time . 
 this be on condition that Miss Jellyby and Peepy should come back 
 with we to dinner . the last article of the agreement be 
 joyfully accede to by both , we smartene Peepy up a little with 
 the assistance of a few pin , some soap and water , and a hair- 
 brush , and go out , bend our step towards Newman Street , which 
 be very near . 
 I find the academy establish in a sufficiently dingy house at 
 the corner of an archway , with bust in all the staircase window . 
 in the same house there be also establish , as I gather from 
 the plate on the door , a drawing - master , a coal - merchant   there 
 be , certainly , no room for his coal , and a lithographic artist . 
 on the plate which , in size and situation , take precedence of all 
 the rest , I read , MR . TURVEYDROP . the door be open , and the hall 
 be block up by a grand piano , a harp , and several other musical 
 instrument in case , all in progress of removal , and all look 
 rakish in the daylight . Miss Jellyby inform I that the academy 
 have be lend , last night , for a concert . 
 we go upstairs - it have be quite a fine house once , when it be 
 anybody 's business to keep it clean and fresh , and nobody 's 
 business to smoke in it all day - and into Mr. Turveydrop 's great 
 room , which be build out into a mew at the back and be light 
 by a skylight . it be a bare , resounding room smelling of stable , 
 with cane form along the wall , and the wall ornament at 
 regular interval with paint lyre and little cut - glass branch 
 for candle , which seem to be shed their old - fashioned drop 
 as other branch might shed autumn leaf . several young lady 
 pupil , range from thirteen or fourteen year of age to two or 
 three and twenty , be assemble ; and I be look among they for 
 their instructor when Caddy , pinch my arm , repeat the ceremony 
 of introduction . " Miss Summerson , Mr. Prince Turveydrop ! " 
 I curtsy to a little blue - eyed fair man of youthful appearance 
 with flaxen hair part in the middle and curl at the end all 
 round his head . he have a little fiddle , which we use to call at 
 school a kit , under his left arm , and its little bow in the same 
 hand . his little dancing - shoe be particularly diminutive , and 
 he have a little innocent , feminine manner which not only appeal 
 to I in an amiable way , but make this singular effect upon I , 
 that I receive the impression that he be like his mother and that 
 his mother have not be much consider or well use . 
 " I be very happy to see Miss Jellyby 's friend , " he say , bow low 
 to I . " I begin to fear , " with timid tenderness , " as it be past 
 the usual time , that Miss Jellyby be not come . " 
 " I beg you will have the goodness to attribute that to I , who have 
 detain she , and to receive my excuse , sir , " say I. 
 " oh , dear ! " say he . 
 " and pray , " I entreat , " do not allow I to be the cause of any 
 more delay . " 
 with that apology I withdraw to a seat between Peepy   who , be 
 well use to it , have already climb into a corner place   and an 
 old lady of a censorious countenance whose two niece be in the 
 class and who be very indignant with Peepy 's boot . Prince 
 Turveydrop then tinkle the string of his kit with his finger , 
 and the young lady stand up to dance . just then there appear 
 from a side - door old Mr. Turveydrop , in the full lustre of his 
 deportment . 
 he be a fat old gentleman with a false complexion , false tooth , 
 false whisker , and a wig . he have a fur collar , and he have a 
 padded breast to his coat , which only want a star or a broad blue 
 ribbon to be complete . he be pinch in , and swell out , and get 
 up , and strap down , as much as he could possibly bear . he have 
 such a neckcloth on   puff his very eye out of their natural 
 shape , and his chin and even his ear so sink into it , that it 
 seem as though be must inevitably double up if it be cast 
 loose . he have under his arm a hat of great size and weight , 
 shelve downward from the crown to the brim , and in his hand a 
 pair of white glove with which he flap it as he stand poise on 
 one leg in a high - shoulder , round - elbow state of elegance not 
 to be surpass . he have a cane , he have an eye - glass , he have a 
 snuff - box , he have ring , he have wristband , he have everything but 
 any touch of nature ; he be not like youth , he be not like age , he 
 be not like anything in the world but a model of deportment . 
 " Father ! a visitor . Miss Jellyby 's friend , Miss Summerson . " 
 " Distinguished , " say Mr. Turveydrop , " by Miss Summerson 's 
 presence . " as he bow to I in that tight state , I almost believe 
 I see crease come into the white of his eye . 
 " my father , " say the son , aside , to I with quite an affect 
 belief in he , " be a celebrated character . my father be greatly 
 admire . " 
 " go on , Prince ! go on ! " say Mr. Turveydrop , stand with his 
 back to the fire and wave his glove condescendingly . " go on , my 
 son ! " 
 at this command , or by this gracious permission , the lesson go 
 on . Prince Turveydrop sometimes play the kit , dancing ; sometimes 
 play the piano , standing ; sometimes hum the tune with what 
 little breath he could spare , while he set a pupil right ; always 
 conscientiously move with the least proficient through every step 
 and every part of the figure ; and never rest for an instant . his 
 distinguished father do nothing whatever but stand before the 
 fire , a model of deportment . 
 " and he never do anything else , " say the old lady of the 
 censorious countenance . " yet would you believe that it be his name 
 on the door - plate ? " 
 " his son 's name be the same , you know , " say I. 
 " he would not   let his son have any name if he could take it from 
 he , " return the old lady . " look at the son 's dress ! " it 
 certainly be plain - threadbare - almost shabby . " yet the father 
 must be garnish and trick out , " say the old lady , " because of 
 his deportment . I would deport he ! transport he would be well ! " 
 I feel curious to know more concern this person . I ask , " do 
 he give lesson in deportment now ? " 
 " now ! " return the old lady shortly . " never do . " 
 after a moment 's consideration , I suggest that perhaps fence 
 have be his accomplishment . 
 " I do not   believe he can fence at all , ma'am , " say the old lady . 
 I look surprised and inquisitive . the old lady , become more 
 and more incense against the master of deportment as she dwelt 
 upon the subject , give I some particular of his career , with 
 strong assurance that they be mildly state . 
 he have marry a meek little dancing - mistress , with a tolerable 
 connexion   have never in his life before do anything but deport 
 himself , and have work she to death , or have , at the good , 
 suffer she to work herself to death , to maintain he in those 
 expense which be indispensable to his position . at once to 
 exhibit his deportment to the good model and to keep the good 
 model constantly before himself , he have find it necessary to 
 frequent all public place of fashionable and lounge resort , to 
 be see at Brighton and elsewhere at fashionable time , and to lead 
 an idle life in the very good clothe . to enable he to do this , 
 the affectionate little dancing - mistress have toil and labour 
 and would have toil and labour to that hour if her strength have 
 last so long . for the mainspring of the story be that in spite 
 of the man 's absorbing selfishness , his wife   overpower by his 
 deportment   have , to the last , believe in he and have , on her 
 death - bed , in the most moving term , confide he to their son as 
 one who have an inextinguishable claim upon he and whom he could 
 never regard with too much pride and deference . the son , 
 inherit his mother 's belief , and have the deportment always 
 before he , have live and grow in the same faith , and now , at 
 thirty year of age , work for his father twelve hour a day and 
 look up to he with veneration on the old imaginary pinnacle . 
 " the air the fellow give himself ! " say my informant , shake she 
 head at old Mr. Turveydrop with speechless indignation as he draw 
 on his tight glove , of course unconscious of the homage she be 
 render . " he fully believe he be one of the aristocracy ! and 
 he be so condescend to the son he so egregiously delude that 
 you might suppose he the most virtuous of parent . oh ! " say the 
 old lady , apostrophize he with infinite vehemence . " I could 
 bite you ! " 
 I could not help be amuse , though I hear the old lady out with 
 feeling of real concern . it be difficult to doubt she with the 
 father and son before I . what I might have think of they 
 without the old lady 's account , or what I might have think of the 
 old lady 's account without they , I can not say . there be a fitness 
 of thing in the whole that carry conviction with it . 
 my eye be yet wander , from young Mr. Turveydrop work so 
 hard , to old Mr. Turveydrop deport himself so beautifully , when 
 the latter come amble up to I and enter into conversation . 
 he ask I , first of all , whether I confer a charm and a 
 distinction on London by reside in it ? I do not think it 
 necessary to reply that I be perfectly aware I should not do that , 
 in any case , but merely tell he where I do reside . 
 " a lady so graceful and accomplish , " he say , kiss his right 
 glove and afterwards extend it towards the pupil , " will look 
 leniently on the deficiency here . we do our good to polish - 
 polish - polish ! " 
 he sit down beside I , take some pain to sit on the form , I 
 think , in imitation of the print of his illustrious model on the 
 sofa . and really he do look very like it . 
 " to polish - polish - polish ! " he repeat , take a pinch of snuff 
 and gently flutter his finger . " but we be not , if I may say 
 so to one form to be graceful both by Nature and art - " with the 
 high - shoulder bow , which it seem impossible for he to make 
 without lift up his eyebrow and shut his eye " - we be not 
 what we use to be in point of deportment . " 
 " be we not , sir ? " say I. 
 " we have degenerate , " he return , shake his head , which he 
 could do to a very limited extent in his cravat . " a levelling age 
 be not favourable to deportment . it develop vulgarity . perhaps I 
 speak with some little partiality . it may not be for I to say 
 that I have be call , for some year now , Gentleman Turveydrop , 
 or that his Royal Highness the Prince Regent do I the honour to 
 inquire , on my remove my hat as he drive out of the Pavilion at 
 Brighton   that fine building , ' who be he ? who the devil be he ? 
 why do not   I know he ? why have not   he thirty thousand a year ? ' but 
 these be little matter of anecdote - the general property , ma'am - 
 still repeat occasionally among the upper class . " 
 " indeed ? " say I. 
 he reply with the high - shoulder bow . " where what be leave among 
 we of deportment , " he add , ' still linger . England - alas , my 
 country ! - have degenerate very much , and be degenerate every day . 
 she have not many gentleman leave . we be few . I see nothing to 
 succeed we but a race of weaver . " 
 " one might hope that the race of gentleman would be perpetuate 
 here , " say I. 
 " you be very good . " he smile with a high - shoulder bow again . 
 " you flatter I . but , no - no ! I have never be able to imbue my 
 poor boy with that part of his art . Heaven forbid that I should 
 disparage my dear child , but he have - no deportment . " 
 " he appear to be an excellent master , " I observe . 
 " understand I , my dear madam , he be an excellent master . all that 
 can be acquire , he have acquire . all that can be impart , he can 
 impart . but there be thing - " he take another pinch of snuff 
 and make the bow again , as if to add , " this kind of thing , for 
 instance . " 
 I glance towards the centre of the room , where Miss Jellyby 's 
 lover , now engage with single pupil , be undergo great 
 drudgery than ever . 
 " my amiable child , " murmur Mr. Turveydrop , adjust his cravat . 
 " your son be indefatigable , " say I. 
 " it be my reward , " say Mr. Turveydrop , " to hear you say so . in 
 some respect , he tread in the footstep of his sainted mother . 
 she be a devoted creature . but wooman , lovely wooman , " say Mr. 
 Turveydrop with very disagreeable gallantry , " what a sex you be ! " 
 I rise and join Miss Jellyby , who be by this time put on her 
 bonnet . the time allot to a lesson have fully elapse , there 
 be a general put on of bonnet . when Miss Jellyby and the 
 unfortunate Prince find an opportunity to become betrothed I do not 
 know , but they certainly find none on this occasion to exchange a 
 dozen word . 
 " my dear , " say Mr. Turveydrop benignly to his son , " do you know 
 the hour ? " 
 " no , father . " the son have no watch . the father have a handsome 
 gold one , which he pull out with an air that be an example to 
 mankind . 
 " my son , " say he , " it be two o'clock . recollect your school at 
 Kensington at three . " 
 " that be time enough for I , father , " say Prince . " I can take a 
 morsel of dinner stand and be off . " 
 " my dear boy , " return his father , " you must be very quick . you 
 will find the cold mutton on the table . " 
 " thank you , father . be you off now , father ? " 
 " yes , my dear . I suppose , " say Mr. Turveydrop , shut his eye 
 and lift up his shoulder with modest consciousness , " that I 
 must show myself , as usual , about town . " 
 " you have well dine out comfortably somewhere , " say his son . 
 " my dear child , I intend to . I shall take my little meal , I think , 
 at the french house , in the Opera Colonnade . " 
 " that be right . good - bye , father ! " say Prince , shake hand . 
 " good - bye , my son . bless you ! " 
 Mr. Turveydrop say this in quite a pious manner , and it seem to 
 do his son good , who , in part from he , be so pleased with he , 
 so dutiful to he , and so proud of he that I almost feel as if it 
 be an unkindness to the young man not to be able to believe 
 implicitly in the elder . the few moment that be occupy by 
 Prince in take leave of we   and particularly of one of we , as I 
 see , be in the secret , enhance my favourable impression of his 
 almost childish character . I feel a liking for he and a 
 compassion for he as he put his little kit in his pocket - and with 
 it his desire to stay a little while with Caddy - and go away 
 good - humouredly to his cold mutton and his school at Kensington , 
 that make I scarcely less irate with his father than the 
 censorious old lady . 
 the father open the room door for we and bow we out in a 
 manner , I must acknowledge , worthy of his shin original . in the 
 same style he presently pass we on the other side of the street , 
 on his way to the aristocratic part of the town , where he be go 
 to show himself among the few other gentleman leave . for some 
 moment , I be so lose in reconsider what I have hear and see 
 in Newman Street that I be quite unable to talk to Caddy or even 
 to fix my attention on what she say to I , especially when I begin 
 to inquire in my mind whether there be , or ever have be , any 
 other gentleman , not in the dancing profession , who live and 
 found a reputation entirely on their deportment . this become so 
 bewildering and suggest the possibility of so many Mr. 
 Turveydrops that I say , " Esther , you must make up your mind to 
 abandon this subject altogether and attend to Caddy . " I 
 accordingly do so , and we chat all the rest of the way to 
 Lincoln 's Inn . 
 Caddy tell I that her lover 's education have be so neglect that 
 it be not always easy to read his note . she say if he be not 
 so anxious about his spelling and take less pain to make it clear , 
 he would do well ; but he put so many unnecessary letter into 
 short word that they sometimes quite lose their english 
 appearance . " he do it with the good intention , " observe Caddy , 
 " but it have not   the effect he mean , poor fellow ! " Caddy then go 
 on to reason , how could he be expect to be a scholar when he have 
 pass his whole life in the dancing - school and have do nothing 
 but teach and fag , fag and teach , morning , noon , and night ! and 
 what do it matter ? she could write letter enough for both , as 
 she know to her cost , and it be far well for he to be amiable 
 than learn . " besides , it be not as if I be an accomplished girl 
 who have any right to give herself air , " say Caddy . " I know 
 little enough , I be sure , thank to Ma ! 
 " there be another thing I want to tell you , now we be alone , " 
 continue Caddy , " which I should not have like to mention unless 
 you have see Prince , Miss Summerson . you know what a house ours 
 be . it be of no use my try to learn anything that it would be 
 useful for Prince 's wife to know in our house . we live in such a 
 state of muddle that it be impossible , and I have only be more 
 dishearten whenever I have try . so I get a little practice 
 with - who do you think ? poor Miss Flite ! early in the morning I 
 help she to tidy her room and clean her bird , and I make her cup 
 of coffee for she   of course she teach I , and I have learn to 
 make it so well that Prince say it be the very good coffee he ever 
 taste , and would quite delight old Mr. Turveydrop , who be very 
 particular indeed about his coffee . I can make little pudding 
 too ; and I know how to buy neck of mutton , and tea , and sugar , and 
 butter , and a good many housekeeping thing . I be not clever at my 
 needle , yet , " say Caddy , glance at the repair on Peepy 's frock , 
 " but perhaps I shall improve , and since I have be engage to 
 Prince and have be do all this , I have feel well - temper , I 
 hope , and more forgiving to Ma . it rather put I out at first this 
 morning to see you and Miss Clare look so neat and pretty and to 
 feel ashamed of Peepy and myself too , but on the whole I hope I be 
 well - temper than I be and more forgiving to Ma . " 
 the poor girl , try so hard , say it from her heart , and touch 
 mine . " Caddy , my love , " I reply , " I begin to have a great 
 affection for you , and I hope we shall become friend . " 
 " oh , do you ? " cry Caddy . " how happy that would make I ! " 
 " my dear Caddy , " say I , " let we be friend from this time , and let 
 we often have a chat about these matter and try to find the right 
 way through they . " Caddy be overjoy . I say everything I could 
 in my old - fashioned way to comfort and encourage she , and I would 
 not have object to old Mr. Turveydrop that day for any small 
 consideration than a settlement on his daughter - in - law . 
 by this time we be come to Mr. Krook 's , whose private door stand 
 open . there be a bill , paste on the door - post , announce a room 
 to let on the second floor . it remind Caddy to tell I as we 
 proceed upstairs that there have be a sudden death there and an 
 inquest and that our little friend have be ill of the fright . the 
 door and window of the vacant room be open , we look in . it 
 be the room with the dark door to which Miss Flite have secretly 
 direct my attention when I be last in the house . a sad and 
 desolate place it be , a gloomy , sorrowful place that give I a 
 strange sensation of mournfulness and even dread . " you look pale , " 
 say Caddy when we come out , " and cold ! " I feel as if the room have 
 chill I . 
 we have walk slowly while we be talk , and my guardian and Ada 
 be here before we . we find they in Miss Flite 's garret . they 
 be look at the bird , while a medical gentleman who be so 
 good as to attend Miss Flite with much solicitude and compassion 
 speak with she cheerfully by the fire . 
 " I have finish my professional visit , " he say , come forward . 
 " Miss Flite be much well and may appear in court   as her mind be 
 set upon it   to - morrow . she have be greatly miss there , I 
 understand . " 
 Miss Flite receive the compliment with complacency and drop a 
 general curtsy to we . 
 " honour , indeed , " say she , " by another visit from the ward in 
 Jarndyce ! Ve - ry happy to receive Jarndyce of Bleak House beneath 
 my humble roof ! " with a special curtsy . " Fitz - Jarndyce , my dear " - 
 she have bestow that name on Caddy , it appear , and always call 
 she by it - " a double welcome ! " 
 " have she be very ill ? " ask Mr. Jarndyce of the gentleman whom 
 we have find in attendance on she . she answer for herself 
 directly , though he have put the question in a whisper . 
 " oh , decidedly unwell ! oh , very unwell indeed , " she say 
 confidentially . " not pain , you know - trouble . not bodily so much 
 as nervous , nervous ! the truth be , " in a subdue voice and 
 trembling , " we have have death here . there be poison in the house . 
 I be very susceptible to such horrid thing . it frighten I . 
 only Mr. Woodcourt know how much . my physician , Mr. Woodcourt ! " 
 with great stateliness . " the ward in Jarndyce - Jarndyce of Bleak 
 House - Fitz - Jarndyce ! " 
 " Miss Flite , " say Mr. Woodcourt in a grave kind of voice , as if he 
 be appeal to she while speak to we , and lay his hand 
 gently on her arm , " Miss Flite describe her illness with her usual 
 accuracy . she be alarm by an occurrence in the house which 
 might have alarm a strong person , and be make ill by the 
 distress and agitation . she bring I here in the first hurry of 
 the discovery , though too late for I to be of any use to the 
 unfortunate man . I have compensate myself for that disappointment 
 by come here since and being of some small use to she . " 
 " the kind physician in the college , " whisper Miss Flite to I . 
 " I expect a judgment . on the day of judgment . and shall then 
 confer estate . " 
 " she will be as well in a day or two , " say Mr. Woodcourt , look 
 at she with an observant smile , " as she ever will be . in other 
 word , quite well of course . have you hear of her good fortune ? " 
 " most extraordinary ! " say Miss Flite , smile brightly . " you 
 never hear of such a thing , my dear ! every Saturday , Conversation 
 Kenge or Guppy   clerk to Conversation K.   place in my hand a paper 
 of shilling . shilling . I assure you ! always the same number in 
 the paper . always one for every day in the week . now you know , 
 really ! so well - time , be it not ? ye - es ! from whence do these 
 paper come , you say ? that be the great question . naturally . 
 shall I tell you what I think ? I think , " say Miss Flite , draw 
 herself back with a very shrewd look and shake her right 
 forefinger in a most significant manner , " that the Lord Chancellor , 
 aware of the length of time during which the Great Seal have be 
 open   for it have be open a long time ! , forward they . until the 
 judgment I expect be give . now that be very creditable , you know . 
 to confess in that way that he be a little slow for human life . so 
 delicate ! attend court the other day - I attend it regularly , 
 with my document - I tax he with it , and he almost confess . 
 that be , I smile at he from my bench , and he smile at I from 
 his bench . but it be great good fortune , be it not ? and fitz- 
 Jarndyce lay the money out for I to great advantage . oh , I 
 assure you to the great advantage ! " 
 I congratulate she   as she address herself to I   upon this 
 fortunate addition to her income and wish she a long continuance 
 of it . I do not speculate upon the source from which it come or 
 wonder whose humanity be so considerate . my guardian stand before 
 I , contemplate the bird , and I have no need to look beyond he . 
 " and what do you call these little fellow , ma'am ? " say he in his 
 pleasant voice . " have they any name ? " 
 " I can answer for Miss Flite that they have , " say I , " for she 
 promise to tell we what they be . Ada remember ? " 
 Ada remember very well . 
 " do I ? " say Miss Flite . " who be that at my door ? what be you 
 listen at my door for , Krook ? " 
 the old man of the house , push it open before he , appear 
 there with his fur cap in his hand and his cat at his heel . 
 " I warn't   listen , Miss Flite , " he say , " I be go to give a 
 rap with my knuckle , only you be so quick ! " 
 " make your cat go down . drive she away ! " the old lady angrily 
 exclaim . 
 " bah , bah ! there be not   no danger , gentlefolk , " say Mr. Krook , 
 look slowly and sharply from one to another until he have look 
 at all of we ; ' she would never offer at the bird when I be here 
 unless I tell she to it . " 
 " you will excuse my landlord , " say the old lady with a dignified 
 air . " M , quite m ! what do you want , Krook , when I have company ? " 
 " Hi ! " say the old man . " you know I be the Chancellor . " 
 " well ? " return Miss Elite . " what of that ? " 
 " for the Chancellor , " say the old man with a chuckle , " not to be 
 acquaint with a Jarndyce be queer , be not   it , Miss Flite ? 
 might not   I take the liberty ? your servant , sir . I know Jarndyce 
 and Jarndyce a'most as well as you do , sir . I know old squire 
 Tom , sir . I never to my knowledge see you afore though , not even 
 in court . yet , I go there a mortal sight of time in the course of 
 the year , take one day with another . " 
 " I never go there , " say Mr. Jarndyce   which he never do on any 
 consideration . " I would soon go - somewhere else . " 
 " would you though ? " return Krook , grin . " you be bear hard 
 upon my noble and learn brother in your meaning , sir , though 
 perhaps it be but nat'ral in a Jarndyce . the burn child , sir ! 
 what , you be look at my lodger 's bird , Mr. Jarndyce ? " the old 
 man have come by little and little into the room until he now 
 touch my guardian with his elbow and look close up into his 
 face with his spectacled eye . " it be one of her strange way that 
 she will never tell the name of these bird if she can help it , 
 though she name them all . " this be in a whisper . " shall I run 
 them over , Flite ? " he ask aloud , wink at we and point at she 
 as she turn away , affect to sweep the grate . 
 " if you like , " she answer hurriedly . 
 the old man , look up at the cage after another look at we , go 
 through the list . 
 " Hope , Joy , Youth , Peace , Rest , Life , Dust , Ashes , Waste , Want , 
 Ruin , Despair , Madness , Death , Cunning , Folly , Words , Wigs , Rags , 
 Sheepskin , Plunder , Precedent , Jargon , Gammon , and Spinach . that be 
 the whole collection , " say the old man , " all coope up together , 
 by my noble and learn brother . " 
 " this be a bitter wind ! " mutter my guardian . 
 " when my noble and learn brother give his judgment , they be to 
 be let go free , " say Krook , wink at we again . " and then , " he 
 add , whispering and grinning , " if that ever be to happen - which 
 it will not   - the bird that have never be cage would kill them . " 
 " if ever the wind be in the east , " say my guardian , pretend to 
 look out of the window for a weathercock , " I think it be there to- 
 day ! " 
 we find it very difficult to get away from the house . it be not 
 Miss Flite who detain we ; she be as reasonable a little creature 
 in consult the convenience of other as there possibly could be . 
 it be Mr. Krook . he seem unable to detach himself from Mr. 
 Jarndyce . if he have be link to he , he could hardly have 
 attend he more closely . he propose to show we his Court of 
 Chancery and all the strange medley it contain ; during the whole 
 of our inspection   prolong by himself   he keep close to Mr. 
 Jarndyce and sometimes detain he under one pretence or other 
 until we have pass on , as if he be torment by an inclination 
 to enter upon some secret subject which he could not make up his 
 mind to approach . I can not imagine a countenance and manner more 
 singularly expressive of caution and indecision , and a perpetual 
 impulse to do something he could not resolve to venture on , than 
 Mr. Krook 's be that day . his watchfulness of my guardian be 
 incessant . he rarely remove his eye from his face . if he go 
 on beside he , he observe he with the slyness of an old white 
 fox . if he go before , he look back . when we stand still , he 
 get opposite to he , and draw his hand across and across his 
 open mouth with a curious expression of a sense of power , and 
 turn up his eye , and lower his grey eyebrow until they 
 appear to be shut , seem to scan every lineament of his face . 
 at last , have be   always attend by the cat   all over the 
 house and have see the whole stock of miscellaneous lumber , 
 which be certainly curious , we come into the back part of the 
 shop . here on the head of an empty barrel stand on end be an 
 ink - bottle , some old stump of pen , and some dirty playbill ; and 
 against the wall be paste several large print alphabet in 
 several plain hand . 
 " what be you do here ? " ask my guardian . 
 " try to learn myself to read and write , " say Krook . 
 " and how do you get on ? " 
 " slow . bad , " return the old man impatiently . " it be hard at my 
 time of life . " 
 " it would be easy to be teach by some one , " say my guardian . 
 " Aye , but they might teach I wrong ! " return the old man with a 
 wonderfully suspicious flash of his eye . " I do not   know what I may 
 have lose by not be learn afore . I would not   like to lose 
 anything by be learn wrong now . " 
 " Wrong ? " say my guardian with his good - humour smile . " who do 
 you suppose would teach you wrong ? " 
 " I do not   know , Mr. Jarndyce of Bleak House ! " reply the old man , 
 turn up his spectacle on his forehead and rub his hand . 
 " I do not   suppose as anybody would , but I would rather trust my own self 
 than another ! " 
 these answer and his manner be strange enough to cause my 
 guardian to inquire of Mr. Woodcourt , as we all walk across 
 Lincoln 's inn together , whether Mr. Krook be really , as his 
 lodger represent he , derange . the young surgeon reply , no , 
 he have see no reason to think so . he be exceedingly distrustful , 
 as ignorance usually be , and he be always more or less under the 
 influence of raw gin , of which he drink great quantity and of 
 which he and his back - shop , as we might have observe , smell 
 strongly ; but he do not think he mad as yet . 
 on our way home , I so conciliate Peepy 's affection by buy he 
 a windmill and two flour - sack that he would suffer nobody else to 
 take off his hat and glove and would sit nowhere at dinner but at 
 my side . Caddy sit upon the other side of I , next to Ada , to whom 
 we impart the whole history of the engagement as soon as we get 
 back . we make much of Caddy , and Peepy too ; and Caddy brighten 
 exceedingly ; and my guardian be as merry as we be ; and we be 
 all very happy indeed until Caddy go home at night in a hackney- 
 coach , with Peepy fast asleep , but hold tight to the windmill . 
 I have forget to mention - at least I have not mention - that 
 Mr. Woodcourt be the same dark young surgeon whom we have meet at 
 Mr. Badger 's . or that Mr. Jarndyce invite he to dinner that day . 
 or that he come . or that when they be all go and I say to 
 Ada , " now , my darling , let we have a little talk about Richard ! " 
 Ada laugh and say - 
 but I do not   think it matter what my darling say . she be always 
 merry . 
 CHAPTER XV 
 Bell Yard 
 while we be in London Mr. Jarndyce be constantly beset by the 
 crowd of excitable lady and gentleman whose proceeding have so 
 much astonish we . Mr. Quale , who present himself soon after 
 our arrival , be in all such excitement . he seem to project 
 those two shin knob of temple of his into everything that go 
 on and to brush his hair far and far back , until the very 
 root be almost ready to fly out of his head in inappeasable 
 philanthropy . all object be alike to he , but he be always 
 particularly ready for anything in the way of a testimonial to any 
 one . his great power seem to be his power of indiscriminate 
 admiration . he would sit for any length of time , with the utmost 
 enjoyment , bath his temple in the light of any order of 
 luminary . have first see he perfectly swallow up in 
 admiration of Mrs. Jellyby , I have suppose she to be the absorbing 
 object of his devotion . I soon discover my mistake and find he 
 to be train - bearer and organ - blower to a whole procession of 
 people . 
 Mrs. Pardiggle come one day for a subscription to something , and 
 with she , Mr. Quale . whatever Mrs. Pardiggle say , Mr. Quale 
 repeat to we ; and just as he have draw Mrs. Jellyby out , he draw 
 Mrs. Pardiggle out . Mrs. Pardiggle write a letter of introduction 
 to my guardian in behalf of her eloquent friend Mr. Gusher . with 
 Mr. Gusher appear Mr. Quale again . Mr. Gusher , be a flabby 
 gentleman with a moist surface and eye so much too small for his 
 moon of a face that they seem to have be originally make for 
 somebody else , be not at first sight prepossessing ; yet he be 
 scarcely seat before Mr. Quale ask Ada and I , not inaudibly , 
 whether he be not a great creature - which he certainly be , 
 flabbily speak , though Mr. Quale mean in intellectual beauty - 
 and whether we be not strike by his massive configuration of 
 brow . in short , we hear of a great many mission of various sort 
 among this set of people , but nothing respect they be half so 
 clear to we as that it be Mr. Quale 's mission to be in ecstasy 
 with everybody else 's mission and that it be the most popular 
 mission of all . 
 Mr. Jarndyce have fall into this company in the tenderness of his 
 heart and his earnest desire to do all the good in his power ; but 
 that he feel it to be too often an unsatisfactory company , where 
 benevolence take spasmodic form , where charity be assume as a 
 regular uniform by loud professor and speculator in cheap 
 notoriety , vehement in profession , restless and vain in action , 
 servile in the last degree of meanness to the great , adulatory of 
 one another , and intolerable to those who be anxious quietly to 
 help the weak from fail rather than with a great deal of bluster 
 and self - laudation to raise they up a little way when they be 
 down , he plainly tell we . when a testimonial be originate to Mr. 
 Quale by Mr. Gusher   who have already get one , originate by Mr. 
 Quale , and when Mr. Gusher speak for an hour and a half on the 
 subject to a meeting , include two charity school of small boy 
 and girl , who be specially remind of the widow 's mite , and 
 request to come forward with halfpence and be acceptable 
 sacrifice , I think the wind be in the east for three whole week . 
 I mention this because I be come to Mr. Skimpole again . it 
 seem to I that his off - hand profession of childishness and 
 carelessness be a great relief to my guardian , by contrast with 
 such thing , and be the more readily believe in since to find 
 one perfectly undesigning and candid man among many opposite could 
 not fail to give he pleasure . I should be sorry to imply that Mr. 
 Skimpole divine this and be politic ; I really never understand 
 he well enough to know . what he be to my guardian , he certainly 
 be to the rest of the world . 
 he have not be very well ; and thus , though he live in London , we 
 have see nothing of he until now . he appear one morning in his 
 usual agreeable way and as full of pleasant spirit as ever . 
 well , he say , here he be ! he have be bilious , but rich man be 
 often bilious , and therefore he have be persuade himself that he 
 be a man of property . so he be , in a certain point of view - in 
 his expansive intention . he have be enrich his medical 
 attendant in the most lavish manner . he have always double , and 
 sometimes quadruple , his fee . he have say to the doctor , " now , 
 my dear doctor , it be quite a delusion on your part to suppose that 
 you attend I for nothing . I be overwhelm you with money - in my 
 expansive intention - if you only know it ! " and really   he say 
 he mean it to that degree that he think it much the same as 
 do it . if he have have those bit of metal or thin paper to which 
 mankind attach so much importance to put in the doctor 's hand , he 
 would have put they in the doctor 's hand . not have they , he 
 substitute the will for the deed . very well ! if he really mean 
 it - if his will be genuine and real , which it be - it appear to 
 he that it be the same as coin , and cancel the obligation . 
 " it may be , partly , because I know nothing of the value of money , " 
 say Mr. Skimpole , " but I often feel this . it seem so reasonable ! 
 my butcher say to I he want that little bill . it be a part of 
 the pleasant unconscious poetry of the man 's nature that he always 
 call it a ' little ' bill - to make the payment appear easy to both 
 of we . I reply to the butcher , ' my good friend , if you know it , 
 you be pay . you have not   have the trouble of come to ask for the 
 little bill . you be pay . I mean it . ' " 
 " but , suppose , " say my guardian , laugh , " he have mean the meat 
 in the bill , instead of provide it ? " 
 " my dear Jarndyce , " he return , " you surprise I . you take the 
 butcher 's position . a butcher I once deal with occupy that very 
 ground . say he , ' Sir , why do you eat spring lamb at eighteen 
 penny a pound ? ' ' why do I eat spring lamb at eighteen penny a 
 pound , my honest friend ? ' say I , naturally amazed by the question . 
 ' I like spring lamb ! ' this be so far convincing . ' well , sir , ' 
 say he , ' I wish I have mean the lamb as you mean the money ! ' ' my 
 good fellow , ' say I , ' pray let we reason like intellectual being . 
 how could that be ? it be impossible . you had get the lamb , and I 
 have not get the money . you could not   really mean the lamb without 
 send it in , whereas I can , and do , really mean the money without 
 pay it ! ' he have not a word . there be an end of the subject . " 
 " do he take no legal proceeding ? " inquire my guardian . 
 " yes , he take legal proceeding , " say Mr. Skimpole . " but in that 
 he be influence by passion , not by reason . passion remind I of 
 Boythorn . he write I that you and the lady have promise he a 
 short visit at his bachelor - house in Lincolnshire . " 
 " he be a great favourite with my girl , " say Mr. Jarndyce , " and I 
 have promise for they . " 
 " nature forget to shade he off , I think , " observe Mr. Skimpole to 
 Ada and I . " a little too boisterous - like the sea . a little too 
 vehement - like a bull who have make up his mind to consider every 
 colour scarlet . but I grant a sledge - hammer sort of merit in 
 he ! " 
 I should have be surprised if those two could have think very 
 highly of one another , Mr. Boythorn attach so much importance to 
 many thing and Mr. Skimpole care so little for anything . 
 besides which , I have notice Mr. Boythorn more than once on the 
 point of break out into some strong opinion when Mr. Skimpole 
 be refer to . of course I merely join Ada in say that we 
 have be greatly pleased with he . 
 " he have invite I , " say Mr. Skimpole ; " and if a child may trust 
 himself in such hand - which the present child be encourage to do , 
 with the united tenderness of two angel to guard he - I shall go . 
 he propose to frank I down and back again . I suppose it will 
 cost money ? shilling perhaps ? or pound ? or something of that 
 sort ? by the by , Coavinses . you remember our friend Coavinses , 
 Miss Summerson ? " 
 he ask I as the subject arise in his mind , in his graceful , 
 light - hearted manner and without the least embarrassment . 
 " oh , yes ! " say I. 
 " coavinse have be arrest by the Great Bailiff , " say Mr. 
 Skimpole . " he will never do violence to the sunshine any more . " 
 it quite shock I to hear it , for I have already recall with 
 anything but a serious association the image of the man sit on 
 the sofa that night wipe his head . 
 " his successor inform I of it yesterday , " say Mr. Skimpole . 
 " his successor be in my house now - in possession , I think he call 
 it . he come yesterday , on my blue - eyed daughter 's birthday . I put 
 it to he , ' this be unreasonable and inconvenient . if you have a 
 blue - eyed daughter you would not   like I to come , uninvited , on she 
 birthday ? ' but he stay . " 
 Mr. Skimpole laugh at the pleasant absurdity and lightly touch 
 the piano by which he be seat . 
 " and he tell I , " he say , play little chord where I shall put 
 full stop , " the Coavinses have leave . three child . no mother . 
 and that coavinse ' profession . be unpopular . the rise 
 coavinse . be at a considerable disadvantage . " 
 Mr. Jarndyce get up , rub his head , and begin to walk about . 
 Mr. Skimpole play the melody of one of Ada 's favourite song . 
 Ada and I both look at Mr. Jarndyce , think that we know what 
 be pass in his mind . 
 after walk and stop , and several time leave off rub 
 his head , and begin again , my guardian put his hand upon the 
 key and stop Mr. Skimpole 's playing . " I do not   like this , 
 Skimpole , " he say thoughtfully . 
 Mr. Skimpole , who have quite forget the subject , look up 
 surprised . 
 " the man be necessary , " pursue my guardian , walk backward and 
 forward in the very short space between the piano and the end of 
 the room and rub his hair up from the back of his head as if a 
 high east wind have blow it into that form . " if we make such man 
 necessary by our fault and folly , or by our want of worldly 
 knowledge , or by our misfortune , we must not revenge ourselves 
 upon they . there be no harm in his trade . he maintain his 
 child . one would like to know more about this . " 
 " oh ! coavinse ? " cry Mr. Skimpole , at length perceive what he 
 mean . " nothing easy . a walk to Coavinses ' headquarter , and 
 you can know what you will . " 
 Mr. Jarndyce nod to we , who be only wait for the signal . 
 " come ! we will walk that way , my dear . why not that way as soon 
 as another ! " we be quickly ready and go out . Mr. Skimpole 
 go with we and quite enjoy the expedition . it be so new and 
 so refreshing , he say , for he to want Coavinses instead of 
 coavinse want he ! 
 he take we , first , to Cursitor Street , Chancery Lane , where there 
 be a house with bar window , which he call Coavinses ' Castle . 
 on our go into the entry and ring a bell , a very hideous boy 
 come out of a sort of office and look at we over a spiked wicket . 
 " who do you want ? " say the boy , fit two of the spike into 
 his chin . 
 " there be a follower , or an officer , or something , here , " say Mr. 
 Jarndyce , " who be dead . " 
 " yes ? " say the boy . " well ? " 
 " I want to know his name , if you please ? " 
 " name of Neckett , " say the boy . 
 " and his address ? " 
 " Bell Yard , " say the boy . " Chandler 's shop , leave hand side , name 
 of Blinder . " 
 " be he - I do not   know how to shape the question - " murmur my 
 guardian , " industrious ? " 
 " be Neckett ? " say the boy . " yes , wery much so . he be never 
 tired of watch . he would set upon a post at a street corner eight 
 or ten hour at a stretch if he undertake to do it . " 
 " he might have do bad , " I hear my guardian soliloquize . " he 
 might have undertake to do it and not do it . thank you . that be 
 all I want . " 
 we leave the boy , with his head on one side and his arm on the 
 gate , fondle and suck the spike , and go back to Lincoln 's 
 Inn , where Mr. Skimpole , who have not care to remain nearer 
 Coavinses , await we . then we all go to Bell Yard , a narrow 
 alley at a very short distance . we soon find the chandler 's shop . 
 in it be a good - natured - look old woman with a dropsy , or an 
 asthma , or perhaps both . 
 " Neckett 's child ? " say she in reply to my inquiry . " yes , 
 surely , miss . three pair , if you please . door right opposite the 
 stair . " and she hand I the key across the counter . 
 I glance at the key and glance at she , but she take it for 
 grant that I know what to do with it . as it could only be 
 intend for the child 's door , I come out without ask any more 
 question and lead the way up the dark stair . we go as quietly 
 as we could , but four of we make some noise on the aged board , and 
 when we come to the second story we find we have disturb a man 
 who be stand there look out of his room . 
 " be it Gridley that be want ? " he say , fix his eye on I with 
 an angry stare . 
 " no , sir , " say I ; " I be go high up . " 
 he look at Ada , and at Mr. Jarndyce , and at Mr. Skimpole , fix 
 the same angry stare on each in succession as they pass and 
 follow I . Mr. Jarndyce give he good day . " good day ! " he say 
 abruptly and fiercely . he be a tall , sallow man with a careworn 
 head on which but little hair remain , a deeply line face , and 
 prominent eye . he have a combative look and a chafing , irritable 
 manner which , associate with his figure - still large and powerful , 
 though evidently in its decline - rather alarm I . he have a pen 
 in his hand , and in the glimpse I catch of his room in pass , I 
 see that it be cover with a litter of paper . 
 leave he stand there , we go up to the top room . I tap 
 at the door , and a little shrill voice inside say , " we be lock 
 in . Mrs. Blinder 's get the key ! " 
 I apply the key on hear this and open the door . in a poor 
 room with a sloping ceiling and contain very little furniture 
 be a mite of a boy , some five or six year old , nursing and 
 hush a heavy child of eighteen month . there be no fire , 
 though the weather be cold ; both child be wrap in some 
 poor shawl and tippet as a substitute . their clothing be not so 
 warm , however , but that their nose look red and pinch and 
 their small figure shrink as the boy walk up and down nursing 
 and hush the child with its head on his shoulder . 
 " who have lock you up here alone ? " we naturally ask . 
 " Charley , " say the boy , stand still to gaze at we . 
 " be Charley your brother ? " 
 " no . she be my sister , Charlotte . Father call she Charley . " 
 " be there any more of you besides Charley ? " 
 " I , " say the boy , " and Emma , " pat the limp bonnet of the 
 child he be nurse . " and Charley . " 
 " where be Charley now ? " 
 " out a - washing , " say the boy , begin to walk up and down again 
 and take the nankeen bonnet much too near the bedstead by try 
 to gaze at we at the same time . 
 we be look at one another and at these two child when there 
 come into the room a very little girl , childish in figure but 
 shrewd and older - look in the face - pretty - face too - wear a 
 womanly sort of bonnet much too large for she and dry her bare 
 arm on a womanly sort of apron . her finger be white and 
 wrinkle with washing , and the soap - sud be yet smoke which she 
 wipe off her arm . but for this , she might have be a child 
 playing at washing and imitate a poor working - woman with a quick 
 observation of the truth . 
 she have come run from some place in the neighbourhood and have 
 make all the haste she could . consequently , though she be very 
 light , she be out of breath and could not speak at first , as she 
 stand pant , and wipe her arm , and look quietly at we . 
 " oh , here be Charley ! " say the boy . 
 the child he be nursing stretch forth its arm and cry out to 
 be take by Charley . the little girl take it , in a womanly sort of 
 manner belong to the apron and the bonnet , and stand look at 
 we over the burden that clung to she most affectionately . 
 " be it possible , " whisper my guardian as we put a chair for the 
 little creature and get she to sit down with her load , the boy 
 keep close to she , hold to her apron , " that this child work 
 for the rest ? look at this ! for God 's sake , look at this ! " 
 it be a thing to look at . the three child close together , and 
 two of they rely solely on the third , and the third so young and 
 yet with an air of age and steadiness that sit so strangely on the 
 childish figure . 
 " Charley , Charley ! " say my guardian . " how old be you ? " 
 " over thirteen , sir , " reply the child . 
 " oh ! what a great age , " say my guardian . " what a great age , 
 Charley ! " 
 I can not describe the tenderness with which he speak to she , half 
 playfully yet all the more compassionately and mournfully . 
 " and do you live alone here with these baby , Charley ? " say my 
 guardian . 
 " yes , sir , " return the child , look up into his face with 
 perfect confidence , ' since father die . " 
 " and how do you live , Charley ? oh ! Charley , " say my guardian , 
 turn his face away for a moment , " how do you live ? " 
 " since father die , sir , I have   go out to work . I be out washing 
 to - day . " 
 " God help you , Charley ! " say my guardian . " you be not tall enough 
 to reach the tub ! " 
 " in patten I be , sir , " she say quickly . " I have   get a high pair as 
 belong to mother . " 
 " and when do mother die ? poor mother ! " 
 " Mother die just after Emma be bear , " say the child , glance at 
 the face upon her bosom . " then father say I be to be as good a 
 mother to she as I could . and so I try . and so I work at home 
 and do cleaning and nursing and washing for a long time before I 
 begin to go out . and that be how I know how ; do not   you see , sir ? " 
 " and do you often go out ? " 
 " as often as I can , " say Charley , open her eye and smile , 
 " because of earn sixpence and shilling ! " 
 " and do you always lock the baby up when you go out ? " 
 " to keep them safe , sir , do not   you see ? " say Charley . " Mrs. 
 Blinder come up now and then , and Mr. Gridley come up sometimes , 
 and perhaps I can run in sometimes , and they can play you know , and 
 Tom an't   afraid of be lock up , be you , Tom ? " 
 " no - o ! " say Tom stoutly . 
 " when it come on dark , the lamp be light down in the court , 
 and they show up here quite bright - almost quite bright . do not 
 they , Tom ? " 
 " yes , Charley , " say Tom , " almost quite bright . " 
 " then he be as good as gold , " say the little creature - oh , in such 
 a motherly , womanly way ! " and when Emma 's tired , he put she to 
 bed . and when he be tired he go to bed himself . and when I come 
 home and light the candle and have a bit of supper , he sit up again 
 and have it with I . do not   you , Tom ? " 
 " oh , yes , Charley ! " say Tom . " that I do ! " and either in this 
 glimpse of the great pleasure of his life or in gratitude and love 
 for Charley , who be all in all to he , he lay his face among the 
 scanty fold of her frock and pass from laugh into crying . 
 it be the first time since our entry that a tear have be shed 
 among these child . the little orphan girl have speak of their 
 father and their mother as if all that sorrow be subdue by the 
 necessity of take courage , and by her childish importance in 
 be able to work , and by her bustling busy way . but now , when 
 Tom cry , although she sit quite tranquil , look quietly at we , 
 and do not by any movement disturb a hair of the head of either of 
 her little charge , I see two silent tear fall down her face . 
 I stand at the window with Ada , pretend to look at the 
 housetop , and the blacken stack of chimney , and the poor 
 plant , and the bird in little cage belong to the neighbour , 
 when I find that Mrs. Blinder , from the shop below , have come in 
  perhaps it have take she all this time to get upstairs   and be 
 talk to my guardian . 
 " it be not much to forgive them the rent , sir , " she say ; " who could 
 take it from they ! " 
 " well , well ! " say my guardian to we two . " it be enough that the 
 time will come when this good woman will find that it be much , and 
 that forasmuch as she do it unto the least of these - this child , " 
 he add after a few moment , " could she possibly continue this ? " 
 " really , sir , I think she might , " say Mrs. Blinder , get she 
 heavy breath by painful degree . " she be as handy as it be possible 
 to be . bless you , sir , the way she tend they two child after 
 the mother die be the talk of the yard ! and it be a wonder to 
 see she with he after he be take ill , it really be ! ' Mrs. 
 Blinder , ' he say to I the very last he speak - he be lie there 
  - ' Mrs. Blinder , whatever my calling may have be , I see a angel 
 sit in this room last night along with my child , and I trust 
 she to our Father ! ' " 
 " he have no other call ? " say my guardian . 
 " no , sir , " return Mrs. Blinder , " he be nothing but a follerer . 
 when he first come to lodge here , I do not   know what he be , and I 
 confes that when I find out I give he notice . it be not   like 
 in the yard . it be not   approve by the other lodger . it be not a 
 genteel calling , " say Mrs. Blinder , " and most people do object to 
 it . Mr. Gridley object to it very strong , and he be a good 
 lodger , though his temper have be hard try . " 
 " so you give he notice ? " say my guardian . 
 " so I give he notice , " say Mrs. Blinder . " but really when the 
 time come , and I know no other ill of he , I be in doubt . he be 
 punctual and diligent ; he do what he have to do , sir , " say Mrs. 
 Blinder , unconsciously fix Mr. Skimpole with her eye , " and it be 
 something in this world even to do that . " 
 " so you keep he after all ? " 
 " why , I say that if he could arrange with Mr. Gridley , I could 
 arrange it with the other lodger and should not so much mind its 
 be like or dislike in the yard . Mr. Gridley give his consent 
 gruff - but give it . he be always gruff with he , but he have be 
 kind to the child since . a person be never know till a person 
 be prove . " 
 " have many people be kind to the child ? " ask Mr. Jarndyce . 
 " upon the whole , not so bad , sir , " say Mrs. Blinder ; " but 
 certainly not so many as would have be if their father 's calling 
 have be different . Mr. Coavins give a guinea , and the follerer 
 make up a little purse . some neighbour in the yard that have 
 always joke and tap their shoulder when he go by come 
 forward with a little subscription , and - in general - not so bad . 
 similarly with Charlotte . some people will not   employ she because she 
 be a follerer 's child ; some people that do employ she cast it at 
 she ; some make a merit of have she to work for they , with that 
 and all her draw - back upon she , and perhaps pay she less and put 
 upon her more . but she be patienter than other would be , and be 
 clever too , and always willing , up to the full mark of her strength 
 and over . so I should say , in general , not so bad , sir , but might 
 be well . " 
 Mrs. Blinder sit down to give herself a more favourable opportunity 
 of recover her breath , exhaust anew by so much talk before 
 it be fully restore . Mr. Jarndyce be turn to speak to we 
 when his attention be attract by the abrupt entrance into the 
 room of the Mr. Gridley who have be mention and whom we have see 
 on our way up . 
 " I do not   know what you may be do here , lady and gentleman , " he 
 say , as if he resent our presence , " but you will excuse my coming 
 in . I do not   come in to stare about I . well , Charley ! well , Tom ! 
 well , little one ! how be it with we all to - day ? " 
 he bend over the group in a caressing way and clearly be regard 
 as a friend by the child , though his face retain its stern 
 character and his manner to we be as rude as it could be . my 
 guardian notice it and respect it . 
 " no one , surely , would come here to stare about he , " he say 
 mildly . 
 " may be so , sir , may be so , " return the other , take Tom upon 
 his knee and wave he off impatiently . " I do not   want to argue 
 with lady and gentleman . I have have enough of argue to last 
 one man his life . " 
 " you have sufficient reason , I dare say , " say Mr. Jarndyce , " for 
 be chafe and irritated - " 
 " there again ! " exclaim the man , become violently angry . " I be 
 of a quarrelsome temper . I be irascible . I be not polite ! " 
 " not very , I think . " 
 " Sir , " say Gridley , put down the child and go up to he as 
 if he mean to strike he , " do you know anything of Courts of 
 Equity ? " 
 " perhaps I do , to my sorrow . " 
 " to your sorrow ? " say the man , pause in his wrath , " if so , I 
 beg your pardon . I be not polite , I know . I beg your pardon ! 
 Sir , " with renew violence , " I have be drag for five and 
 twenty year over burn iron , and I have lose the habit of 
 treading upon velvet . go into the Court of Chancery yonder and ask 
 what be one of the stand joke that brighten up their business 
 sometimes , and they will tell you that the good joke they have be 
 the man from Shropshire . I , " he say , beat one hand on the 
 other passionately , " be the man from Shropshire . " 
 " I believe I and my family have also have the honour of furnish 
 some entertainment in the same grave place , " say my guardian 
 composedly . " you may have hear my name - Jarndyce . " 
 " Mr. Jarndyce , " say Gridley with a rough sort of salutation , " you 
 bear your wrong more quietly than I can bear mine . More than 
 that , I tell you - and I tell this gentleman , and these young 
 lady , if they be friend of your - that if I take my wrong in 
 any other way , I should be drive mad ! it be only by resent 
 they , and by revenge they in my mind , and by angrily demand 
 the justice I never get , that I be able to keep my wit together . 
 it be only that ! " he say , speak in a homely , rustic way and 
 with great vehemence . " you may tell I that I over - excite myself . 
 I answer that it be in my nature to do it , under wrong , and I must 
 do it . there be nothing between do it , and sink into the 
 smile state of the poor little mad woman that haunt the court . 
 if I be once to sit down under it , I should become imbecile . " 
 the passion and heat in which he be , and the manner in which his 
 face work , and the violent gesture with which he accompany 
 what he say , be most painful to see . 
 " Mr. Jarndyce , " he say , " consider my case . as true as there be a 
 heaven above we , this be my case . I be one of two brother . my 
 father   a farmer   make a will and leave his farm and stock and so 
 forth to my mother for her life . after my mother 's death , all be 
 to come to I except a legacy of three hundred pound that I be 
 then to pay my brother . my mother die . my brother some time 
 afterwards claim his legacy . I and some of my relation say 
 that he have have a part of it already in board and lodge and some 
 other thing . now mind ! that be the question , and nothing else . 
 no one dispute the will ; no one dispute anything but whether part 
 of that three hundred pound have be already pay or not . to 
 settle that question , my brother file a bill , I be oblige to go 
 into this accursed Chancery ; I be force there because the law 
 force I and would let I go nowhere else . seventeen people be 
 make defendant to that simple suit ! it first come on after two 
 year . it be then stop for another two year while the master 
  may his head rot off !   inquire whether I be my father 's son , 
 about which there be no dispute at all with any mortal creature . 
 he then find out that there be not defendant enough - remember , 
 there be only seventeen as yet ! - but that we must have another 
 who have be leave out and must begin all over again . the cost at 
 that time - before the thing be begin ! - be three time the 
 legacy . my brother would have give up the legacy , and joyful , to 
 escape more cost . my whole estate , leave to I in that will of my 
 father 's , have go in cost . the suit , still undecided , have fall 
 into rack , and ruin , and despair , with everything else - and here I 
 stand , this day ! now , Mr. Jarndyce , in your suit there be 
 thousand and thousand involve , where in mine there be hundred . 
 be mine less hard to bear or be it hard to bear , when my whole 
 living be in it and have be thus shamefully suck away ? " 
 Mr. Jarndyce say that he condole with he with all his heart and 
 that he set up no monopoly himself in be unjustly treat by 
 this monstrous system . 
 " there again ! " say Mr. Gridley with no diminution of his rage . 
 " the system ! I be tell on all hand , it be the system . I must not 
 look to individual . it be the system . I must not   go into court and 
 say , ' my Lord , I beg to know this from you - be this right or wrong ? 
 have you the face to tell I I have receive justice and therefore 
 be dismiss ? ' my Lord know nothing of it . he sit there to 
 administer the system . I must not   go to Mr. Tulkinghorn , the 
 solicitor in Lincoln 's Inn Fields , and say to he when he make I 
 furious by be so cool and satisfied - as they all do , for I know 
 they gain by it while I lose , do not   I ? - I must not   say to he , ' I 
 will have something out of some one for my ruin , by fair mean or 
 foul ! ' he be not responsible . it be the system . but , if I do no 
 violence to any of they , here - I may ! I do not   know what may happen 
 if I be carry beyond myself at last ! I will accuse the 
 individual worker of that system against I , face to face , before 
 the great eternal bar ! " 
 his passion be fearful . I could not have believe in such rage 
 without see it . 
 " I have do ! " he say , sit down and wipe his face . " Mr. 
 Jarndyce , I have do ! I be violent , I know . I ought to know it . 
 I have be in prison for contempt of court . I have be in prison 
 for threaten the solicitor . I have be in this trouble , and 
 that trouble , and shall be again . I be the man from Shropshire , 
 and I sometimes go beyond amuse they , though they have find it 
 amusing , too , to see I commit into custody and bring up in 
 custody and all that . it would be well for I , they tell I , if 
 I restrain myself . I tell they that if I do restrain myself I 
 should become imbecile . I be a good - enough - temper man once , I 
 believe . People in my part of the country say they remember I so , 
 but now I must have this vent under my sense of injury or nothing 
 could hold my wit together . it would be far well for you , Mr. 
 Gridley , ' the Lord Chancellor tell I last week , ' not to waste your 
 time here , and to stay , usefully employ , down in Shropshire . ' 
 ' my Lord , my Lord , I know it would , ' say I to he , ' and it would 
 have be far well for I never to have hear the name of your 
 high office , but unhappily for I , I can not   undo the past , and the 
 past drive I here ! ' besides , " he add , break fiercely out , 
 " I will shame they . to the last , I will show myself in that court to 
 its shame . if I know when I be go to die , and could be carry 
 there , and have a voice to speak with , I would die there , say , 
 ' you have bring I here and send I from here many and many a 
 time . now send I out foot foremost ! ' " 
 his countenance have , perhaps for year , become so set in its 
 contentious expression that it do not soften , even now when he be 
 quiet . 
 " I come to take these baby down to my room for an hour , " he say , 
 go to they again , " and let they play about . I do not   mean to 
 say all this , but it do not   much signify . you be not afraid of I , 
 Tom , be you ? " 
 " no ! " say Tom . " you be not   angry with I . " 
 " you be right , my child . you be go back , Charley ? aye ? come 
 then , little one ! " he take the young child on his arm , where 
 she be willing enough to be carry . " I should not   wonder if we 
 find a ginger - bread soldier downstairs . let us go and look for 
 he ! " 
 he make his former rough salutation , which be not deficient in a 
 certain respect , to Mr. Jarndyce , and bow slightly to we , go 
 downstairs to his room . 
 upon that , Mr. Skimpole begin to talk , for the first time since our 
 arrival , in his usual gay strain . he say , well , it be really 
 very pleasant to see how thing lazily adapt themselves to 
 purpose . here be this Mr. Gridley , a man of a robust will and 
 surprising energy - intellectually speak , a sort of inharmonious 
 blacksmith - and he could easily imagine that there Gridley be , 
 year ago , wander about in life for something to expend his 
 superfluous combativeness upon - a sort of Young Love among the 
 thorn - when the Court of Chancery come in his way and accommodate 
 he with the exact thing he want . there they be , match , ever 
 afterwards ! otherwise he might have be a great general , blow 
 up all sort of town , or he might have be a great politician , 
 deal in all sort of parliamentary rhetoric ; but as it be , he 
 and the Court of Chancery have fall upon each other in the 
 pleasantest way , and nobody be much the bad , and Gridley be , so 
 to speak , from that hour provide for . then look at Coavinses ! 
 how delightfully poor Coavinses   father of these charming child 
 illustrate the same principle ! he , Mr. Skimpole , himself , have 
 sometimes repine at the existence of Coavinses . he have find 
 Coavinses in his way . he could have dispense with Coavinses . 
 there have be time when , if he have be a sultan , and his grand 
 vizier have say one morning , " what do the Commander of the 
 Faithful require at the hand of his slave ? " he might have even 
 go so far as to reply , " the head of coavinse ! " but what turn 
 out to be the case ? that , all that time , he have be give 
 employment to a most deserving man , that he have be a benefactor 
 to Coavinses , that he have actually be enable Coavinses to bring 
 up these charming child in this agreeable way , develop these 
 social virtue ! insomuch that his heart have just now swell and 
 the tear have come into his eye when he have look round the room 
 and think , " I be the great patron of Coavinses , and his little 
 comfort be MY work ! " 
 there be something so captivate in his light way of touch 
 these fantastic string , and he be such a mirthful child by the 
 side of the graver childhood we have see , that he make my guardian 
 smile even as he turn towards we from a little private talk with 
 Mrs. Blinder . we kiss Charley , and take she downstairs with we , 
 and stop outside the house to see she run away to her work . I 
 do not   know where she be go , but we see her run , such a little , 
 little creature in her womanly bonnet and apron , through a cover 
 way at the bottom of the court and melt into the city 's strife and 
 sound like a dewdrop in an ocean . 
 CHAPTER XVI 
 Tom - all - Alone 's 
 my Lady Dedlock be restless , very restless . the astonished 
 fashionable intelligence hardly know where to have she . to - day 
 she be at Chesney Wold ; yesterday she be at her house in town ; to- 
 morrow she may be abroad , for anything the fashionable intelligence 
 can with confidence predict . even Sir Leicester 's gallantry have 
 some trouble to keep pace with she . it would have more but that 
 his other faithful ally , for well and for bad - the gout - dart 
 into the old oak bed - chamber at Chesney Wold and grip he by both 
 leg . 
 Sir Leicester receive the gout as a troublesome demon , but still a 
 demon of the patrician order . all the dedlock , in the direct male 
 line , through a course of time during and beyond which the memory 
 of man goeth not to the contrary , have have the gout . it can be 
 prove , sir . other man 's father may have die of the rheumatism 
 or may have take base contagion from the tainted blood of the sick 
 vulgar , but the Dedlock family have communicate something 
 exclusive even to the levelling process of die by die of their 
 own family gout . it have come down through the illustrious line 
 like the plate , or the picture , or the place in Lincolnshire . it 
 be among their dignity . Sir Leicester be perhaps not wholly 
 without an impression , though he have never resolve it into word , 
 that the angel of death in the discharge of his necessary duty 
 may observe to the shade of the aristocracy , " my lord and 
 gentleman , I have the honour to present to you another Dedlock 
 certify to have arrive per the family gout . " 
 hence Sir Leicester yield up his family leg to the family 
 disorder as if he hold his name and fortune on that feudal tenure . 
 he feel that for a Dedlock to be lay upon his back and 
 spasmodically twitch and stab in his extremity be a liberty 
 take somewhere , but he think , " we have all yield to this ; it 
 belong to we ; it have for some hundred of year be understand 
 that we be not to make the vault in the park interesting on more 
 ignoble term ; and I submit myself to the compromise . " 
 and a goodly show he make , lie in a flush of crimson and gold in 
 the midst of the great drawing - room before his favourite picture of 
 my Lady , with broad strip of sunlight shin in , down the long 
 perspective , through the long line of window , and alternate with 
 soft relief of shadow . outside , the stately oak , root for age 
 in the green ground which have never know ploughshare , but be 
 still a chase when king ride to battle with sword and shield and 
 ride a - hunting with bow and arrow , bear witness to his greatness . 
 inside , his forefather , look on he from the wall , say , " each 
 of we be a pass reality here and leave this coloured shadow of 
 himself and melt into remembrance as dreamy as the distant voice 
 of the rook now lull you to rest , " and hear their testimony to 
 his greatness too . and he be very great this day . and woe to 
 Boythorn or other daring wight who shall presumptuously contest an 
 inch with he ! 
 my Lady be at present represent , near Sir Leicester , by her 
 portrait . she have flit away to town , with no intention of 
 remain there , and will soon flit hither again , to the confusion 
 of the fashionable intelligence . the house in town be not prepare 
 for her reception . it be muffled and dreary . only one Mercury in 
 powder gape disconsolate at the hall - window ; and he mention last 
 night to another Mercury of his acquaintance , also accustom to 
 good society , that if that sort of thing be to last - which it 
 could not , for a man of his spirit could not   bear it , and a man of 
 his figure could not   be expect to bear it - there would be no 
 resource for he , upon his honour , but to cut his throat ! 
 what connexion can there be between the place in Lincolnshire , the 
 house in town , the Mercury in powder , and the whereabout of Jo the 
 outlaw with the broom , who have that distant ray of light upon he 
 when he sweep the churchyard - step ? what connexion can there have 
 be between many people in the innumerable history of this world 
 who from opposite side of great gulfs have , nevertheless , be 
 very curiously bring together ! 
 Jo sweep his crossing all day long , unconscious of the link , if 
 any link there be . he sum up his mental condition when ask a 
 question by reply that he " do not   know nothink . " he know that 
 it be hard to keep the mud off the crossing in dirty weather , and 
 hard still to live by do it . nobody teach he even that 
 much ; he find it out . 
 Jo live - that be to say , Jo have not yet die - in a ruinous place 
 know to the like of he by the name of Tom - all - Alone 's . it be a 
 black , dilapidated street , avoid by all decent people , where the 
 crazy house be seize upon , when their decay be far advanced , 
 by some bold vagrant who after establish their own possession 
 take to let they out in lodging . now , these tumble 
 tenement contain , by night , a swarm of misery . as on the ruin 
 human wretch vermin parasite appear , so these ruin shelter have 
 breed a crowd of foul existence that crawl in and out of gap in 
 wall and board ; and coil itself to sleep , in maggot number , 
 where the rain drip in ; and come and go , fetch and carry 
 fever and sow more evil in its every footprint than Lord Coodle , 
 and Sir Thomas Doodle , and the Duke of Foodle , and all the fine 
 gentleman in office , down to Zoodle , shall set right in five 
 hundred year - though bear expressly to do it . 
 twice lately there have be a crash and a cloud of dust , like the 
 springing of a mine , in Tom - all - Alone 's ; and each time a house have 
 fall . these accident have make a paragraph in the newspaper 
 and have fill a bed or two in the near hospital . the gap 
 remain , and there be not unpopular lodging among the rubbish . as 
 several more house be nearly ready to go , the next crash in Tom- 
 all - Alone 's may be expect to be a good one . 
 this desirable property be in Chancery , of course . it would be an 
 insult to the discernment of any man with half an eye to tell he 
 so . whether " Tom " be the popular representative of the original 
 plaintiff or defendant in Jarndyce and Jarndyce , or whether Tom 
 live here when the suit have lay the street waste , all alone , 
 until other settler come to join he , or whether the traditional 
 title be a comprehensive name for a retreat cut off from honest 
 company and put out of the pale of hope , perhaps nobody know . 
 certainly Jo do not   know . 
 " for I do not , " say Jo , " I do not   know nothink . " 
 it must be a strange state to be like Jo ! to shuffle through the 
 street , unfamiliar with the shape , and in utter darkness as to 
 the meaning , of those mysterious symbol , so abundant over the 
 shop , and at the corner of street , and on the door , and in the 
 window ! to see people read , and to see people write , and to see 
 the postman deliver letter , and not to have the least idea of all 
 that language - to be , to every scrap of it , stone blind and dumb ! 
 it must be very puzzling to see the good company go to the 
 church on Sundays , with their book in their hand , and to think 
  for perhaps Jo do think at odd time   what do it all mean , and 
 if it mean anything to anybody , how come it that it mean nothing 
 to I ? to be hustle , and jostle , and move on ; and really to 
 feel that it would appear to be perfectly true that I have no 
 business here , or there , or anywhere ; and yet to be perplex by 
 the consideration that I be here somehow , too , and everybody 
 overlook I until I become the creature that I be ! it must be a 
 strange state , not merely to be tell that I be scarcely human   as 
 in the case of my offer myself for a witness , but to feel it of 
 my own knowledge all my life ! to see the horse , dog , and cattle 
 go by I and to know that in ignorance I belong to they and not to 
 the superior being in my shape , whose delicacy I offend ! Jo 's 
 idea of a criminal trial , or a judge , or a bishop , or a government , 
 or that inestimable jewel to he   if he only know it   the 
 Constitution , should be strange ! his whole material and immaterial 
 life be wonderfully strange ; his death , the strange thing of all . 
 Jo come out of Tom - all - Alone 's , meet the tardy morning which be 
 always late in get down there , and munch his dirty bit of 
 bread as he come along . his way lie through many street , and 
 the house not yet be open , he sit down to breakfast on the 
 door - step of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in 
 Foreign Parts and give it a brush when he have finish as an 
 acknowledgment of the accommodation . he admire the size of the 
 edifice and wonder what it be all about . he have no idea , poor 
 wretch , of the spiritual destitution of a coral reef in the Pacific 
 or what it cost to look up the precious soul among the coco - nut 
 and bread - fruit . 
 he go to his crossing and begin to lay it out for the day . the 
 town awake ; the great tee - totum be set up for its daily spin and 
 whirl ; all that unaccountable reading and writing , which have be 
 suspend for a few hour , recommence . Jo and the other low 
 animal get on in the unintelligible mess as they can . it be 
 market - day . the blinded oxen , over - goad , over - drive , never 
 guide , run into wrong place and be beat out , and plunge red- 
 eyed and foam at stone wall , and often sorely hurt the 
 innocent , and often sorely hurt themselves . very like Jo and his 
 order ; very , very like ! 
 a band of music come and play . Jo listen to it . so do a dog 
  - a drover 's dog , wait for his master outside a butcher 's shop , 
 and evidently think about those sheep he have have upon his mind 
 for some hour and be happily rid of . he seem perplexed 
 respect three or four , can not   remember where he leave they , look 
 up and down the street as half expect to see they astray , 
 suddenly prick up his ear and remember all about it . a 
 thoroughly vagabond dog , accustom to low company and public- 
 house ; a terrific dog to sheep , ready at a whistle to scamper over 
 their back and tear out mouthful of their wool ; but an educate , 
 improve , develop dog who have be teach his duty and know 
 how to discharge they . he and Jo listen to the music , probably 
 with much the same amount of animal satisfaction ; likewise as to 
 awakened association , aspiration , or regret , melancholy or joyful 
 reference to thing beyond the sens , they be probably upon a 
 par . but , otherwise , how far above the human listener be the 
 brute ! 
 turn that dog 's descendant wild , like Jo , and in a very few year 
 they will so degenerate that they will lose even their bark - but 
 not their bite . 
 the day change as it wear itself away and become dark and 
 drizzly . Jo fight it out at his crossing among the mud and 
 wheel , the horse , whip , and umbrella , and get but a scanty sum 
 to pay for the unsavoury shelter of Tom - all - Alone 's . Twilight 
 come on ; gas begin to start up in the shop ; the lamplighter , 
 with his ladder , run along the margin of the pavement . a wretched 
 evening be begin to close in . 
 in his chamber Mr. Tulkinghorn sit meditate an application to 
 the near magistrate to - morrow morning for a warrant . Gridley , 
 a disappointed suitor , have be here to - day and have be alarming . 
 we be not to be put in bodily fear , and that ill - condition fellow 
 shall be hold to bail again . from the ceiling , foreshorten 
 Allegory , in the person of one impossible roman upside down , point 
 with the arm of Samson   out of joint , and an odd one   obtrusively 
 toward the window . why should Mr. Tulkinghorn , for such no reason , 
 look out of window ? be the hand not always point there ? so he 
 do not look out of window . 
 and if he do , what would it be to see a woman go by ? there be 
 woman enough in the world , Mr. Tulkinghorn think - too many ; they 
 be at the bottom of all that go wrong in it , though , for the 
 matter of that , they create business for lawyer . what would it be 
 to see a woman go by , even though she be go secretly ? they 
 be all secret . Mr. Tulkinghorn know that very well . 
 but they be not all like the woman who now leave he and his 
 house behind , between whose plain dress and her refined manner 
 there be something exceedingly inconsistent . she should be an 
 upper servant by her attire , yet in her air and step , though both 
 be hurry and assume - as far as she can assume in the muddy 
 street , which she tread with an unaccustomed foot - she be a lady . 
 her face be veil , and still she sufficiently betray herself to 
 make more than one of those who pass she look round sharply . 
 she never turn her head . Lady or servant , she have a purpose in 
 she and can follow it . she never turn her head until she come to 
 the crossing where Jo ply with his broom . he cross with she 
 and beg . still , she do not turn her head until she have land 
 on the other side . then she slightly beckon to he and say , 
 " come here ! " 
 Jo follow she a pace or two into a quiet court . 
 " be you the boy I have   read of in the paper ? " she ask behind her 
 veil . 
 " I do not   know , " say Jo , star moodily at the veil , " nothink 
 about no paper . I do not   know nothink about nothink at all . " 
 " be you examine at an inquest ? " 
 " I do not   know nothink about no - where I be take by the beadle , do 
 you mean ? " say Jo . " be the boy 's name at the inkwhich Jo ? " 
 " yes . " 
 " that be I ! " say Jo . 
 " come far up . " 
 " you mean about the man ? " say Jo , follow . " he as wos dead ? " 
 " hush ! speak in a whisper ! yes . do he look , when he be live , 
 so very ill and poor ? " 
 " oh , jist ! " say Jo . 
 " do he look like - not like you ? " say the woman with abhorrence . 
 " oh , not so bad as I , " say Jo . " I be a reg'lar one I be ! you 
 do not   know he , do you ? " 
 " how dare you ask I if I know he ? " 
 " no offence , my lady , " say Jo with much humility , for even he have 
 get at the suspicion of she be a lady . 
 " I be not a lady . I be a servant . " 
 " you be a jolly servant ! " say Jo without the least idea of say 
 anything offensive , merely as a tribute of admiration . 
 " listen and be silent . do not   talk to I , and stand far from 
 I ! can you show I all those place that be speak of in the 
 account I read ? the place he write for , the place he die at , the 
 place where you be take to , and the place where he be bury ? 
 do you know the place where he be bury ? " 
 Jo answer with a nod , have also nod as each other place be 
 mention . 
 " go before I and show I all those dreadful place . stop opposite 
 to each , and do not   speak to I unless I speak to you . do not   look 
 back . do what I want , and I will pay you well . " 
 Jo attend closely while the word be be speak ; tell they off 
 on his broom - handle , find they rather hard ; pause to consider 
 their meaning ; consider it satisfactory ; and nod his ragged head . 
 " I be fly , " say Jo . " but fen lark , you know . stow hook it ! " 
 " what do the horrible creature mean ? " exclaim the servant , 
 recoil from he . 
 " stow cut away , you know ! " say Jo . 
 " I do not   understand you . go on before ! I will give you more money 
 than you ever have in your life . " 
 Jo screw up his mouth into a whistle , give his ragged head a rub , 
 take his broom under his arm , and lead the way , pass deftly 
 with his bare foot over the hard stone and through the mud and 
 mire . 
 Cook 's Court . Jo stop . a pause . 
 " who live here ? " 
 " he wot give he his writing and give I half a bull , " say Jo in 
 a whisper without look over his shoulder . 
 " go on to the next . " 
 Krook 's house . Jo stop again . a long pause . 
 " who live here ? " 
 " he live here , " Jo answer as before . 
 after a silence he be ask , " in which room ? " 
 " in the back room up there . you can see the winder from this 
 corner . up there ! that be where I see he stritche out . this be 
 the public - ouse where I be take to . " 
 " go on to the next ! " 
 it be a long walk to the next , but Jo , relieve of his first 
 suspicion , stick to the form impose upon he and do not look 
 round . by many devious way , reek with offence of many kind , 
 they come to the little tunnel of a court , and to the gas - lamp 
  light now , and to the iron gate . 
 " he be put there , " say Jo , hold to the bar and look in . 
 " where ? oh , what a scene of horror ! " 
 " there ! " say Jo , point . " over yinder . among they pile of 
 bone , and close to that there kitchin winder ! they put he wery 
 nigh the top . they be oblige to stamp upon it to git it in . I 
 could unkiver it for you with my broom if the gate be open . 
 that be why they lock it , I s'pose , " give it a shake . " it be 
 always lock . look at the rat ! " cry Jo , excited . " hi ! look ! 
 there he go ! ho ! into the ground ! " 
 the servant shrink into a corner , into a corner of that hideous 
 archway , with its deadly stain contaminate her dress ; and 
 put out her two hand and passionately tell he to keep away 
 from she , for he be loathsome to she , so remain for some moment . 
 Jo stand star and be still star when she recover herself . 
 " be this place of abomination consecrate ground ? " 
 " I do not   know nothink of consequential ground , " say Jo , still 
 star . 
 " be it bless ? " 
 " which ? " say Jo , in the last degree amazed . 
 " be it bless ? " 
 " I be blest if I know , " say Jo , star more than ever ; " but I 
 should not   think it warn't . bl ? " repeat Jo , something trouble 
 in his mind . " it an't   do it much good if it be . bl ? I 
 should think it be t'othere myself . but I do not   know nothink ! " 
 the servant take as little heed of what he say as she seem to 
 take of what she have say herself . she draw off her glove to get 
 some money from her purse . Jo silently notice how white and small 
 her hand be and what a jolly servant she must be to wear such 
 sparkling ring . 
 she drop a piece of money in his hand without touch it , and 
 shudder as their hand approach . " now , " she add , ' show I the 
 spot again ! " 
 Jo thrust the handle of his broom between the bar of the gate , 
 and with his utmost power of elaboration , point it out . at 
 length , look aside to see if he have make himself intelligible , 
 he find that he be alone . 
 his first proceeding be to hold the piece of money to the gas - light 
 and to be overpower at find that it be yellow - gold . his next 
 be to give it a one - sided bite at the edge as a test of its 
 quality . his next , to put it in his mouth for safety and to sweep 
 the step and passage with great care . his job do , he set off 
 for Tom - all - Alone 's , stop in the light of innumerable gas - lamp 
 to produce the piece of gold and give it another one - sided bite as 
 a reassurance of its be genuine . 
 the Mercury in powder be in no want of society to - night , for my 
 Lady go to a grand dinner and three or four ball . Sir Leicester 
 be fidgety down at Chesney Wold , with no well company than the 
 goat ; he complain to Mrs. Rouncewell that the rain make such a 
 monotonous pattering on the terrace that he can not   read the paper 
 even by the fireside in his own snug dressing - room . 
 " Sir Leicester would have do well to try the other side of the 
 house , my dear , " say Mrs. Rouncewell to Rosa . " his dressing - room 
 be on my Lady 's side . and in all these year I never hear the 
 step upon the Ghost 's Walk more distinct than it be to - night ! " 
 CHAPTER XVII 
 Esther 's Narrative 
 Richard very often come to see we while we remain in London 
  though he soon fail in his letter - writing , and with his quick 
 ability , his good spirit , his good temper , his gaiety and 
 freshness , be always delightful . but though I like he more and 
 more the well I know he , I still feel more and more how much it 
 be to be regret that he have be educate in no habit of 
 application and concentration . the system which have address he 
 in exactly the same manner as it have address hundred of other 
 boy , all vary in character and capacity , have enable he to 
 dash through his task , always with fair credit and often with 
 distinction , but in a fitful , dazzle way that have confirm his 
 reliance on those very quality in himself which it have be most 
 desirable to direct and train . they be good quality , without 
 which no high place can be meritoriously win , but like fire and 
 water , though excellent servant , they be very bad master . if 
 they have be under Richard 's direction , they would have be his 
 friend ; but Richard be under their direction , they become his 
 enemy . 
 I write down these opinion not because I believe that this or any 
 other thing be so because I think so , but only because I do 
 think so and I want to be quite candid about all I think and do . 
 these be my thought about Richard . I think I often observe 
 besides how right my guardian be in what he have say , and that the 
 uncertainty and delay of the Chancery suit have impart to his 
 nature something of the careless spirit of a gamester who feel that 
 he be part of a great gaming system . 
 Mr. and Mrs. Bayham Badger come one afternoon when my guardian 
 be not at home , in the course of conversation I naturally inquire 
 after Richard . 
 " why , Mr. Carstone , " say Mrs. Badger , " be very well and be , I 
 assure you , a great acquisition to our society . Captain Swosser 
 use to say of I that I be always well than land a - head and a 
 breeze a - starn to the midshipman 's mess when the purser 's junk have 
 become as tough as the fore - topsel weather earing . it be his 
 naval way of mention generally that I be an acquisition to any 
 society . I may render the same tribute , I be sure , to Mr. 
 Carstone . but I - you will not   think I premature if I mention it ? " 
 I say no , as Mrs. Badger 's insinuate tone seem to require such 
 an answer . 
 " nor Miss Clare ? " say Mrs. Bayham Badger sweetly . 
 Ada say no , too , and look uneasy . 
 " why , you see , my dear , " say Mrs. Badger , " - you will excuse I 
 call you my dear ? " 
 we entreat Mrs. Badger not to mention it . 
 " because you really be , if I may take the liberty of say so , " 
 pursue Mrs. Badger , ' so perfectly charming . you see , my dear , 
 that although I be still young - or Mr. Bayham Badger pay I the 
 compliment of say so - " 
 " no , " Mr. Badger call out like some one contradict at a public 
 meeting . " not at all ! " 
 " very well , " smile Mrs. Badger , " we will say still young . " 
 " undoubtedly , " say Mr. Badger . 
 " my dear , though still young , I have have many opportunity of 
 observe young man . there be many such on board the dear old 
 Crippler , I assure you . after that , when I be with Captain 
 Swosser in the Mediterranean , I embrace every opportunity of 
 know and befriend the midshipman under Captain Swosser 's 
 command . you never hear they call the young gentleman , my 
 dear , and probably would not understand allusion to their 
 pipe - clay their weekly account , but it be otherwise with I , for 
 blue water have be a second home to I , and I have be quite a 
 sailor . again , with Professor Dingo . " 
 " a man of european reputation , " murmur Mr. Badger . 
 " when I lose my dear first and become the wife of my dear second , " 
 say Mrs. Badger , speak of her former husband as if they be 
 part of a charade , " I still enjoy opportunity of observe 
 youth . the class attendant on Professor Dingo 's lecture be a 
 large one , and it become my pride , as the wife of an eminent 
 scientific man seek herself in science the utmost consolation it 
 could impart , to throw our house open to the student as a kind of 
 Scientific Exchange . every Tuesday evening there be lemonade and 
 a mixed biscuit for all who choose to partake of those refreshment . 
 and there be science to an unlimited extent . " 
 " remarkable assembly those , Miss Summerson , " say Mr. Badger 
 reverentially . " there must have be great intellectual friction 
 go on there under the auspex of such a man ! " 
 " and now , " pursue Mrs. Badger , " now that I be the wife of my dear 
 third , Mr. Badger , I still pursue those habit of observation which 
 be form during the lifetime of Captain Swosser and adapt to 
 new and unexpected purpose during the lifetime of Professor Dingo . 
 I therefore have not come to the consideration of Mr. Carstone as a 
 neophyte . and yet I be very much of the opinion , my dear , that he 
 have not choose his profession advisedly . " 
 Ada look so very anxious now that I ask Mrs. Badger on what she 
 found her supposition . 
 " my dear Miss Summerson , " she reply , " on Mr. Carstone 's character 
 and conduct . he be of such a very easy disposition that probably 
 he would never think it worth - while to mention how he really feel , 
 but he feel languid about the profession . he have not that 
 positive interest in it which make it his vocation . if he have any 
 decide impression in reference to it , I should say it be that it 
 be a tiresome pursuit . now , this be not promise . young man like 
 Mr. Allan Woodcourt who take it from a strong interest in all that 
 it can do will find some reward in it through a great deal of work 
 for a very little money and through year of considerable endurance 
 and disappointment . but I be quite convinced that this would never 
 be the case with Mr. Carstone . " 
 " do Mr. Badger think so too ? " ask Ada timidly . 
 " why , " say Mr. Badger , " to tell the truth , Miss Clare , this view 
 of the matter have not occur to I until Mrs. Badger mention 
 it . but when Mrs. Badger put it in that light , I naturally give 
 great consideration to it , know that Mrs. Badger 's mind , in 
 addition to its natural advantage , have have the rare advantage of 
 be form by two such very distinguished   I will even say 
 illustrious   public man as Captain Swosser of the Royal Navy and 
 Professor Dingo . the conclusion at which I have arrive be - in 
 short , be Mrs. Badger 's conclusion . " 
 " it be a maxim of Captain Swosser 's , " say Mrs. Badger , ' speak 
 in his figurative naval manner , that when you make pitch hot , you 
 can not make it too hot ; and that if you only have to swab a plank , 
 you should swab it as if Davy Jones be after you . it appear to 
 I that this maxim be applicable to the medical as well as to the 
 nautical profession . 
 " to all profession , " observe Mr. Badger . " it be admirably say 
 by Captain Swosser . Beautifully say . " 
 " People object to Professor Dingo when we be stay in the 
 north of Devon after our marriage , " say Mrs. Badger , " that he 
 disfigure some of the house and other building by chip off 
 fragment of those edifice with his little geological hammer . but 
 the professor reply that he know of no building save the Temple 
 of Science . the principle be the same , I think ? " 
 " precisely the same , " say Mr. Badger . " finely express ! the 
 professor make the same remark , Miss Summerson , in his last 
 illness , when   his mind wander   he insist on keep his 
 little hammer under the pillow and chip at the countenance of 
 the attendant . the rule passion ! " 
 although we could have dispense with the length at which Mr. and 
 Mrs. Badger pursue the conversation , we both feel that it be 
 disintereste in they to express the opinion they have communicate 
 to we and that there be a great probability of its be sound . 
 we agree to say nothing to Mr. Jarndyce until we have speak to 
 Richard ; and as he be come next evening , we resolve to have a 
 very serious talk with he . 
 so after he have be a little while with Ada , I go in and find 
 my darling   as I know she would be   prepared to consider he 
 thoroughly right in whatever he say . 
 " and how do you get on , Richard ? " say I. I always sit down on the 
 other side of he . he make quite a sister of I . 
 " oh ! well enough ! " say Richard . 
 " he can not   say well than that , Esther , can he ? " cry my pet 
 triumphantly . 
 I try to look at my pet in the wise manner , but of course I 
 could not . 
 " well enough ? " I repeat . 
 " yes , " say Richard , " well enough . it be rather jog - trotty and 
 humdrum . but it will do as well as anything else ! " 
 " oh ! my dear Richard ! " I remonstrate . 
 " what be the matter ? " say Richard . 
 " do as well as anything else ! " 
 " I do not   think there be any harm in that , Dame Durden , " say Ada , 
 look so confidingly at I across he ; " because if it will do as 
 well as anything else , it will do very well , I hope . " 
 " oh , yes , I hope so , " return Richard , carelessly toss his hair 
 from his forehead . " after all , it may be only a kind of probation 
 till our suit be - I forget though . I be not to mention the suit . 
 Forbidden ground ! oh , yes , it be all right enough . let we talk 
 about something else . " 
 Ada would have do so willingly , and with a full persuasion that 
 we have bring the question to a most satisfactory state . but I 
 think it would be useless to stop there , so I begin again . 
 " no , but Richard , " say I , " and my dear Ada ! consider how 
 important it be to you both , and what a point of honour it be 
 towards your cousin , that you , Richard , should be quite in earnest 
 without any reservation . I think we have well talk about this , 
 really , Ada . it will be too late very soon . " 
 " oh , yes ! we must talk about it ! " say Ada . " but I think Richard 
 be right . " 
 what be the use of my try to look wise when she be so pretty , 
 and so engaging , and so fond of he ! 
 " Mr. and Mrs. Badger be here yesterday , Richard , " say I , " and 
 they seem disposed to think that you have no great liking for the 
 profession . " 
 " do they though ? " say Richard . " oh ! well , that rather alter the 
 case , because I have no idea that they think so , and I should not 
 have like to disappoint or inconvenience they . the fact be , I 
 do not   care much about it . but , oh , it do not   matter ! it will do as 
 well as anything else ! " 
 " you hear he , Ada ! " say I. 
 " the fact be , " Richard proceed , half thoughtfully and half 
 jocosely , " it be not quite in my way . I do not   take to it . and I 
 get too much of Mrs. Bayham Badger 's first and second . " 
 " I be sure that be very natural ! " cry Ada , quite delighted . " the 
 very thing we both say yesterday , Esther ! " 
 " then , " pursue Richard , " it be monotonous , and to - day be too like 
 yesterday , and to - morrow be too like to - day . " 
 " but I be afraid , " say I , " this be an objection to all kind of 
 application - to life itself , except under some very uncommon 
 circumstance . " 
 " do you think so ? " return Richard , still consider . " perhaps ! 
 ha ! why , then , you know , " he add , suddenly become gay again , 
 " we travel outside a circle to what I say just now . it will do as 
 well as anything else . oh , it be all right enough ! let we talk 
 about something else . " 
 but even Ada , with her love face - and if it have seem innocent 
 and trust when I first see it in that memorable November fog , 
 how much more do it seem now when I know her innocent and trusting 
 heart - even Ada shake her head at this and look serious . so I 
 think it a good opportunity to hint to Richard that if he be 
 sometimes a little careless of himself , I be very sure he never 
 mean to be careless of Ada , and that it be a part of his 
 affectionate consideration for she not to slight the importance of 
 a step that might influence both their life . this make he almost 
 grave . 
 " my dear Mother Hubbard , " he say , " that be the very thing ! I have 
 think of that several time and have be quite angry with myself 
 for meaning to be so much in earnest and - somehow - not exactly 
 be so . I do not   know how it be ; I seem to want something or 
 other to stand by . even you have no idea how fond I be of Ada   my 
 darling cousin , I love you , so much ! , but I do not   settle down to 
 constancy in other thing . it be such uphill work , and it take 
 such a time ! " say Richard with an air of vexation . 
 " that may be , " I suggest , " because you do not   like what you have 
 choose . " 
 " poor fellow ! " say Ada . " I be sure I do not   wonder at it ! " 
 no . it be not of the least use my try to look wise . I try 
 again , but how could I do it , or how could it have any effect if I 
 could , while Ada rest her clasp hand upon his shoulder and 
 while he look at her tender blue eye , and while they look at 
 he ! 
 " you see , my precious girl , " say Richard , pass her golden curl 
 through and through his hand , " I be a little hasty perhaps ; or I 
 misunderstood my own inclination perhaps . they do not   seem to lie 
 in that direction . I could not   tell till I try . now the question 
 be whether it be worth - while to undo all that have be do . it 
 seem like make a great disturbance about nothing particular . " 
 " my dear Richard , " say I , " how can you say about nothing 
 particular ? " 
 " I do not   mean absolutely that , " he return . " I mean that it may 
 be nothing particular because I may never want it . " 
 both Ada and I urge , in reply , not only that it be decidedly 
 worth - while to undo what have be do , but that it must be undo . 
 I then ask Richard whether he have think of any more congenial 
 pursuit . 
 " there , my dear Mrs. Shipton , " say Richard , " you touch I home . 
 yes , I have . I have be think that the law be the boy for I . " 
 " the law ! " repeat Ada as if she be afraid of the name . 
 " if I go into Kenge 's office , " say Richard , " and if I be 
 place under article to Kenge , I should have my eye on the - hum ! - 
 the forbidden ground - and should be able to study it , and master 
 it , and to satisfy myself that it be not neglect and be be 
 properly conduct . I should be able to look after Ada 's interest 
 and my own interest   the same thing ! ; and I should peg away at 
 Blackstone and all those fellow with the most tremendous ardour . " 
 I be not by any mean so sure of that , and I see how his hankering 
 after the vague thing yet to come of those long - defer hope 
 cast a shade on Ada 's face . but I think it well to encourage he 
 in any project of continuous exertion , and only advise he to be 
 quite sure that his mind be make up now . 
 " my dear Minerva , " say Richard , " I be as steady as you be . I 
 make a mistake ; we be all liable to mistake ; I will not   do so any 
 more , and I will become such a lawyer as be not often see . that is , 
 you know , " say Richard , relapse into doubt , " if it really be 
 worth - while , after all , to make such a disturbance about nothing 
 particular ! " 
 this lead to our say again , with a great deal of gravity , all 
 that we have say already and to our come to much the same 
 conclusion afterwards . but we so strongly advise Richard to be 
 frank and open with Mr. Jarndyce , without a moment 's delay , and his 
 disposition be naturally so opposed to concealment that he seek 
 he out at once   take we with he   and make a full avowal . 
 " Rick , " say my guardian , after hear he attentively , " we can 
 retreat with honour , and we will . but we must be careful - for our 
 cousin 's sake , Rick , for our cousin 's sake - that we make no more 
 such mistake . therefore , in the matter of the law , we will have a 
 good trial before we decide . we will look before we leap , and take 
 plenty of time about it . " 
 Richard 's energy be of such an impatient and fitful kind that he 
 would have like nothing well than to have go to Mr. Kenge 's 
 office in that hour and to have enter into article with he on 
 the spot . submit , however , with a good grace to the caution 
 that we have show to be so necessary , he content himself with 
 sit down among we in his light spirit and talk as if his 
 one unvarying purpose in life from childhood have be that one 
 which now hold possession of he . my guardian be very kind and 
 cordial with he , but rather grave , enough so to cause Ada , when he 
 have depart and we be go upstairs to bed , to say , " Cousin 
 John , I hope you do not   think the bad of Richard ? " 
 " no , my love , " say he . 
 " because it be very natural that Richard should be mistake in 
 such a difficult case . it be not uncommon . " 
 " no , no , my love , " say he . " do not   look unhappy . " 
 " oh , I be not unhappy , cousin John ! " say Ada , smile cheerfully , 
 with her hand upon his shoulder , where she have put it in bid 
 he good night . " but I should be a little so if you think at all 
 the bad of Richard . " 
 " my dear , " say Mr. Jarndyce , " I should think the bad of he only 
 if you be ever in the least unhappy through his mean . I should 
 be more disposed to quarrel with myself even then , than with poor 
 Rick , for I bring you together . but , tut , all this be nothing ! 
 he have time before he , and the race to run . I think the bad of 
 he ? not I , my love cousin ! and not you , I swear ! " 
 " no , indeed , cousin John , " say Ada , " I be sure I could not - I be 
 sure I would not - think any ill of Richard if the whole world do . 
 I could , and I would , think well of he then than at any other 
 time ! " 
 so quietly and honestly she say it , with her hand upon his 
 shoulder - both hand now - and look up into his face , like the 
 picture of truth ! 
 " I think , " say my guardian , thoughtfully regard she , " I think 
 it must be somewhere write that the virtue of the mother shall 
 occasionally be visit on the child , as well as the sin of the 
 father . good night , my rosebud . good night , little woman . 
 pleasant slumber ! happy dream ! " 
 this be the first time I ever see he follow Ada with his eye 
 with something of a shadow on their benevolent expression . I well 
 remember the look with which he have contemplate she and Richard 
 when she be sing in the firelight ; it be but a very little 
 while since he have watch they pass down the room in which the 
 sun be shin , and away into the shade ; but his glance be 
 change , and even the silent look of confidence in I which now 
 follow it once more be not quite so hopeful and untroubled as it 
 have originally be . 
 Ada praise Richard more to I that night than ever she have praise 
 he yet . she go to sleep with a little bracelet he have give she 
 clasped upon her arm . I fancy she be dream of he when I 
 kiss her cheek after she have sleep an hour and see how tranquil 
 and happy she look . 
 for I be so little inclined to sleep myself that night that I sit 
 up work . it would not be worth mention for its own sake , but 
 I be wakeful and rather low - spirited . I do not   know why . at least 
 I do not   think I know why . at least , perhaps I do , but I do not 
 think it matter . 
 at any rate , I make up my mind to be so dreadfully industrious that 
 I would leave myself not a moment 's leisure to be low - spirited . 
 for I naturally say , " Esther ! you to be low - spirited . you ! " and 
 it really be time to say so , for I - yes , I really do see myself 
 in the glass , almost cry . " as if you have anything to make you 
 unhappy , instead of everything to make you happy , you ungrateful 
 heart ! " say I. 
 if I could have make myself go to sleep , I would have do it 
 directly , but not be able to do that , I take out of my basket 
 some ornamental work for our house   I mean Bleak House   that I be 
 busy with at that time and sit down to it with great determination . 
 it be necessary to count all the stitch in that work , and I 
 resolve to go on with it until I could not   keep my eye open , and 
 then to go to bed . 
 I soon find myself very busy . but I have leave some silk downstair 
 in a work - table drawer in the temporary growlery , and come to a 
 stop for want of it , I take my candle and go softly down to get 
 it . to my great surprise , on go in I find my guardian still 
 there , and sit look at the ash . he be lose in thought , 
 his book lie unheeded by his side , his silver iron - grey hair be 
 scatter confusedly upon his forehead as though his hand have be 
 wander among it while his thought be elsewhere , and his face 
 look worn . almost frighten by come upon he so unexpectedly , 
 I stand still for a moment and should have retire without speak 
 have he not , in again pass his hand abstractedly through his 
 hair , see I and start . 
 " Esther ! " 
 I tell he what I have come for . 
 " at work so late , my dear ? " 
 " I be work late to - night , " say I , " because I could not   sleep and 
 wish to tire myself . but , dear guardian , you be late too , and 
 look weary . you have no trouble , I hope , to keep you wake ? " 
 " none , little woman , that you would readily understand , " say he . 
 he speak in a regretful tone so new to I that I inwardly repeat , 
 as if that would help I to his meaning , " that I could readily 
 understand ! " 
 " remain a moment , Esther , " say he , " you be in my thought . " 
 " I hope I be not the trouble , guardian ? " 
 he slightly wave his hand and fall into his usual manner . the 
 change be so remarkable , and he appear to make it by dint of so 
 much self - command , that I find myself again inwardly repeat , 
 " none that I could understand ! " 
 " little woman , " say my guardian , " I be think - that be , I have 
 be think since I have be sit here - that you ought to 
 know of your own history all I know . it be very little . next to 
 nothing . " 
 " dear guardian , " I reply , " when you speak to I before on that 
 subject - " 
 " but since then , " he gravely interpose , anticipate what I mean 
 to say , " I have reflect that your have anything to ask I , and 
 my have anything to tell you , be different consideration , 
 Esther . it be perhaps my duty to impart to you the little I know . " 
 " if you think so , guardian , it be right . " 
 " I think so , " he return very gently , and kindly , and very 
 distinctly . " my dear , I think so now . if any real disadvantage 
 can attach to your position in the mind of any man or woman worth a 
 thought , it be right that you at least of all the world should not 
 magnify it to yourself by have vague impression of its nature . " 
 I sit down and say after a little effort to be as calm as I ought 
 to be , " one of my early remembrance , guardian , be of these 
 word : ' your mother , Esther , be your disgrace , and you be her . 
 the time will come , and soon enough , when you will understand this 
 well , and will feel it too , as no one save a woman can . ' " I have 
 cover my face with my hand in repeat the word , but I take 
 they away now with a well kind of shame , I hope , and tell he 
 that to he I owe the blessing that I have from my childhood to 
 that hour never , never , never feel it . he put up his hand as if to 
 stop I . I well know that he be never to be thank , and say no 
 more . 
 " nine year , my dear , " he say after think for a little while , 
 " have pass since I receive a letter from a lady live in 
 seclusion , write with a stern passion and power that render it 
 unlike all other letter I have ever read . it be write to I 
  as it tell I in so many word , perhaps because it be the 
 writer 's idiosyncrasy to put that trust in I , perhaps because it 
 be mine to justify it . it tell I of a child , an orphan girl then 
 twelve year old , in some such cruel word as those which live in 
 your remembrance . it tell I that the writer have breed she in 
 secrecy from her birth , have blot out all trace of her existence , 
 and that if the writer be to die before the child become a woman , 
 she would be leave entirely friendless , nameless , and unknown . it 
 ask I to consider if I would , in that case , finish what the 
 writer have begin . " 
 I listen in silence and look attentively at he . 
 " your early recollection , my dear , will supply the gloomy medium 
 through which all this be see and express by the writer , and 
 the distorted religion which cloud her mind with impression of 
 the need there be for the child to expiate an offence of which she 
 be quite innocent . I feel concerned for the little creature , in 
 her darken life , and reply to the letter . " 
 I take his hand and kiss it . 
 " it lay the injunction on I that I should never propose to see 
 the writer , who have long be estrange from all intercourse with 
 the world , but who would see a confidential agent if I would 
 appoint one . I accredit Mr. Kenge . the lady say , of her own 
 accord and not of his seeking , that her name be an assumed one . 
 that she be , if there be any tie of blood in such a case , the 
 child 's aunt . that more than this she would never   and he be well 
 persuade of the steadfastness of her resolution   for any human 
 consideration disclose . my dear , I have tell you all . " 
 I hold his hand for a little while in mine . 
 " I see my ward oftener than she see I , " he add , cheerily make 
 light of it , " and I always know she be beloved , useful , and happy . 
 she repay I twenty - thousandfold , and twenty more to that , every 
 hour in every day ! " 
 " and oftener still , " say I , ' she bless the guardian who be a 
 father to she ! " 
 at the word father , I see his former trouble come into his face . 
 he subdue it as before , and it be go in an instant ; but it have 
 be there and it have come so swiftly upon my word that I feel as 
 if they have give he a shock . I again inwardly repeat , 
 wonder , " that I could readily understand . none that I could 
 readily understand ! " no , it be true . I do not understand it . 
 not for many and many a day . 
 " take a fatherly good night , my dear , " say he , kiss I on the 
 forehead , " and so to rest . these be late hour for work and 
 thinking . you do that for all of we , all day long , little 
 housekeeper ! " 
 I neither work nor think any more that night . I open my 
 grateful heart to heaven in thankfulness for its providence to I 
 and its care of I , and fall asleep . 
 we have a visitor next day . Mr. Allan Woodcourt come . he come to 
 take leave of we ; he have settle to do so beforehand . he be go 
 to China and to India as a surgeon on board ship . he be to be 
 away a long , long time . 
 I believe - at least I know - that he be not rich . all his widow 
 mother could spare have be spend in qualify he for his 
 profession . it be not lucrative to a young practitioner , with 
 very little influence in London ; and although he be , night and 
 day , at the service of number of poor people and do wonder of 
 gentleness and skill for they , he gain very little by it in 
 money . he be seven year old than I. not that I need mention 
 it , for it hardly seem to belong to anything . 
 I think - I mean , he tell we - that he have be in practice three or 
 four year and that if he could have hop to contend through three 
 or four more , he would not have make the voyage on which he be 
 bind . but he have no fortune or private mean , and so he be go 
 away . he have be to see we several time altogether . we think 
 it a pity he should go away . because he be distinguish in his 
 art among those who know it well , and some of the great man 
 belong to it have a high opinion of he . 
 when he come to bid we good - bye , he bring his mother with he for 
 the first time . she be a pretty old lady , with bright black eye , 
 but she seem proud . she come from Wales and have have , a long time 
 ago , an eminent person for an ancestor , of the name of Morgan ap- 
 Kerrig - of some place that sound like Gimlet - who be the most 
 illustrious person that ever be know and all of whose relation 
 be a sort of royal family . he appear to have pass his life 
 in always get up into mountain and fight somebody ; and a 
 bard whose name sound like Crumlinwallinwer have sing his praise 
 in a piece which be call , as nearly as I could catch it , 
 Mewlinnwillinwodd . 
 Mrs. Woodcourt , after expatiate to we on the fame of her great 
 kinsman , say that no doubt wherever her son Allan go he would 
 remember his pedigree and would on no account form an alliance 
 below it . she tell he that there be many handsome english 
 lady in India who go out on speculation , and that there be 
 some to be pick up with property , but that neither charm nor 
 wealth would suffice for the descendant from such a line without 
 birth , which must ever be the first consideration . she talk so 
 much about birth that for a moment I half fancy , and with pain - 
 but what an idle fancy to suppose that she could think or care what 
 mine be ! 
 Mr. Woodcourt seem a little distressed by her prolixity , but he 
 be too considerate to let she see it and contrive delicately to 
 bring the conversation round to make his acknowledgment to my 
 guardian for his hospitality and for the very happy hour - he 
 call they the very happy hour - he have pass with we . the 
 recollection of they , he say , would go with he wherever he go 
 and would be always treasure . and so we give he our hand , one 
 after another - at least , they do - and I do ; and so he put his 
 lip to Ada 's hand - and to mine ; and so he go away upon his long , 
 long voyage ! 
 I be very busy indeed all day and write direction home to the 
 servant , and write note for my guardian , and dust his book and 
 paper , and jingle my housekeeping key a good deal , one way and 
 another . I be still busy between the light , singing and working 
 by the window , when who should come in but Caddy , whom I have no 
 expectation of see ! 
 " why , Caddy , my dear , " say I , " what beautiful flower ! " 
 she have such an exquisite little nosegay in her hand . 
 " indeed , I think so , Esther , " reply Caddy . " they be the 
 lovely I ever see . " 
 " Prince , my dear ? " say I in a whisper . 
 " no , " answer Caddy , shake her head and hold they to I to 
 smell . " not Prince . " 
 " well , to be sure , Caddy ! " say I. " you must have two lover ! " 
 " what ? do they look like that sort of thing ? " say Caddy . 
 " do they look like that sort of thing ? " I repeat , pinch she 
 cheek . 
 Caddy only laugh in return , and tell I that she have come for 
 half an hour , at the expiration of which time Prince would be 
 wait for she at the corner , sit chat with I and Ada in the 
 window , every now and then hand I the flower again or try 
 how they look against my hair . at last , when she be go , she 
 take I into my room and put they in my dress . 
 " for I ? " say I , surprised . 
 " for you , " say Caddy with a kiss . " they be leave behind by 
 somebody . " 
 " leave behind ? " 
 " at poor Miss Flite 's , " say Caddy . " somebody who have be very 
 good to she be hurry away an hour ago to join a ship and leave 
 these flower behind . no , no ! do not   take they out . let the 
 pretty little thing lie here , " say Caddy , adjust they with a 
 careful hand , " because I be present myself , and I should not   wonder 
 if somebody leave they on purpose ! " 
 " do they look like that sort of thing ? " say Ada , come laughingly 
 behind I and clasp I merrily round the waist . " oh , yes , 
 indeed they do , Dame Durden ! they look very , very like that sort 
 of thing . oh , very like it indeed , my dear ! " 
 CHAPTER xviii 
 Lady Dedlock 
 it be not so easy as it have appear at first to arrange for 
 Richard 's make a trial of Mr. Kenge 's office . Richard himself 
 be the chief impediment . as soon as he have it in his power to 
 leave Mr. Badger at any moment , he begin to doubt whether he want 
 to leave he at all . he do not   know , he say , really . it be not   a 
 bad profession ; he could not   assert that he dislike it ; perhaps he 
 like it as well as he like any other - suppose he give it one more 
 chance ! upon that , he shut himself up for a few week with some 
 book and some bone and seem to acquire a considerable fund of 
 information with great rapidity . his fervour , after last about 
 a month , begin to cool , and when it be quite cool , begin to grow 
 warm again . his vacillation between law and medicine last so 
 long that midsummer arrive before he finally separate from Mr. 
 Badger and enter on an experimental course of Messrs. Kenge and 
 Carboy . for all his waywardness , he take great credit to himself 
 as be determined to be in earnest " this time . " and he be so 
 good - natured throughout , and in such high spirit , and so fond of 
 Ada , that it be very difficult indeed to be otherwise than please 
 with he . 
 " as to Mr. Jarndyce , " who , I may mention , find the wind much 
 give , during this period , to stick in the east ; " as to Mr. 
 Jarndyce , " Richard would say to I , " he be the fine fellow in the 
 world , Esther ! I must be particularly careful , if it be only for 
 his satisfaction , to take myself well to task and have a regular 
 wind - up of this business now . " 
 the idea of his take himself well to task , with that laugh 
 face and heedless manner and with a fancy that everything could 
 catch and nothing could hold , be ludicrously anomalous . however , 
 he tell we between - while that he be do it to such an extent 
 that he wonder his hair do not   turn grey . his regular wind - up of 
 the business be   as I have say   that he go to Mr. Kenge 's about 
 midsummer to try how he like it . 
 all this time he be , in money affair , what I have describe he 
 in a former illustration - generous , profuse , wildly careless , but 
 fully persuade that he be rather calculate and prudent . I 
 happen to say to Ada , in his presence , half jestingly , half 
 seriously , about the time of his go to Mr. Kenge 's , that he 
 need to have Fortunatus ' purse , he make so light of money , which 
 he answer in this way , " my jewel of a dear cousin , you hear this 
 old woman ! why do she say that ? because I give eight pound odd 
  or whatever it be   for a certain neat waistcoat and button a few 
 day ago . now , if I have stay at Badger 's I should have be 
 oblige to spend twelve pound at a blow for some heart - break 
 lecture - fee . so I make four pound - in a lump - by the 
 transaction ! " 
 it be a question much discuss between he and my guardian what 
 arrangement should be make for his live in London while he 
 experiment on the law , for we have long since go back to Bleak 
 House , and it be too far off to admit of his come there oftener 
 than once a week . my guardian tell I that if Richard be to 
 settle down at Mr. Kenge 's he would take some apartment or 
 chamber where we too could occasionally stay for a few day at a 
 time ; " but , little woman , " he add , rub his head very 
 significantly , " he have not   settle down there yet ! " the discussion 
 end in our hiring for he , by the month , a neat little furnished 
 lodge in a quiet old house near Queen Square . he immediately 
 begin to spend all the money he have in buy the oddest little 
 ornament and luxury for this lodging ; and so often as Ada and I 
 dissuade he from make any purchase that he have in contemplation 
 which be particularly unnecessary and expensive , he take credit 
 for what it would have cost and make out that to spend anything 
 less on something else be to save the difference . 
 while these affair be in abeyance , our visit to Mr. Boythorn 's 
 be postpone . at length , Richard have take possession of his 
 lodging , there be nothing to prevent our departure . he could have 
 go with we at that time of the year very well , but he be in the 
 full novelty of his new position and be make most energetic 
 attempt to unravel the mystery of the fatal suit . consequently 
 we go without he , and my darling be delighted to praise he for 
 be so busy . 
 we make a pleasant journey down into Lincolnshire by the coach and 
 have an entertaining companion in Mr. Skimpole . his furniture have 
 be all clear off , it appear , by the person who take 
 possession of it on his blue - eyed daughter 's birthday , but he 
 seem quite relieved to think that it be go . chair and table , 
 he say , be wearisome object ; they be monotonous idea , they 
 have no variety of expression , they look you out of countenance , 
 and you look they out of countenance . how pleasant , then , to be 
 bind to no particular chair and table , but to sport like a 
 butterfly among all the furniture on hire , and to flit from 
 rosewood to mahogany , and from mahogany to walnut , and from this 
 shape to that , as the humour take one ! 
 " the oddity of the thing be , " say Mr. Skimpole with a quicken 
 sense of the ludicrous , " that my chair and table be not pay 
 for , and yet my landlord walk off with they as composedly as 
 possible . now , that seem droll ! there be something grotesque in 
 it . the chair and table merchant never engage to pay my landlord 
 my rent . why should my landlord quarrel with HIM ? if I have a 
 pimple on my nose which be disagreeable to my landlord 's peculiar 
 idea of beauty , my landlord have no business to scratch my chair 
 and table merchant 's nose , which have no pimple on it . his 
 reasoning seem defective ! " 
 " well , " say my guardian good - humouredly , " it be pretty clear that 
 whoever become security for those chair and table will have to 
 pay for they . " 
 " exactly ! " return Mr. Skimpole . " that be the crowning point of 
 unreason in the business ! I say to my landlord , ' my good man , you 
 be not aware that my excellent friend Jarndyce will have to pay 
 for those thing that you be sweep off in that indelicate 
 manner . have you no consideration for his property ? ' he have not   the 
 least . " 
 " and refuse all proposal , " say my guardian . 
 " refuse all proposal , " return Mr. Skimpole . " I make he 
 business proposal . I have he into my room . I say , ' you be a 
 man of business , I believe ? ' he reply , ' I be , ' ' very well , ' 
 say I , ' now let we be business - like . here be an inkstand , here 
 be pen and paper , here be wafer . what do you want ? I have 
 occupy your house for a considerable period , I believe to our 
 mutual satisfaction until this unpleasant misunderstanding arise ; 
 let we be at once friendly and business - like . what do you want ? ' 
 in reply to this , he make use of the figurative expression - which 
 have something Eastern about it - that he have never see the colour 
 of my money . ' my amiable friend , ' say I , ' I never have any money . 
 I never know anything about money . ' ' well , sir , ' say he , ' what do 
 you offer if I give you time ? ' ' my good fellow , ' say I , ' I have 
 no idea of time ; but you say you be a man of business , and 
 whatever you can suggest to be do in a business - like way with 
 pen , and ink , and paper - and wafer - I be ready to do . do not   pay 
 yourself at another man 's expense   which be foolish , but be 
 business - like ! ' however , he would not   be , and there be an end of 
 it . " 
 if these be some of the inconvenience of Mr. Skimpole 's 
 childhood , it assuredly possess its advantage too . on the 
 journey he have a very good appetite for such refreshment as come in 
 our way   include a basket of choice hothouse peach , but never 
 think of pay for anything . so when the coachman come round 
 for his fee , he pleasantly ask he what he consider a very good 
 fee indeed , now - a liberal one - and on his reply half a crown 
 for a single passenger , say it be little enough too , all thing 
 consider , and leave Mr. Jarndyce to give it he . 
 it be delightful weather . the green corn wave so beautifully , 
 the lark sing so joyfully , the hedge be so full of wild 
 flower , the tree be so thickly out in leaf , the bean - field , 
 with a light wind blow over they , fill the air with such a 
 delicious fragrance ! late in the afternoon we come to the market- 
 town where we be to alight from the coach - a dull little town 
 with a church - spire , and a marketplace , and a market - cross , and one 
 intensely sunny street , and a pond with an old horse cool his 
 leg in it , and a very few man sleepily lie and stand about in 
 narrow little bit of shade . after the rustling of the leaf and 
 the waving of the corn all along the road , it look as still , as 
 hot , as motionless a little town as England could produce . 
 at the inn we find Mr. Boythorn on horseback , wait with an open 
 carriage to take we to his house , which be a few mile off . he 
 be overjoy to see we and dismount with great alacrity . 
 " by heaven ! " say he after give we a courteous greeting . this a 
 most infamous coach . it be the most flagrant example of an 
 abominable public vehicle that ever encumber the face of the 
 earth . it be twenty - five minute after its time this afternoon . 
 the coachman ought to be put to death ! " 
 " be he after his time ? " say Mr. Skimpole , to whom he happen to 
 address himself . " you know my infirmity . " 
 " twenty - five minute ! twenty - six minute ! " reply Mr. Boythorn , 
 refer to his watch . " with two lady in the coach , this 
 scoundrel have deliberately delay his arrival six and twenty 
 minute . deliberately ! it be impossible that it can be 
 accidental ! but his father - and his uncle - be the most 
 profligate coachman that ever sit upon a box . " 
 while he say this in tone of the great indignation , he hand 
 we into the little phaeton with the utmost gentleness and be all 
 smile and pleasure . 
 " I be sorry , lady , " he say , stand bare - headed at the 
 carriage - door when all be ready , " that I be oblige to conduct you 
 nearly two mile out of the way . but our direct road lie through 
 Sir Leicester Dedlock 's park , and in that fellow 's property I have 
 swear never to set foot of mine , or horse 's foot of mine , pende 
 the present relation between we , while I breathe the breath of 
 life ! " and here , catch my guardian 's eye , he break into one of 
 his tremendous laugh , which seem to shake even the motionless 
 little market - town . 
 " be the dedlock down here , Lawrence ? " say my guardian as we 
 drive along and Mr. Boythorn trot on the green turf by the 
 roadside . 
 " Sir Arrogant Numskull be here , " reply Mr. Boythorn . " ha ha ha ! 
 Sir Arrogant be here , and I be glad to say , have be lay by the 
 heel here . my Lady , " in name whom he always make a courtly 
 gesture as if particularly to exclude she from any part in the 
 quarrel , " be expect , I believe , daily . I be not in the least 
 surprised that she postpone her appearance as long as possible . 
 whatever can have induce that transcendent woman to marry that 
 effigy and figure - head of a baronet be one of the most impenetrable 
 mystery that ever baffle human inquiry . ha ha ha ha ! " 
 " I suppose , " say my guardian , laugh , " we may set foot in the 
 park while we be here ? the prohibition do not extend to we , 
 do it ? " 
 " I can lay no prohibition on my guest , " he say , bend his head 
 to Ada and I with the smile politeness which sit so gracefully 
 upon he , " except in the matter of their departure . I be only 
 sorry that I can not have the happiness of be their escort about 
 Chesney Wold , which be a very fine place ! but by the light of this 
 summer day , Jarndyce , if you call upon the owner while you stay 
 with I , you be likely to have but a cool reception . he carry 
 himself like an eight - day clock at all time , like one of a race of 
 eight - day clock in gorgeous case that never go and never go - ha 
 ha ha ! - but he will have some extra stiffness , I can promise you , 
 for the friend of his friend and neighbour Boythorn ! " 
 " I shall not put he to the proof , " say my guardian . " he be as 
 indifferent to the honour of know I , I dare say , as I be to the 
 honour of know he . the air of the ground and perhaps such a 
 view of the house as any other sightseer might get be quite enough 
 for I . " 
 " well ! " say Mr. Boythorn . " I be glad of it on the whole . it be in 
 well keeping . I be look upon about here as a second ajax 
 defy the lightning . ha ha ha ha ! when I go into our little 
 church on a Sunday , a considerable part of the inconsiderable 
 congregation expect to see I drop , scorch and wither , on the 
 pavement under the Dedlock displeasure . ha ha ha ha ! I have no 
 doubt he be surprised that I do not . for he be , by heaven , the most 
 self - satisfied , and the shallow , and the most coxcombical and 
 utterly brainless ass ! " 
 our come to the ridge of a hill we have be ascend enable our 
 friend to point out Chesney Wold itself to we and divert his 
 attention from its master . 
 it be a picturesque old house in a fine park richly woode . among 
 the tree and not far from the residence he point out the spire 
 of the little church of which he have speak . oh , the solemn wood 
 over which the light and shadow travel swiftly , as if heavenly 
 wing be sweep on benignant errand through the summer air ; 
 the smooth green slope , the glitter water , the garden where the 
 flower be so symmetrically arrange in cluster of the rich 
 colour , how beautiful they look ! the house , with gable and 
 chimney , and tower , and turret , and dark doorway , and broad 
 terrace - walk , twin among the balustrade of which , and lie 
 heap upon the vas , there be one great flush of rose , seem 
 scarcely real in its light solidity and in the serene and peaceful 
 hush that rest on all around it . to Ada and to I , that above 
 all appear the pervade influence . on everything , house , 
 garden , terrace , green slope , water , old oak , fern , moss , wood 
 again , and far away across the opening in the prospect to the 
 distance lie wide before we with a purple bloom upon it , there 
 seem to be such undisturbed repose . 
 when we come into the little village and pass a small inn with 
 the sign of the Dedlock Arms swing over the road in front , Mr. 
 Boythorn interchanged greeting with a young gentleman sit on a 
 bench outside the inn - door who have some fishing - tackle lie beside 
 he . 
 " that be the housekeeper 's grandson , Mr. Rouncewell by name , " say , 
 he , " and he be in love with a pretty girl up at the house . Lady 
 Dedlock have take a fancy to the pretty girl and be go to keep 
 she about her own fair person - an honour which my young friend 
 himself do not at all appreciate . however , he can not   marry just 
 yet , even if his Rosebud be willing ; so he be fain to make the 
 good of it . in the meanwhile , he come here pretty often for a day 
 or two at a time to - fish . ha ha ha ha ! " 
 " be he and the pretty girl engage , Mr. Boythorn ? " ask Ada . 
 " why , my dear Miss Clare , " he return , " I think they may perhaps 
 understand each other ; but you will see they soon , I dare say , and 
 I must learn from you on such a point - not you from I . " 
 Ada blush , and Mr. Boythorn , trot forward on his comely grey 
 horse , dismount at his own door and stand ready with extended arm 
 and uncovered head to welcome we when we arrive . 
 he live in a pretty house , formerly the parsonage house , with a 
 lawn in front , a bright flower - garden at the side , and a well- 
 stock orchard and kitchen - garden in the rear , enclose with a 
 venerable wall that have of itself a ripened ruddy look . but , 
 indeed , everything about the place wear an aspect of maturity and 
 abundance . the old lime - tree walk be like green cloister , the 
 very shadow of the cherry - tree and apple - tree be heavy with 
 fruit , the gooseberry - bush be so laden that their branch 
 arch and rest on the earth , the strawberry and raspberry 
 grow in like profusion , and the peach bask by the hundred on 
 the wall . tumble about among the spread net and the glass frame 
 sparkle and wink in the sun there be such heap of droop 
 pod , and marrow , and cucumber , that every foot of ground 
 appear a vegetable treasury , while the smell of sweet herb and 
 all kind of wholesome growth   to say nothing of the neighbouring 
 meadow where the hay be carry   make the whole air a great 
 nosegay . such stillness and composure reign within the orderly 
 precinct of the old red wall that even the feather hang in 
 garland to scare the bird hardly stir ; and the wall have such a 
 ripen influence that where , here and there high up , a disuse 
 nail and scrap of list still clung to it , it be easy to fancy that 
 they have mellow with the change season and that they have 
 rust and decay accord to the common fate . 
 the house , though a little disorderly in comparison with the 
 garden , be a real old house with settle in the chimney of the 
 brick - floor kitchen and great beam across the ceiling . on one 
 side of it be the terrible piece of ground in dispute , where Mr. 
 Boythorn maintain a sentry in a smock - frock day and night , whose 
 duty be suppose to be , in case of aggression , immediately to 
 ring a large bell hang up there for the purpose , to unchain a great 
 bull - dog establish in a kennel as his ally , and generally to deal 
 destruction on the enemy . not content with these precaution , Mr. 
 Boythorn have himself compose and post there , on paint board 
 to which his name be attach in large letter , the follow 
 solemn warning : " beware of the bull - dog . he be most ferocious . 
 Lawrence Boythorn . " " the blunderbus be load with slug . 
 Lawrence Boythorn . " " man - trap and spring - gun be set here at all 
 time of the day and night . Lawrence Boythorn . " " take notice . 
 that any person or person audaciously presume to trespass on 
 this property will be punish with the utmost severity of private 
 chastisement and prosecute with the utmost rigour of the law . 
 Lawrence Boythorn . " these he show we from the drawing - room 
 window , while his bird be hop about his head , and he laugh , 
 " ha ha ha ha ! ha ha ha ha ! " to that extent as he point they out 
 that I really think he would have hurt himself . 
 " but this be take a good deal of trouble , " say Mr. Skimpole in 
 his light way , " when you be not in earnest after all . " 
 " not in earnest ! " return Mr. Boythorn with unspeakable warmth . 
 " not in earnest ! if I could have hop to train he , I would have 
 buy a lion instead of that dog and would have turn he loose 
 upon the first intolerable robber who should dare to make an 
 encroachment on my right . let Sir Leicester Dedlock consent to 
 come out and decide this question by single combat , and I will meet 
 he with any weapon know to mankind in any age or country . I be 
 that much in earnest . not more ! " 
 we arrive at his house on a Saturday . on the Sunday morning we 
 all set forth to walk to the little church in the park . enter 
 the park , almost immediately by the dispute ground , we pursue a 
 pleasant footpath wind among the verdant turf and the beautiful 
 tree until it bring we to the church - porch . 
 the congregation be extremely small and quite a rustic one with 
 the exception of a large muster of servant from the house , some of 
 whom be already in their seat , while other be yet drop 
 in . there be some stately footman , and there be a perfect 
 picture of an old coachman , who look as if he be the official 
 representative of all the pomp and vanity that have ever be put 
 into his coach . there be a very pretty show of young woman , and 
 above they , the handsome old face and fine responsible portly 
 figure of the housekeeper tower pre - eminent . the pretty girl of 
 whom Mr. Boythorn have tell we be close by she . she be so very 
 pretty that I might have know she by her beauty even if I have not 
 see how blushingly conscious she be of the eye of the young 
 fisherman , whom I discover not far off . one face , and not an 
 agreeable one , though it be handsome , seem maliciously watchful 
 of this pretty girl , and indeed of every one and everything there . 
 it be a Frenchwoman 's . 
 as the bell be yet ring and the great people be not yet come , 
 I have leisure to glance over the church , which smell as earthy as a 
 grave , and to think what a shady , ancient , solemn little church it 
 be . the window , heavily shade by tree , admit a subdued 
 light that make the face around I pale , and darken the old 
 brass in the pavement and the time and damp - wear monument , and 
 render the sunshine in the little porch , where a monotonous 
 ringer be work at the bell , inestimably bright . but a stir in 
 that direction , a gathering of reverential awe in the rustic face , 
 and a blandly ferocious assumption on the part of Mr. Boythorn of 
 be resolutely unconscious of somebody 's existence forewarn I 
 that the great people be come and that the service be go to 
 begin . 
 " ' enter not into judgment with thy servant , o Lord , for in thy 
 sight - ' " 
 shall I ever forget the rapid beating at my heart , occasion by 
 the look I meet as I stand up ! shall I ever forget the manner in 
 which those handsome proud eye seem to spring out of their 
 languor and to hold mine ! it be only a moment before I cast mine 
 down - release again , if I may say so - on my book ; but I know the 
 beautiful face quite well in that short space of time . 
 and , very strangely , there be something quicken within I , 
 associate with the lonely day at my godmother 's ; yes , away even 
 to the day when I have stand on tiptoe to dress myself at my little 
 glass after dress my doll . and this , although I have never see 
 this lady 's face before in all my life - I be quite sure of it - 
 absolutely certain . 
 it be easy to know that the ceremonious , gouty , grey - haire 
 gentleman , the only other occupant of the great pew , be Sir 
 Leicester Dedlock , and that the lady be Lady Dedlock . but why she 
 face should be , in a confused way , like a broken glass to I , in 
 which I see scrap of old remembrance , and why I should be so 
 flutter and trouble   for I be still   by have casually meet her 
 eye , I could not think . 
 I feel it to be an unmeaning weakness in I and try to overcome 
 it by attend to the word I hear . then , very strangely , I 
 seem to hear they , not in the reader 's voice , but in the well- 
 remember voice of my godmother . this make I think , do Lady 
 Dedlock 's face accidentally resemble my godmother 's ? it might be 
 that it do , a little ; but the expression be so different , and the 
 stern decision which have wear into my godmother 's face , like 
 weather into rock , be so completely want in the face before I 
 that it could not be that resemblance which have strike I . neither 
 do I know the loftiness and haughtiness of Lady Dedlock 's face , at 
 all , in any one . and yet I - I , little Esther Summerson , the child 
 who live a life apart and on whose birthday there be no 
 rejoicing - seem to arise before my own eye , evoke out of the 
 past by some power in this fashionable lady , whom I not only 
 entertain no fancy that I have ever see , but whom I perfectly 
 well know I have never see until that hour . 
 it make I tremble so to be throw into this unaccountable 
 agitation that I be conscious of be distress even by the 
 observation of the french maid , though I know she have be look 
 watchfully here , and there , and everywhere , from the moment of she 
 come into the church . by degree , though very slowly , I at last 
 overcome my strange emotion . after a long time , I look towards 
 Lady Dedlock again . it be while they be prepare to sing , 
 before the sermon . she take no heed of I , and the beating at my 
 heart be go . neither do it revive for more than a few moment 
 when she once or twice afterwards glance at Ada or at I through 
 her glass . 
 the service be conclude , Sir Leicester give his arm with much 
 taste and gallantry to Lady Dedlock - though he be oblige to walk 
 by the help of a thick stick - and escort she out of church to the 
 pony carriage in which they have come . the servant then disperse , 
 and so do the congregation , whom Sir Leicester have contemplate 
 all along   Mr. Skimpole say to Mr. Boythorn 's infinite delight   as 
 if he be a considerable land proprietor in heaven . 
 " he believe he be ! " say Mr. Boythorn . " he firmly believe it . 
 so do his father , and his grandfather , and his great - grandfather ! " 
 " do you know , " pursue Mr. Skimpole very unexpectedly to Mr. 
 Boythorn , " it be agreeable to I to see a man of that sort . " 
 " be it ! " say Mr. Boythorn . 
 " say that he want to patronize I , " pursue Mr. Skimpole . " very 
 well ! I do not   object . " 
 " I do , " say Mr. Boythorn with great vigour . 
 " do you really ? " return Mr. Skimpole in his easy light vein . 
 " but that be take trouble , surely . and why should you take 
 trouble ? here be I , content to receive thing childishly as they 
 fall out , and I never take trouble ! I come down here , for 
 instance , and I find a mighty potentate exacting homage . very 
 well ! I say ' mighty potentate , here be my homage ! it be easy to 
 give it than to withhold it . here it be . if you have anything of 
 an agreeable nature to show I , I shall be happy to see it ; if you 
 have anything of an agreeable nature to give I , I shall be happy 
 to accept it . ' mighty potentate reply in effect , ' this be a 
 sensible fellow . I find he accord with my digestion and my 
 bilious system . he do not   impose upon I the necessity of roll 
 myself up like a hedgehog with my point outward . I expand , I 
 open , I turn my silver lining outward like Milton 's cloud , and it be 
 more agreeable to both of we . ' that be my view of such thing , 
 speak as a child ! " 
 " but suppose you go down somewhere else to - morrow , " say Mr. 
 Boythorn , " where there be the opposite of that fellow - or of this 
 fellow . how then ? " 
 " how then ? " say Mr. Skimpole with an appearance of the utmost 
 simplicity and candour . " just the same then ! I should say , ' my 
 esteemed Boythorn ' - to make you the personification of our 
 imaginary friend - ' my esteemed Boythorn , you object to the mighty 
 potentate ? very good . so do I. I take it that my business in the 
 social system be to be agreeable ; I take it that everybody 's 
 business in the social system be to be agreeable . it be a system of 
 harmony , in short . therefore if you object , I object . now , 
 excellent Boythorn , let we go to dinner ! ' " 
 " but excellent Boythorn might say , " return our host , swell and 
 grow very red , " I will be - " 
 " I understand , " say Mr. Skimpole . " very likely he would . " 
 " - if I will go to dinner ! " cry Mr. Boythorn in a violent burst 
 and stop to strike his stick upon the ground . " and he would 
 probably add , ' be there such a thing as principle , Mr. Harold 
 Skimpole ? ' " 
 " to which Harold Skimpole would reply , you know , " he return in 
 his gay manner and with his most ingenuous smile , " ' upon my life 
 I have not the least idea ! I do not   know what it be you call by 
 that name , or where it be , or who possess it . if you possess it 
 and find it comfortable , I be quite delighted and congratulate you 
 heartily . but I know nothing about it , I assure you ; for I be a 
 mere child , and I lay no claim to it , and I do not   want it ! ' so , 
 you see , excellent Boythorn and I would go to dinner after all ! " 
 this be one of many little dialogue between they which I always 
 expect to end , and which I dare say would have end under other 
 circumstance , in some violent explosion on the part of our host . 
 but he have so high a sense of his hospitable and responsible 
 position as our entertainer , and my guardian laugh so sincerely 
 at and with Mr. Skimpole , as a child who blow bubble and break 
 they all day long , that matter never go beyond this point . Mr. 
 Skimpole , who always seem quite unconscious of have be on 
 delicate ground , then betook himself to begin some sketch in 
 the park which be never finish , or to play fragment of air 
 on the piano , or to sing scrap of song , or to lie down on 
 his back under a tree and look at the sky - which he could not 
 help think , he say , be what he be mean for ; it suit he so 
 exactly . 
 " enterprise and effort , " he would say to we   on his back , " be 
 delightful to I . I believe I be truly cosmopolitan . I have the 
 deep sympathy with they . I lie in a shady place like this and 
 think of adventurous spirit go to the North Pole or penetrate 
 to the heart of the Torrid Zone with admiration . mercenary 
 creature ask , ' what be the use of a man 's go to the North Pole ? 
 what good do it do ? ' I can not   say ; but , for anything I can say , 
 he may go for the purpose - though he do not   know it - of employ my 
 thought as I lie here . take an extreme case . take the case of 
 the slave on american plantation . I dare say they be work 
 hard , I dare say they do not   altogether like it . I dare say theirs 
 be an unpleasant experience on the whole ; but they people the 
 landscape for I , they give it a poetry for I , and perhaps that be 
 one of the pleasanter object of their existence . I be very 
 sensible of it , if it be , and I should not   wonder if it be ! " 
 I always wonder on these occasion whether he ever think of 
 Mrs. Skimpole and the child , and in what point of view they 
 present themselves to his cosmopolitan mind . so far as I could 
 understand , they rarely present themselves at all . 
 the week have go round to the Saturday follow that beating of 
 my heart in the church ; and every day have be so bright and blue 
 that to ramble in the wood , and to see the light strike down 
 among the transparent leaf and sparkle in the beautiful 
 interlacing of the shadow of the tree , while the bird pour 
 out their song and the air be drowsy with the hum of insect , have 
 be most delightful . we have one favourite spot , deep in moss and 
 last year 's leaf , where there be some felled tree from which 
 the bark be all strip off . seat among these , we look 
 through a green vista support by thousand of natural column , 
 the whitened stem of tree , upon a distant prospect make so 
 radiant by its contrast with the shade in which we sit and make so 
 precious by the arched perspective through which we see it that it 
 be like a glimpse of the well land . upon the Saturday we sit 
 here , Mr. Jarndyce , Ada , and I , until we hear thunder muttering in 
 the distance and feel the large raindrop rattle through the 
 leaf . 
 the weather have be all the week extremely sultry , but the storm 
 break so suddenly - upon we , at least , in that shelter spot - that 
 before we reach the outskirt of the wood the thunder and 
 lightning be frequent and the rain come plunge through the 
 leaf as if every drop be a great leaden bead . as it be not a 
 time for stand among tree , we run out of the wood , and up and 
 down the moss - grow step which cross the plantation - fence like 
 two broad - stave ladder place back to back , and make for a 
 keeper 's lodge which be close at hand . we have often notice the 
 dark beauty of this lodge stand in a deep twilight of tree , and 
 how the ivy cluster over it , and how there be a steep hollow 
 near , where we have once see the keeper 's dog dive down into the 
 fern as if it be water . 
 the lodge be so dark within , now the sky be overcast , that we 
 only clearly see the man who come to the door when we take shelter 
 there and put two chair for Ada and I . the lattice - window be 
 all throw open , and we sit just within the doorway watch the 
 storm . it be grand to see how the wind awake , and bent the tree , 
 and drive the rain before it like a cloud of smoke ; and to hear the 
 solemn thunder and to see the lightning ; and while think with 
 awe of the tremendous power by which our little life be 
 encompass , to consider how beneficent they be and how upon the 
 small flower and leaf there be already a freshness pour from 
 all this seem rage which seem to make creation new again . 
 " be it not dangerous to sit in so expose a place ? " 
 " oh , no , Esther dear ! " say Ada quietly . 
 Ada say it to I , but I have not speak . 
 the beating of my heart come back again . I have never hear the 
 voice , as I have never see the face , but it affect I in the same 
 strange way . again , in a moment , there arise before my mind 
 innumerable picture of myself . 
 Lady Dedlock have take shelter in the lodge before our arrival 
 there and have come out of the gloom within . she stand behind my 
 chair with her hand upon it . I see she with her hand close to my 
 shoulder when I turn my head . 
 " I have frighten you ? " she say . 
 no . it be not fright . why should I be frightened ! 
 " I believe , " say Lady Dedlock to my guardian , " I have the pleasure 
 of speak to Mr. Jarndyce . " 
 " your remembrance do I more honour than I have suppose it would , 
 Lady Dedlock , " he return . 
 " I recognize you in church on Sunday . I be sorry that any local 
 dispute of Sir Leicester 's - they be not of his seeking , however , 
 I believe - should render it a matter of some absurd difficulty to 
 show you any attention here . " 
 " I be aware of the circumstance , " return my guardian with a 
 smile , " and be sufficiently oblige . " 
 she have give he her hand in an indifferent way that seem 
 habitual to she and speak in a correspondingly indifferent manner , 
 though in a very pleasant voice . she be as graceful as she be 
 beautiful , perfectly self - possess , and have the air , I think , of 
 be able to attract and interest any one if she have think it 
 worth her while . the keeper have bring she a chair on which she 
 sit in the middle of the porch between we . 
 " be the young gentleman dispose of whom you write to Sir Leicester 
 about and whose wish Sir Leicester be sorry not to have it in 
 his power to advance in any way ? " she say over her shoulder to my 
 guardian . 
 " I hope so , " say he . 
 she seem to respect he and even to wish to conciliate he . 
 there be something very win in her haughty manner , and it 
 become more familiar - I be go to say more easy , but that could 
 hardly be - as she speak to he over her shoulder . 
 " I presume this be your other ward , Miss Clare ? " 
 he present Ada , in form . 
 " you will lose the disinterested part of your Don Quixote 
 character , " say Lady Dedlock to Mr. Jarndyce over her shoulder 
 again , " if you only redress the wrong of beauty like this . but 
 present I , " and she turn full upon I , " to this young lady too ! " 
 " Miss Summerson really be my ward , " say Mr. Jarndyce . " I be 
 responsible to no Lord Chancellor in her case . " 
 " have Miss Summerson lose both her parent ? " say my Lady . 
 " yes . " 
 " she be very fortunate in her guardian . " 
 Lady Dedlock look at I , and I look at she and say I be 
 indeed . all at once she turn from I with a hasty air , almost 
 expressive of displeasure or dislike , and speak to he over her 
 shoulder again . 
 " age have pass since we be in the habit of meeting , Mr. 
 Jarndyce . " 
 " a long time . at least I think it be a long time , until I see 
 you last Sunday , " he return . 
 " what ! even you be a courtier , or think it necessary to become 
 one to I ! " she say with some disdain . " I have achieve that 
 reputation , I suppose . " 
 " you have achieve so much , Lady Dedlock , " say my guardian , " that 
 you pay some little penalty , I dare say . but none to I . " 
 " so much ! " she repeat , slightly laugh . " yes ! " 
 with her air of superiority , and power , and fascination , and I know 
 not what , she seem to regard Ada and I as little more than 
 child . so , as she slightly laugh and afterwards sit look 
 at the rain , she be as self - possess and as free to occupy 
 herself with her own thought as if she have be alone . 
 " I think you know my sister when we be abroad together well 
 than you know I ? " she say , look at he again . 
 " yes , we happen to meet oftener , " he return . 
 " we go our several way , " say Lady Dedlock , " and have little in 
 common even before we agree to differ . it be to be regret , I 
 suppose , but it could not be help . " 
 Lady Dedlock again sit look at the rain . the storm soon begin 
 to pass upon its way . the shower greatly abate , the lightning 
 cease , the thunder roll among the distant hill , and the sun 
 begin to glisten on the wet leaf and the fall rain . as we sit 
 there , silently , we see a little pony phaeton come towards we at 
 a merry pace . 
 " the messenger be come back , my Lady , " say the keeper , " with the 
 carriage . " 
 as it drive up , we see that there be two people inside . there 
 alight from it , with some cloak and wrapper , first the 
 Frenchwoman whom I have see in church , and secondly the pretty 
 girl , the Frenchwoman with a defiant confidence , the pretty girl 
 confused and hesitating . 
 " what now ? " say Lady Dedlock . " Two ! " 
 " I be your maid , my Lady , at the present , " say the Frenchwoman . 
 " the message be for the attendant . " 
 " I be afraid you might mean I , my Lady , " say the pretty girl . 
 " I do mean you , child , " reply her mistress calmly . " put that 
 shawl on I . " 
 she slightly stoop her shoulder to receive it , and the pretty 
 girl lightly drop it in its place . the Frenchwoman stand 
 unnoticed , look on with her lip very tightly set . 
 " I be sorry , " say Lady Dedlock to Mr. Jarndyce , " that we be not 
 likely to renew our former acquaintance . you will allow I to send 
 the carriage back for your two ward . it shall be here directly . " 
 but as he would on no account accept this offer , she take a 
 graceful leave of Ada - none of I - and put her hand upon his 
 proffer arm , and get into the carriage , which be a little , low , 
 park carriage with a hood . 
 " come in , child , " she say to the pretty girl ; " I shall want you . 
 go on ! " 
 the carriage roll away , and the Frenchwoman , with the wrapper 
 she have bring hang over her arm , remain stand where she 
 have alight . 
 I suppose there be nothing pride can so little bear with as pride 
 itself , and that she be punish for her imperious manner . her 
 retaliation be the most singular I could have imagine . she 
 remain perfectly still until the carriage have turn into the 
 drive , and then , without the least discomposure of countenance , 
 slip off her shoe , leave they on the ground , and walk 
 deliberately in the same direction through the wet of the wet 
 grass . 
 " be that young woman mad ? " say my guardian . 
 " oh , no , sir ! " say the keeper , who , with his wife , be look 
 after she . " Hortense be not one of that sort . she have as good a 
 head - piece as the good . but she be mortal high and passionate - 
 powerful high and passionate ; and what with have notice to leave , 
 and have other put above she , she do not   take kindly to it . " 
 " but why should she walk shoeless through all that water ? " say my 
 guardian . 
 " why , indeed , sir , unless it be to cool she down ! " say the man . 
 " or unless she fancy it be blood , " say the woman . " she would as soon 
 walk through that as anything else , I think , when her own 's up ! " 
 we pass not far from the house a few minute afterwards . 
 peaceful as it have look when we first see it , it look even more 
 so now , with a diamond spray glitter all about it , a light wind 
 blow , the bird no long hush but sing strongly , 
 everything refresh by the late rain , and the little carriage 
 shin at the doorway like a fairy carriage make of silver . 
 still , very steadfastly and quietly walk towards it , a peaceful 
 figure too in the landscape , go Mademoiselle Hortense , shoeless , 
 through the wet grass . 
 CHAPTER XIX 
 move on 
 it be the long vacation in the region of Chancery Lane . the good 
 ship Law and Equity , those teak - build , copper - bottom , iron- 
 fasten , brazen - face , and not by any mean fast - sail clipper 
 be lay up in ordinary . the Flying Dutchman , with a crew of 
 ghostly client implore all whom they may encounter to peruse 
 their paper , have drift , for the time be , heaven know where . 
 the court be all shut up ; the public office lie in a hot sleep . 
 Westminster Hall itself be a shady solitude where nightingale 
 might sing , and a tenderer class of suitor than be usually find 
 there , walk . 
 the Temple , Chancery Lane , Serjeants ' Inn , and Lincoln 's Inn even 
 unto the Fields be like tidal harbour at low water , where 
 strand proceeding , office at anchor , idle clerk lounge on 
 lop - sided stool that will not recover their perpendicular until 
 the current of Term set in , lie high and dry upon the ooze of the 
 long vacation . outer door of chamber be shut up by the score , 
 message and parcel be to be leave at the Porter 's Lodge by the 
 bushel . a crop of grass would grow in the chink of the stone 
 pavement outside Lincoln 's Inn Hall , but that the ticket - porter , 
 who have nothing to do beyond sit in the shade there , with 
 their white apron over their head to keep the fly off , grub it 
 up and eat it thoughtfully . 
 there be only one judge in town . even he only come twice a week 
 to sit in chamber . if the country folk of those assize town on 
 his circuit could see he now ! no full - bottom wig , no red 
 petticoat , no fur , no javelin - man , no white wand . merely a 
 close - shave gentleman in white trouser and a white hat , with sea- 
 bronze on the judicial countenance , and a strip of bark peel by 
 the solar ray from the judicial nose , who call in at the shell- 
 fish shop as he come along and drink ice ginger - beer ! 
 the bar of England be scatter over the face of the earth . how 
 England can get on through four long summer month without its bar 
  - which be its acknowledge refuge in adversity and its only 
 legitimate triumph in prosperity - be beside the question ; assuredly 
 that shield and buckler of Britannia be not in present wear . the 
 learn gentleman who be always so tremendously indignant at the 
 unprecedented outrage commit on the feeling of his client by 
 the opposite party that he never seem likely to recover it be 
 do infinitely well than might be expect in Switzerland . the 
 learn gentleman who do the wither business and who blight 
 all opponent with his gloomy sarcasm be as merry as a grig at a 
 french watering - place . the learn gentleman who weep by the pint 
 on the small provocation have not shed a tear these six week . 
 the very learn gentleman who have cool the natural heat of his 
 gingery complexion in pool and fountain of law until he have 
 become great in knotty argument for term - time , when he pose the 
 drowsy bench with legal " chaff , " inexplicable to the uninitiated 
 and to most of the initiate too , be roam , with a characteristic 
 delight in aridity and dust , about Constantinople . other disperse 
 fragment of the same great palladium be to be find on the canal 
 of Venice , at the second cataract of the Nile , in the bath of 
 Germany , and sprinkle on the sea - sand all over the english coast . 
 Scarcely one be to be encounter in the deserted region of 
 Chancery Lane . if such a lonely member of the bar do flit across 
 the waste and come upon a prowling suitor who be unable to leave 
 off haunt the scene of his anxiety , they frighten one another 
 and retreat into opposite shade . 
 it be the hot long vacation know for many year . all the 
 young clerk be madly in love , and accord to their various 
 degree , pine for bliss with the beloved object , at Margate , 
 Ramsgate , or gravesend . all the middle - aged clerk think their 
 family too large . all the unowned dog who stray into the Inns 
 of Court and pant about staircase and other dry place seek 
 water give short howl of aggravation . all the blind man 's dog in 
 the street draw their master against pump or trip they over 
 bucket . a shop with a sun - blind , and a water pavement , and a 
 bowl of gold and silver fish in the window , be a sanctuary . Temple 
 bar get so hot that it be , to the adjacent Strand and Fleet 
 Street , what a heater be in an urn , and keep they simmer all 
 night . 
 there be office about the Inns of Court in which a man might be 
 cool , if any coolness be worth purchase at such a price in 
 dullness ; but the little thoroughfare immediately outside those 
 retirement seem to blaze . in Mr. Krook 's court , it be so hot that 
 the people turn their house inside out and sit in chair upon the 
 pavement - Mr. Krook include , who there pursue his study , with 
 his cat   who never be too hot   by his side . the Sol 's arm have 
 discontinue the Harmonic Meetings for the season , and Little 
 Swills be engage at the Pastoral Gardens down the river , where he 
 come out in quite an innocent manner and sing comic ditty of a 
 juvenile complexion calculate   as the bill say   not to wound the 
 feeling of the most fastidious mind . 
 over all the legal neighbourhood there hang , like some great veil 
 of rust or gigantic cobweb , the idleness and pensiveness of the 
 long vacation . Mr. Snagsby , law - stationer of Cook 's Court , 
 Cursitor Street , be sensible of the influence not only in his mind 
 as a sympathetic and contemplative man , but also in his business as 
 a law - stationer aforesaid . he have more leisure for musing in 
 Staple Inn and in the Rolls Yard during the long vacation than at 
 other season , and he say to the two ' prentice , what a thing it 
 be in such hot weather to think that you live in an island with the 
 sea a - rolling and a - bowling right round you . 
 Guster be busy in the little drawing - room on this present afternoon 
 in the long vacation , when Mr. and Mrs. Snagsby have it in 
 contemplation to receive company . the expect guest be rather 
 select than numerous , be Mr. and Mrs. Chadband and no more . 
 from Mr. Chadband 's be much give to describe himself , both 
 verbally and in writing , as a vessel , he be occasionally mistake 
 by stranger for a gentleman connect with navigation , but he be , 
 as he express it , " in the ministry . " Mr. Chadband be attach to 
 no particular denomination and be consider by his persecutor to 
 have nothing so very remarkable to say on the great of subject 
 as to render his volunteering , on his own account , at all incumbent 
 on his conscience ; but he have his follower , and Mrs. Snagsby be of 
 the number . Mrs. Snagsby have but recently take a passage upward 
 by the vessel , Chadband ; and her attention be attract to that 
 Bark a 1 , when she be something flush by the hot weather . 
 " my little woman , " say Mr. Snagsby to the sparrow in Staple Inn , 
 " like to have her religion rather sharp , you see ! " 
 so Guster , much impressed by regard herself for the time as the 
 handmaid of Chadband , whom she know to be endow with the gift of 
 hold forth for four hour at a stretch , prepare the little 
 drawing - room for tea . all the furniture be shake and dust , the 
 portrait of Mr. and Mrs. Snagsby be touch up with a wet cloth , 
 the good tea - service be set forth , and there be excellent provision 
 make of dainty new bread , crusty twist , cool fresh butter , thin 
 slice of ham , tongue , and german sausage , and delicate little row 
 of anchovy nestle in parsley , not to mention new - lay egg , to 
 be bring up warm in a napkin , and hot butter toast . for 
 Chadband be rather a consume vessel - the persecutor say a 
 gorging vessel - and can wield such weapon of the flesh as a knife 
 and fork remarkably well . 
 Mr. Snagsby in his good coat , look at all the preparation when 
 they be complete and cough his cough of deference behind his 
 hand , say to Mrs. Snagsby , " at what time do you expect Mr. and 
 Mrs. Chadband , my love ? " 
 " at six , " say Mrs. Snagsby . 
 Mr. Snagsby observe in a mild and casual way that " it be go 
 that . " 
 " perhaps you would like to begin without they , " be Mrs. Snagsby 's 
 reproachful remark . 
 Mr. Snagsby do look as if he would like it very much , but he 
 say , with his cough of mildness , " no , my dear , no . I merely name 
 the time . " 
 " what be time , " say Mrs. Snagsby , " to eternity ? " 
 " very true , my dear , " say Mr. Snagsby . " only when a person lay 
 in victual for tea , a person do it with a view - perhaps - more to 
 time . and when a time be name for have tea , it be well to come 
 up to it . " 
 " to come up to it ! " Mrs. Snagsby repeat with severity . " up to it ! 
 as if Mr. Chadband be a fighter ! " 
 " not at all , my dear , " say Mr. Snagsby . 
 here , Guster , who have be look out of the bedroom window , come 
 rustle and scratch down the little staircase like a popular 
 ghost , and fall flush into the drawing - room , announce that 
 Mr. and Mrs. Chadband have appear in the court . the bell at the 
 inner door in the passage immediately thereafter tinkle , she be 
 admonish by Mrs. Snagsby , on pain of instant reconsignment to her 
 patron saint , not to omit the ceremony of announcement . much 
 discompose in her nerve   which be previously in the good order 
 by this threat , she so fearfully mutilate that point of state as 
 to announce " Mr. and Mrs. Cheeseming , least which , Imeantersay , 
 whatsername ! " and retire conscience - stricken from the presence . 
 Mr. Chadband be a large yellow man with a fat smile and a general 
 appearance of have a good deal of train oil in his system . Mrs. 
 Chadband be a stern , severe - look , silent woman . Mr. Chadband 
 move softly and cumbrously , not unlike a bear who have be teach 
 to walk upright . he be very much embarrassed about the arm , as if 
 they be inconvenient to he and he want to grovel , be very much 
 in a perspiration about the head , and never speak without first 
 put up his great hand , as deliver a token to his hearer 
 that he be go to edify they . 
 " my friend , " say Mr. Chadband , " peace be on this house ! on the 
 master thereof , on the mistress thereof , on the young maiden , and 
 on the young man ! my friend , why do I wish for peace ? what be 
 peace ? be it war ? no . be it strife ? no . be it lovely , and 
 gentle , and beautiful , and pleasant , and serene , and joyful ? oh , 
 yes ! therefore , my friend , I wish for peace , upon you and upon 
 your . " 
 in consequence of Mrs. Snagsby look deeply edify , Mr. Snagsby 
 think it expedient on the whole to say aman , which be well 
 receive . 
 " now , my friend , " proceed Mr. Chadband , ' since I be upon this 
 theme - " 
 Guster present herself . Mrs. Snagsby , in a spectral bass voice 
 and without remove her eye from Chadband , say with dreadful 
 distinctness , " go away ! " 
 " now , my friend , " say Chadband , ' since I be upon this theme , and 
 in my lowly path improve it - " 
 Guster be hear unaccountably to murmur " one thouse seven hundred 
 and eighty - two . " the spectral voice repeat more solemnly , " go 
 away ! " 
 " now , my friend , " say Mr. Chadband , " we will inquire in a spirit 
 of love - " 
 still Guster reiterate " one thouse seven hundred and eighty- 
 two . " 
 Mr. Chadband , pause with the resignation of a man accustom to 
 be persecute and languidly fold up his chin into his fat smile , 
 say , " let we hear the maiden ! Speak , maiden ! " 
 " one thouse seven hundred and eighty - two , if you please , sir . 
 which he wish to know what the shilling ware for , " say Guster , 
 breathless . 
 " for ? " return Mrs. Chadband . " for his fare ! " 
 Guster reply that " he insist on one and eightpence or on 
 summonsizze the party . " Mrs. Snagsby and Mrs. Chadband be 
 proceed to grow shrill in indignation when Mr. Chadband quiet 
 the tumult by lift up his hand . 
 " my friend , " say he , " I remember a duty unfulfilled yesterday . 
 it be right that I should be chasten in some penalty . I ought 
 not to murmur . Rachael , pay the eightpence ! " 
 while Mrs. Snagsby , draw her breath , look hard at Mr. Snagsby , 
 as who should say , " you hear this apostle ! " and while Mr. Chadband 
 glow with humility and train oil , Mrs. Chadband pay the money . 
 it be Mr. Chadband 's habit - it be the head and front of his 
 pretension indeed - to keep this sort of debtor and creditor 
 account in the small item and to post it publicly on the most 
 trivial occasion . 
 " my friend , " say Chadband , " eightpence be not much ; it might 
 justly have be one and fourpence ; it might justly have be half 
 a crown . o let we be joyful , joyful ! o let we be joyful ! " 
 with which remark , which appear from its sound to be an extract in 
 verse , Mr. Chadband stalk to the table , and before take a chair , 
 lift up his admonitory hand . 
 " my friend , " say he , " what be this which we now behold as be 
 spread before we ? refreshment . do we need refreshment then , my 
 friend ? we do . and why do we need refreshment , my friend ? 
 because we be but mortal , because we be but sinful , because we 
 be but of the earth , because we be not of the air . can we fly , 
 my friend ? we can not . why can we not fly , my friend ? " 
 Mr. Snagsby , presume on the success of his last point , venture 
 to observe in a cheerful and rather know tone , " no wing . " but 
 be immediately frown down by Mrs. Snagsby . 
 " I say , my friend , " pursue Mr. Chadband , utterly reject and 
 obliterate Mr. Snagsby 's suggestion , " why can we not fly ? be it 
 because we be calculate to walk ? it be . could we walk , my 
 friend , without strength ? we could not . what should we do 
 without strength , my friend ? our leg would refuse to bear we , 
 our knee would double up , our ankle would turn over , and we 
 should come to the ground . then from whence , my friend , in a 
 human point of view , do we derive the strength that be necessary to 
 our limb ? be it , " say Chadband , glance over the table , " from 
 bread in various form , from butter which be churn from the milk 
 which be yield unto we by the cow , from the egg which be lay 
 by the fowl , from ham , from tongue , from sausage , and from such 
 like ? it be . then let we partake of the good thing which be set 
 before we ! " 
 the persecutor deny that there be any particular gift in Mr. 
 Chadband 's pile verbose flight of stair , one upon another , 
 after this fashion . but this can only be receive as a proof of 
 their determination to persecute , since it must be within 
 everybody 's experience that the chadband style of oratory be widely 
 receive and much admire . 
 Mr. Chadband , however , have conclude for the present , sit down 
 at Mr. Snagsby 's table and lay about he prodigiously . the 
 conversion of nutriment of any sort into oil of the quality already 
 mention appear to be a process so inseparable from the 
 constitution of this exemplary vessel that in begin to eat and 
 drink , he may be describe as always become a kind of 
 considerable oil mill or other large factory for the production of 
 that article on a wholesale scale . on the present evening of the 
 long vacation , in Cook 's Court , Cursitor Street , he do such a 
 powerful stroke of business that the warehouse appear to be quite 
 full when the work cease . 
 at this period of the entertainment , Guster , who have never 
 recover her first failure , but have neglect no possible or 
 impossible mean of bring the establishment and herself into 
 contempt - among which may be briefly enumerate her unexpectedly 
 perform clash military music on Mr. Chadband 's head with 
 plate , and afterwards crown that gentleman with muffin - at 
 which period of the entertainment , Guster whisper Mr. Snagsby that 
 he be want . 
 " and be want in the - not to put too fine a point upon it - in 
 the shop , " say Mr. Snagsby , rise , " perhaps this good company 
 will excuse I for half a minute . " 
 Mr. Snagsby descend and find the two ' prentice intently 
 contemplate a police constable , who hold a ragged boy by the 
 arm . 
 " why , bless my heart , " say Mr. Snagsby , " what be the matter ! " 
 " this boy , " say the constable , " although he be repeatedly tell to , 
 will not   move on - " 
 " I be always a - move on , sar , " cry the boy , wipe away his grimy 
 tear with his arm . " I have   always be a - move and a - move on , 
 ever since I be bear . where can I possibly move to , sir , more nor 
 I do move ! " 
 " he will not   move on , " say the constable calmly , with a slight 
 professional hitch of his neck involve its well settlement in 
 his stiff stock , " although he have be repeatedly caution , and 
 therefore I be oblige to take he into custody . he be as obstinate 
 a young gonoph as I know . he WON'T move on . " 
 " oh , my eye ! where can I move to ! " cry the boy , clutch quite 
 desperately at his hair and beat his bare foot upon the floor of 
 Mr. Snagsby 's passage . 
 " do not   you come none of that or I shall make blessed short work of 
 you ! " say the constable , give he a passionless shake . " my 
 instruction be that you be to move on . I have tell you so five 
 hundred time . " 
 " but where ? " cry the boy . 
 " well ! really , constable , you know , " say Mr. Snagsby wistfully , 
 and cough behind his hand his cough of great perplexity and 
 doubt , " really , that do seem a question . where , you know ? " 
 " my instruction do not   go to that , " reply the constable . " my 
 instruction be that this boy be to move on . " 
 do you hear , Jo ? it be nothing to you or to any one else that the 
 great light of the parliamentary sky have fail for some few 
 year in this business to set you the example of move on . the 
 one grand recipe remain for you - the profound philosophical 
 prescription - the be - all and the end - all of your strange existence 
 upon earth . move on ! you be by no means to move off , Jo , for the 
 great light can not   at all agree about that . move on ! 
 Mr. Snagsby say nothing to this effect , say nothing at all 
 indeed , but cough his forlornest cough , expressive of no 
 thoroughfare in any direction . by this time Mr. and Mrs. Chadband 
 and Mrs. Snagsby , hear the altercation , have appear upon the 
 stair . guster have never leave the end of the passage , the whole 
 household be assemble . 
 " the simple question be , sir , " say the constable , " whether you 
 know this boy . he say you do . " 
 Mrs. Snagsby , from her elevation , instantly cry out , " no he 
 do not ! " 
 " my lit - tle woman ! " say Mr. Snagsby , look up the staircase . 
 " my love , permit I ! pray have a moment 's patience , my dear . I do 
 know something of this lad , and in what I know of he , I can not   say 
 that there be any harm ; perhaps on the contrary , constable . " to 
 whom the law - stationer relate his joful and woeful experience , 
 suppress the half - crown fact . 
 " well ! " say the constable , ' so far , it seem , he have ground for 
 what he say . when I take he into custody up in Holborn , he say 
 you know he . upon that , a young man who be in the crowd say he 
 be acquaint with you , and you be a respectable housekeeper , 
 and if I would call and make the inquiry , he would appear . the young man 
 do not   seem inclined to keep his word , but - oh ! here be the young 
 man ! " 
 enter Mr. Guppy , who nod to Mr. Snagsby and touch his hat with 
 the chivalry of clerkship to the lady on the stair . 
 " I be stroll away from the office just now when I find this 
 row go on , " say Mr. Guppy to the law - stationer , " and as your 
 name be mention , I think it be right the thing should be 
 look into . " 
 " it be very good - natured of you , sir , " say Mr. Snagsby , " and I be 
 oblige to you . " and Mr. Snagsby again relate his experience , 
 again suppress the half - crown fact . 
 " now , I know where you live , " say the constable , then , to Jo . 
 " you live down in Tom - all - Alone 's . that be a nice innocent place to 
 live in , be not   it ? " 
 " I can not   go and live in no nicer place , sir , " reply Jo . " they 
 would not   have nothink to say to I if I wo to go to a nice 
 innocent place fur to live . who ud go and let a nice innocent 
 lodge to such a reg'lar one as I ! " 
 " you be very poor , be not   you ? " say the constable . 
 " yes , I be indeed , sir , wery poor in gin'ral , " reply Jo . " I 
 leave you to judge now ! I shake these two half - crown out of he , " 
 say the constable , produce they to the company , " in only put 
 my hand upon he ! " 
 " they be wot 's left , Mr. Snagsby , " say Jo , " out of a sov - ring as 
 wos give I by a lady in a wale as se she wo a servant and as 
 come to my crossin one night and ask to be showd this ' ere ouse 
 and the ouse wot he as you giv the writin to die at , and the 
 berrin - ground wot he be berrid in . she se to I she se ' be you 
 the boy at the inkwhich ? ' she se . I ses ' yes ' I se . she se to 
 I she se ' can you show I all they place ? ' I se ' yes I can ' I 
 s . and she se to I ' do it ' and I dun it and she giv I a 
 sov'ring and hook it . and I an't   have much of the sov'ring 
 neither , " say Jo , with dirty tear , " fur I have to pay five bob , 
 down in Tom - all - Alone 's , afore they would square it fur to give I 
 change , and then a young man he thieve another five while I be 
 asleep and another boy he thieve ninepence and the landlord he 
 stand drain round with a lot more on it . " 
 " you do not   expect anybody to believe this , about the lady and the 
 sovereign , do you ? " say the constable , eye he aside with 
 ineffable disdain . 
 " I do not   know as I do , sir , " reply Jo . " I do not   expect nothink 
 at all , sir , much , but that be the true hist'ry on it . " 
 " you see what he be ! " the constable observe to the audience . 
 " well , Mr. Snagsby , if I do not   lock he up this time , will you 
 engage for his move on ? " 
 " no ! " cry Mrs. Snagsby from the stair . 
 " my little woman ! " plead her husband . " Constable , I have no doubt 
 he will move on . you know you really must do it , " say Mr. Snagsby . 
 " I be everyway agreeable , sir , " say the hapless Jo . 
 " do it , then , " observe the constable . " you know what you have get 
 to do . do it ! and recollect you will not   get off so easy next time . 
 catch hold of your money . now , the soon you be five mile off , 
 the well for all party . " 
 with this farewell hint and point generally to the set sun 
 as a likely place to move on to , the constable bid his auditor 
 good afternoon and make the echo of Cook 's Court perform slow 
 music for he as he walk away on the shady side , carry his 
 iron - bind hat in his hand for a little ventilation . 
 now , Jo 's improbable story concern the lady and the sovereign 
 have awaken more or less the curiosity of all the company . Mr. 
 Guppy , who have an inquire mind in matter of evidence and who have 
 be suffer severely from the lassitude of the long vacation , 
 take that interest in the case that he enter on a regular cross- 
 examination of the witness , which be find so interesting by the 
 lady that Mrs. Snagsby politely invite he to step upstairs and 
 drink a cup of tea , if he will excuse the disarrange state of the 
 tea - table , consequent on their previous exertion . Mr. Guppy 
 yield his assent to this proposal , Jo be request to follow 
 into the drawing - room doorway , where Mr. Guppy take he in hand as 
 a witness , pat he into this shape , that shape , and the other 
 shape like a butterman deal with so much butter , and worry 
 he accord to the good model . nor be the examination unlike 
 many such model display , both in respect of its elicit nothing 
 and of its be lengthy , for Mr. Guppy be sensible of his talent , 
 and Mrs. Snagsby feel not only that it gratify her inquisitive 
 disposition , but that it lift her husband 's establishment high 
 up in the law . during the progress of this keen encounter , the 
 vessel Chadband , be merely engage in the oil trade , get 
 aground and wait to be float off . 
 " well ! " say Mr. Guppy . " either this boy stick to it like 
 cobbler' - wax or there be something out of the common here that 
 beat anything that ever come into my way at Kenge and Carboy 's . " 
 Mrs. Chadband whisper Mrs. Snagsby , who exclaim , " you do not   say 
 so ! " 
 " for year ! " reply Mrs. Chadband . 
 " have know Kenge and Carboy 's office for year , " Mrs. Snagsby 
 triumphantly explain to Mr. Guppy . " Mrs. Chadband - this 
 gentleman 's wife - Reverend Mr. Chadband . " 
 " oh , indeed ! " say Mr. Guppy . 
 " before I marry my present husband , " say Mrs. Chadband . 
 " be you a party in anything , ma'am ? " say Mr. Guppy , transfer 
 his cross - examination . 
 " no . " 
 " not a party in anything , ma'am ? " say Mr. Guppy . 
 Mrs. Chadband shake her head . 
 " perhaps you be acquaint with somebody who be a party in 
 something , ma'am ? " say Mr. Guppy , who like nothing well than to 
 model his conversation on forensic principle . 
 " not exactly that , either , " reply Mrs. Chadband , humour the 
 joke with a hard - favour smile . 
 " not exactly that , either ! " repeat Mr. Guppy . " very good . pray , 
 ma'am , be it a lady of your acquaintance who have some transaction 
  we will not at present say what transaction   with Kenge and 
 Carboy 's office , or be it a gentleman of your acquaintance ? take 
 time , ma'am . we shall come to it presently . man or woman , ma'am ? " 
 " Neither , " say Mrs. Chadband as before . 
 " oh ! a child ! " say Mr. Guppy , throw on the admiring Mrs. 
 Snagsby the regular acute professional eye which be throw on 
 british juryman . " now , ma'am , perhaps you will have the kindness to 
 tell we what child . " 
 " you have get it at last , sir , " say Mrs. Chadband with another 
 hard - favour smile . " well , sir , it be before your time , most 
 likely , judge from your appearance . I be leave in charge of a 
 child name Esther Summerson , who be put out in life by Messrs. 
 Kenge and Carboy . " 
 " Miss Summerson , ma'am ! " cry Mr. Guppy , excited . 
 " I call her Esther Summerson , " say Mrs. Chadband with austerity . 
 " there be no Miss - ing of the girl in my time . it be Esther . 
 ' Esther , do this ! Esther , do that ! ' and she be make to do it . " 
 " my dear ma'am , " return Mr. Guppy , move across the small 
 apartment , " the humble individual who now address you receive 
 that young lady in London when she first come here from the 
 establishment to which you have allude . allow I to have the 
 pleasure of take you by the hand . " 
 Mr. Chadband , at last see his opportunity , make his accustom 
 signal and rise with a smoking head , which he dab with his 
 pocket - handkerchief . Mrs. Snagsby whisper " hush ! " 
 " my friend , " say Chadband , " we have partake in moderation " 
  which be certainly not the case so far as he be concern   " of 
 the comfort which have be provide for we . may this house live 
 upon the fatness of the land ; may corn and wine be plentiful 
 therein ; may it grow , may it thrive , may it prosper , may it 
 advance , may it proceed , may it press forward ! but , my friend , 
 have we partake of anything else ? we have . my friend , of what 
 else have we partake ? of spiritual profit ? yes . from whence 
 have we derive that spiritual profit ? my young friend , stand 
 forth ! " 
 Jo , thus apostrophize , give a slouch backward , and another slouch 
 forward , and another slouch to each side , and confront the 
 eloquent Chadband with evident doubt of his intention . 
 " my young friend , " say Chadband , " you be to we a pearl , you be 
 to we a diamond , you be to we a gem , you be to we a jewel . and 
 why , my young friend ? " 
 " I do not   know , " reply Jo . " I do not   know nothink . " 
 " my young friend , " say Chadband , " it be because you know nothing 
 that you be to we a gem and jewel . for what be you , my young 
 friend ? be you a beast of the field ? no . a bird of the air ? 
 no . a fish of the sea or river ? no . you be a human boy , my 
 young friend . a human boy . o glorious to be a human boy ! and why 
 glorious , my young friend ? because you be capable of receive 
 the lesson of wisdom , because you be capable of profit by this 
 discourse which I now deliver for your good , because you be not a 
 stick , or a staff , or a stock , or a stone , or a post , or a pillar . 
 " o running stream of sparkle joy 
 to be a soar human boy ! 
 " and do you cool yourself in that stream now , my young friend ? no . 
 why do you not cool yourself in that stream now ? because you be 
 in a state of darkness , because you be in a state of obscurity , 
 because you be in a state of sinfulness , because you be in a 
 state of bondage . my young friend , what be bondage ? let we , in a 
 spirit of love , inquire . " 
 at this threaten stage of the discourse , Jo , who seem to have 
 be gradually go out of his mind , smear his right arm over his 
 face and give a terrible yawn . Mrs. Snagsby indignantly express 
 her belief that he be a limb of the arch - fiend . 
 " my friend , " say Mr. Chadband with his persecute chin fold 
 itself into its fat smile again as he look round , " it be right 
 that I should be humble , it be right that I should be try , it be 
 right that I should be mortify , it be right that I should be 
 correct . I stumble , on Sabbath last , when I think with pride 
 of my three hour ' improve . the account be now favourably 
 balance : my creditor have accept a composition . o let we be 
 joyful , joyful ! o let we be joyful ! " 
 great sensation on the part of Mrs. Snagsby . 
 " my friend , " say Chadband , look round he in conclusion , " I 
 will not proceed with my young friend now . will you come to- 
 morrow , my young friend , and inquire of this good lady where I be 
 to be find to deliver a discourse unto you , and will you come like 
 the thirsty swallow upon the next day , and upon the day after that , 
 and upon the day after that , and upon many pleasant day , to hear 
 discourse ? "   this with a cow - like lightness . 
 Jo , whose immediate object seem to be to get away on any term , 
 give a shuffle nod . Mr. Guppy then throw he a penny , and Mrs. 
 Snagsby call to Guster to see he safely out of the house . but 
 before he go downstairs , Mr. Snagsby load he with some break 
 meat from the table , which he carry away , hug in his arm . 
 so , Mr. Chadband - of whom the persecutor say that it be no wonder 
 he should go on for any length of time utter such abominable 
 nonsense , but that the wonder rather be that he should ever leave 
 off , have once the audacity to begin - retire into private life 
 until he invest a little capital of supper in the oil - trade . Jo 
 move on , through the long vacation , down to Blackfriars Bridge , 
 where he find a bake stony corner wherein to settle to his 
 repast . 
 and there he sit , munch and gnawing , and look up at the 
 great cross on the summit of St. Paul 's Cathedral , glitter above 
 a red - and - violet - tint cloud of smoke . from the boy 's face one 
 might suppose that sacred emblem to be , in his eye , the crowning 
 confusion of the great , confused city - so golden , so high up , so 
 far out of his reach . there he sit , the sun go down , the river 
 run fast , the crowd flow by he in two stream - everything 
 move on to some purpose and to one end - until he be stir up 
 and tell to " move on " too . 
 CHAPTER XX 
 a New Lodger 
 the long vacation saunter on towards term - time like an idle river 
 very leisurely stroll down a flat country to the sea . Mr. Guppy 
 saunter along with it congenially . he have blunt the blade of 
 his penknife and break the point off by stick that instrument 
 into his desk in every direction . not that he bear the desk any 
 ill will , but he must do something , and it must be something of an 
 unexciting nature , which will lay neither his physical nor his 
 intellectual energy under too heavy contribution . he find that 
 nothing agree with he so well as to make little gyration on one 
 leg of his stool , and stab his desk , and gape . 
 Kenge and Carboy be out of town , and the article clerk have take 
 out a shooting license and go down to his father 's , and Mr. 
 Guppy 's two fellow - stipendiary be away on leave . Mr. Guppy and 
 Mr. Richard Carstone divide the dignity of the office . but Mr. 
 Carstone be for the time be establish in Kenge 's room , whereat 
 Mr. Guppy chafe . so exceedingly that he with bite sarcasm 
 inform his mother , in the confidential moment when he sup with 
 she off a lobster and lettuce in the Old Street Road , that he be 
 afraid the office be hardly good enough for swell , and that if he 
 have know there be a swell coming , he would have get it paint . 
 Mr. Guppy suspect everybody who enter on the occupation of a 
 stool in Kenge and Carboy 's office of entertain , as a matter of 
 course , sinister design upon he . he be clear that every such 
 person want to depose he . if he be ever ask how , why , when , or 
 wherefore , he shut up one eye and shake his head . on the 
 strength of these profound view , he in the most ingenious manner 
 take infinite pain to counterplot when there be no plot , and 
 play the deep game of chess without any adversary . 
 it be a source of much gratification to Mr. Guppy , therefore , to 
 find the new - comer constantly pore over the paper in Jarndyce 
 and Jarndyce , for he well know that nothing but confusion and 
 failure can come of that . his satisfaction communicate itself to 
 a third saunterer through the long vacation in Kenge and Carboy 's 
 office , to wit , Young Smallweed . 
 whether Young Smallweed   metaphorically call small and eke Chick 
 Weed , as it be jocularly to express a fledgling   be ever a boy 
 be much doubted in Lincoln 's Inn . he be now something under 
 fifteen and an old limb of the law . he be facetiously understand 
 to entertain a passion for a lady at a cigar - shop in the 
 neighbourhood of Chancery Lane and for her sake to have break off 
 a contract with another lady , to whom he have be engage some 
 year . he be a town - make article , of small stature and weazen 
 feature , but may be perceive from a considerable distance by 
 mean of his very tall hat . to become a Guppy be the object of his 
 ambition . he dress at that gentleman   by whom he be patronize , 
 talk at he , walk at he , found himself entirely on he . he be 
 honour with Mr. Guppy 's particular confidence and occasionally 
 advise he , from the deep well of his experience , on difficult 
 point in private life . 
 Mr. Guppy have be loll out of window all the morning after 
 try all the stool in succession and find none of they easy , 
 and after several time put his head into the iron safe with a 
 notion of cool it . Mr. Smallweed have be twice dispatch for 
 effervescent drink , and have twice mix they in the two official 
 tumbler and stir they up with the ruler . Mr. Guppy propound 
 for Mr. Smallweed 's consideration the paradox that the more you 
 drink the thirstier you be and recline his head upon the window- 
 sill in a state of hopeless languor . 
 while thus look out into the shade of Old Square , Lincoln 's Inn , 
 survey the intolerable brick and mortar , Mr. Guppy become 
 conscious of a manly whisker emerge from the cloister walk 
 below and turn itself up in the direction of his face . at the 
 same time , a low whistle be waft through the Inn and a suppress 
 voice cry , " Hip ! Gup - py ! " 
 " why , you do not   mean it ! " say Mr. Guppy , arouse . " small ! here 's 
 Jobling ! " Small 's head look out of window too and nod to 
 Jobling . 
 " where have you spring up from ? " inquire Mr. Guppy . 
 " from the market - garden down by Deptford . I can not   stand it any 
 long . I must enlist . I say ! I wish you would lend I half a crown . 
 upon my soul , I be hungry . " 
 Jobling look hungry and also have the appearance of have run to 
 seed in the market - garden down by Deptford . 
 " I say ! just throw out half a crown if you have get one to spare . 
 I want to get some dinner . " 
 " will you come and dine with I ? " say Mr. Guppy , throw out the 
 coin , which Mr. Jobling catch neatly . 
 " how long should I have to hold out ? " say Jobling . 
 " not half an hour . I be only wait here till the enemy go , 
 return Mr. Guppy , butt inward with his head . 
 " what enemy ? " 
 " a new one . go to be article . will you wait ? " 
 " can you give a fellow anything to read in the meantime ? " say Mr. 
 Jobling . 
 Smallweed suggest the law list . but Mr. Jobling declare with 
 much earnestness that he " can not   stand it . " 
 " you shall have the paper , " say Mr. Guppy . " he shall bring it 
 down . but you have well not be see about here . sit on our 
 staircase and read . it be a quiet place . " 
 Jobling nod intelligence and acquiescence . the sagacious 
 smallweed supply he with the newspaper and occasionally drop 
 his eye upon he from the landing as a precaution against his 
 become disgusted with wait and make an untimely departure . 
 at last the enemy retreat , and then Smallweed fetch Mr. Jobling 
 up . 
 " well , and how be you ? " say Mr. Guppy , shake hand with he . 
 " so , so . how be you ? " 
 Mr. Guppy reply that he be not much to boast of , Mr. Jobling 
 venture on the question , " how be she ? " this Mr. Guppy resent as 
 a liberty , retort , " Jobling , there be chord in the human 
 mind - " Jobling beg pardon . 
 " any subject but that ! " say Mr. Guppy with a gloomy enjoyment of 
 his injury . " for there be chord , Jobling - " 
 Mr. Jobling beg pardon again . 
 during this short colloquy , the active Smallweed , who be of the 
 dinner party , have write in legal character on a slip of paper , 
 " return immediately . " this notification to all whom it may 
 concern , he insert in the letter - box , and then put on the tall 
 hat at the angle of inclination at which Mr. Guppy wear his , 
 inform his patron that they may now make themselves scarce . 
 accordingly they betake themselves to a neighbouring dining - house , 
 of the class know among its frequenter by the denomination slap- 
 bang , where the waitress , a bounce young female of forty , be 
 suppose to have make some impression on the susceptible smallweed , 
 of whom it may be remark that he be a weird changeling to whom 
 year be nothing . he stand precociously possess of century 
 of owlish wisdom . if he ever lie in a cradle , it seem as if he 
 must have lain there in a tail - coat . he have an old , old eye , have 
 Smallweed ; and he drink and smoke in a monkeyish way ; and his 
 neck be stiff in his collar ; and he be never to be take in ; and he 
 know all about it , whatever it be . in short , in his bringing up 
 he have be so nurse by Law and Equity that he have become a kind 
 of fossil imp , to account for whose terrestrial existence it be 
 report at the public office that his father be John Doe and his 
 mother the only female member of the Roe family , also that his 
 first long - clothe be make from a blue bag . 
 into the dining - house , unaffected by the seductive show in the 
 window of artificially whiten cauliflower and poultry , verdant 
 basket of pea , coolly blooming cucumber , and joint ready for 
 the spit , Mr. Smallweed lead the way . they know he there and 
 defer to he . he have his favourite box , he bespeak all the 
 paper , he be down upon bald patriarch , who keep they more than 
 ten minute afterwards . it be of no use try he with anything 
 less than a full - sized " bread " or propose to he any joint in cut 
 unless it be in the very good cut . in the matter of gravy he be 
 adamant . 
 conscious of his elfin power and submit to his dread 
 experience , Mr. Guppy consult he in the choice of that day 's 
 banquet , turn an appeal look towards he as the waitress 
 repeat the catalogue of viand and say " what do you take , 
 Chick ? " Chick , out of the profundity of his artfulness , prefer 
 " veal and ham and french bean - and do not   you forget the stuffing , 
 Polly "   with an unearthly cock of his venerable eye , Mr. Guppy and 
 Mr. Jobling give the like order . three pint pot of half - and - half 
 be superadde . quickly the waitress return bear what be 
 apparently a model of the Tower of Babel but what be really a pile 
 of plate and flat tin dish - cover . Mr. Smallweed , approve of 
 what be set before he , convey intelligent benignity into his 
 ancient eye and wink upon she . then , amid a constant coming in , 
 and go out , and run about , and a clatter of crockery , and a 
 rumble up and down of the machine which bring the nice cut from 
 the kitchen , and a shrill cry for more nice cut down the 
 speaking - pipe , and a shrill reckoning of the cost of nice cut that 
 have be dispose of , and a general flush and steam of hot joint , 
 cut and uncut , and a considerably heated atmosphere in which the 
 soil knife and tablecloth seem to break out spontaneously into 
 eruption of grease and blotch of beer , the legal triumvirate 
 appease their appetite . 
 Mr. Jobling be button up close than mere adornment might 
 require . his hat present at the rim a peculiar appearance of a 
 glistening nature , as if it have be a favourite snail - promenade . 
 the same phenomenon be visible on some part of his coat , and 
 particularly at the seam . he have the fade appearance of a 
 gentleman in embarrassed circumstance ; even his light whisker 
 droop with something of a shabby air . 
 his appetite be so vigorous that it suggest spare live for some 
 little time back . he make such a speedy end of his plate of veal 
 and ham , bring it to a close while his companion be yet midway 
 in theirs , that Mr. Guppy propose another . " thank you , Guppy , " 
 say Mr. Jobling , " I really do not   know but what I will take 
 another . " 
 another be bring , he fall to with great goodwill . 
 Mr. Guppy take silent notice of he at interval until he be half 
 way through this second plate and stop to take an enjoying pull at 
 his pint pot of half - and - half   also renew   and stretch out his 
 leg and rub his hand . behold he in which glow of 
 contentment , Mr. Guppy say , " you be a man again , Tony ! " 
 " well , not quite yet , " say Mr. Jobling . " say , just bear . " 
 " will you take any other vegetable ? grass ? pea ? summer 
 cabbage ? " 
 " thank you , Guppy , " say Mr. Jobling . " I really do not   know but 
 what I will take summer cabbage . " 
 Order give ; with the sarcastic addition   from Mr. Smallweed   of 
 " without slug , polly ! " and cabbage produce . 
 " I be grow up , Guppy , " say Mr. Jobling , ply his knife and 
 fork with a relish steadiness . 
 " glad to hear it . " 
 " in fact , I have just turn into my teen , " say Mr. Jobling . 
 he say no more until he have perform his task , which he achieve 
 as Messrs. Guppy and Smallweed finish theirs , thus get over the 
 ground in excellent style and beat those two gentleman easily by 
 a veal and ham and a cabbage . 
 " now , Small , " say Mr. Guppy , " what would you recommend about 
 pastry ? " 
 " marrow pudding , " say Mr. Smallweed instantly . 
 " aye , aye ! " cry Mr. Jobling with an arch look . " you be there , 
 be you ? thank you , Mr. Guppy , I do not   know but what I will take a 
 marrow pudding . " 
 three marrow pudding be produce , Mr. Jobling add in a 
 pleasant humour that he be come of age fast . to these succeed , 
 by command of Mr. Smallweed , " three cheshire , " and to those " three 
 small rum . " this apex of the entertainment happily reach , Mr. 
 Jobling put up his leg on the carpet seat   have his own side 
 of the box to himself , lean against the wall , and say , " I be 
 grow up now , Guppy . I have arrive at maturity . " 
 " what do you think , now , " say Mr. Guppy , " about - you do not   mind 
 Smallweed ? " 
 " not the least in the worid . I have the pleasure of drink his 
 good health . " 
 " Sir , to you ! " say Mr. Smallweed . 
 " I be say , what do you think now , " pursue Mr. Guppy , " of 
 enlist ? " 
 " why , what I may think after dinner , " return Mr. Jobling , " be one 
 thing , my dear Guppy , and what I may think before dinner be another 
 thing . still , even after dinner , I ask myself the question , what 
 be I to do ? how be I to live ? Ill fo manger , you know , " say Mr. 
 Jobling , pronounce that word as if he mean a necessary fixture 
 in an english stable . " Ill fo manger . that be the french saying , 
 and mangere be as necessary to I as it be to a Frenchman . or 
 more so . " 
 Mr. Smallweed be decidedly of opinion " much more so . " 
 " if any man have tell I , " pursue Jobling , " even so lately as when 
 you and I have the frisk down in Lincolnshire , Guppy , and drive over 
 to see that house at Castle Wold - " 
 Mr. Smallweed correct he - Chesney Wold . 
 " Chesney Wold .   I thank my honourable friend for that cheer .   if 
 any man have tell I then that I should be as hard up at the present 
 time as I literally find myself , I should have - well , I should have 
 pitch into he , " say Mr. Jobling , take a little rum - and - water 
 with an air of desperate resignation ; " I should have let fly at his 
 head . " 
 " still , Tony , you be on the wrong side of the post then , " 
 remonstrate Mr. Guppy . " you be talk about nothing else in 
 the gig . " 
 " Guppy , " say Mr. Jobling , " I will not deny it . I be on the wrong 
 side of the post . but I trust to thing come round . " 
 that very popular trust in flat thing come round ! not in their 
 be beat round , or work round , but in their " come " round ! 
 as though a lunatic should trust in the world 's " come " 
 triangular ! 
 " I have confident expectation that thing would come round and be 
 all square , " say Mr. Jobling with some vagueness of expression and 
 perhaps of meaning too . " but I be disappoint . they never do . 
 and when it come to creditor make row at the office and to 
 people that the office deal with make complaint about dirty 
 trifle of borrow money , why there be an end of that connexion . 
 and of any new professional connexion too , for if I be to give a 
 reference to - morrow , it would be mention and would sew I up . 
 then what be a fellow to do ? I have be keep out of the way and 
 live cheap down about the market - garden , but what be the use of 
 live cheap when you have get no money ? you might as well live 
 dear . " 
 " well , " Mr. Smallweed think . 
 " certainly . it be the fashionable way ; and fashion and whisker 
 have be my weakness , and I do not   care who know it , " say Mr. 
 Jobling . " they be great weakness - Damme , sir , they be great . 
 well , " proceed Mr. Jobling after a defiant visit to his rum - and- 
 water , " what can a fellow do , I ask you , but enlist ? " 
 Mr. Guppy come more fully into the conversation to state what , in 
 his opinion , a fellow can do . his manner be the gravely impressive 
 manner of a man who have not commit himself in life otherwise 
 than as he have become the victim of a tender sorrow of the heart . 
 " Jobling , " say Mr. Guppy , " myself and our mutual friend Smallweed - " 
 Mr. Smallweed modestly observe , " gentleman both ! " and drink . 
 " - have have a little conversation on this matter more than once 
 since you - " 
 " Say , get the sack ! " cry Mr. Jobling bitterly . " say it , Guppy . 
 you mean it . " 
 " no - o - o ! leave the Inn , " Mr. Smallweed delicately suggest . 
 " since you leave the Inn , Jobling , " say Mr. Guppy ; " and I have 
 mention to our mutual friend Smallweed a plan I have lately 
 thought of propose . you know Snagsby the stationer ? " 
 " I know there be such a stationer , " return Mr. Jobling . " he be 
 not ours , and I be not acquaint with he . " 
 " he be ours , Jobling , and I be acquaint with he , " Mr. Guppy 
 retort . " well , sir ! I have lately become well acquainted with 
 he through some accidental circumstance that have make I a 
 visitor of his in private life . those circumstance it be not 
 necessary to offer in argument . they may - or they may not - have 
 some reference to a subject which may - or may not - have cast its 
 shadow on my existence . " 
 as it be Mr. Guppy 's perplexing way with boastful misery to tempt 
 his particular friend into this subject , and the moment they touch 
 it , to turn on they with that trenchant severity about the chord 
 in the human mind , both Mr. Jobling and Mr. Smallweed decline the 
 pitfall by remain silent . 
 " such thing may be , " repeat Mr. Guppy , " or they may not be . they 
 be no part of the case . it be enough to mention that both Mr. and 
 Mrs. Snagsby be very willing to oblige I and that Snagsby have , in 
 busy time , a good deal of copy work to give out . he have all 
 Tulkinghorn 's , and an excellent business besides . I believe if our 
 mutual friend Smallweed be put into the box , he could prove 
 this ? " 
 Mr. Smallweed nod and appear greedy to be swear . 
 " now , gentleman of the jury , " say Mr. Guppy , " - I mean , now , 
 Jobling - you may say this be a poor prospect of a living . grant . 
 but it be well than nothing , and well than enlistment . you want 
 time . there must be time for these late affair to blow over . you 
 might live through it on much bad term than by write for 
 Snagsby . " 
 Mr. Jobling be about to interrupt when the sagacious Smallweed 
 check he with a dry cough and the word , " Hem ! Shakspeare ! " 
 " there be two branch to this subject , Jobling , " say Mr. Guppy . 
 " that be the first . I come to the second . you know Krook , the 
 Chancellor , across the lane . come , Jobling , " say Mr. Guppy in his 
 encouraging cross - examination - tone , " I think you know Krook , the 
 Chancellor , across the lane ? " 
 " I know he by sight , " say Mr. Jobling . 
 " you know he by sight . very well . and you know little Flite ? " 
 " everybody know she , " say Mr. Jobling . 
 " everybody know she . very well . now it have be one of my duty 
 of late to pay Flite a certain weekly allowance , deduct from it 
 the amount of her weekly rent , which I have pay   in consequence of 
 instruction I have receive   to Krook himself , regularly in her 
 presence . this have bring I into communication with Krook and 
 into a knowledge of his house and his habit . I know he have a room 
 to let . you may live there at a very low charge under any name you 
 like , as quietly as if you be a hundred mile off . he will ask no 
 question and would accept you as a tenant at a word from I - 
 before the clock strike , if you choose . and I tell you another 
 thing , Jobling , " say Mr. Guppy , who have suddenly lower his voice 
 and become familiar again , " he be an extraordinary old chap - always 
 rummage among a litter of paper and grub away at teach 
 himself to read and write , without get on a bit , as it seem to 
 I . he be a most extraordinary old chap , sir . I do not   know but 
 what it might be worth a fellow 's while to look he up a bit . " 
 " you do not   mean - " Mr. Jobling begin . 
 " I mean , " return Mr. Guppy , shrug his shoulder with become 
 modesty , " that I can not   make he out . I appeal to our mutual friend 
 Smallweed whether he have or have not hear I remark that I can not 
 make he out . " 
 Mr. Smallweed bear the concise testimony , " a few ! " 
 " I have see something of the profession and something of life , 
 Tony , " say Mr. Guppy , " and it be seldom I can not   make a man out , 
 more or less . but such an old card as this , so deep , so sly , and 
 secret   though I do not   believe he be ever sober , I never come 
 across . now , he must be precious old , you know , and he have not a 
 soul about he , and he be report to be immensely rich ; and 
 whether he be a smuggler , or a receiver , or an unlicensed 
 pawnbroker , or a money - lender - all of which I have think likely 
 at different time - it might pay you to knock up a sort of 
 knowledge of he . I do not   see why you should not   go in for it , when 
 everything else suit . " 
 Mr. Jobling , Mr. Guppy , and Mr. Smallweed all lean their elbow on 
 the table and their chin upon their hand , and look at the 
 ceiling . after a time , they all drink , slowly lean back , put their 
 hand in their pocket , and look at one another . 
 " if I have the energy I once possess , Tony ! " say Mr. Guppy with a 
 sigh . " but there be chord in the human mind - " 
 express the remainder of the desolate sentiment in rum - and- 
 water , Mr. Guppy conclude by resign the adventure to Tony 
 Jobling and inform he that during the vacation and while thing 
 be slack , his purse , " as far as three or four or even five pound 
 go , " will be at his disposal . " for never shall it be say , " Mr. 
 Guppy add with emphasis , " that William Guppy turn his back upon 
 his friend ! " 
 the latter part of the proposal be so directly to the purpose that 
 Mr. Jobling say with emotion , " Guppy , my trump , your fist ! " Mr. 
 Guppy present it , say , " Jobling , my boy , there it be ! " Mr. 
 Jobling return , " Guppy , we have be pal now for some year ! " 
 Mr. Guppy reply , " Jobling , we have . " 
 they then shake hand , and Mr. Jobling add in a feeling manner , 
 " thank you , Guppy , I do not   know but what I will take another glass 
 for old acquaintance sake . " 
 " Krook 's last lodger die there , " observe Mr. Guppy in an 
 incidental way . 
 " do he though ! " say Mr. Jobling . 
 " there be a verdict . accidental death . you do not   mind that ? " 
 " no , " say Mr. Jobling , " I do not   mind it ; but he might as well have 
 die somewhere else . it be devilish odd that he need go and die at 
 MY place ! " Mr. Jobling quite resent this liberty , several time 
 return to it with such remark as , " there be place enough to 
 die in , I should think ! " or , " he would not   have like my dying at 
 his place , I dare say ! " 
 however , the compact being virtually make , Mr. Guppy propose to 
 dispatch the trusty Smallweed to ascertain if Mr. Krook be at home , 
 as in that case they may complete the negotiation without delay . 
 Mr. Jobling approve , Smallweed put himself under the tall hat 
 and convey it out of the dining - room in the Guppy manner . he 
 soon return with the intelligence that Mr. Krook be at home and 
 that he have see he through the shop - door , sit in the back 
 premise , sleep " like one o'clock . " 
 " then I will pay , " say Mr. Guppy , " and we will go and see he . small , 
 what will it be ? " 
 Mr. Smallweed , compel the attendance of the waitress with one 
 hitch of his eyelash , instantly reply as follow : " four veal and 
 ham be three , and four potato be three and four , and one summer 
 cabbage be three and six , and three marrow be four and six , and 
 six bread be five , and three Cheshires be five and three , and four 
 half - pint of half - and - half be six and three , and four small rum 
 be eight and three , and three Pollys be eight and six . eight and 
 six in half a sovereign , polly , and eighteenpence out ! " 
 not at all excited by these stupendous calculation , smallweed 
 dismiss his friend with a cool nod and remain behind to take a 
 little admiring notice of Polly , as opportunity may serve , and to 
 read the daily paper , which be so very large in proportion to 
 himself , shorn of his hat , that when he hold up the Times to run 
 his eye over the column , he seem to have retire for the night 
 and to have disappear under the bedclothe . 
 Mr. Guppy and Mr. Jobling repair to the rag and bottle shop , where 
 they find Krook still sleep like one o'clock , that be to say , 
 breathe stertorously with his chin upon his breast and quite 
 insensible to any external sound or even to gentle shake . on 
 the table beside he , among the usual lumber , stand an empty gin- 
 bottle and a glass . the unwholesome air be so stain with this 
 liquor that even the green eye of the cat upon her shelf , as they 
 open and shut and glimmer on the visitor , look drunk . 
 " hold up here ! " say Mr. Guppy , give the relaxed figure of the 
 old man another shake . " Mr. Krook ! Halloa , sir ! " 
 but it would seem as easy to wake a bundle of old clothe with a 
 spirituous heat smoulder in it . " do you ever see such a stupor 
 as he fall into , between drink and sleep ? " say Mr. Guppy . 
 " if this be his regular sleep , " return Jobling , rather alarmed , 
 " it will last a long time one of these day , I be think . " 
 " it be always more like a fit than a nap , " say Mr. Guppy , shake 
 he again . " Halloa , your lordship ! why , he might be rob fifty 
 time over ! open your eye ! " 
 after much ado , he open they , but without appear to see his 
 visitor or any other object . though he cross one leg on 
 another , and fold his hand , and several time close and open 
 his parched lip , he seem to all intent and purpose as 
 insensible as before . 
 " he be alive , at any rate , " say Mr. Guppy . " how be you , my Lord 
 Chancellor . I have bring a friend of mine , sir , on a little 
 matter of business . " 
 the old man still sit , often smack his dry lip without the 
 least consciousness . after some minute he make an attempt to 
 rise . they help he up , and he stagger against the wall and 
 stare at they . 
 " how do you do , Mr. Krook ? " say Mr. Guppy in some discomfiture . 
 " how do you do , sir ? you be look charming , Mr. Krook . I hope 
 you be pretty well ? " 
 the old man , in aim a purposeless blow at Mr. Guppy , or at 
 nothing , feebly swing himself round and come with his face 
 against the wall . so he remain for a minute or two , heap up 
 against it , and then stagger down the shop to the front door . the 
 air , the movement in the court , the lapse of time , or the 
 combination of these thing recover he . he come back pretty 
 steadily , adjust his fur cap on his head and look keenly at 
 they . 
 " your servant , gentleman ; I have   be doze . hi ! I be hard to wake , 
 odd time . " 
 " rather so , indeed , sir , " respond Mr. Guppy . 
 " what ? you have   be a - try to do it , have you ? " say the 
 suspicious Krook . 
 " only a little , " Mr. Guppy explain . 
 the old man 's eye rest on the empty bottle , he take it up , 
 examine it , and slowly tilt it upside down . 
 " I say ! " he cry like the hobgoblin in the story . " somebody 's 
 be make free here ! " 
 " I assure you we find it so , " say Mr. Guppy . " would you allow I 
 to get it fill for you ? " 
 " yes , certainly I would ! " cry Krook in high glee . " certainly I 
 would ! do not   mention it ! get it fill next door - Sol 's Arms - the 
 Lord Chancellor 's fourteenpenny . bless you , they know I ! " 
 he so press the empty bottle upon Mr. Guppy that that gentleman , 
 with a nod to his friend , accept the trust and hurry out and 
 hurry in again with the bottle fill . the old man receive it 
 in his arm like a beloved grandchild and pat it tenderly . 
 " but , I say , " he whisper , with his eye screw up , after taste 
 it , " this be not   the Lord Chancellor 's fourteenpenny . this be 
 eighteenpenny ! " 
 " I think you might like that well , " say Mr. Guppy . 
 " you be a nobleman , sir , " return Krook with another taste , and his 
 hot breath seem to come towards they like a flame . " you be a 
 baron of the land . " 
 take advantage of this auspicious moment , Mr. Guppy present his 
 friend under the impromptu name of Mr. Weevle and state the object 
 of their visit . Krook , with his bottle under his arm   he never 
 get beyond a certain point of either drunkenness or sobriety , 
 take time to survey his propose lodger and seem to approve of 
 he . " you would like to see the room , young man ? " he say . " ah ! it be 
 a good room ! be whitewash . be clean down with soft soap 
 and soda . hi ! it be worth twice the rent , let alone my company 
 when you want it and such a cat to keep the mouse away . " 
 commend the room after this manner , the old man take they 
 upstairs , where indeed they do find it clean than it use to be 
 and also contain some old article of furniture which he have dig 
 up from his inexhaustible store . the term be easily conclude - 
 for the Lord Chancellor can not be hard on Mr. Guppy , associate as 
 he be with Kenge and Carboy , Jarndyce and Jarndyce , and other 
 famous claim on his professional consideration - and it be agree 
 that Mr. Weevle shall take possession on the morrow . Mr. Weevle 
 and Mr. Guppy then repair to Cook 's Court , Cursitor Street , where 
 the personal introduction of the former to Mr. Snagsby be effect 
 and   more important   the vote and interest of Mrs. Snagsby be 
 secure . they then report progress to the eminent Smallweed , 
 wait at the office in his tall hat for that purpose , and 
 separate , Mr. Guppy explain that he would terminate his little 
 entertainment by stand treat at the play but that there be 
 chord in the human mind which would render it a hollow mockery . 
 on the morrow , in the dusk of evening , Mr. Weevle modestly appear 
 at Krook 's , by no mean incommode with luggage , and establish 
 himself in his new lodging , where the two eye in the shutter 
 stare at he in his sleep , as if they be full of wonder . on the 
 follow day Mr. Weevle , who be a handy good - for - nothing kind of 
 young fellow , borrow a needle and thread of Miss Flite and a 
 hammer of his landlord and go to work devising apology for 
 window - curtain , and knock up apology for shelf , and hang 
 up his two teacup , milkpot , and crockery sundrie on a pennyworth 
 of little hook , like a shipwreck sailor make the good of it . 
 but what Mr. Weevle prize most of all his few possession   next 
 after his light whisker , for which he have an attachment that only 
 whisker can awaken in the breast of man   be a choice collection of 
 copper - plate impression from that truly national work the 
 Divinities of Albion , or Galaxy Gallery of British Beauty , 
 represent lady of title and fashion in every variety of smirk 
 that art , combine with capital , be capable of produce . with 
 these magnificent portrait , unworthily confine in a band - box 
 during his seclusion among the market - garden , he decorate his 
 apartment ; and as the Galaxy Gallery of British Beauty wear every 
 variety of fancy dress , play every variety of musical instrument , 
 fondle every variety of dog , ogle every variety of prospect , and 
 be back up by every variety of flower - pot and balustrade , the 
 result be very impose . 
 but fashion be Mr. Weevle 's , as it be Tony Jobling 's , weakness . 
 to borrow yesterday 's paper from the Sol 's arm of an evening and 
 read about the brilliant and distinguished meteor that be 
 shoot across the fashionable sky in every direction be 
 unspeakable consolation to he . to know what member of what 
 brilliant and distinguished circle accomplish the brilliant and 
 distinguished feat of join it yesterday or contemplate the no 
 less brilliant and distinguished feat of leave it to - morrow give 
 he a thrill of joy . to be inform what the Galaxy Gallery of 
 British Beauty be about , and mean to be about , and what Galaxy 
 marriage be on the tapis , and what Galaxy rumour be in 
 circulation , be to become acquainted with the most glorious 
 destiny of mankind . Mr. Weevle revert from this intelligence to 
 the Galaxy portrait implicate , and seem to know the original , 
 and to be know of they . 
 for the rest he be a quiet lodger , full of handy shift and device 
 as before mention , able to cook and clean for himself as well as 
 to carpenter , and develop social inclination after the shade 
 of evening have fall on the court . at those time , when he be 
 not visit by Mr. Guppy or by a small light in his likeness 
 quench in a dark hat , he come out of his dull room - where he have 
 inherit the deal wilderness of desk bespatter with a rain of 
 ink - and talk to Krook or be " very free , " as they call it in the 
 court , commendingly , with any one dispose for conversation . 
 wherefore , Mrs. Piper , who lead the court , be impel to offer 
 two remark to Mrs. Perkins : firstly , that if her Johnny be to 
 have whisker , she could wish them to be identically like that young 
 man 's ; and secondly , " mark my word , Mrs. Perkins , ma'am , and do not 
 you be surprised , Lord bless you , if that young man come in at 
 last for old Krook 's money ! " 
 CHAPTER XXI 
 the Smallweed Family 
 in a rather ill - favour and ill - savoured neighbourhood , though one 
 of its rise ground bear the name of Mount Pleasant , the Elfin 
 Smallweed , christen Bartholomew and know on the domestic hearth 
 as Bart , pass that limited portion of his time on which the 
 office and its contingency have no claim . he dwell in a little 
 narrow street , always solitary , shady , and sad , closely bricke in 
 on all side like a tomb , but where there yet linger the stump of 
 an old forest tree whose flavour be about as fresh and natural as 
 the Smallweed smack of youth . 
 there have be only one child in the Smallweed family for several 
 generation . little old man and woman there have be , but no 
 child , until Mr. Smallweed 's grandmother , now live , become weak 
 in her intellect and fall   for the first time   into a childish 
 state . with such infantine grace as a total want of observation , 
 memory , understanding , and interest , and an eternal disposition to 
 fall asleep over the fire and into it , Mr. Smallweed 's grandmother 
 have undoubtedly brighten the family . 
 Mr. Smallweed 's grandfather be likewise of the party . he be in a 
 helpless condition as to his low , and nearly so as to his upper , 
 limb , but his mind be unimpaired . it hold , as well as it ever 
 hold , the first four rule of arithmetic and a certain small 
 collection of the hard fact . in respect of ideality , 
 reverence , wonder , and other such phrenological attribute , it be 
 no bad off than it use to be . everything that Mr. Smallweed 's 
 grandfather ever put away in his mind be a grub at first , and be a 
 grub at last . in all his life he have never breed a single 
 butterfly . 
 the father of this pleasant grandfather , of the neighbourhood of 
 Mount Pleasant , be a horny - skin , two - legged , money - get 
 specie of spider who spin webs to catch unwary fly and retire 
 into hole until they be entrap . the name of this old pagan 's 
 god be Compound Interest . he live for it , marry it , die of 
 it . meet with a heavy loss in an honest little enterprise in 
 which all the loss be intend to have be on the other side , he 
 break something - something necessary to his existence , therefore it 
 could not   have be his heart - and make an end of his career . as 
 his character be not good , and he have be breed at a charity 
 school in a complete course , accord to question and answer , of 
 those ancient people the Amorites and Hittites , he be frequently 
 quote as an example of the failure of education . 
 his spirit shine through his son , to whom he have always preach of 
 " go out " early in life and whom he make a clerk in a sharp 
 scrivener 's office at twelve year old . there the young gentleman 
 improve his mind , which be of a lean and anxious character , and 
 develop the family gift , gradually elevate himself into the 
 discount profession . go out early in life and marry late , 
 as his father have do before he , he too begat a lean and anxious- 
 minded son , who in his turn , go out early in life and marrying 
 late , become the father of Bartholomew and Judith Smallweed , twin . 
 during the whole time consume in the slow growth of this family 
 tree , the house of Smallweed , always early to go out and late to 
 marry , have strengthen itself in its practical character , have 
 discard all amusement , discountenance all story - book , fairy- 
 tale , fiction , and fable , and banish all levity whatsoever . 
 hence the gratifying fact that it have have no child bear to it and 
 that the complete little man and woman whom it have produce have 
 be observe to bear a likeness to old monkey with something 
 depress on their mind . 
 at the present time , in the dark little parlour certain foot below 
 the level of the street - a grim , hard , uncouth parlour , only 
 ornament with the coarse of baize table - cover , and the hard 
 of sheet - iron tea - tray , and offer in its decorative character 
 no bad allegorical representation of Grandfather Smallweed 's mind - 
 seat in two black horsehair porter 's chair , one on each side of 
 the fire - place , the superannuate Mr. and Mrs. Smallweed while away 
 the rosy hour . on the stove be a couple of trivet for the pot 
 and kettle which it be Grandfather Smallweed 's usual occupation to 
 watch , and project from the chimney - piece between they be a sort 
 of brass gallow for roasting , which he also superintend when it 
 be in action . under the venerable Mr. Smallweed 's seat and guard 
 by his spindle leg be a drawer in his chair , report to contain 
 property to a fabulous amount . beside he be a spare cushion with 
 which he be always provide in order that he may have something to 
 throw at the venerable partner of his respected age whenever she 
 make an allusion to money - a subject on which he be particularly 
 sensitive . 
 " and where be Bart ? " Grandfather Smallweed inquire of Judy , Bart 's 
 twin sister . 
 " he an't   come in yet , " say Judy . 
 " it be his tea - time , be not   it ? " 
 " no . " 
 " how much do you mean to say it want then ? " 
 " ten minute . " 
 " hey ? " 
 " ten minute . "   Loud on the part of Judy . 
 " Ho ! " say Grandfather Smallweed . " ten minute . " 
 Grandmother Smallweed , who have be mumble and shake her head 
 at the trivet , hear figure mention , connect they with money 
 and screech like a horrible old parrot without any plumage , " ten 
 ten - pound note ! " 
 Grandfather Smallweed immediately throw the cushion at she . 
 " Drat you , be quiet ! " say the good old man . 
 the effect of this act of jaculation be twofold . it not only 
 double up Mrs. Smallweed 's head against the side of her porter 's 
 chair and cause she to present , when extricate by her 
 granddaughter , a highly unbecoming state of cap , but the necessary 
 exertion recoil on Mr. Smallweed himself , whom it throw back into 
 his porter 's chair like a broken puppet . the excellent old 
 gentleman be at these time a mere clothe - bag with a black 
 skull - cap on the top of it , do not present a very animate 
 appearance until he have undergo the two operation at the hand 
 of his granddaughter of be shake up like a great bottle and 
 poke and punch like a great bolster . some indication of a neck 
 be develop in he by these mean , he and the sharer of his 
 life 's evening again front one another in their two porter 's 
 chair , like a couple of sentinel long forget on their post by 
 the Black Serjeant , Death . 
 Judy the twin be worthy company for these associate . she be so 
 indubitably sister to Mr. Smallweed the young that the two 
 knead into one would hardly make a young person of average 
 proportion , while she so happily exemplify the before - mention 
 family likeness to the monkey tribe that attire in a spangled robe 
 and cap she might walk about the table - land on the top of a barrel- 
 organ without exciting much remark as an unusual speciman . under 
 exist circumstance , however , she be dress in a plain , spare 
 gown of brown stuff . 
 Judy never own a doll , never hear of Cinderella , never play at 
 any game . she once or twice fall into child 's company when she 
 be about ten year old , but the child could not   get on with 
 Judy , and Judy could not   get on with they . she seem like an 
 animal of another specie , and there be instinctive repugnance on 
 both side . it be very doubtful whether Judy know how to laugh . 
 she have so rarely see the thing do that the probability be 
 strong the other way . of anything like a youthful laugh , she 
 certainly can have no conception . if she be to try one , she 
 would find her tooth in her way , model that action of her face , 
 as she have unconsciously model all its other expression , on her 
 pattern of sordid age . such be Judy . 
 and her twin brother could not   wind up a top for his life . he know 
 no more of Jack the Giant Killer or of Sinbad the Sailor than he 
 know of the people in the star . he could as soon play at leap- 
 frog or at cricket as change into a cricket or a frog himself . but 
 he be so much the well off than his sister that on his narrow 
 world of fact an opening have dawn into such broad region as 
 lie within the ken of Mr. Guppy . hence his admiration and his 
 emulation of that shin enchanter . 
 Judy , with a gong - like clash and clatter , set one of the sheet- 
 iron tea - tray on the table and arrange cup and saucer . the 
 bread she put on in an iron basket , and the butter   and not much 
 of it   in a small pewter plate . Grandfather Smallweed look hard 
 after the tea as it be serve out and ask Judy where the girl be . 
 " Charley , do you mean ? " say Judy . 
 " Hey ? " from Grandfather Smallweed . 
 " Charley , do you mean ? " 
 this touch a spring in Grandmother Smallweed , who , chuckle as 
 usual at the trivet , cry , " over the water ! Charley over the 
 water , Charley over the water , over the water to Charley , Charley 
 over the water , over the water to Charley ! " and become quite 
 energetic about it . Grandfather look at the cushion but have not 
 sufficiently recover his late exertion . 
 " ha ! " he say when there be silence . " if that be her name . she 
 eat a deal . it would be well to allow she for her keep . " 
 Judy , with her brother 's wink , shake her head and purse up her 
 mouth into no without say it . 
 " no ? " return the old man . " why not ? " 
 " she would want sixpence a day , and we can do it for less , " say Judy . 
 " sure ? " 
 Judy answer with a nod of deep meaning and call , as she 
 scrap the butter on the loaf with every precaution against waste 
 and cut it into slice , " you , Charley , where be you ? " timidly 
 obedient to the summon , a little girl in a rough apron and a large 
 bonnet , with her hand cover with soap and water and a scrub 
 brush in one of they , appear , and curtsys . 
 " what work be you about now ? " say Judy , make an ancient snap at 
 she like a very sharp old beldame . 
 " I be a - clean the upstairs back room , miss , " reply Charley . 
 " mind you do it thoroughly , and do not   loiter . shirk will not   do 
 for I . make haste ! go along ! " cry Judy with a stamp upon the 
 ground . " you girl be more trouble than you be worth , by half . " 
 on this severe matron , as she return to her task of scrap the 
 butter and cut the bread , fall the shadow of her brother , 
 look in at the window . for whom , knife and loaf in hand , she 
 open the street - door . 
 " aye , aye , Bart ! " say Grandfather Smallweed . " here you be , hey ? " 
 " here I be , " say Bart . 
 " be along with your friend again , Bart ? " 
 small nod . 
 " dining at his expense , Bart ? " 
 small nod again . 
 " that be right . live at his expense as much as you can , and take 
 warning by his foolish example . that be the use of such a friend . 
 the only use you can put he to , " say the venerable sage . 
 his grandson , without receive this good counsel as dutifully as 
 he might , honour it with all such acceptance as may lie in a 
 slight wink and a nod and take a chair at the tea - table . the four 
 old face then hover over teacup like a company of ghastly 
 cherubim , Mrs. Smallweed perpetually twitch her head and 
 chatter at the trivet and Mr. Smallweed require to be 
 repeatedly shake up like a large black draught . 
 " yes , yes , " say the good old gentleman , revert to his lesson of 
 wisdom . " that be such advice as your father would have give you , 
 Bart . you never see your father . More be the pity . he be my true 
 son . " whether it be intend to be convey that he be 
 particularly pleasant to look at , on that account , do not appear . 
 " he be my true son , " repeat the old gentleman , fold his bread 
 and butter on his knee , " a good accountant , and die fifteen year 
 ago . " 
 Mrs. Smallweed , follow her usual instinct , break out with 
 " fifteen hundred pound . fifteen hundred pound in a black box , 
 fifteen hundred pound lock up , fifteen hundred pound put away 
 and hid ! " her worthy husband , set aside his bread and butter , 
 immediately discharge the cushion at she , crush she against 
 the side of her chair , and fall back in his own , overpower . 
 his appearance , after visit Mrs. Smallweed with one of 
 these admonition , be particularly impressive and not wholly 
 prepossessing , firstly because the exertion generally twist 
 his black skull - cap over one eye and give he an air of goblin 
 rakishness , secondly because he mutter violent imprecation 
 against Mrs. Smallweed , and thirdly because the contrast between 
 those powerful expression and his powerless figure be suggestive 
 of a baleful old malignant who would be very wicked if he could . 
 all this , however , be so common in the Smallweed family circle that 
 it produce no impression . the old gentleman be merely shake and 
 have his internal feather beat up , the cushion be restore to 
 its usual place beside he , and the old lady , perhaps with her cap 
 adjust and perhaps not , be plant in her chair again , ready to 
 be bowl down like a ninepin . 
 some time elapse in the present instance before the old gentleman 
 be sufficiently cool to resume his discourse , and even then he 
 mix it up with several edify expletive address to the 
 unconscious partner of his bosom , who hold communication with 
 nothing on earth but the trivet . as thus : " if your father , Bart , 
 have live long , he might have be worth a deal of money - you 
 brimstone chatterer ! - but just as he be begin to build up the 
 house that he have be make the foundation for , through many a 
 year - you jade of a magpie , jackdaw , and poll - parrot , what do you 
 mean ! - he take ill and die of a low fever , always be a sparing 
 and a spare man , full of business care - I should like to throw a 
 cat at you instead of a cushion , and I will too if you make such a 
 confound fool of yourself ! - and your mother , who be a prudent 
 woman as dry as a chip , just dwindle away like touchwood after you 
 and Judy be bear - you be an old pig . you be a brimstone pig . 
 you be a head of swine ! " 
 Judy , not interested in what she have often hear , begin to collect 
 in a basin various tributary stream of tea , from the bottom of 
 cup and saucer and from the bottom of the tea - pot for the little 
 charwoman 's evening meal . in like manner she get together , in the 
 iron bread - basket , as many outside fragment and wear - down heel of 
 loaf as the rigid economy of the house have leave in existence . 
 " but your father and I be partner , Bart , " say the old 
 gentleman , " and when I be go , you and Judy will have all there 
 be . it be rare for you both that you go out early in life - Judy 
 to the flower business , and you to the law . you will not   want to 
 spend it . you will get your living without it , and put more to it . 
 when I be go , Judy will go back to the flower business and you will 
 still stick to the law . " 
 one might infer from Judy 's appearance that her business rather lie 
 with the thorn than the flower , but she have in her time be 
 apprentice to the art and mystery of artificial flower - making . a 
 close observer might perhaps detect both in her eye and her 
 brother 's , when their venerable grandsire anticipate his being 
 go , some little impatience to know when he may be go , and some 
 resentful opinion that it be time he go . 
 " now , if everybody have do , " say Judy , complete her 
 preparation , " I will have that girl in to her tea . she would never 
 leave off if she take it by herself in the kitchen . " 
 Charley be accordingly introduce , and under a heavy fire of eye , 
 sit down to her basin and a druidical ruin of bread and butter . 
 in the active superintendence of this young person , Judy Smallweed 
 appear to attain a perfectly geological age and to date from the 
 remotest period . her systematic manner of fly at she and 
 pounce on she , with or without pretence , whether or no , be 
 wonderful , evince an accomplishment in the art of girl - driving 
 seldom reach by the old practitioner . 
 " now , do not   stare about you all the afternoon , " cry Judy , shake 
 her head and stamp her foot as she happen to catch the glance 
 which have be previously sound the basin of tea , " but take your 
 victual and get back to your work . " 
 " yes , miss , " say Charley . 
 " do not   say yes , " return Miss Smallweed , " for I know what you girl 
 be . do it without say it , and then I may begin to believe 
 you . " 
 Charley swallow a great gulp of tea in token of submission and so 
 disperse the Druidical ruin that Miss Smallweed charge she not 
 to gormandize , which " in you girl , " she observe , be disgusting . 
 Charley might find some more difficulty in meet her view on the 
 general subject of girl but for a knock at the door . 
 " see who it be , and do not   chew when you open it ! " cry Judy . 
 the object of her attention withdraw for the purpose , Miss 
 Smallweed take that opportunity of jumble the remainder of the 
 bread and butter together and launch two or three dirty tea - cup 
 into the ebb - tide of the basin of tea as a hint that she consider 
 the eating and drinking terminate . 
 " now ! who be it , and what be want ? " say the snappish Judy . 
 it be one Mr. George , it appear . without other announcement or 
 ceremony , Mr. George walk in . 
 " Whew ! " say Mr. George . " you be hot here . always a fire , eh ? 
 well ! perhaps you do right to get use to one . " Mr. George make 
 the latter remark to himself as he nod to Grandfather Smallweed . 
 " Ho ! it be you ! " cry the old gentleman . " how de do ? how de do ? " 
 " middling , " reply Mr. George , take a chair . " your 
 granddaughter I have have the honour of see before ; my service to 
 you , miss . " 
 " this be my grandson , " say Grandfather Smallweed . " you ha'n't 
 see he before . he be in the law and not much at home . " 
 " my service to he , too ! he be like his sister . he be very like 
 his sister . he be devilish like his sister , " say Mr. George , 
 lay a great and not altogether complimentary stress on his last 
 adjective . 
 " and how do the world use you , Mr. George ? " Grandfather Smallweed 
 inquire , slowly rub his leg . 
 " pretty much as usual . like a football . " 
 he be a swarthy brown man of fifty , well make , and good looking , 
 with crisp dark hair , bright eye , and a broad chest . his sinewy 
 and powerful hand , as sunburnt as his face , have evidently be 
 use to a pretty rough life . what be curious about he be that he 
 sit forward on his chair as if he be , from long habit , allow 
 space for some dress or accoutrement that he have altogether lay 
 aside . his step too be measure and heavy and would go well with a 
 weighty clash and jingle of spur . he be close - shave now , but his 
 mouth be set as if his upper lip have be for year familiar with a 
 great moustache ; and his manner of occasionally lay the open 
 palm of his broad brown hand upon it be to the same effect . 
 altogether one might guess Mr. George to have be a trooper once 
 upon a time . 
 a special contrast Mr. George make to the Smallweed family . 
 Trooper be never yet billet upon a household more unlike he . 
 it be a broadsword to an oyster - knife . his developed figure and 
 their stunt form , his large manner fill any amount of room 
 and their little narrow pinch way , his sound voice and their 
 sharp spare tone , be in the strong and the strange 
 opposition . as he sit in the middle of the grim parlour , lean 
 a little forward , with his hand upon his thigh and his elbow 
 square , he look as though , if he remain there long , he would 
 absorb into himself the whole family and the whole four - room 
 house , extra little back - kitchen and all . 
 " do you rub your leg to rub life into them ? " he ask of Grandfather 
 Smallweed after look round the room . 
 " why , it be partly a habit , Mr. George , and - yes - it partly help 
 the circulation , " he reply . 
 " the cir - cu - la - tion ! " repeat Mr. George , fold his arm upon his 
 chest and seem to become two size large . " not much of that , I 
 should think . " 
 " truly I be old , Mr. George , " say Grandfather Smallweed . " but I 
 can carry my year . I be old than she , " nod at his wife , " and 
 see what she be ? you be a brimstone chatterer ! " with a sudden 
 revival of his late hostility . 
 " unlucky old soul ! " say Mr. George , turn his head in that 
 direction . " do not   scold the old lady . look at she here , with her 
 poor cap half off her head and her poor hair all in a muddle . hold 
 up , ma'am . that be well . there we be ! think of your mother , 
 Mr. Smallweed , " say Mr. George , come back to his seat from 
 assist she , " if your wife an't   enough . " 
 " I suppose you be an excellent son , Mr. George ? " the old man 
 hint with a leer . 
 the colour of Mr. George 's face rather deepen as he reply , " why 
 no . I be not . " 
 " I be astonish at it . " 
 " so be I. I ought to have be a good son , and I think I mean to 
 have be one . but I be not . I be a thunder bad son , that be 
 the long and the short of it , and never be a credit to anybody . " 
 " surprising ! " cry the old man . 
 " however , " Mr. George resume , " the less say about it , the well 
 now . come ! you know the agreement . always a pipe out of the two 
 month ' interest !   bosh ! it be all correct . you need not   be afraid 
 to order the pipe . here be the new bill , and here be the two month ' 
 interest - money , and a devil - and - all of a scrape it be to get it 
 together in my business . " 
 Mr. George sit , with his arm fold , consume the family and the 
 parlour while Grandfather Smallweed be assist by Judy to two 
 black leathern case out of a locked bureau , in one of which he 
 secure the document he have just receive , and from the other take 
 another similar document which he hand to Mr. George , who twist 
 it up for a pipelight . as the old man inspect , through his 
 glass , every up - stroke and down - stroke of both document before 
 he release they from their leathern prison , and as he count the 
 money three time over and require Judy to say every word she 
 utter at least twice , and be as tremulously slow of speech and 
 action as it be possible to be , this business be a long time in 
 progress . when it be quite conclude , and not before , he 
 disengage his ravenous eye and finger from it and answer Mr. 
 George 's last remark by say , " afraid to order the pipe ? we be 
 not so mercenary as that , sir . Judy , see directly to the pipe and 
 the glass of cold brandy - and - water for Mr. George . " 
 the sportive twin , who have be look straight before they all 
 this time except when they have be engross by the black 
 leathern case , retire together , generally disdainful of the 
 visitor , but leave he to the old man as two young cub might 
 leave a traveller to the parental bear . 
 " and there you sit , I suppose , all the day long , eh ? " say Mr. 
 George with fold arm . 
 " just so , just so , " the old man nod . 
 " and do not   you occupy yourself at all ? " 
 " I watch the fire - and the boiling and the roasting - " 
 " when there be any , " say Mr. George with great expression . 
 " just so . when there be any . " 
 " do not   you read or get read to ? " 
 the old man shake his head with sharp sly triumph . " no , no . we 
 have never be reader in our family . it do not   pay . stuff . 
 idleness . folly . no , no ! " 
 " there be not much to choose between your two state , " say the 
 visitor in a key too low for the old man 's dull hearing as he look 
 from he to the old woman and back again . " I say ! " in a loud 
 voice . 
 " I hear you . " 
 " you will sell I up at last , I suppose , when I be a day in arrear . " 
 " my dear friend ! " cry Grandfather Smallweed , stretch out both 
 hand to embrace he . " never ! never , my dear friend ! but my 
 friend in the city that I get to lend you the money - he might ! " 
 " oh ! you can not   answer for he ? " say Mr. George , finish the 
 inquiry in his low key with the word " you lie old rascal ! " 
 " my dear friend , he be not to be depend on . I would not   trust 
 he . he will have his bond , my dear friend . " 
 " devil doubt he , " say Mr. George . Charley appear with a tray , 
 on which be the pipe , a small paper of tobacco , and the brandy- 
 and - water , he ask she , " how do you come here ! you have not   get the 
 family face . " 
 " I go out to work , sir , " return Charley . 
 the trooper   if trooper he be or have be   take her bonnet off , 
 with a light touch for so strong a hand , and pat she on the head . 
 " you give the house almost a wholesome look . it want a bit of 
 youth as much as it want fresh air . " then he dismiss she , 
 light his pipe , and drink to Mr. Smallweed 's friend in the city - 
 the one solitary flight of that esteem old gentleman 's 
 imagination . 
 " so you think he might be hard upon I , eh ? " 
 " I think he might - I be afraid he would . I have know he do it , " 
 say Grandfather Smallweed incautiously , " twenty time . " 
 Incautiously , because his stricken well - half , who have be doze 
 over the fire for some time , be instantly arouse and jabber 
 " twenty thousand pound , twenty twenty - pound note in a money - box , 
 twenty guineas , twenty million twenty per cent , twenty - " and be 
 then cut short by the fly cushion , which the visitor , to whom 
 this singular experiment appear to be a novelty , snatch from she 
 face as it crush she in the usual manner . 
 " you be a brimstone idiot . you be a scorpion - a brimstone 
 scorpion ! you be a swelter toad . you be a chattering 
 clattering broomstick witch that ought to be burn ! " gasp the old 
 man , prostrate in his chair . " my dear friend , will you shake I up 
 a little ? " 
 Mr. George , who have be look first at one of they and then at 
 the other , as if he be demente , take his venerable acquaintance 
 by the throat on receive this request , and drag he upright 
 in his chair as easily as if he be a doll , appear in two mind 
 whether or no to shake all future power of cushion out of he 
 and shake he into his grave . resist the temptation , but 
 agitate he violently enough to make his head roll like a 
 harlequin 's , he put he smartly down in his chair again and 
 adjust his skull - cap with such a rub that the old man wink with 
 both eye for a minute afterwards . 
 " o Lord ! " gasp Mr. Smallweed . " that will do . thank you , my dear 
 friend , that will do . oh , dear I , I be out of breath . o Lord ! " and 
 Mr. Smallweed say it not without evident apprehension of his dear 
 friend , who still stand over he loom large than ever . 
 the alarming presence , however , gradually subside into its chair 
 and fall to smoke in long puff , console itself with the 
 philosophical reflection , " the name of your friend in the city 
 begin with a d , comrade , and you be about right respect the 
 bond . " 
 " do you speak , Mr. George ? " inquire the old man . 
 the trooper shake his head , and lean forward with his right 
 elbow on his right knee and his pipe support in that hand , while 
 his other hand , rest on his left leg , square his left elbow in 
 a martial manner , continue to smoke . meanwhile he look at Mr. 
 Smallweed with grave attention and now and then fan the cloud of 
 smoke away in order that he may see he the more clearly . 
 " I take it , " he say , make just as much and as little change in 
 his position as will enable he to reach the glass to his lip with 
 a round , full action , " that I be the only man alive   or dead 
 either   that get the value of a pipe out of you ? " 
 " well , " return the old man , " it be true that I do not   see company , 
 Mr. George , and that I do not   treat . I can not   afford to it . but as 
 you , in your pleasant way , make your pipe a condition - " 
 " why , it be not for the value of it ; that be no great thing . it be 
 a fancy to get it out of you . to have something in for my money . " 
 " ha ! you be prudent , prudent , sir ! " cry Grandfather Smallweed , 
 rub his leg . 
 " very . I always be . " puff . " it be a sure sign of my prudence 
 that I ever find the way here . " puff . " also , that I be what I 
 be . " Puff . " I be well known to be prudent , " say Mr. George , 
 composedly smoke . " I rise in life that way . " 
 " do not   he down - hearte , sir . you may rise yet . " 
 Mr. George laugh and drink . 
 " Ha'n't   you no relation , now , " ask Grandfather Smallweed with a 
 twinkle in his eye , " who would pay off this little principal or 
 who would lend you a good name or two that I could persuade my 
 friend in the city to make you a further advance upon ? two good 
 name would be sufficient for my friend in the city . Ha'n't   you no 
 such relation , Mr. George ? " 
 Mr. George , still composedly smoking , reply , " if I have , I 
 should not   trouble they . I have be trouble enough to my 
 belonging in my day . it may be a very good sort of penitence in a 
 vagabond , who have waste the good time of his life , to go back then 
 to decent people that he never be a credit to and live upon they , 
 but it be not my sort . the good kind of amend then for have go 
 away be to keep away , in my opinion . " 
 " but natural affection , Mr. George , " hint Grandfather Smallweed . 
 " for two good name , hey ? " say Mr. George , shake his head and 
 still composedly smoke . " no . that be not my sort either . " 
 Grandfather Smallweed have be gradually slide down in his chair 
 since his last adjustment and be now a bundle of clothe with a 
 voice in it call for Judy . that houri , appear , shake he up 
 in the usual manner and be charge by the old gentleman to remain 
 near he . for he seem chary of put his visitor to the trouble 
 of repeat his late attention . 
 " ha ! " he observe when he be in trim again . " if you could have 
 trace out the captain , Mr. George , it would have be the making 
 of you . if when you first come here , in consequence of our 
 advertisement in the newspaper - when I say ' our , ' I be allude to 
 the advertisement of my friend in the city , and one or two other 
 who embark their capital in the same way , and be so friendly 
 towards I as sometimes to give I a lift with my little pittance - 
 if at that time you could have help we , Mr. George , it would have 
 be the making of you . " 
 " I be willing enough to be ' make , ' as you call it , " say Mr. 
 George , smoke not quite so placidly as before , for since the 
 entrance of Judy he have be in some measure disturb by a 
 fascination , not of the admiring kind , which oblige he to look at 
 she as she stand by her grandfather 's chair , " but on the whole , I 
 be glad I be not   now . " 
 " why , Mr. George ? in the name of - of brimstone , why ? " say 
 Grandfather Smallweed with a plain appearance of exasperation . 
  Brimstone apparently suggest by his eye lighting on Mrs. 
 Smallweed in her slumber . 
 " for two reason , comrade . " 
 " and what two reason , Mr. George ? in the name of the - " 
 " of our friend in the city ? " suggest Mr. George , composedly 
 drinking . 
 " Aye , if you like . what two reason ? " 
 " in the first place , " return Mr. George , but still look at Judy 
 as if she be so old and so like her grandfather it be 
 indifferent which of the two he address , " you gentleman take I 
 in . you advertise that Mr. Hawdon   Captain Hawdon , if you hold to 
 the saying ' once a captain , always a captain '   be to hear of 
 something to his advantage . " 
 " well ? " return the old man shrilly and sharply . 
 " well ! " say Mr. George , smoke on . " it would not   have be much 
 to his advantage to have be clap into prison by the whole bill 
 and judgment trade of London . " 
 " how do you know that ? some of his rich relation might have pay 
 his debt or compound for them . besides , he have take US in . he 
 owe we immense sum all round . I would soon have strangle he 
 than have no return . if I sit here think of he , " snarl the old 
 man , hold up his impotent ten finger , " I want to strangle he 
 now . " and in a sudden access of fury , he throw the cushion at the 
 unoffending Mrs. Smallweed , but it pass harmlessly on one side of 
 her chair . 
 " I do not   need to be tell , " return the trooper , take his pipe 
 from his lip for a moment and carry his eye back from 
 follow the progress of the cushion to the pipe - bowl which be 
 burn low , " that he carry on heavily and go to ruin . I have 
 be at his right hand many a day when he be charge upon ruin 
 full - gallop . I be with he when he be sick and well , rich and 
 poor . I lay this hand upon he after he have run through 
 everything and break down everything beneath he - when he hold a 
 pistol to his head . " 
 " I wish he have let it off , " say the benevolent old man , " and blow 
 his head into as many piece as he owe pound ! " 
 " that would have be a smash indeed , " return the trooper coolly ; 
 " any way , he have be young , hopeful , and handsome in the day go 
 by , and I be glad I never find he , when he be neither , to lead 
 to a result so much to his advantage . that be reason number one . " 
 " I hope number two 's as good ? " snarl the old man . 
 " why , no . it be more of a selfish reason . if I have find he , I 
 must have go to the other world to look . he be there . " 
 " how do you know he be there ? " 
 " he be not   here . " 
 " how do you know he be not   here ? " 
 " do not   lose your temper as well as your money , " say Mr. George , 
 calmly knock the ash out of his pipe . " he be drown long 
 before . I be convinced of it . he go over a ship 's side . 
 whether intentionally or accidentally , I do not   know . perhaps your 
 friend in the city do . do you know what that tune be , Mr. 
 Smallweed ? " he add after break off to whistle one , accompany 
 on the table with the empty pipe . 
 " Tune ! " reply the old man . " no . we never have tune here . " 
 " that be the Dead March in Saul . they bury soldier to it , so it be 
 the natural end of the subject . now , if your pretty granddaughter 
  - excuse I , miss - will condescend to take care of this pipe for two 
 month , we shall save the cost of one next time . good evening , Mr. 
 Smallweed ! " 
 " my dear friend ! " the old man give he both his hand . 
 " so you think your friend in the city will be hard upon I if I 
 fall in a payment ? " say the trooper , look down upon he like a 
 giant . 
 " my dear friend , I be afraid he will , " return the old man , look 
 up at he like a pygmy . 
 Mr. George laugh , and with a glance at Mr. Smallweed and a parting 
 salutation to the scornful Judy , stride out of the parlour , 
 clash imaginary sabre and other metallic appurtenance as he 
 go . 
 " you be a damned rogue , " say the old gentleman , make a hideous 
 grimace at the door as he shut it . " but I will lime you , you dog , 
 I will lime you ! " 
 after this amiable remark , his spirit soar into those enchant 
 region of reflection which its education and pursuit have open 
 to it , and again he and Mrs. Smallweed while away the rosy hour , 
 two unrelieved sentinel forget as aforesaid by the Black 
 Serjeant . 
 while the twain be faithful to their post , Mr. George stride 
 through the street with a massive kind of swagger and a grave- 
 enough face . it be eight o'clock now , and the day be fast drawing 
 in . he stop hard by Waterloo Bridge and read a playbill , decide 
 to go to Astley 's Theatre . be there , be much delighted with the 
 horse and the feat of strength ; look at the weapon with a 
 critical eye ; disapprove of the combat as give evidence of 
 unskilful swordsmanship ; but be touch home by the sentiment . in 
 the last scene , when the Emperor of Tartary get up into a cart and 
 condescend to bless the united lover by hover over they with 
 the Union Jack , his eyelash be moisten with emotion . 
 the theatre over , Mr. George come across the water again and make 
 his way to that curious region lie about the Haymarket and 
 Leicester Square which be a centre of attraction to indifferent 
 foreign hotel and indifferent foreigner , racket - court , fighting- 
 man , swordsman , footguard , old china , gaming - house , exhibition , 
 and a large medley of shabbiness and shrink out of sight . 
 penetrate to the heart of this region , he arrive by a court and 
 a long whitewash passage at a great brick building compose of 
 bare wall , floor , roof - rafter , and skylight , on the front of 
 which , if it can be say to have any front , be paint GEORGE 'S 
 shooting GALLERY ,   c. 
 into George 's Shooting Gallery ,   c. , he go ; and in it there be 
 gaslight   partly turn off now , and two whitened target for 
 rifle - shooting , and archery accommodation , and fence appliance , 
 and all necessary for the british art of boxing . none of these 
 sport or exercise be pursue in George 's Shooting Gallery to- 
 night , which be so devoid of company that a little grotesque man 
 with a large head have it all to himself and lie asleep upon the 
 floor . 
 the little man be dress something like a gunsmith , in a green- 
 baize apron and cap ; and his face and hand be dirty with 
 gunpowder and begrime with the loading of gun . as he lie in the 
 light before a glare white target , the black upon he shin 
 again . not far off be the strong , rough , primitive table with a 
 vice upon it at which he have be work . he be a little man with 
 a face all crush together , who appear , from a certain blue and 
 speckle appearance that one of his cheek present , to have be 
 blow up , in the way of business , at some odd time or time . 
 " Phil ! " say the trooper in a quiet voice . 
 " all right ! " cry Phil , scramble to his foot . 
 " anything be do ? " 
 " flat as ever so much swipe , " say Phil . " five dozen rifle and a 
 dozen pistol . as to aim ! " Phil give a howl at the recollection . 
 " shut up shop , Phil ! " 
 as Phil move about to execute this order , it appear that he be 
 lame , though able to move very quickly . on the speckled side of 
 his face he have no eyebrow , and on the other side he have a bushy 
 black one , which want of uniformity give he a very singular and 
 rather sinister appearance . everything seem to have happen to 
 his hand that could possibly take place consistently with the 
 retention of all the finger , for they be notch , and seam , and 
 crumple all over . he appear to be very strong and lift heavy 
 bench about as if he have no idea what weight be . he have a 
 curious way of limp round the gallery with his shoulder against 
 the wall and tack off at object he want to lay hold of instead 
 of go straight to they , which have leave a smear all round the 
 four wall , conventionally call " Phil 's mark . " 
 this custodian of George 's Gallery in George 's absence conclude 
 his proceeding , when he have lock the great door and turn out 
 all the light but one , which he leave to glimmer , by drag out 
 from a wooden cabin in a corner two mattress and bed . these 
 be draw to opposite end of the gallery , the trooper make his 
 own bed and Phil make his . 
 " Phil ! " say the master , walk towards he without his coat and 
 waistcoat , and look more soldierly than ever in his brace . 
 " you be find in a doorway , be not   you ? " 
 " Gutter , " say Phil . " Watchman tumble over I . " 
 " then vagabondize come natural to you from the beginning . " 
 " as nat'ral as possible , " say Phil . 
 " good night ! " 
 " good night , guv'ner . " 
 Phil can not even go straight to bed , but find it necessary to 
 shoulder round two side of the gallery and then tack off at his 
 mattress . the trooper , after take a turn or two in the rifle- 
 distance and look up at the moon now shin through the 
 skylight , stride to his own mattress by a short route and go 
 to bed too . 
 CHAPTER XXII 
 Mr. Bucket 
 Allegory look pretty cool in Lincoln 's Inn Fields , though the 
 evening be hot , for both Mr. Tulkinghorn 's window be wide open , 
 and the room be lofty , gusty , and gloomy . these may not be 
 desirable characteristic when November come with fog and sleet or 
 January with ice and snow , but they have their merit in the sultry 
 long vacation weather . they enable Allegory , though it have cheek 
 like peach , and knee like bunch of blossom , and rosy 
 swelling for calf to its leg and muscle to its arm , to look 
 tolerably cool to - night . 
 Plenty of dust come in at Mr. Tulkinghorn 's window , and plenty 
 more have generate among his furniture and paper . it lie thick 
 everywhere . when a breeze from the country that have lose its way 
 take fright and make a blind hurry to rush out again , it fling 
 as much dust in the eye of Allegory as the law - or Mr. Tulkinghorn , 
 one of its trusty representative - may scatter , on occasion , in 
 the eye of the laity . 
 in his lower magazine of dust , the universal article into which 
 his paper and himself , and all his client , and all thing of 
 earth , animate and inanimate , be resolve , Mr. Tulkinghorn sit 
 at one of the open window enjoy a bottle of old port . though a 
 hard - grain man , close , dry , and silent , he can enjoy old wine 
 with the good . he have a priceless bin of port in some artful 
 cellar under the Fields , which be one of his many secret . when he 
 din alone in chamber , as he have din to - day , and have his bit of 
 fish and his steak or chicken bring in from the coffee - house , he 
 descend with a candle to the echo region below the deserted 
 mansion , and herald by a remote reverberation of thunder 
 door , come gravely back encircled by an earthy atmosphere and 
 carry a bottle from which he pour a radiant nectar , two score 
 and ten year old , that blush in the glass to find itself so 
 famous and fill the whole room with the fragrance of southern 
 grape . 
 Mr. Tulkinghorn , sit in the twilight by the open window , enjoy 
 his wine . as if it whisper to he of its fifty year of silence 
 and seclusion , it shut he up the close . more impenetrable than 
 ever , he sit , and drink , and mellow as it be in secrecy , 
 ponder at that twilight hour on all the mystery he know , 
 associate with darken wood in the country , and vast blank 
 shut - up house in town , and perhaps spar a thought or two for 
 himself , and his family history , and his money , and his will - all a 
 mystery to every one - and that one bachelor friend of his , a man of 
 the same mould and a lawyer too , who live the same kind of life 
 until he be seventy - five year old , and then suddenly conceive 
  as it be suppose   an impression that it be too monotonous , give 
 his gold watch to his hair - dresser one summer evening and walk 
 leisurely home to the Temple and hang himself . 
 but Mr. Tulkinghorn be not alone to - night to ponder at his usual 
 length . seat at the same table , though with his chair modestly 
 and uncomfortably draw a little way from it , sit a bald , mild , 
 shin man who cough respectfully behind his hand when the lawyer 
 bid he fill his glass . 
 " now , Snagsby , " say Mr. Tulkinghorn , " to go over this odd story 
 again . " 
 " if you please , sir . " 
 " you tell I when you be so good as to step round here last 
 night - " 
 " for which I must ask you to excuse I if it be a liberty , sir ; 
 but I remember that you have take a sort of an interest in that 
 person , and I think it possible that you might - just - wish - to - " 
 Mr. Tulkinghorn be not the man to help he to any conclusion or to 
 admit anything as to any possibility concern himself . so Mr. 
 Snagsby trail off into say , with an awkward cough , " I must ask 
 you to excuse the liberty , sir , I be sure . " 
 " not at all , " say Mr. Tulkinghorn . " you tell I , Snagsby , that 
 you put on your hat and come round without mention your 
 intention to your wife . that be prudent I think , because it be not 
 a matter of such importance that it require to be mention . " 
 " well , sir , " return Mr. Snagsby , " you see , my little woman be - not 
 to put too fine a point upon it - inquisitive . she be inquisitive . 
 poor little thing , she be liable to spasm , and it be good for she to 
 have her mind employ . in consequence of which she employ it - I 
 should say upon every individual thing she can lay hold of , whether 
 it concern she or not - especially not . my little woman have a very 
 active mind , sir . " 
 Mr. Snagsby drink and murmur with an admire cough behind his 
 hand , " dear I , very fine wine indeed ! " 
 " therefore you keep your visit to yourself last night ? " say Mr. 
 Tulkinghorn . " and to - night too ? " 
 " yes , sir , and to - night , too . my little woman be at present in - 
 not to put too fine a point on it - in a pious state , or in what she 
 consider such , and attend the Evening Exertions   which be the 
 name they go by   of a reverend party of the name of Chadband . he 
 have a great deal of eloquence at his command , undoubtedly , but I be 
 not quite favourable to his style myself . that be neither here nor 
 there . my little woman be engage in that way make it easy 
 for I to step round in a quiet manner . " 
 Mr. Tulkinghorn assent . " fill your glass , Snagsby . " 
 " thank you , sir , I be sure , " return the stationer with his cough 
 of deference . " this be wonderfully fine wine , sir ! " 
 " it be a rare wine now , " say Mr. Tulkinghorn . " it be fifty year 
 old . " 
 " be it indeed , sir ? but I be not surprised to hear it , I be sure . 
 it might be - any age almost . " after render this general tribute 
 to the port , Mr. Snagsby in his modesty cough an apology behind 
 his hand for drink anything so precious . 
 " will you run over , once again , what the boy say ? " ask Mr. 
 Tulkinghorn , put his hand into the pocket of his rusty 
 smallclothe and lean quietly back in his chair . 
 " with pleasure , sir . " 
 then , with fidelity , though with some prolixity , the law - stationer 
 repeat Jo 's statement make to the assemble guest at his house . 
 on come to the end of his narrative , he give a great start and 
 break off with , " dear I , sir , I be not   aware there be any other 
 gentleman present ! " 
 Mr. Snagsby be dismay to see , stand with an attentive face 
 between himself and the lawyer at a little distance from the table , 
 a person with a hat and stick in his hand who be not there when he 
 himself come in and have not since enter by the door or by either 
 of the window . there be a press in the room , but its hinge have 
 not creak , nor have a step be audible upon the floor . yet this 
 third person stand there with his attentive face , and his hat and 
 stick in his hand , and his hand behind he , a composed and quiet 
 listener . he be a stoutly build , steady - look , sharp - eyed man in 
 black , of about the middle - age . except that he look at Mr. 
 Snagsby as if he be go to take his portrait , there be nothing 
 remarkable about he at first sight but his ghostly manner of 
 appear . 
 " do not   mind this gentleman , " say Mr. Tulkinghorn in his quiet way . 
 " this be only Mr. Bucket . " 
 " oh , indeed , sir ? " return the stationer , express by a cough 
 that he be quite in the dark as to who Mr. Bucket may be . 
 " I want he to hear this story , " say the lawyer , " because I have 
 half a mind   for a reason   to know more of it , and he be very 
 intelligent in such thing . what do you say to this , Bucket ? " 
 " it be very plain , sir . since our people have move this boy on , 
 and he be not to be find on his old lay , if Mr. Snagsby do not 
 object to go down with I to Tom - all - Alone 's and point he out , we 
 can have he here in less than a couple of hour ' time . I can do 
 it without Mr. Snagsby , of course , but this be the short way . " 
 " Mr. Bucket be a detective officer , Snagsby , " say the lawyer in 
 explanation . 
 " be he indeed , sir ? " say Mr. Snagsby with a strong tendency in his 
 clump of hair to stand on end . 
 " and if you have no real objection to accompany Mr. Bucket to the 
 place in question , " pursue the lawyer , " I shall feel oblige to 
 you if you will do so . " 
 in a moment 's hesitation on the part of Mr. Snagsby , Bucket dip 
 down to the bottom of his mind . 
 " do not   you be afraid of hurt the boy , " he say . " you will not   do 
 that . it be all right as far as the boy 's concern . we shall only 
 bring he here to ask he a question or so I want to put to he , 
 and he will be pay for his trouble and send away again . it will be a 
 good job for he . I promise you , as a man , that you shall see the 
 boy send away all right . do not   you be afraid of hurt he ; you 
 an't   go to do that . " 
 " very well , Mr. Tulkinghorn ! " cry Mr. Snagsby cheerfully . and 
 reassure , " since that be the case - " 
 " yes ! and lookee here , Mr. Snagsby , " resume Bucket , take he 
 aside by the arm , tap he familiarly on the breast , and 
 speak in a confidential tone . " you be a man of the world , you 
 know , and a man of business , and a man of sense . that be what you 
 be . " 
 " I be sure I be much oblige to you for your good opinion , " return 
 the stationer with his cough of modesty , " but - " 
 " that be what you be , you know , " say Bucket . " now , it an't 
 necessary to say to a man like you , engage in your business , which 
 be a business of trust and require a person to be wide awake and 
 have his sens about he and his head screw on tight   I have an 
 uncle in your business once   - it an't   necessary to say to a man 
 like you that it be the good and wise way to keep little matter 
 like this quiet . do not   you see ? quiet ! " 
 " certainly , certainly , " return the other . 
 " I do not   mind tell you , " say Bucket with an engaging appearance 
 of frankness , " that as far as I can understand it , there seem to 
 be a doubt whether this dead person be not   entitle to a little 
 property , and whether this female have not   be up to some game 
 respect that property , do not   you see ? " 
 " oh ! " say Mr. Snagsby , but not appear to see quite distinctly . 
 " now , what you want , " pursue Bucket , again tap Mr. Snagsby on 
 the breast in a comfortable and soothing manner , " be that every 
 person should have their right accord to justice . that be what 
 you want . " 
 " to be sure , " return Mr. Snagsby with a nod . 
 " on account of which , and at the same time to oblige a - do you call 
 it , in your business , customer or client ? I forget how my uncle 
 use to call it . " 
 " why , I generally say customer myself , " reply Mr. Snagsby . 
 " you be right ! " return Mr. Bucket , shake hand with he quite 
 affectionately . " - on account of which , and at the same time to 
 oblige a real good customer , you mean to go down with I , in 
 confidence , to Tom - all - Alone 's and to keep the whole thing quiet 
 ever afterwards and never mention it to any one . that be about your 
 intention , if I understand you ? " 
 " you be right , sir . you be right , " say Mr. Snagsby . 
 " then here be your hat , " return his new friend , quite as intimate 
 with it as if he have make it ; " and if you be ready , I be . " 
 they leave Mr. Tulkinghorn , without a ruffle on the surface of his 
 unfathomable depth , drink his old wine , and go down into the 
 street . 
 " you do not   happen to know a very good sort of person of the name of 
 Gridley , do you ? " say Bucket in friendly converse as they descend 
 the stair . 
 " no , " say Mr. Snagsby , consider , " I do not   know anybody of that 
 name . why ? " 
 " nothing particular , " say Bucket ; " only have allow his temper 
 to get a little the well of he and have be threaten some 
 respectable people , he be keep out of the way of a warrant I 
 have get against he - which it be a pity that a man of sense should 
 do . " 
 as they walk along , Mr. Snagsby observe , as a novelty , that 
 however quick their pace may be , his companion still seem in some 
 undefinable manner to lurk and lounge ; also , that whenever he be 
 go to turn to the right or left , he pretend to have a fix 
 purpose in his mind of go straight ahead , and wheel off , 
 sharply , at the very last moment . now and then , when they pass a 
 police - constable on his beat , Mr. Snagsby notice that both the 
 constable and his guide fall into a deep abstraction as they come 
 towards each other , and appear entirely to overlook each other , and 
 to gaze into space . in a few instance , Mr. Bucket , come behind 
 some under - sized young man with a shin hat on , and his sleek 
 hair twist into one flat curl on each side of his head , almost 
 without glance at he touch he with his stick , upon which the 
 young man , look round , instantly evaporate . for the most part 
 Mr. Bucket notice thing in general , with a face as unchanging as 
 the great mourning ring on his little finger or the brooch , 
 compose of not much diamond and a good deal of setting , which he 
 wear in his shirt . 
 when they come at last to Tom - all - Alone 's , Mr. Bucket stop for a 
 moment at the corner and take a lighted bull's - eye from the 
 constable on duty there , who then accompany he with his own 
 particular bull's - eye at his waist . between his two conductor , 
 Mr. Snagsby pass along the middle of a villainous street , 
 undraine , unventilated , deep in black mud and corrupt water - 
 though the road be dry elsewhere - and reek with such smell 
 and sight that he , who have live in London all his life , can 
 scarce believe his sens . branch from this street and its 
 heap of ruin be other street and court so infamous that Mr. 
 Snagsby sicken in body and mind and feel as if he be go 
 every moment deeply down into the infernal gulf . 
 " draw off a bit here , Mr. Snagsby , " say Bucket as a kind of shabby 
 palanquin be bear towards they , surround by a noisy crowd . 
 " here be the fever come up the street ! " 
 as the unseen wretch go by , the crowd , leave that object of 
 attraction , hover round the three visitor like a dream of 
 horrible face and fade away up alley and into ruin and behind 
 wall , and with occasional cry and shrill whistle of warning , 
 thenceforth flit about they until they leave the place . 
 " be those the fever - house , Darby ? " Mr. Bucket coolly ask as he 
 turn his bull's - eye on a line of stink ruin . 
 Darby reply that " all they be , " and far that in all , for 
 month and month , the people " have be down by dozen " and have 
 be carry out dead and die " like sheep with the rot . " Bucket 
 observe to Mr. Snagsby as they go on again that he look a little 
 poorly , Mr. Snagsby answer that he feel as if he could not   breathe 
 the dreadful air . 
 there be inquiry make at various house for a boy name Jo . as few 
 people be know in Tom - all - Alone 's by any christian sign , there be 
 much reference to Mr. Snagsby whether he mean carrot , or the 
 Colonel , or Gallows , or Young Chisel , or Terrier Tip , or lanky , or 
 the Brick . Mr. Snagsby describe over and over again . there be 
 conflicting opinion respect the original of his picture . some 
 think it must be carrot , some say the Brick . the Colonel be 
 produce , but be not at all near the thing . whenever Mr. Snagsby 
 and his conductor be stationary , the crowd flow round , and from 
 its squalid depth obsequious advice heave up to Mr. Bucket . 
 whenever they move , and the angry bull' - eye glare , it fade away 
 and flit about they up the alley , and in the ruin , and behind 
 the wall , as before . 
 at last there be a lair find out where Toughy , or the tough 
 subject , lay he down at night ; and it be think that the tough 
 subject may be Jo . comparison of note between Mr. Snagsby and the 
 proprietress of the house - a drunken face tie up in a black 
 bundle , and flare out of a heap of rag on the floor of a dog- 
 hutch which be her private apartment - lead to the establishment of 
 this conclusion . toughy have go to the doctor 's to get a bottle 
 of stuff for a sick woman but will be here anon . 
 " and who have we get here to - night ? " say Mr. Bucket , open 
 another door and glare in with his bull' - eye . " two drunken man , 
 eh ? and two woman ? the man be sound enough , " turn back each 
 sleeper 's arm from his face to look at he . " be these your good 
 man , my dear ? " 
 " yes , sir , " return one of the woman . " they be our husband . " 
 " brickmaker , eh ? " 
 " yes , sir . " 
 " what be you do here ? you do not   belong to London . " 
 " no , sir . we belong to Hertfordshire . " 
 " Whereabouts in Hertfordshire ? " 
 " Saint Albans . " 
 " come up on the tramp ? " 
 " we walk up yesterday . there be no work down with we at present , 
 but we have do no good by come here , and shall do none , I 
 expect . " 
 " that be not the way to do much good , " say Mr. Bucket , turn his 
 head in the direction of the unconscious figure on the ground . 
 " it an't   indeed , " reply the woman with a sigh . " Jenny and I 
 know it full well . " 
 the room , though two or three foot high than the door , be so low 
 that the head of the tall of the visitor would touch the 
 blacken ceiling if he stand upright . it be offensive to every 
 sense ; even the gross candle burn pale and sickly in the polluted 
 air . there be a couple of bench and a high bench by way of 
 table . the man lie asleep where they stumble down , but the woman 
 sit by the candle . lie in the arm of the woman who have speak 
 be a very young child . 
 " why , what age do you call that little creature ? " say Bucket . " it 
 look as if it be bear yesterday . " he be not at all rough about 
 it ; and as he turn his light gently on the infant , Mr. Snagsby be 
 strangely remind of another infant , encircle with light , that he 
 have see in picture . 
 " he be not three week old yet , sir , " say the woman . 
 " be he your child ? " 
 " mine . " 
 the other woman , who be bend over it when they come in , stoop 
 down again and kiss it as it lie asleep . 
 " you seem as fond of it as if you be the mother yourself , " say 
 Mr. Bucket . 
 " I be the mother of one like it , master , and it die . " 
 " ah , Jenny , Jenny ! " say the other woman to she . " well so . much 
 well to think of dead than alive , Jenny ! much well ! " 
 " why , you an't   such an unnatural woman , I hope , " return Bucket 
 sternly , " as to wish your own child dead ? " 
 " God know you be right , master , " she return . " I be not . I would 
 stand between it and death with my own life if I could , as true as 
 any pretty lady . " 
 " then do not   talk in that wrong manner , " say Mr. Bucket , mollify 
 again . " why do you do it ? " 
 " it be bring into my head , master , " return the woman , her eye 
 fill with tear , " when I look down at the child lie so . if it 
 be never to wake no more , you would think I mad , I should take on so . 
 I know that very well . I be with Jenny when she lose her - warn't 
 I , Jenny ? - and I know how she grieve . but look around you at this 
 place . look at they , " glance at the sleeper on the ground . 
 " look at the boy you be wait for , who be go out to do I a good 
 turn . think of the child that your business lay with often and 
 often , and that you see grow up ! " 
 " well , well , " say Mr. Bucket , " you train he respectable , and 
 he will be a comfort to you , and look after you in your old age , you 
 know . " 
 " I mean to try hard , " she answer , wipe her eye . " but I have 
 be a - thinking , be over - tired to - night and not well with the 
 ague , of all the many thing that will come in his way . my master 
 will be against it , and he will be beat , and see I beat , and make to 
 fear his home , and perhaps to stray wild . if I work for he ever 
 so much , and ever so hard , there be no one to help I ; and if he 
 should be turn bad ' spite of all I could do , and the time should 
 come when I should sit by he in his sleep , make hard and change , 
 an't   it likely I should think of he as he lie in my lap now and 
 wish he have die as Jenny 's child die ! " 
 " there , there ! " say Jenny . " Liz , you be tired and ill . let I 
 take he . " 
 in do so , she displace the mother 's dress , but quickly 
 readjust it over the wounded and bruise bosom where the baby have 
 be lie . 
 " it be my dead child , " say Jenny , walk up and down as she 
 nurse , " that make I love this child so dear , and it be my dead 
 child that make her love it so dear too , as even to think of its 
 be take away from she now . while she think that , I think what 
 fortune would I give to have my darling back . but we mean the same 
 thing , if we know how to say it , we two mother do in our poor 
 heart ! " 
 as Mr. Snagsby blow his nose and cough his cough of sympathy , a 
 step be hear without . Mr. Bucket throw his light into the 
 doorway and say to Mr. Snagsby , " now , what do you say to Toughy ? 
 will he do ? " 
 " that be Jo , " say Mr. Snagsby . 
 Jo stand amazed in the disk of light , like a ragged figure in a 
 magic - lantern , tremble to think that he have offend against the 
 law in not have move on far enough . Mr. Snagsby , however , 
 give he the consolatory assurance , " it be only a job you will be 
 pay for , Jo , " he recover ; and on be take outside by Mr. 
 Bucket for a little private confabulation , tell his tale 
 satisfactorily , though out of breath . 
 " I have square it with the lad , " say Mr. Bucket , return , " and 
 it be all right . now , Mr. Snagsby , we be ready for you . " 
 first , Jo have to complete his errand of good nature by hand over 
 the physic he have be to get , which he deliver with the laconic 
 verbal direction that " it be to be all take d'rectly . " secondly , 
 Mr. Snagsby have to lay upon the table half a crown , his usual 
 panacea for an immense variety of affliction . thirdly , Mr. Bucket 
 have to take Jo by the arm a little above the elbow and walk he on 
 before he , without which observance neither the Tough Subject nor 
 any other subject could be professionally conduct to Lincoln 's 
 Inn Fields . these arrangement complete , they give the woman good 
 night and come out once more into black and foul Tom - all - Alone 's . 
 by the noisome way through which they descend into that pit , 
 they gradually emerge from it , the crowd flit , and whistling , 
 and skulk about they until they come to the verge , where 
 restoration of the bull' - eye be make to Darby . here the crowd , 
 like a concourse of imprison demon , turn back , yell , and be 
 see no more . through the clear and fresher street , never so 
 clear and fresh to Mr. Snagsby 's mind as now , they walk and ride 
 until they come to Mr. Tulkinghorn 's gate . 
 as they ascend the dim stair   Mr. Tulkinghorn 's chamber be on 
 the first floor , Mr. Bucket mention that he have the key of the 
 outer door in his pocket and that there be no need to ring . for a 
 man so expert in most thing of that kind , Bucket take time to 
 open the door and make some noise too . it may be that he sound a 
 note of preparation . 
 Howbeit , they come at last into the hall , where a lamp be burn , 
 and so into Mr. Tulkinghorn 's usual room - the room where he drink 
 his old wine to - night . he be not there , but his two old - fashioned 
 candlestick be , and the room be tolerably light . 
 Mr. Bucket , still have his professional hold of Jo and appear 
 to Mr. Snagsby to possess an unlimited number of eye , make a 
 little way into this room , when Jo start and stop . 
 " what be the matter ? " say Bucket in a whisper . 
 " there she be ! " cry Jo . 
 " who ! " 
 " the lady ! " 
 a female figure , closely veil , stand in the middle of the room , 
 where the light fall upon it . it be quite still and silent . the 
 front of the figure be towards they , but it take no notice of 
 their entrance and remain like a statue . 
 " now , tell I , " say Bucket aloud , " how you know that to be the 
 lady . " 
 " I know the wale , " reply Jo , star , " and the bonnet , and the 
 gownd . " 
 " be quite sure of what you say , tough , " return Bucket , narrowly 
 observant of he . " look again . " 
 " I be a - look as hard as ever I can look , " say Jo with start 
 eye , " and that there be the wale , the bonnet , and the gownd . " 
 " what about those ring you tell I of ? " ask Bucket . 
 " a - sparkle all over here , " say Jo , rub the finger of his 
 leave hand on the knuckle of his right without take his eye from 
 the figure . 
 the figure remove the right - hand glove and show the hand . 
 " now , what do you say to that ? " ask Bucket . 
 Jo shake his head . " not ring a bit like they . not a hand like 
 that . " 
 " what be you talk of ? " say Bucket , evidently please though , 
 and well please too . 
 " Hand be a deal whiter , a deal delicater , and a deal small , " 
 return Jo . 
 " why , you will tell I I be my own mother next , " say Mr. Bucket . " do 
 you recollect the lady 's voice ? " 
 " I think I do , " say Jo . 
 the figure speak . " be it at all like this ? I will speak as long 
 as you like if you be not sure . be it this voice , or at all like 
 this voice ? " 
 Jo look aghast at Mr. Bucket . " not a bit ! " 
 " then , what , " retort that worthy , point to the figure , " do you 
 say it be the lady for ? " 
 " cos , " say Jo with a perplexed stare but without be at all 
 shake in his certainty , " cos that there be the wale , the bonnet , 
 and the gownd . it be she and it an't   she . it an't   her hand , nor 
 yet her ring , nor yet her woice . but that there be the wale , the 
 bonnet , and the gownd , and they be wear the same way wot she wear 
 them , and it be her height wot she wo , and she giv I a sov'ring and 
 hook it . " 
 " well ! " say Mr. Bucket slightly , " we have not   get much good out of 
 you . but , however , here be five shilling for you . take care how 
 you spend it , and do not   get yourself into trouble . " Bucket 
 stealthily tell the coin from one hand into the other like 
 counter - which be a way he have , his principal use of they be in 
 these game of skill - and then put they , in a little pile , into 
 the boy 's hand and take he out to the door , leave Mr. Snagsby , 
 not by any mean comfortable under these mysterious circumstance , 
 alone with the veiled figure . but on Mr. Tulkinghorn 's come into 
 the room , the veil be raise and a sufficiently good - look 
 Frenchwoman be reveal , though her expression be something of the 
 intensest . 
 " thank you , Mademoiselle Hortense , " say Mr. Tulkinghorn with his 
 usual equanimity . " I will give you no further trouble about this 
 little wager . " 
 " you will do I the kindness to remember , sir , that I be not at 
 present place ? " say mademoiselle . 
 " certainly , certainly ! " 
 " and to confer upon I the favour of your distinguished 
 recommendation ? " 
 " by all mean , Mademoiselle Hortense . " 
 " a word from Mr. Tulkinghorn be so powerful . " 
 " it shall not be want , mademoiselle . " 
 " receive the assurance of my devoted gratitude , dear sir . " 
 " good night . " 
 Mademoiselle go out with an air of native gentility ; and Mr. 
 Bucket , to whom it be , on an emergency , as natural to be groom of 
 the ceremony as it be to be anything else , show she downstair , 
 not without gallantry . 
 " well , Bucket ? " quoth Mr. Tulkinghorn on his return . 
 " it be all square , you see , as I square it myself , sir . there 
 an't   a doubt that it be the other one with this one 's dress on . 
 the boy be exact respect colour and everything . Mr. Snagsby , 
 I promise you as a man that he should be send away all right . 
 do not   say it be not   do ! " 
 " you have keep your word , sir , " return the stationer ; " and if I 
 can be of no further use , Mr. Tulkinghorn , I think , as my little 
 woman will be get anxious - " 
 " thank you , Snagsby , no further use , " say Mr. Tulkinghorn . " I be 
 quite indebted to you for the trouble you have take already . " 
 " not at all , sir . I wish you good night . " 
 " you see , Mr. Snagsby , " say Mr. Bucket , accompany he to the 
 door and shake hand with he over and over again , " what I like 
 in you be that you be a man it be of no use pumping ; that be what you 
 be . when you know you have do a right thing , you put it away , 
 and it be do with and go , and there be an end of it . that be what 
 you do . " 
 " that be certainly what I endeavour to do , sir , " return Mr. 
 Snagsby . 
 " no , you do not   do yourself justice . it an't   what you endeavour to 
 do , " say Mr. Bucket , shake hand with he and bless he in 
 the tender manner , " it be what you do . that be what I estimate in 
 a man in your way of business . " 
 Mr. Snagsby make a suitable response and go homeward so confuse 
 by the event of the evening that he be doubtful of his be awake 
 and out - doubtful of the reality of the street through which he 
 go - doubtful of the reality of the moon that shin above he . 
 he be presently reassure on these subject by the unchallengeable 
 reality of Mrs. Snagsby , sit up with her head in a perfect 
 beehive of curl - paper and night - cap , who have dispatch Guster to 
 the police - station with official intelligence of her husband 's 
 be make away with , and who within the last two hour have pass 
 through every stage of swoon with the great decorum . but as 
 the little woman feelingly say , many thank she get for it ! 
 CHAPTER XXIII 
 Esther 's Narrative 
 we come home from Mr. Boythorn 's after six pleasant week . we be 
 often in the park and in the wood and seldom pass the lodge 
 where we have take shelter without look in to speak to the 
 keeper 's wife ; but we see no more of Lady Dedlock , except at church 
 on Sundays . there be company at Chesney Wold ; and although 
 several beautiful face surround she , her face retain the same 
 influence on I as at first . I do not quite know even now whether 
 it be painful or pleasurable , whether it draw I towards she or 
 make I shrink from she . I think I admire she with a kind of 
 fear , and I know that in her presence my thought always wander 
 back , as they have do at first , to that old time of my life . 
 I have a fancy , on more than one of these Sundays , that what this 
 lady so curiously be to I , I be to she - I mean that I disturb 
 her thought as she influence mine , though in some different way . 
 but when I steal a glance at she and see she so composed and 
 distant and unapproachable , I feel this to be a foolish weakness . 
 indeed , I feel the whole state of my mind in reference to she to be 
 weak and unreasonable , and I remonstrate with myself about it as 
 much as I could . 
 one incident that occur before we quit Mr. Boythorn 's house , 
 I have well mention in this place . 
 I be walk in the garden with Ada and when I be tell that some 
 one wish to see I . go into the breakfast - room where this 
 person be wait , I find it to be the french maid who have cast 
 off her shoe and walk through the wet grass on the day when it 
 thunder and lighten . 
 " Mademoiselle , " she begin , look fixedly at I with her too - eager 
 eye , though otherwise present an agreeable appearance and 
 speak neither with boldness nor servility , " I have take a great 
 liberty in come here , but you know how to excuse it , be so 
 amiable , mademoiselle . " 
 " no excuse be necessary , " I return , " if you wish to speak to I . " 
 " that be my desire , mademoiselle . a thousand thank for the 
 permission . I have your leave to speak . be it not ? " she say in a 
 quick , natural way . 
 " certainly , " say I. 
 " Mademoiselle , you be so amiable ! listen then , if you please . I 
 have leave my Lady . we could not agree . my Lady be so high , so 
 very high . Pardon ! Mademoiselle , you be right ! " her quickness 
 anticipate what I might have say presently but as yet have only 
 think . " it be not for I to come here to complain of my Lady . 
 but I say she be so high , so very high . I will not say a word 
 more . all the world know that . " 
 " go on , if you please , " say I. 
 " assuredly ; mademoiselle , I be thankful for your politeness . 
 Mademoiselle , I have an inexpressible desire to find service with a 
 young lady who be good , accomplished , beautiful . you be good , 
 accomplish , and beautiful as an angel . ah , could I have the 
 honour of be your domestic ! " 
 " I be sorry - " I begin . 
 " do not dismiss I so soon , mademoiselle ! " she say with an 
 involuntary contraction of her fine black eyebrow . " let I hope a 
 moment ! Mademoiselle , I know this service would be more retire 
 than that which I have quit . well ! I wish that . I know this 
 service would be less distinguished than that which I have quit . 
 well ! I wish that , I know that I should win less , as to wage here . 
 good . I be content . " 
 " I assure you , " say I , quite embarrassed by the mere idea of 
 have such an attendant , " that I keep no maid - " 
 " ah , mademoiselle , but why not ? why not , when you can have one so 
 devoted to you ! who would be enchant to serve you ; who would be 
 so true , so zealous , and so faithful every day ! Mademoiselle , I 
 wish with all my heart to serve you . do not speak of money at 
 present . take I as I be . for nothing ! " 
 she be so singularly earnest that I draw back , almost afraid of 
 she . without appear to notice it , in her ardour she still 
 press herself upon I , speak in a rapid subdued voice , though 
 always with a certain grace and propriety . 
 " Mademoiselle , I come from the South country where we be quick and 
 where we like and dislike very strong . my Lady be too high for 
 I ; I be too high for she . it be do - past - finish ! receive 
 I as your domestic , and I will serve you well . I will do more for 
 you than you figure to yourself now . Chut ! Mademoiselle , I will - 
 no matter , I will do my utmost possible in all thing . if you 
 accept my service , you will not repent it . Mademoiselle , you will 
 not repent it , and I will serve you well . you do not   know how 
 well ! " 
 there be a lower energy in her face as she stand look at I 
 while I explain the impossibility of my engage she   without 
 think it necessary to say how very little I desire to do so , 
 which seem to bring visibly before I some woman from the street 
 of Paris in the reign of terror . 
 she hear I out without interruption and then say with her pretty 
 accent and in her mild voice , " hey , mademoiselle , I have 
 receive my answer ! I be sorry of it . but I must go elsewhere and 
 seek what I have not find here . will you graciously let I kiss 
 your hand ? " 
 she look at I more intently as she take it , and seem to take 
 note , with her momentary touch , of every vein in it . " I fear I 
 surprise you , mademoiselle , on the day of the storm ? " she say 
 with a parting curtsy . 
 I confess that she have surprise we all . 
 " I take an oath , mademoiselle , " she say , smile , " and I want to 
 stamp it on my mind so that I might keep it faithfully . and I 
 will ! Adieu , mademoiselle ! " 
 so end our conference , which I be very glad to bring to a close . 
 I suppose she go away from the village , for I see she no more ; 
 and nothing else occur to disturb our tranquil summer pleasure 
 until six week be out and we return home as I begin just now 
 by say . 
 at that time , and for a good many week after that time , Richard 
 be constant in his visit . besides come every Saturday or 
 Sunday and remain with we until Monday morning , he sometimes 
 ride out on horseback unexpectedly and pass the evening with we 
 and ride back again early next day . he be as vivacious as ever 
 and tell we he be very industrious , but I be not easy in my mind 
 about he . it appear to I that his industry be all 
 misdirect . I could not find that it lead to anything but the 
 formation of delusive hope in connexion with the suit already the 
 pernicious cause of so much sorrow and ruin . he have get at the 
 core of that mystery now , he tell we , and nothing could be plainer 
 than that the will under which he and Ada be to take I do not   know 
 how many thousand of pound must be finally establish if there 
 be any sense or justice in the Court of Chancery - but oh , what a 
 great if that sound in my ear - and that this happy conclusion 
 could not be much long delay . he prove this to himself by all 
 the weary argument on that side he have read , and every one of they 
 sink he deeply in the infatuation . he have even begin to haunt the 
 court . he tell we how he see Miss Flite there daily , how they 
 talk together , and how he do her little kindness , and how , 
 while he laugh at she , he pity she from his heart . but he 
 never think - never , my poor , dear , sanguine Richard , capable of 
 so much happiness then , and with such well thing before he - 
 what a fatal link be riveting between his fresh youth and her 
 fade age , between his free hope and her cage bird , and her 
 hungry garret , and her wander mind . 
 Ada love he too well to mistrust he much in anything he say or 
 do , and my guardian , though he frequently complain of the east 
 wind and read more than usual in the growlery , preserve a strict 
 silence on the subject . so I think one day when I go to London 
 to meet Caddy Jellyby , at her solicitation , I would ask Richard to 
 be in wait for I at the coach - office , that we might have a 
 little talk together . I find he there when I arrive , and we 
 walk away arm in arm . 
 " well , Richard , " say I as soon as I could begin to be grave with 
 he , " be you begin to feel more settle now ? " 
 " oh , yes , my dear ! " return Richard . " I be all right enough . " 
 " but settle ? " say I. 
 " how do you mean , settle ? " return Richard with his gay laugh . 
 " settle in the law , " say I. 
 " oh , aye , " reply Richard , " I be all right enough . " 
 " you say that before , my dear Richard . " 
 " and you do not   think it be an answer , eh ? well ! perhaps it be not . 
 settle ? you mean , do I feel as if I be settle down ? " 
 " yes . " 
 " why , no , I can not   say I be settle down , " say Richard , strongly 
 emphasize " down , " as if that express the difficulty , " because 
 one can not   settle down while this business remain in such an 
 unsettled state . when I say this business , of course I mean the - 
 forbid subject . " 
 " do you think it will ever be in a settle state ? " say I. 
 " not the least doubt of it , " answer Richard . 
 we walk a little way without speak , and presently Richard 
 address I in his frank and most feeling manner , thus : " my 
 dear Esther , I understand you , and I wish to heaven I be a more 
 constant sort of fellow . I do not   mean constant to Ada , for I love 
 her dearly - well and well every day - but constant to myself . 
  somehow , I mean something that I can not   very well express , but 
 you will make it out .   if I be a more constant sort of fellow , I 
 should have hold on either to Badger or to Kenge and Carboy like 
 grim death , and should have begin to be steady and systematic by 
 this time , and should not   be in debt , and - " 
 " be you in debt , Richard ? " 
 " yes , " say Richard , " I be a little so , my dear . also , I have 
 take rather too much to billiard and that sort of thing . now the 
 murder be out ; you despise I , Esther , do not   you ? " 
 " you know I do not , " say I. 
 " you be kind to I than I often be to myself , " he return . " my 
 dear Esther , I be a very unfortunate dog not to be more settle , 
 but how can I be more settle ? if you live in an unfinished 
 house , you could not   settle down in it ; if you be condemn to 
 leave everything you undertake unfinished , you would find it hard 
 to apply yourself to anything ; and yet that be my unhappy case . I 
 be bear into this unfinished contention with all its chance and 
 change , and it begin to unsettle I before I quite know the 
 difference between a suit at law and a suit of clothe ; and it have 
 go on unsettle I ever since ; and here I be now , conscious 
 sometimes that I be but a worthless fellow to love my confiding 
 cousin Ada . " 
 we be in a solitary place , and he put his hand before his eye 
 and sob as he say the word . 
 " oh , Richard ! " say I. " do not be so moved . you have a noble 
 nature , and Ada 's love may make you worthy every day . " 
 " I know , my dear , " he reply , press my arm , " I know all that . 
 you must not   mind my be a little soft now , for I have have all 
 this upon my mind for a long time , and have often mean to speak to 
 you , and have sometimes want opportunity and sometimes courage . 
 I know what the thought of Ada ought to do for I , but it do not 
 do it . I be too unsettled even for that . I love she most 
 devotedly , and yet I do she wrong , in do myself wrong , every day 
 and hour . but it can not   last for ever . we shall come on for a 
 final hearing and get judgment in our favour , and then you and Ada 
 shall see what I can really be ! " 
 it have give I a pang to hear he sob and see the tear start out 
 between his finger , but that be infinitely less affect to I 
 than the hopeful animation with which he say these word . 
 " I have look well into the paper , Esther . I have be deep in 
 they for month , " he continue , recover his cheerfulness in a 
 moment , " and you may rely upon it that we shall come out 
 triumphant . as to year of delay , there have be no want of they , 
 heaven know ! and there be the great probability of our bringing 
 the matter to a speedy close ; in fact , it be on the paper now . it 
 will be all right at last , and then you shall see ! " 
 recall how he have just now place Messrs. Kenge and Carboy in 
 the same category with Mr. Badger , I ask he when he intend to 
 be article in Lincoln 's Inn . 
 " there again ! I think not at all , Esther , " he return with an 
 effort . " I fancy I have have enough of it . have work at 
 Jarndyce and Jarndyce like a galley slave , I have slake my thirst 
 for the law and satisfy myself that I should not   like it . 
 besides , I find it unsettle I more and more to be so constantly 
 upon the scene of action . so what , " continue Richard , confident 
 again by this time , " do I naturally turn my thought to ? " 
 " I can not   imagine , " say I. 
 " do not   look so serious , " return Richard , " because it be the good 
 thing I can do , my dear Esther , I be certain . it be not as if I 
 want a profession for life . these proceeding will come to a 
 termination , and then I be provide for . no . I look upon it as a 
 pursuit which be in its nature more or less unsettled , and 
 therefore suit to my temporary condition - I may say , precisely 
 suit . what be it that I naturally turn my thought to ? " 
 I look at he and shake my head . 
 " what , " say Richard , in a tone of perfect conviction , " but the 
 army ! " 
 " the army ? " say I. 
 " the army , of course . what I have to do be to get a commission ; 
 and - there I be , you know ! " say Richard . 
 and then he show I , prove by elaborate calculation in his 
 pocket - book , that suppose he have contract , say , two hundred 
 pound of debt in six month out of the army ; and that he 
 contract no debt at all within a corresponding period in the 
 army - as to which he have quite make up his mind ; this step must 
 involve a saving of four hundred pound in a year , or two thousand 
 pound in five year , which be a considerable sum . and then he 
 speak so ingenuously and sincerely of the sacrifice he make in 
 withdraw himself for a time from Ada , and of the earnestness 
 with which he aspire - as in thought he always do , I know full 
 well - to repay her love , and to ensure her happiness , and to 
 conquer what be amiss in himself , and to acquire the very soul of 
 decision , that he make my heart ache keenly , sorely . for , I 
 think , how would this end , how could this end , when so soon and 
 so surely all his manly quality be touch by the fatal blight 
 that ruin everything it rest on ! 
 I speak to Richard with all the earnestness I feel , and all the 
 hope I could not quite feel then , and implore he for Ada 's sake 
 not to put any trust in Chancery . to all I say , Richard readily 
 assent , rid over the court and everything else in his easy way 
 and draw the bright picture of the character he be to 
 settle into - alas , when the grievous suit should loose its hold 
 upon he ! we have a long talk , but it always come back to that , in 
 substance . 
 at last we come to Soho Square , where Caddy Jellyby have appoint 
 to wait for I , as a quiet place in the neighbourhood of Newman 
 Street . Caddy be in the garden in the centre and hurry out as 
 soon as I appear . after a few cheerful word , Richard leave we 
 together . 
 " Prince have a pupil over the way , Esther , " say Caddy , " and get the 
 key for we . so if you will walk round and round here with I , we 
 can lock ourselves in and I can tell you comfortably what I want 
 to see your dear good face about . " 
 " very well , my dear , " say i. " nothing could be well . " so 
 Caddy , after affectionately squeeze the dear good face as she 
 call it , lock the gate , and take my arm , and we begin to walk 
 round the garden very cosily . 
 " you see , Esther , " say Caddy , who thoroughly enjoy a little 
 confidence , " after you speak to I about its be wrong to marry 
 without Ma 's knowledge , or even to keep Ma long in the dark 
 respect our engagement - though I do not   believe Ma care much for 
 I , I must say - I think it right to mention your opinion to 
 Prince . in the first place because I want to profit by everything 
 you tell I , and in the second place because I have no secret from 
 Prince . " 
 " I hope he approve , Caddy ? " 
 " oh , my dear ! I assure you he would approve of anything you could 
 say . you have no idea what an opinion he have of you ! " 
 " indeed ! " 
 " Esther , it be enough to make anybody but I jealous , " say Caddy , 
 laugh and shake her head ; " but it only make I joyful , for 
 you be the first friend I ever have , and the good friend I ever can 
 have , and nobody can respect and love you too much to please I . " 
 " upon my word , Caddy , " say I , " you be in the general conspiracy 
 to keep I in a good humour . well , my dear ? " 
 " well ! I be go to tell you , " reply Caddy , cross her hand 
 confidentially upon my arm . " so we talk a good deal about it , 
 and so I say to Prince , ' Prince , as Miss Summerson - ' " 
 " I hope you do not   say ' Miss Summerson ' ? " 
 " no . I do not ! " cry Caddy , greatly pleased and with the 
 bright of face . " I say , ' Esther . ' I say to Prince , ' as 
 Esther be decidedly of that opinion , Prince , and have express it 
 to I , and always hint it when she write those kind note , which 
 you be so fond of hear I read to you , I be prepared to 
 disclose the truth to Ma whenever you think proper . and I think , 
 Prince , ' say I , ' that Esther think that I should be in a well , 
 and truer , and more honourable position altogether if you do the 
 same to your papa . ' " 
 " yes , my dear , " say I. " Esther certainly do think so . " 
 " so I be right , you see ! " exclaim Caddy . " well ! this trouble 
 Prince a good deal , not because he have the least doubt about it , 
 but because he be so considerate of the feeling of old Mr. 
 Turveydrop ; and he have his apprehension that old Mr. Turveydrop 
 might break his heart , or faint away , or be very much overcome in 
 some affect manner or other if he make such an announcement . he 
 fear old Mr. Turveydrop might consider it undutiful and might 
 receive too great a shock . for old Mr. Turveydrop 's deportment be 
 very beautiful , you know , Esther , " say Caddy , " and his feeling 
 be extremely sensitive . " 
 " be they , my dear ? " 
 " oh , extremely sensitive . Prince say so . now , this have cause my 
 darling child - I do not   mean to use the expression to you , Esther , " 
 Caddy apologize , her face suffuse with blush , " but I generally 
 call Prince my darling child . " 
 I laugh ; and Caddy laugh and blush , and go on . 
 " this have cause he , Esther - " 
 " cause whom , my dear ? " 
 " oh , you tiresome thing ! " say Caddy , laughing , with her pretty 
 face on fire . " my darling child , if you insist upon it ! this have 
 cause he week of uneasiness and have make he delay , from day to 
 day , in a very anxious manner . at last he say to I , ' Caddy , if 
 Miss Summerson , who be a great favourite with my father , could be 
 prevail upon to be present when I break the subject , I think I 
 could do it . ' so I promise I would ask you . and I make up my 
 mind , besides , " say Caddy , look at I hopefully but timidly , 
 " that if you consent , I would ask you afterwards to come with I 
 to Ma . this be what I mean when I say in my note that I have a 
 great favour and a great assistance to beg of you . and if you 
 think you could grant it , Esther , we should both be very 
 grateful . " 
 " let I see , Caddy , " say I , pretend to consider . " really , I 
 think I could do a great thing than that if the need be 
 press . I be at your service and the darling child 's , my dear , 
 whenever you like . " 
 Caddy be quite transport by this reply of mine , be , I 
 believe , as susceptible to the least kindness or encouragement as 
 any tender heart that ever beat in this world ; and after another 
 turn or two round the garden , during which she put on an entirely 
 new pair of glove and make herself as resplendent as possible that 
 she might do no avoidable discredit to the Master of Deportment , we 
 go to Newman Street direct . 
 Prince be teach , of course . we find he engage with a not 
 very hopeful pupil - a stubborn little girl with a sulky forehead , a 
 deep voice , and an inanimate , dissatisfied mama - whose case be 
 certainly not render more hopeful by the confusion into which we 
 throw her preceptor . the lesson at last come to an end , after 
 proceed as discordantly as possible ; and when the little girl 
 have change her shoe and have have her white muslin extinguish in 
 shawl , she be take away . after a few word of preparation , we 
 then go in search of Mr. Turveydrop , whom we find , group with 
 his hat and glove , as a model of deportment , on the sofa in his 
 private apartment - the only comfortable room in the house . he 
 appear to have dress at his leisure in the interval of a light 
 collation , and his dressing - case , brush , and so forth , all of 
 quite an elegant kind , lie about . 
 " Father , Miss Summerson ; Miss Jellyby . " 
 " Charmed ! enchant ! " say Mr. Turveydrop , rise with his high- 
 shoulder bow . " permit I ! " hand chair . " be seat ! " 
 kiss the tip of his left finger . " overjoyed ! " shut his 
 eye and roll . " my little retreat be make a paradise . " 
 recompose himself on the sofa like the second gentleman in 
 Europe . 
 " again you find we , Miss Summerson , " say he , " use our little 
 art to polish , polish ! again the sex stimulate we and reward we 
 by the condescension of its lovely presence . it be much in these 
 time   and we have make an awfully degenerate business of it 
 since the day of his Royal Highness the Prince Regent - my patron , 
 if I may presume to say so   to experience that deportment be not 
 wholly tread under foot by mechanic . that it can yet bask in 
 the smile of beauty , my dear madam . " 
 I say nothing , which I think a suitable reply ; and he take a 
 pinch of snuff . 
 " my dear son , " say Mr. Turveydrop , " you have four school this 
 afternoon . I would recommend a hasty sandwich . " 
 " thank you , father , " return Prince , " I will be sure to be 
 punctual . my dear father , may I beg you to prepare your mind for 
 what I be go to say ? " 
 " Good heaven ! " exclaim the model , pale and aghast as Prince and 
 Caddy , hand in hand , bend down before he . " what be this ? be this 
 lunacy ! or what be this ? " 
 " Father , " return Prince with great submission , " I love this young 
 lady , and we be engage . " 
 " engage ! " cry Mr. Turveydrop , recline on the sofa and shut 
 out the sight with his hand . " an arrow launch at my brain by my 
 own child ! " 
 " we have be engage for some time , father , " falter Prince , " and 
 Miss Summerson , hear of it , advise that we should declare the 
 fact to you and be so very kind as to attend on the present 
 occasion . Miss Jellyby be a young lady who deeply respect you , 
 father . " 
 Mr. Turveydrop utter a groan . 
 " no , pray do not ! pray do not , father , " urge his son . " Miss 
 Jellyby be a young lady who deeply respect you , and our first 
 desire be to consider your comfort . " 
 Mr. Turveydrop sob . 
 " no , pray do not , father ! " cry his son . 
 " boy , " say Mr. Turveydrop , " it be well that your sainted mother be 
 spar this pang . strike deep , and spare not . strike home , sir , 
 strike home ! " 
 " pray do not   say so , father , " implore Prince , in tear . " it go 
 to my heart . I do assure you , father , that our first wish and 
 intention be to consider your comfort . Caroline and I do not 
 forget our duty - what be my duty be Caroline 's , as we have often 
 say together - and with your approval and consent , father , we will 
 devote ourselves to make your life agreeable . " 
 " strike home , " murmur Mr. Turveydrop . " strike home ! " but he 
 seem to listen , I think , too . 
 " my dear father , " return Prince , " we well know what little 
 comfort you be accustom to and have a right to , and it will 
 always be our study and our pride to provide those before anything . 
 if you will bless we with your approval and consent , father , we 
 shall not think of be marry until it be quite agreeable to 
 you ; and when we be married , we shall always make you - of course - 
 our first consideration . you must ever be the head and master 
 here , father ; and we feel how truly unnatural it would be in we if 
 we fail to know it or if we fail to exert ourselves in every 
 possible way to please you . " 
 Mr. Turveydrop undergo a severe internal struggle and come 
 upright on the sofa again with his cheek puff over his stiff 
 cravat , a perfect model of parental deportment . 
 " my son ! " say Mr. Turveydrop . " my child ! I can not resist your 
 prayer . be happy ! " 
 his benignity as he raise his future daughter - in - law and stretch 
 out his hand to his son   who kiss it with affectionate respect 
 and gratitude   be the most confusing sight I ever see . 
 " my child , " say Mr. Turveydrop , paternally encircle Caddy 
 with his left arm as she sit beside he , and put his right hand 
 gracefully on his hip . " my son and daughter , your happiness shall 
 be my care . I will watch over you . you shall always live with 
 I " - meaning , of course , I will always live with you - " this house 
 be henceforth as much your as mine ; consider it your home . May 
 you long live to share it with I ! " 
 the power of his deportment be such that they really be as much 
 overcome with thankfulness as if , instead of quarter himself 
 upon they for the rest of his life , he be make some munificent 
 sacrifice in their favour . 
 " for myself , my child , " say Mr. Turveydrop , " I be fall into 
 the sear and yellow leaf , and it be impossible to say how long the 
 last feeble trace of gentlemanly deportment may linger in this 
 weaving and spin age . but , so long , I will do my duty to 
 society and will show myself , as usual , about town . my want be 
 few and simple . my little apartment here , my few essential for 
 the toilet , my frugal morning meal , and my little dinner will 
 suffice . I charge your dutiful affection with the supply of these 
 requirement , and I charge myself with all the rest . " 
 they be overpower afresh by his uncommon generosity . 
 " my son , " say Mr. Turveydrop , " for those little point in which 
 you be deficient - point of deportment , which be bear with a man , 
 which may be improve by cultivation , but can never be originate - 
 you may still rely on I . I have be faithful to my post since 
 the day of his Royal Highness the Prince Regent , and I will not 
 desert it now . no , my son . if you have ever contemplate your 
 father 's poor position with a feeling of pride , you may rest 
 assure that he will do nothing to tarnish it . for yourself , 
 Prince , whose character be different   we can not be all alike , nor 
 be it advisable that we should , work , be industrious , earn money , 
 and extend the connexion as much as possible . " 
 " that you may depend I will do , dear father , with all my heart , " 
 reply Prince . 
 " I have no doubt of it , " say Mr. Turveydrop . " your quality be 
 not shin , my dear child , but they be steady and useful . and to 
 both of you , my child , I would merely observe , in the spirit of 
 a sainted wooman on whose path I have the happiness of cast , I 
 believe , some ray of light , take care of the establishment , take 
 care of my simple want , and bless you both ! " 
 Old Mr. Turveydrop then become so very gallant , in honour of the 
 occasion , that I tell Caddy we must really go to Thavies Inn at 
 once if we be to go at all that day . so we take our departure 
 after a very love farewell between Caddy and she betroth , and 
 during our walk she be so happy and so full of old Mr. 
 Turveydrop 's praise that I would not have say a word in his 
 disparagement for any consideration . 
 the house in Thavies Inn have bill in the window annouce that it 
 be to let , and it look dirty and gloomy and ghastly than 
 ever . the name of poor Mr. Jellyby have appear in the list of 
 bankrupt but a day or two before , and he be shut up in the 
 dining - room with two gentleman and a heap of blue bag , account- 
 book , and paper , make the most desperate endeavour to 
 understand his affair . they appear to I to be quite beyond his 
 comprehension , for when Caddy take I into the dining - room by 
 mistake and we come upon Mr. Jellyby in his spectacle , forlornly 
 fence into a corner by the great dining - table and the two 
 gentleman , he seem to have give up the whole thing and to be 
 speechless and insensible . 
 go upstairs to Mrs. Jellyby 's room   the child be all 
 scream in the kitchen , and there be no servant to be see , we 
 find that lady in the midst of a voluminous correspondence , 
 opening , reading , and sort letter , with a great accumulation of 
 tear cover on the floor . she be so preoccupied that at first she 
 do not know I , though she sit look at I with that curious , 
 bright - eye , far - off look of her . 
 " ah ! Miss Summerson ! " she say at last . " I be think of 
 something so different ! I hope you be well . I be happy to see 
 you . Mr. Jarndyce and Miss Clare quite well ? " 
 I hop in return that Mr. Jellyby be quite well . 
 " why , not quite , my dear , " say Mrs. Jellyby in the calm manner . 
 " he have be unfortunate in his affair and be a little out of 
 spirit . happily for I , I be so much engage that I have no time 
 to think about it . we have , at the present moment , one hundred and 
 seventy family , Miss Summerson , average five person in each , 
 either go or go to the left bank of the Niger . " 
 I think of the one family so near we who be neither go nor 
 go to the left bank of the Niger , and wonder how she could be 
 so placid . 
 " you have bring Caddy back , I see , " observe Mrs. Jellyby with a 
 glance at her daughter . " it have become quite a novelty to see she 
 here . she have almost desert her old employment and in fact 
 oblige I to employ a boy . " 
 " I be sure , Ma - " begin Caddy . 
 " now you know , Caddy , " her mother mildly interpose , " that I do 
 employ a boy , who be now at his dinner . what be the use of your 
 contradicting ? " 
 " I be not go to contradict , Ma , " return Caddy . " I be only 
 go to say that surely you would not   have I be a mere drudge all 
 my life . " 
 " I believe , my dear , " say Mrs. Jellyby , still open her letter , 
 cast her bright eye smilingly over they , and sort they as 
 she speak , " that you have a business example before you in your 
 mother . besides . a mere drudge ? if you have any sympathy with the 
 destiny of the human race , it would raise you high above any such 
 idea . but you have none . I have often tell you , Caddy , you have 
 no such sympathy . " 
 " not if it be Africa , Ma , I have not . " 
 " of course you have not . now , if I be not happily so much 
 engage , Miss Summerson , " say Mrs. Jellyby , sweetly cast her 
 eye for a moment on I and consider where to put the particular 
 letter she have just open , " this would distress and disappoint I . 
 but I have so much to think of , in connexion with Borrioboola - Gha 
 and it be so necessary I should concentrate myself that there be my 
 remedy , you see . " 
 as Caddy give I a glance of entreaty , and as Mrs. Jellyby be 
 look far away into Africa straight through my bonnet and head , I 
 think it a good opportunity to come to the subject of my visit 
 and to attract Mrs. Jellyby 's attention . 
 " perhaps , " I begin , " you will wonder what have bring I here to 
 interrupt you . " 
 " I be always delighted to see Miss Summerson , " say Mrs. Jellyby , 
 pursue her employment with a placid smile . " though I wish , " and 
 she shake her head , ' she be more interested in the Borrioboolan 
 project . " 
 " I have come with Caddy , " say I , " because Caddy justly think she 
 ought not to have a secret from her mother and fancy I shall 
 encourage and aid she   though I be sure I do not   know how   in 
 impart one . " 
 " Caddy , " say Mrs. Jellyby , pause for a moment in her occupation 
 and then serenely pursue it after shake her head , " you be 
 go to tell I some nonsense . " 
 Caddy untie the string of her bonnet , take her bonnet off , and 
 let it dangle on the floor by the string , and cry heartily , 
 say , " Ma , I be engage . " 
 " oh , you ridiculous child ! " observe Mrs. Jellyby with an 
 abstract air as she look over the dispatch last open ; " what a 
 goose you be ! " 
 " I be engage , Ma , " sob Caddy , " to young Mr. Turveydrop , at the 
 academy ; and old Mr. Turveydrop   who be a very gentlemanly man 
 indeed   have give his consent , and I beg and pray you will give we 
 your , Ma , because I never could be happy without it . I never , 
 never could ! " sob Caddy , quite forgetful of her general 
 complaining and of everything but her natural affection . 
 " you see again , Miss Summerson , " observe Mrs. Jellyby serenely , 
 " what a happiness it be to be so much occupy as I be and to 
 have this necessity for self - concentration that I have . here be 
 Caddy engage to a dancing - master 's son - mix up with people who 
 have no more sympathy with the destiny of the human race than 
 she have herself ! this , too , when Mr. Quale , one of the first 
 philanthropist of our time , have mention to I that he be 
 really disposed to be interested in she ! " 
 " Ma , I always hat and detest Mr. Quale ! " sob Caddy . 
 " Caddy , Caddy ! " return Mrs. Jellyby , open another letter with 
 the great complacency . " I have no doubt you do . how could you 
 do otherwise , be totally destitute of the sympathy with which 
 he overflow ! now , if my public duty be not a favourite child 
 to I , if I be not occupy with large measure on a vast scale , 
 these petty detail might grieve I very much , Miss Summerson . but 
 can I permit the film of a silly proceeding on the part of Caddy 
  from whom I expect nothing else   to interpose between I and the 
 great african continent ? no . no , " repeat Mrs. Jellyby in a calm 
 clear voice , and with an agreeable smile , as she open more 
 letter and sort they . " no , indeed . " 
 I be so unprepared for the perfect coolness of this reception , 
 though I might have expect it , that I do not know what to say . 
 Caddy seem equally at a loss . Mrs. Jellyby continue to open and 
 sort letter and to repeat occasionally in quite a charming tone of 
 voice and with a smile of perfect composure , " no , indeed . " 
 " I hope , Ma , " sob poor Caddy at last , " you be not angry ? " 
 " oh , Caddy , you really be an absurd girl , " return Mrs. Jellyby , 
 " to ask such question after what I have say of the preoccupation 
 of my mind . " 
 " and I hope , Ma , you give we your consent and wish we well ? " say 
 Caddy . 
 " you be a nonsensical child to have do anything of this kind , " 
 say Mrs. Jellyby ; " and a degenerate child , when you might have 
 devote yourself to the great public measure . but the step be 
 take , and I have engage a boy , and there be no more to be say . 
 now , pray , Caddy , " say Mrs. Jellyby , for Caddy be kiss she , 
 " do not   delay I in my work , but let I clear off this heavy batch 
 of paper before the afternoon post come in ! " 
 I think I could not do well than take my leave ; I be detain 
 for a moment by Caddy 's saying , " you will not   object to my bringing 
 he to see you , Ma ? " 
 " oh , dear I , Caddy , " cry Mrs. Jellyby , who have relapse into 
 that distant contemplation , " have you begin again ? bring whom ? " 
 " Him , Ma . " 
 " Caddy , Caddy ! " say Mrs. Jellyby , quite weary of such little 
 matter . " then you must bring he some evening which be not a 
 Parent Society night , or a Branch night , or a Ramification night . 
 you must accommodate the visit to the demand upon my time . my 
 dear Miss Summerson , it be very kind of you to come here to help 
 out this silly chit . good - bye ! when I tell you that I have fifty- 
 eight new letter from manufacture family anxious to understand 
 the detail of the native and coffee - cultivation question this 
 morning , I need not apologize for have very little leisure . " 
 I be not surprise by Caddy 's be in low spirit when we go 
 downstairs , or by her sob afresh on my neck , or by her say 
 she would far rather have be scold than treat with such 
 indifference , or by she confide to I that she be so poor in 
 clothe that how she be ever to be marry creditably she do not 
 know . I gradually cheer she up by dwell on the many thing 
 she would do for her unfortunate father and for Peepy when she have 
 a home of her own ; and finally we go downstairs into the damp 
 dark kitchen , where Peepy and his little brother and sister be 
 grovel on the stone floor and where we have such a game of play 
 with they that to prevent myself from be quite tear to piece I 
 be oblige to fall back on my fairy - tale . from time to time I 
 hear loud voice in the parlour overhead , and occasionally a 
 violent tumbling about of the furniture . the last effect I be 
 afraid be cause by poor Mr. Jellyby 's break away from the 
 dining - table and make rush at the window with the intention of 
 throw himself into the area whenever he make any new attempt to 
 understand his affair . 
 as I ride quietly home at night after the day 's bustle , I think a 
 good deal of Caddy 's engagement and feel confirm in my hope   in 
 spite of the eld Mr. Turveydrop   that she would be the happy 
 and well for it . and if there seem to be but a slender chance 
 of she and her husband ever find out what the model of 
 deportment really be , why that be all for the good too , and who 
 would wish they to be wiser ? I do not wish they to be any wiser 
 and indeed be half ashamed of not entirely believe in he 
 myself . and I look up at the star , and think about traveller 
 in distant country and the star they see , and hop I might 
 always be so blest and happy as to be useful to some one in my 
 small way . 
 they be so glad to see I when I get home , as they always be , 
 that I could have sit down and cry for joy if that have not be a 
 method of make myself disagreeable . everybody in the house , from 
 the low to the high , show I such a bright face of welcome , 
 and speak so cheerily , and be so happy to do anything for I , that 
 I suppose there never be such a fortunate little creature in the 
 world . 
 we get into such a chatty state that night , through Ada and my 
 guardian draw I out to tell they all about Caddy , that I go 
 on prose , prose , prose for a length of time . at last I get up to 
 my own room , quite red to think how I have be hold forth , and 
 then I hear a soft tap at my door . so I say , " come in ! " and 
 there come in a pretty little girl , neatly dress in mourning , who 
 drop a curtsy . 
 " if you please , miss , " say the little girl in a soft voice , " I be 
 Charley . " 
 " why , so you be , " say I , stoop down in astonishment and give 
 she a kiss . " how glad be I to see you , Charley ! " 
 " if you please , miss , " pursue Charley in the same soft voice , " I be 
 your maid . " 
 " Charley ? " 
 " if you please , miss , I be a present to you , with Mr. Jarndyce 's 
 love . " 
 I sit down with my hand on Charley 's neck and look at Charley . 
 " and oh , miss , " say Charley , clap her hand , with the tear 
 start down her dimpled cheek , " Tom 's at school , if you please , 
 and learn so good ! and little Emma , she be with Mrs. Blinder , 
 miss , a - being take such care of ! and Tom , he would have be at 
 school - and Emma , she would have be leave with Mrs. Blinder - and 
 I , I should have be here - all a deal soon , miss ; only Mr. 
 Jarndyce think that Tom and Emma and I have well get a little 
 use to part first , we be so small . do not   cry , if you please , 
 miss ! " 
 " I can not   help it , Charley . " 
 " no , miss , nor I can not   help it , " say Charley . " and if you please , 
 miss , Mr. Jarndyce 's love , and he think you will like to teach I 
 now and then . and if you please , Tom and Emma and I be to see 
 each other once a month . and I be so happy and so thankful , miss , " 
 cry Charley with a heaving heart , " and I will try to be such a good 
 maid ! " 
 " oh , Charley dear , never forget who do all this ! " 
 " no , miss , I never will . nor Tom will not . nor yet Emma . it be all 
 you , miss . " 
 " I have know nothing of it . it be Mr. Jarndyce , Charley . " 
 " yes , miss , but it be all do for the love of you and that you 
 might be my mistress . if you please , miss , I be a little present 
 with his love , and it be all do for the love of you . I and Tom 
 be to be sure to remember it . " 
 Charley dry her eye and enter on her function , go in her 
 matronly little way about and about the room and fold up 
 everything she could lay her hand upon . presently Charley come 
 creep back to my side and say , " oh , do not   cry , if you please , 
 miss . " 
 and I say again , " I can not   help it , Charley . " 
 and Charley say again , " no , miss , nor I can not   help it . " and so , 
 after all , I do cry for joy indeed , and so do she . 
 CHAPTER XXIV 
 an Appeal case 
 as soon as Richard and I have hold the conversation of which I have 
 give an account , Richard communicate the state of his mind to Mr. 
 Jarndyce . I doubt if my guardian be altogether take by surprise 
 when he receive the representation , though it cause he much 
 uneasiness and disappointment . he and Richard be often closet 
 together , late at night and early in the morning , and pass whole 
 day in London , and have innumerable appointment with Mr. Kenge , 
 and labour through a quantity of disagreeable business . while 
 they be thus employ , my guardian , though he undergo 
 considerable inconvenience from the state of the wind and rub 
 his head so constantly that not a single hair upon it ever rest 
 in its right place , be as genial with Ada and I as at any other 
 time , but maintain a steady reserve on these matter . and as our 
 utmost endeavour could only elicit from Richard himself sweep 
 assurance that everything be go on capitally and that it 
 really be all right at last , our anxiety be not much relieve by 
 he . 
 we learn , however , as the time go on , that a new application be 
 make to the Lord Chancellor on Richard 's behalf as an infant and a 
 ward , and I do not   know what , and that there be a quantity of 
 talk , and that the Lord Chancellor describe he in open court 
 as a vexatious and capricious infant , and that the matter be 
 adjourn and readjourne , and refer , and report on , and 
 petition about until Richard begin to doubt   as he tell we 
 whether , if he enter the army at all , it would not be as a 
 veteran of seventy or eighty year of age . at last an appointment 
 be make for he to see the Lord Chancellor again in his private 
 room , and there the Lord Chancellor very seriously reprove he for 
 trifle with time and not know his mind - " a pretty good joke , I 
 think , " say Richard , " from that quarter ! " - and at last it be 
 settle that his application should be grant . his name be 
 enter at the Horse Guards as an applicant for an ensign 's 
 commission ; the purchase - money be deposit at an agent 's ; and 
 Richard , in his usual characteristic way , plunge into a violent 
 course of military study and get up at five o'clock every morning 
 to practise the broadsword exercise . 
 thus , vacation succeed term , and term succeed vacation . we 
 sometimes hear of Jarndyce and Jarndyce as be in the paper or 
 out of the paper , or as be to be mention , or as be to be 
 speak to ; and it come on , and it go off . Richard , who be now 
 in a professor 's house in London , be able to be with we less 
 frequently than before ; my guardian still maintain the same 
 reserve ; and so time pass until the commission be obtain and 
 Richard receive direction with it to join a regiment in Ireland . 
 he arrive post - haste with the intelligence one evening , and have a 
 long conference with my guardian . upwards of an hour elapse 
 before my guardian put his head into the room where Ada and I be 
 sit and say , " come in , my dear ! " we go in and find 
 Richard , whom we have last see in high spirit , lean on the 
 chimney - piece look mortified and angry . 
 " Rick and I , Ada , " say Mr. Jarndyce , " be not quite of one mind . 
 come , come , Rick , put a bright face upon it ! " 
 " you be very hard with I , sir , " say Richard . " the hard 
 because you have be so considerate to I in all other respect 
 and have do I kindness that I can never acknowledge . I never 
 could have be set right without you , sir . " 
 " well , well ! " say Mr. Jarndyce . " I want to set you more right 
 yet . I want to set you more right with yourself . " 
 " I hope you will excuse my saying , sir , " return Richard in a 
 fiery way , but yet respectfully , " that I think I be the good judge 
 about myself . " 
 " I hope you will excuse my saying , my dear Rick , " observe Mr. 
 Jarndyce with the sweetest cheerfulness and good humour , " that 
 it be quite natural in you to think so , but I do not   think so . I 
 must do my duty , Rick , or you could never care for I in cool 
 blood ; and I hope you will always care for I , cool and hot . " 
 Ada have turn so pale that he make she sit down in his reading- 
 chair and sit beside she . 
 " it be nothing , my dear , " he say , " it be nothing . Rick and I have 
 only have a friendly difference , which we must state to you , for you 
 be the theme . now you be afraid of what be come . " 
 " I be not indeed , cousin John , " reply Ada with a smile , " if it be 
 to come from you . " 
 " thank you , my dear . do you give I a minute 's calm attention , 
 without look at Rick . and , little woman , do you likewise . my 
 dear girl , " put his hand on hers as it lie on the side of the 
 easy - chair , " you recollect the talk we have , we four when the little 
 woman tell I of a little love affair ? " 
 " it be not likely that either Richard or I can ever forget your 
 kindness that day , cousin John . " 
 " I can never forget it , " say Richard . 
 " and I can never forget it , " say Ada . 
 " so much the easier what I have to say , and so much the easy for 
 we to agree , " return my guardian , his face irradiate by the 
 gentleness and honour of his heart . " Ada , my bird , you should know 
 that Rick have now choose his profession for the last time . all 
 that he have of certainty will be expend when he be fully 
 equip . he have exhaust his resource and be bind henceforward 
 to the tree he have plant . " 
 " quite true that I have exhaust my present resource , and I be 
 quite content to know it . but what I have of certainty , sir , " say 
 Richard , " be not all I have . " 
 " Rick , Rick ! " cry my guardian with a sudden terror in his manner , 
 and in an altered voice , and put up his hand as if he would 
 have stop his ear . " for the love of God , do not   find a hope or 
 expectation on the family curse ! whatever you do on this side the 
 grave , never give one linger glance towards the horrible phantom 
 that have haunt we so many year . well to borrow , well to 
 beg , well to die ! " 
 we be all startle by the fervour of this warning . Richard bit 
 his lip and hold his breath , and glance at I as if he feel , and 
 know that I feel too , how much he need it . 
 " Ada , my dear , " say Mr. Jarndyce , recover his cheerfulness , 
 " these be strong word of advice , but I live in Bleak House and 
 have see a sight here . enough of that . all Richard have to start 
 he in the race of life be venture . I recommend to he and you , 
 for his sake and your own , that he should depart from we with the 
 understanding that there be no sort of contract between you . I 
 must go far . I will be plain with you both . you be to 
 confide freely in I , and I will confide freely in you . I ask you 
 wholly to relinquish , for the present , any tie but your 
 relationship . " 
 " well to say at once , sir , " return Richard , " that you renounce 
 all confidence in I and that you advise Ada to do the same . " 
 " well to say nothing of the sort , Rick , because I do not   mean it . " 
 " you think I have begin ill , sir , " retort Richard . " I have , I 
 know . " 
 " how I hop you would begin , and how go on , I tell you when we 
 speak of these thing last , " say Mr. Jarndyce in a cordial and 
 encouraging manner . " you have not make that beginning yet , but 
 there be a time for all thing , and yours be not go by ; rather , 
 it be just now fully come . make a clear beginning altogether . you 
 two   very young , my dear   be cousin . as yet , you be nothing 
 more . what more may come must come of be work out , Rick , and 
 no soon . " 
 " you be very hard with I , sir , " say Richard . " hard than I 
 could have suppose you would be . " 
 " my dear boy , " say Mr. Jarndyce , " I be hard with myself when I 
 do anything that give you pain . you have your remedy in your own 
 hand . Ada , it be well for he that he should be free and that 
 there should be no youthful engagement between you . Rick , it be 
 well for she , much well ; you owe it to she . come ! each of you 
 will do what be good for the other , if not what be good for 
 yourself . " 
 " why be it good , sir ? " return Richard hastily . " it be not when 
 we open our heart to you . you do not say so then . " 
 " I have have experience since . I do not   blame you , Rick , but I have 
 have experience since . " 
 " you mean of I , sir . " 
 " well ! yes , of both of you , " say Mr. Jarndyce kindly . " the time 
 be not come for your standing pledge to one another . it be not 
 right , and I must not recognize it . come , come , my young cousin , 
 begin afresh ! bygone shall be bygone , and a new page turn for 
 you to write your life in . " 
 Richard give an anxious glance at Ada but say nothing . 
 " I have avoid say one word to either of you or to Esther , " 
 say Mr. Jarndyce , " until now , in order that we might be open as 
 the day , and all on equal term . I now affectionately advise , I 
 now most earnestly entreat , you two to part as you come here . 
 leave all else to time , truth , and steadfastness . if you do 
 otherwise , you will do wrong , and you will have make I do wrong in 
 ever bring you together . " 
 a long silence succeed . 
 " Cousin Richard , " say Ada then , raise her blue eye tenderly to 
 his face , " after what our cousin John have say , I think no choice 
 be leave we . your mind may he quite at ease about I , for you will 
 leave I here under his care and will be sure that I can have 
 nothing to wish for - quite sure if I guide myself by his advice . 
 I - I do not   doubt , cousin Richard , " say Ada , a little confused , 
 " that you be very fond of I , and I - I do not   think you will fall 
 in love with anybody else . but I should like you to consider well 
 about it too , as I should like you to be in all thing very happy . 
 you may trust in I , cousin Richard . I be not at all changeable ; 
 but I be not unreasonable , and should never blame you . even 
 cousin may be sorry to part ; and in truth I be very , very sorry , 
 Richard , though I know it be for your welfare . I shall always think 
 of you affectionately , and often talk of you with Esther , and - and 
 perhaps you will sometimes think a little of I , cousin Richard . 
 so now , " say Ada , go up to he and give he her trembling 
 hand , " we be only cousin again , Richard - for the time perhaps - 
 and I pray for a blessing on my dear cousin , wherever he go ! " 
 it be strange to I that Richard should not be able to forgive my 
 guardian for entertain the very same opinion of he which he 
 himself have express of himself in much strong term to I . but 
 it be certainly the case . I observe with great regret that from 
 this hour he never be as free and open with Mr. Jarndyce as he have 
 be before . he have every reason give he to be so , but he be 
 not ; and solely on his side , an estrangement begin to arise between 
 they . 
 in the business of preparation and equipment he soon lose himself , 
 and even his grief at part from Ada , who remain in 
 Hertfordshire while he , Mr. Jarndyce , and I go up to London for a 
 week . he remember she by fit and start , even with burst of 
 tear , and at such time would confide to I the heavy self- 
 reproach . but in a few minute he would recklessly conjure up 
 some undefinable mean by which they be both to be make rich and 
 happy for ever , and would become as gay as possible . 
 it be a busy time , and I trot about with he all day long , 
 buy a variety of thing of which he stand in need . of the 
 thing he would have buy if he have be leave to his own way I 
 say nothing . he be perfectly confidential with I , and often 
 talk so sensibly and feelingly about his fault and his vigorous 
 resolution , and dwelt so much upon the encouragement he derive 
 from these conversation that I could never have be tired if I 
 have try . 
 there use , in that week , to come backward and forward to our 
 lodge to fence with Richard a person who have formerly be a 
 cavalry soldier ; he be a fine bluff - look man , of a frank free 
 bearing , with whom Richard have practise for some month . I hear 
 so much about he , not only from Richard , but from my guardian too , 
 that I be purposely in the room with my work one morning after 
 breakfast when he come . 
 " good morning , Mr. George , " say my guardian , who happen to be 
 alone with I . " Mr. Carstone will be here directly . meanwhile , 
 Miss Summerson be very happy to see you , I know . sit down . " 
 he sit down , a little disconcert by my presence , I think , and 
 without look at I , draw his heavy sunburnt hand across and 
 across his upper lip . 
 " you be as punctual as the sun , " say Mr. Jarndyce . 
 " military time , sir , " he reply . " Force of habit . a mere habit 
 in I , sir . I be not at all business - like . " 
 " yet you have a large establishment , too , I be tell ? " say Mr. 
 Jarndyce . 
 " not much of a one , sir . I keep a shooting gallery , but not much 
 of a one . " 
 " and what kind of a shot and what kind of a swordsman do you make 
 of Mr. Carstone ? " say my guardian . 
 " pretty good , sir , " he reply , fold his arm upon his broad 
 chest and look very large . " if Mr. Carstone be to give his 
 full mind to it , he would come out very good . " 
 " but he do not , I suppose ? " say my guardian . 
 " he do at first , sir , but not afterwards . not his full mind . 
 perhaps he have something else upon it - some young lady , perhaps . " 
 his bright dark eye glance at I for the first time . 
 " he have not I upon his mind , I assure you , Mr. George , " say I , 
 laugh , " though you seem to suspect I . " 
 he redden a little through his brown and make I a trooper 's bow . 
 " no offence , I hope , miss . I be one of the rough . " 
 " not at all , " say i. " I take it as a compliment . " 
 if he have not look at I before , he look at I now in three or 
 four quick successive glance . " I beg your pardon , sir , " he say 
 to my guardian with a manly kind of diffidence , " but you do I the 
 honour to mention the young lady 's name - " 
 " Miss Summerson . " 
 " Miss Summerson , " he repeat , and look at I again . 
 " do you know the name ? " I ask . 
 " no , miss . to my knowledge I never hear it . I think I have see 
 you somewhere . " 
 " I think not , " I return , raise my head from my work to look at 
 he ; and there be something so genuine in his speech and manner 
 that I be glad of the opportunity . " I remember face very well . " 
 " so do I , miss ! " he return , meet my look with the fullness of 
 his dark eye and broad forehead . " Humph ! what set I off , now , 
 upon that ! " 
 his once more redden through his brown and be disconcert by 
 his effort to remember the association bring my guardian to his 
 relief . 
 " have you many pupil , Mr. George ? " 
 " they vary in their number , sir . mostly they be but a small lot to 
 live by . " 
 " and what class of chance people come to practise at your 
 gallery ? " 
 " all sort , sir . native and foreigner . from gentleman to 
 ' prentice . I have have Frenchwomen come , before now , and show 
 themselves dab at pistol - shooting . mad people out of number , of 
 course , but they go everywhere where the door stand open . " 
 " People do not   come with grudge and scheme of finish their 
 practice with live target , I hope ? " say my guardian , smile . 
 " not much of that , sir , though that have happen . mostly they come 
 for skill - or idleness . six of one , and half - a - dozen of the other . 
 I beg your pardon , " say Mr. George , sit stiffly upright and 
 square an elbow on each knee , " but I believe you be a Chancery 
 suitor , if I have hear correct ? " 
 " I be sorry to say I be . " 
 " I have have one of your compatriot in my time , sir . " 
 " a Chancery suitor ? " return my guardian . " how be that ? " 
 " why , the man be so badgered and worried and torture by be 
 knock about from post to pillar , and from pillar to post , " say 
 Mr. George , " that he get out of sort . I do not   believe he have any 
 idea of take aim at anybody , but he be in that condition of 
 resentment and violence that he would come and pay for fifty shot 
 and fire away till he be red hot . one day I say to he when 
 there be nobody by and he have be talk to I angrily about his 
 wrong , ' if this practice be a safety - valve , comrade , well and 
 good ; but I do not   altogether like your be so bent upon it in 
 your present state of mind ; I would rather you take to something else . ' 
 I be on my guard for a blow , he be that passionate ; but he 
 receive it in very good part and leave off directly . we shake 
 hand and strike up a sort of friendship . " 
 " what be that man ? " ask my guardian in a new tone of interest . 
 " why , he begin by be a small Shropshire farmer before they make 
 a bait bull of he , " say Mr. George . 
 " be his name Gridley ? " 
 " it be , sir . " 
 Mr. George direct another succession of quick bright glance at 
 I as my guardian and I exchange a word or two of surprise at the 
 coincidence , and I therefore explain to he how we know the name . 
 he make I another of his soldierly bow in acknowledgment of what 
 he call my condescension . 
 " I do not   know , " he say as he look at I , " what it be that set 
 I off again - but - bosh ! what be my head run against ! " he 
 pass one of his heavy hand over his crisp dark hair as if to 
 sweep the break thought out of his mind and sit a little forward , 
 with one arm akimbo and the other rest on his leg , look in a 
 brown study at the ground . 
 " I be sorry to learn that the same state of mind have get this 
 Gridley into new trouble and that he be in hiding , " say my 
 guardian . 
 " so I be tell , sir , " return Mr. George , still muse and look 
 on the ground . " so I be tell . " 
 " you do not   know where ? " 
 " no , sir , " return the trooper , lift up his eye and come out 
 of his reverie . " I can not   say anything about he . he will be wear 
 out soon , I expect . you may file a strong man 's heart away for a 
 good many year , but it will tell all of a sudden at last . " 
 Richard 's entrance stop the conversation . Mr. George rise , make 
 I another of his soldierly bow , wish my guardian a good day , 
 and stride heavily out of the room . 
 this be the morning of the day appoint for Richard 's departure . 
 we have no more purchase to make now ; I have complete all his 
 packing early in the afternoon ; and our time be disengage until 
 night , when he be to go to Liverpool for Holyhead . Jarndyce and 
 Jarndyce be again expect to come on that day , Richard propose 
 to I that we should go down to the court and hear what pass . as 
 it be his last day , and he be eager to go , and I have never be 
 there , I give my consent and we walk down to Westminster , where 
 the court be then sit . we beguile the way with arrangement 
 concern the letter that Richard be to write to I and the 
 letter that I be to write to he and with a great many hopeful 
 project . my guardian know where we be go and therefore be 
 not with we . 
 when we come to the court , there be the Lord Chancellor - the same 
 whom I have see in his private room in Lincoln 's inn - sit in 
 great state and gravity on the bench , with the mace and seal on a 
 red table below he and an immense flat nosegay , like a little 
 garden , which scent the whole court . below the table , again , be 
 a long row of solicitor , with bundle of paper on the matting at 
 their foot ; and then there be the gentleman of the bar in wig 
 and gown - some awake and some asleep , and one talk , and nobody 
 pay much attention to what he say . the Lord Chancellor lean 
 back in his very easy chair with his elbow on the cushioned arm and 
 his forehead rest on his hand ; some of those who be present 
 doze ; some read the newspaper ; some walk about or whisper in 
 group : all seem perfectly at their ease , by no mean in a hurry , 
 very unconcerned , and extremely comfortable . 
 to see everything go on so smoothly and to think of the 
 roughness of the suitor ' life and death ; to see all that full 
 dress and ceremony and to think of the waste , and want , and 
 beggar misery it represent ; to consider that while the sickness 
 of hope defer be rag in so many heart this polite show go 
 calmly on from day to day , and year to year , in such good order and 
 composure ; to behold the Lord Chancellor and the whole array of 
 practitioner under he look at one another and at the 
 spectator as if nobody have ever hear that all over England the 
 name in which they be assemble be a bitter jest , be hold in 
 universal horror , contempt , and indignation , be know for 
 something so flagrant and bad that little short of a miracle could 
 bring any good out of it to any one - this be so curious and self- 
 contradictory to I , who have no experience of it , that it be at 
 first incredible , and I could not comprehend it . I sit where 
 Richard put I , and try to listen , and look about I ; but there 
 seem to be no reality in the whole scene except poor little Miss 
 Flite , the madwoman , stand on a bench and nod at it . 
 Miss Flite soon espy we and come to where we sit . she give I a 
 gracious welcome to her domain and indicate , with much 
 gratification and pride , its principal attraction . Mr. Kenge also 
 come to speak to we and do the honour of the place in much the 
 same way , with the bland modesty of a proprietor . it be not a 
 very good day for a visit , he say ; he would have prefer the 
 first day of term ; but it be impose , it be impose . 
 when we have be there half an hour or so , the case in progress - if 
 I may use a phrase so ridiculous in such a connexion - seem to die 
 out of its own vapidity , without come , or be by anybody 
 expect to come , to any result . the Lord Chancellor then throw 
 down a bundle of paper from his desk to the gentleman below he , 
 and somebody say , " Jarndyce and Jarndyce . " upon this there be a 
 buzz , and a laugh , and a general withdrawal of the bystander , and 
 a bringing in of great heap , and pile , and bag and bag full of 
 paper . 
 I think it come on " for further direction " - about some bill of 
 cost , to the good of my understanding , which be confuse enough . 
 but I count twenty - three gentleman in wig who say they be " in 
 it , " and none of they appear to understand it much well than I. 
 they chat about it with the Lord Chancellor , and contradict 
 and explain among themselves , and some of they say it be this 
 way , and some of they say it be that way , and some of they 
 jocosely propose to read huge volume of affidavit , and there be 
 more buzzing and laughing , and everybody concern be in a state 
 of idle entertainment , and nothing could be make of it by anybody . 
 after an hour or so of this , and a good many speech be begin 
 and cut short , it be " refer back for the present , " as Mr. Kenge 
 say , and the paper be bundle up again before the clerk have 
 finish bring they in . 
 I glance at Richard on the termination of these hopeless 
 proceeding and be shocked to see the worn look of his handsome 
 young face . " it can not   last for ever , Dame Durden . well luck 
 next time ! " be all he say . 
 I have see Mr. Guppy bring in paper and arrange they for Mr. 
 Kenge ; and he have see I and make I a forlorn bow , which render 
 I desirous to get out of the court . Richard have give I his arm 
 and be take I away when Mr. Guppy come up . 
 " I beg your pardon , Mr. Carstone , " say he in a whisper , " and Miss 
 Summerson 's also , but there be a lady here , a friend of mine , who 
 know she and wish to have the pleasure of shake hand . " as he 
 speak , I see before I , as if she have start into bodily shape 
 from my remembrance , Mrs. Rachael of my godmother 's house . 
 " how do you do , Esther ? " say she . " do you recollect I ? " 
 I give she my hand and tell she yes and that she be very little 
 alter . 
 " I wonder you remember those time , Esther , " she return with her 
 old asperity . " they be change now . well ! I be glad to see you , 
 and glad you be not too proud to know I . " but indeed she seem 
 disappoint that I be not . 
 " Proud , Mrs. Rachael ! " I remonstrate . 
 " I be marry , Esther , " she return , coldly correct I , " and be 
 Mrs. Chadband . well ! I wish you good day , and I hope you will do 
 well . " 
 Mr. Guppy , who have be attentive to this short dialogue , heave a 
 sigh in my ear and elbow his own and Mrs. Rachael 's way through 
 the confused little crowd of people come in and go out , which 
 we be in the midst of and which the change in the business have 
 bring together . Richard and I be make our way through it , 
 and I be yet in the first chill of the late unexpected recognition 
 when I see , come towards we , but not see we , no less a person 
 than Mr. George . he make nothing of the people about he as he 
 tramp on , star over their head into the body of the court . 
 " George ! " say Richard as I call his attention to he . 
 " you be well meet , sir , " he return . " and you , miss . could you 
 point a person out for I , I want ? I do not   understand these 
 place . " 
 turn as he speak and make an easy way for we , he stop when 
 we be out of the press in a corner behind a great red curtain . 
 " there be a little crack old woman , " he begin , " that - " 
 I put up my finger , for Miss Flite be close by I , have keep 
 beside I all the time and have call the attention of several 
 of her legal acquaintance to I   as I have overhear to my 
 confusion   by whisper in their ear , " hush ! Fitz Jarndyce on my 
 left ! " 
 " Hem ! " say Mr. George . " you remember , miss , that we pass some 
 conversation on a certain man this morning ? Gridley , " in a low 
 whisper behind his hand . 
 " yes , " say I. 
 " he be hide at my place . I could not   mention it . had not   his 
 authority . he be on his last march , miss , and have a whim to see 
 she . he say they can feel for one another , and she have be 
 almost as good as a friend to he here . I come down to look for 
 she , for when I sit by Gridley this afternoon , I seem to hear the 
 roll of the muffle drum . " 
 " shall I tell she ? " say I. 
 " would you be so good ? " he return with a glance of something like 
 apprehension at Miss Flite . " it be a providence I meet you , miss ; I 
 doubt if I should have know how to get on with that lady . " and he 
 put one hand in his breast and stand upright in a martial attitude 
 as I inform little Miss Flite , in her ear , of the purport of his 
 kind errand . 
 " my angry friend from Shropshire ! almost as celebrate as myself ! " 
 she exclaim . " now really ! my dear , I will wait upon he with 
 the great pleasure . " 
 " he be live conceal at Mr. George 's , " say I. " Hush ! this be 
 Mr. George . " 
 " in - deed ! " return Miss Flite . " very proud to have the honour ! 
 a military man , my dear . you know , a perfect general ! " she 
 whisper to I . 
 Poor Miss Flite deem it necessary to be so courtly and polite , as 
 a mark of her respect for the army , and to curtsy so very often 
 that it be no easy matter to get she out of the court . when this 
 be at last do , and address Mr. George as " General , " she give 
 he her arm , to the great entertainment of some idler who be 
 look on , he be so discompose and beg I so respectfully 
 " not to desert he " that I could not make up my mind to do it , 
 especially as Miss Flite be always tractable with I and as she 
 too say , " Fitz Jarndyce , my dear , you will accompany we , of 
 course . " as Richard seem quite willing , and even anxious , that 
 we should see they safely to their destination , we agree to do so . 
 and as Mr. George inform we that Gridley 's mind have run on Mr. 
 Jarndyce all the afternoon after hearing of their interview in the 
 morning , I write a hasty note in pencil to my guardian to say where 
 we be go and why . Mr. George seal it at a coffee - house , that 
 it might lead to no discovery , and we send it off by a ticket- 
 porter . 
 we then take a hackney - coach and drive away to the neighbourhood of 
 Leicester Square . we walk through some narrow court , for which 
 Mr. George apologize , and soon come to the shooting gallery , the 
 door of which be closed . as he pull a bell - handle which hang by 
 a chain to the door - post , a very respectable old gentleman with 
 grey hair , wear spectacle , and dress in a black spencer and 
 gaiter and a broad - brim hat , and carry a large gold - bead 
 cane , address he . 
 " I ask your pardon , my good friend , " say he , " but be this George 's 
 Shooting Gallery ? " 
 " it be , sir , " return Mr. George , glance up at the great letter 
 in which that inscription be paint on the whitewashed wall . 
 " oh ! to be sure ! " say the old gentleman , follow his eye . 
 " thank you . have you rung the bell ? " 
 " my name be George , sir , and I have ring the bell . " 
 " oh , indeed ? " say the old gentleman . " your name be George ? then 
 I be here as soon as you , you see . you come for I , no doubt ? " 
 " no , sir . you have the advantage of I . " 
 " oh , indeed ? " say the old gentleman . " then it be your young man 
 who come for I . I be a physician and be request - five minute 
 ago - to come and visit a sick man at George 's Shooting Gallery . " 
 " the muffled drum , " say Mr. George , turn to Richard and I and 
 gravely shake his head . " it be quite correct , sir . will you 
 please to walk in . " 
 the door be at that moment open by a very singular - look 
 little man in a green - baize cap and apron , whose face and hand and 
 dress be blacken all over , we pass along a dreary passage 
 into a large building with bare brick wall where there be 
 target , and gun , and sword , and other thing of that kind . when 
 we have all arrive here , the physician stop , and take off his 
 hat , appear to vanish by magic and to leave another and quite a 
 different man in his place . 
 " now lookee here , George , " say the man , turn quickly round upon 
 he and tap he on the breast with a large forefinger . " you 
 know I , and I know you . you be a man of the world , and I be a man 
 of the world . my name 's Bucket , as you be aware , and I have get a 
 peace - warrant against Gridley . you have keep he out of the way a 
 long time , and you have be artful in it , and it do you credit . " 
 Mr. George , look hard at he , bit his lip and shake his head . 
 " now , George , " say the other , keep close to he , " you be a 
 sensible man and a well - conduct man ; that be what you be , beyond 
 a doubt . and mind you , I do not   talk to you as a common character , 
 because you have serve your country and you know that when duty 
 call we must obey . consequently you be very far from want to 
 give trouble . if I require assistance , you would assist I ; that be 
 what you'd do . Phil Squod , do not   you go a - sidle round the 
 gallery like that " - the dirty little man be shuffle about with 
 his shoulder against the wall , and his eye on the intruder , in a 
 manner that look threaten - " because I know you and will not   have 
 it . " 
 " Phil ! " say Mr. George . 
 " yes , guv'ner . " 
 " be quiet . " 
 the little man , with a low growl , stand still . 
 " lady and gentleman , " say Mr. Bucket , " you will excuse anything 
 that may appear to be disagreeable in this , for my name 's Inspector 
 Bucket of the Detective , and I have a duty to perform . George , I 
 know where my man be because I be on the roof last night and see 
 he through the skylight , and you along with he . he be in there , 
 you know , " point ; " that be where he be - on a sofy . now I must 
 see my man , and I must tell my man to consider himself in custody ; 
 but you know I , and you know I do not   want to take any uncomfortable 
 measure . you give I your word , as from one man to another   and 
 an old soldier , mind you , likewise , that it be honourable between 
 us two , and I will accommodate you to the utmost of my power . " 
 " I give it , " be the reply . " but it be not   handsome in you , Mr. 
 Bucket . " 
 " Gammon , George ! not handsome ? " say Mr. Bucket , tap he on 
 his broad breast again and shake hand with he . " I do not   say it 
 be not   handsome in you to keep my man so close , do I ? be equally 
 good - temper to I , old boy ! Old William Tell , Old Shaw , the Life 
 Guardsman ! why , he be a model of the whole british army in himself , 
 lady and gentleman . I would give a fifty - pun ' note to be such a 
 figure of a man ! " 
 the affair be bring to this head , Mr. George , after a little 
 consideration , propose to go in first to his comrade   as he call 
 he , take Miss Flite with he . Mr. Bucket agreeing , they go 
 away to the further end of the gallery , leave we sit and 
 stand by a table cover with gun . Mr. Bucket take this 
 opportunity of enter into a little light conversation , ask I 
 if I be afraid of fire - arm , as most young lady be ; ask 
 Richard if he be a good shot ; ask Phil Squod which he 
 consider the good of those rifle and what it might be worth 
 first - hand , tell he in return that it be a pity he ever give 
 way to his temper , for he be naturally so amiable that he might 
 have be a young woman , and make himself generally agreeable . 
 after a time he follow we to the further end of the gallery , and 
 Richard and I be go quietly away when Mr. George come after 
 we . he say that if we have no objection to see his comrade , he 
 would take a visit from we very kindly . the word have hardly 
 pass his lip when the bell be rung and my guardian appear , 
 " on the chance , " he slightly observe , " of be able to do any 
 little thing for a poor fellow involve in the same misfortune as 
 himself . " we all four go back together and go into the place 
 where Gridley be . 
 it be a bare room , partition off from the gallery with unpainted 
 wood . as the screening be not more than eight or ten foot high 
 and only enclose the side , not the top , the rafter of the high 
 gallery roof be overhead , and the skylight through which Mr. 
 Bucket have look down . the sun be low - near setting - and its 
 light come redly in above , without descend to the ground . upon 
 a plain canvas - cover sofa lie the man from Shropshire , dress 
 much as we have see he last , but so change that at first I 
 recognize no likeness in his colourless face to what I 
 recollect . 
 he have be still write in his hiding - place , and still dwell 
 on his grievance , hour after hour . a table and some shelf be 
 cover with manuscript paper and with worn pen and a medley of 
 such token . touchingly and awfully draw together , he and the 
 little mad woman be side by side and , as it be , alone . she sit 
 on a chair hold his hand , and none of we go close to they . 
 his voice have fade , with the old expression of his face , with his 
 strength , with his anger , with his resistance to the wrong that 
 have at last subdue he . the faint shadow of an object full of 
 form and colour be such a picture of it as he be of the man from 
 Shropshire whom we have speak with before . 
 he incline his head to Richard and I and speak to my guardian . 
 " Mr. Jarndyce , it be very kind of you to come to see I . I be not 
 long to be see , I think . I be very glad to take your hand , sir . 
 you be a good man , superior to injustice , and God know I honour 
 you . " 
 they shake hand earnestly , and my guardian say some word of 
 comfort to he . 
 " it may seem strange to you , sir , " return Gridley ; " I should not 
 have like to see you if this have be the first time of our 
 meeting . but you know I make a fight for it , you know I stand up 
 with my single hand against they all , you know I tell they the 
 truth to the last , and tell they what they be , and what they have 
 do to I ; so I do not   mind your see I , this wreck . " 
 " you have be courageous with they many and many a time , " return 
 my guardian . 
 " Sir , I have be , " with a faint smile . " I tell you what would 
 come of it when I cease to be so , and see here ! look at we - look 
 at we ! " he draw the hand Miss Flite hold through her arm and 
 bring she something near to he . 
 " this end it . of all my old association , of all my old pursuit 
 and hope , of all the living and the dead world , this one poor soul 
 alone come natural to I , and I be fit for . there be a tie of 
 many suffer year between we two , and it be the only tie I ever 
 have on earth that Chancery have not break . " 
 " accept my blessing , Gridley , " say Miss Flite in tear . " accept 
 my blessing ! " 
 " I think , boastfully , that they never could break my heart , Mr. 
 Jarndyce . I be resolve that they should not . I do believe that 
 I could , and would , charge they with be the mockery they be 
 until I die of some bodily disorder . but I be wear out . how long 
 I have be wear out , I do not   know ; I seem to break down in an 
 hour . I hope they may never come to hear of it . I hope everybody 
 here will lead they to believe that I die defy they , 
 consistently and perseveringly , as I do through so many year . " 
 here Mr. Bucket , who be sit in a corner by the door , good- 
 naturedly offer such consolation as he could administer . 
 " come , come ! " he say from his corner . " do not   go on in that way , 
 Mr. Gridley . you be only a little low . we be all of we a little 
 low sometimes . I be . hold up , hold up ! you will lose your temper 
 with the whole round of them , again and again ; and I shall take you 
 on a score of warrant yet , if I have luck . " 
 he only shake his head . 
 " do not   shake your head , " say Mr. Bucket . " nod it ; that be what I 
 want to see you do . why , Lord bless your soul , what time we have 
 have together ! have not   I see you in the Fleet over and over again 
 for contempt ? have not   I come into court , twenty afternoon for no 
 other purpose than to see you pin the Chancellor like a bull - dog ? 
 do not   you remember when you first begin to threaten the lawyer , 
 and the peace be swear against you two or three time a week ? ask 
 the little old lady there ; she have be always present . hold up , 
 Mr. Gridley , hold up , sir ! " 
 " what be you go to do about he ? " ask George in a low voice . 
 " I do not   know yet , " say Bucket in the same tone . then resume 
 his encouragement , he pursue aloud : " wear out , Mr. Gridley ? after 
 dodge I for all these week and force I to climb the roof 
 here like a tom cat and to come to see you as a doctor ? that be not 
 like be wear out . I should think not ! now I tell you what you 
 want . you want excitement , you know , to keep you up ; that be what 
 you want . you be use to it , and you can not   do without it . I 
 could not   myself . very well , then ; here be this warrant get by Mr. 
 Tulkinghorn of Lincoln 's Inn Fields , and back into half - a - dozen 
 county since . what do you say to come along with I , upon this 
 warrant , and have a good angry argument before the magistrate ? 
 it will do you good ; it will freshen you up and get you into training 
 for another turn at the Chancellor . give in ? why , I be surprised 
 to hear a man of your energy talk of give in . you must not   do 
 that . you be half the fun of the fair in the Court of Chancery . 
 George , you lend Mr. Gridley a hand , and let us see now whether he 
 will not   be well up than down . " 
 " he be very weak , " say the trooper in a low voice . 
 " be he ? " return Bucket anxiously . " I only want to rouse he . I 
 do not   like to see an old acquaintance give in like this . it 
 would cheer he up more than anything if I could make he a little 
 waxy with I . he be welcome to drop into I , right and leave , if he 
 like . I shall never take advantage of it . " 
 the roof ring with a scream from Miss Flite , which still ring in 
 my ear . 
 " oh , no , Gridley ! " she cry as he fall heavily and calmly back 
 from before she . " not without my blessing . after so many year ! " 
 the sun be down , the light have gradually steal from the roof , and 
 the shadow have creep upward . but to I the shadow of that pair , 
 one living and one dead , fall heavy on Richard 's departure than 
 the darkness of the dark night . and through Richard 's farewell 
 word I hear it echo : " of all my old association , of all my old 
 pursuit and hope , of all the living and the dead world , this one 
 poor soul alone come natural to I , and I be fit for . there be a 
 tie of many suffer year between we two , and it be the only tie 
 I ever have on earth that Chancery have not break ! " 
 CHAPTER XXV 
 Mrs. Snagsby see it all 
 there be disquietude in Cook 's Court , Cursitor Street . black 
 suspicion hide in that peaceful region . the mass of Cook 's 
 Courtiers be in their usual state of mind , no well and no worse ; 
 but Mr. Snagsby be change , and his little woman know it . 
 for Tom - all - Alone 's and Lincoln 's Inn Fields persist in harness 
 themselves , a pair of ungovernable courser , to the chariot of Mr. 
 Snagsby 's imagination ; and Mr. Bucket drive ; and the passenger 
 be Jo and Mr. Tulkinghorn ; and the complete equipage whirl though 
 the law - stationery business at wild speed all round the clock . 
 even in the little front kitchen where the family meal be take , 
 it rattle away at a smoking pace from the dinner - table , when Mr. 
 Snagsby pause in carve the first slice of the leg of mutton 
 bake with potato and stare at the kitchen wall . 
 Mr. Snagsby can not make out what it be that he have have to do with . 
 something be wrong somewhere , but what something , what may come of 
 it , to whom , when , and from which unthought of and unheard of 
 quarter be the puzzle of his life . his remote impression of the 
 robe and coronet , the star and garter , that sparkle through the 
 surface - dust of Mr. Tulkinghorn 's chamber ; his veneration for the 
 mystery preside over by that good and close of his customer , 
 whom all the Inns of Court , all Chancery Lane , and all the legal 
 neighbourhood agree to hold in awe ; his remembrance of Detective 
 Mr. Bucket with his forefinger and his confidential manner , 
 impossible to be evade or decline , persuade he that he be a 
 party to some dangerous secret without know what it be . and it 
 be the fearful peculiarity of this condition that , at any hour of 
 his daily life , at any opening of the shop - door , at any pull of the 
 bell , at any entrance of a messenger , or any delivery of a letter , 
 the secret may take air and fire , explode , and blow up - Mr. Bucket 
 only know whom . 
 for which reason , whenever a man unknown come into the shop   as 
 many man unknown do   and say , " be Mr. Snagsby in ? " or word to 
 that innocent effect , Mr. Snagsby 's heart knock hard at his guilty 
 breast . he undergo so much from such inquiry that when they 
 be make by boy he revenge himself by flip at their ear over 
 the counter and ask the young dog what they mean by it and why 
 they can not   speak out at once ? more impracticable man and boy 
 persist in walk into Mr. Snagsby 's sleep and terrify he with 
 unaccountable question , so that often when the cock at the little 
 dairy in Cursitor Street break out in his usual absurd way about 
 the morning , Mr. Snagsby find himself in a crisis of nightmare , 
 with his little woman shake he and say " what be the matter 
 with the man ! " 
 the little woman herself be not the least item in his difficulty . 
 to know that he be always keep a secret from she , that he have 
 under all circumstance to conceal and hold fast a tender double 
 tooth , which her sharpness be ever ready to twist out of his head , 
 give Mr. Snagsby , in her dentistical presence , much of the air of 
 a dog who have a reservation from his master and will look anywhere 
 rather than meet his eye . 
 these various sign and token , mark by the little woman , be not 
 lose upon she . they impel she to say , " Snagsby have something on 
 his mind ! " and thus suspicion get into Cook 's Court , Cursitor 
 Street . from suspicion to jealousy , Mrs. Snagsby find the road as 
 natural and short as from Cook 's Court to Chancery Lane . and thus 
 jealousy get into Cook 's Court , Cursitor Street . once there   and 
 it be always lurk thereabout , it be very active and nimble in 
 Mrs. Snagsby 's breast , prompt she to nocturnal examination of 
 Mr. Snagsby 's pocket ; to secret perusal of Mr. Snagsby 's letter ; 
 to private research in the day book and ledger , till , cash - box , 
 and iron safe ; to watching at window , listening behind door , 
 and a general putting of this and that together by the wrong end . 
 Mrs. Snagsby be so perpetually on the alert that the house become 
 ghostly with creak board and rustle garment . the ' prentice 
 think somebody may have be murder there in bygone time . 
 Guster hold certain loose atom of an idea   pick up at Tooting , 
 where they be find float among the orphan   that there be 
 bury money underneath the cellar , guard by an old man with a 
 white beard , who can not get out for seven thousand year because he 
 say the Lord 's Prayer backwards . 
 " who be Nimrod ? " Mrs. Snagsby repeatedly inquire of herself . 
 " who be that lady - that creature ? and who be that boy ? " now , 
 Nimrod be as dead as the mighty hunter whose name Mrs. Snagsby 
 have appropriate , and the lady be unproducible , she direct her 
 mental eye , for the present , with redouble vigilance to the boy . 
 " and who , " quoth Mrs. Snagsby for the thousand and first time , " be 
 that boy ? who be that - ! " and there Mrs. Snagsby be seize with 
 an inspiration . 
 he have no respect for Mr. Chadband . no , to be sure , and he 
 would not   have , of course . naturally he would not , under those 
 contagious circumstance . he be invite and appoint by Mr. 
 Chadband - why , Mrs. Snagsby hear it herself with her own ear ! - to 
 come back , and be tell where he be to go , to be address by Mr. 
 Chadband ; and he never come ! why do he never come ? because he 
 be tell not to come . who tell he not to come ? who ? ha , ha ! 
 Mrs. Snagsby see it all . 
 but happily   and Mrs. Snagsby tightly shake her head and tightly 
 smile   that boy be meet by Mr. Chadband yesterday in the street ; 
 and that boy , as afford a subject which Mr. Chadband desire to 
 improve for the spiritual delight of a select congregation , be 
 seize by Mr. Chadband and threaten with be deliver over to 
 the police unless he show the reverend gentleman where he live 
 and unless he enter into , and fulfil , an undertaking to appear 
 in Cook 's Court to - morrow night , " to - mor - row - night , " Mrs. 
 Snagsby repeat for mere emphasis with another tight smile and 
 another tight shake of her head ; and to - morrow night that boy will 
 be here , and to - morrow night Mrs. Snagsby will have her eye upon 
 he and upon some one else ; and oh , you may walk a long while in 
 your secret way   say Mrs. Snagsby with haughtiness and scorn , 
 but you can not   blind ME ! 
 Mrs. Snagsby sound no timbrel in anybody 's ear , but hold she 
 purpose quietly , and keep her counsel . to - morrow come , the 
 savoury preparation for the Oil Trade come , the evening come . 
 come Mr. Snagsby in his black coat ; come the Chadbands ; come   when 
 the gorging vessel be replete   the ' prentice and Guster , to be 
 edify ; come at last , with his slouch head , and his shuffle 
 backward , and his shuffle forward , and his shuffle to the right , 
 and his shuffle to the left , and his bit of fur cap in his muddy 
 hand , which he pick as if it be some mangy bird he have catch 
 and be pluck before eat raw , Jo , the very , very tough 
 subject Mr. Chadband be to improve . 
 Mrs. Snagsby screw a watchful glance on Jo as he be bring into 
 the little drawing - room by Guster . he look at Mr. Snagsby the 
 moment he come in . aha ! why do he look at Mr. Snagsby ? Mr. 
 Snagsby look at he . why should he do that , but that Mrs. Snagsby 
 see it all ? why else should that look pass between they , why else 
 should Mr. Snagsby be confused and cough a signal cough behind his 
 hand ? it be as clear as crystal that Mr. Snagsby be that boy 's 
 father . 
 " Peace , my friend , " say Chadband , rise and wipe the oily 
 exudation from his reverend visage . " peace be with we ! my 
 friend , why with we ? because , " with his fat smile , " it can not be 
 against we , because it must be for we ; because it be not harden , 
 because it be soften ; because it do not make war like the 
 hawk , but come home unto we like the dove . therefore , my friend , 
 peace be with we ! my human boy , come forward ! " 
 stretch forth his flabby paw , Mr. Chadband lay the same on Jo 's 
 arm and consider where to station he . Jo , very doubtful of his 
 reverend friend 's intention and not at all clear but that 
 something practical and painful be go to be do to he , 
 mutter , " you let I alone . I never say nothink to you . you let 
 I alone . " 
 " no , my young friend , " say Chadband smoothly , " I will not let you 
 alone . and why ? because I be a harvest - labourer , because I be a 
 toiler and a moiler , because you be deliver over unto I and be 
 become as a precious instrument in my hand . my friend , may I so 
 employ this instrument as to use it to your advantage , to your 
 profit , to your gain , to your welfare , to your enrichment ! my 
 young friend , sit upon this stool . " 
 Jo , apparently possess by an impression that the reverend 
 gentleman want to cut his hair , shield his head with both arm 
 and be get into the require position with great difficulty and 
 every possible manifestation of reluctance . 
 when he be at last adjust like a lay - figure , Mr. Chadband , 
 retire behind the table , hold up his bear's - paw and say , " my 
 friend ! " this be the signal for a general settlement of the 
 audience . the ' prentice giggle internally and nudge each other . 
 Guster fall into a star and vacant state , compound of a 
 stunned admiration of Mr. Chadband and pity for the friendless 
 outcast whose condition touch she nearly . Mrs. Snagsby silently 
 lay train of gunpowder . Mrs. Chadband compose herself grimly by 
 the fire and warm her knee , find that sensation favourable to 
 the reception of eloquence . 
 it happen that Mr. Chadband have a pulpit habit of fix some 
 member of his congregation with his eye and fatly argue his 
 point with that particular person , who be understand to be 
 expect to be move to an occasional grunt , groan , gasp , or other 
 audible expression of inward working , which expression of inward 
 working , be echo by some elderly lady in the next pew and so 
 communicate like a game of forfeit through a circle of the more 
 fermentable sinner present , serve the purpose of parliamentary 
 cheering and get Mr. Chadband 's steam up . from mere force of 
 habit , Mr. Chadband in say " my friend ! " have rest his eye on 
 Mr. Snagsby and proceed to make that ill - star stationer , 
 already sufficiently confuse , the immediate recipient of his 
 discourse . 
 " we have here among we , my friend , " say Chadband , " a Gentile and 
 a heathen , a dweller in the tent of Tom - all - Alone 's and a mover - on 
 upon the surface of the earth . we have here among we , my friend , " 
 and Mr. Chadband , untwist the point with his dirty thumb - nail , 
 bestow an oily smile on Mr. Snagsby , signify that he will throw 
 he an argumentative back - fall presently if he be not already down , 
 " a brother and a boy . devoid of parent , devoid of relation , 
 devoid of flock and herd , devoid of gold and silver and of 
 precious stone . now , my friend , why do I say he be devoid of 
 these possession ? why ? why be he ? " Mr. Chadband state the 
 question as if he be propound an entirely new riddle of much 
 ingenuity and merit to Mr. Snagsby and entreat he not to give 
 it up . 
 Mr. Snagsby , greatly perplex by the mysterious look he receive 
 just now from his little woman - at about the period when Mr. 
 Chadband mention the word parent - be tempt into modestly 
 remarking , " I do not   know , I be sure , sir . " on which interruption 
 Mrs. Chadband glare and Mrs. Snagsby say , " for shame ! " 
 " I hear a voice , " say Chadband ; " be it a still small voice , my 
 friend ? I fear not , though I fain would hope so - " 
 " ah - h ! " from Mrs. Snagsby . 
 " which say , ' I do not   know . ' then I will tell you why . I say this 
 brother present here among we be devoid of parent , devoid of 
 relation , devoid of flock and herd , devoid of gold , of silver , 
 and of precious stone because he be devoid of the light that 
 shin in upon some of we . what be that light ? what be it ? I ask 
 you , what be that light ? " 
 Mr. Chadband draw back his head and pause , but Mr. Snagsby be not 
 to be lure on to his destruction again . Mr. Chadband , lean 
 forward over the table , pierce what he have get to follow directly 
 into Mr. Snagsby with the thumb - nail already mention . 
 " it be , " say Chadband , " the ray of ray , the sun of sun , the moon 
 of moon , the star of star . it be the light of terewth . " 
 Mr. Chadband draw himself up again and look triumphantly at Mr. 
 Snagsby as if he would be glad to know how he feel after that . 
 " of terewth , " say Mr. Chadband , hit he again . " say not to I 
 that it be not the lamp of lamp . I say to you it be . I say to 
 you , a million of time over , it be . it be ! I say to you that I 
 will proclaim it to you , whether you like it or not ; nay , that the 
 less you like it , the more I will proclaim it to you . with a 
 speak - trumpet ! I say to you that if you rear yourself against 
 it , you shall fall , you shall be bruise , you shall be batter , 
 you shall be flaw , you shall be smash . " 
 the present effect of this flight of oratory - much admire for its 
 general power by Mr. Chadband 's follower - be not only to make 
 Mr. Chadband unpleasantly warm , but to represent the innocent Mr. 
 Snagsby in the light of a determined enemy to virtue , with a 
 forehead of brass and a heart of adamant , that unfortunate 
 tradesman become yet more disconcerted and be in a very advanced 
 state of low spirit and false position when Mr. Chadband 
 accidentally finish he . 
 " my friend , " he resume after dab his fat head for some time - 
 and it smoke to such an extent that he seem to light his pocket- 
 handkerchief at it , which smoke , too , after every dab - " to pursue 
 the subject we be endeavour with our lowly gift to improve , 
 let we in a spirit of love inquire what be that Terewth to which I 
 have allude . for , my young friend , " suddenly address the 
 ' prentice and Guster , to their consternation , " if I be tell by the 
 doctor that calomel or castor - oil be good for I , I may naturally 
 ask what be calomel , and what be castor - oil . I may wish to be 
 inform of that before I dose myself with either or with both . 
 now , my young friend , what be this terewth then ? firstly   in a 
 spirit of love , what be the common sort of terewth - the working 
 clothe - the every - day wear , my young friend ? be it deception ? " 
 " ah - h ! " from Mrs. Snagsby . 
 " be it suppression ? " 
 a shiver in the negative from Mrs. Snagsby . 
 " be it reservation ? " 
 a shake of the head from Mrs. Snagsby - very long and very tight . 
 " no , my friend , it be neither of these . neither of these name 
 belong to it . when this young heathen now among we - who be now , 
 my friend , asleep , the seal of indifference and perdition be 
 set upon his eyelid ; but do not wake he , for it be right that I 
 should have to wrestle , and to combat and to struggle , and to 
 conquer , for his sake - when this young harden heathen tell we a 
 story of a cock , and of a bull , and of a lady , and of a sovereign , 
 be that the terewth ? no . or if it be partly , be it wholly and 
 entirely ? no , my friend , no ! " 
 if Mr. Snagsby could withstand his little woman 's look as it enter 
 at his eye , the window of his soul , and search the whole 
 tenement , he be other than the man he be . he cower and droop . 
 " or , my juvenile friend , " say Chadband , descend to the level 
 of their comprehension with a very obtrusive demonstration in his 
 greasily meek smile of come a long way downstairs for the 
 purpose , " if the master of this house be to go forth into the city 
 and there see an eel , and be to come back , and be to call unto 
 he the mistress of this house , and be to say , ' sarah , rejoice 
 with I , for I have see an elephant ! ' would that be terewth ? " 
 Mrs. Snagsby in tear . 
 " or put it , my juvenile friend , that he see an elephant , and 
 returning say ' Lo , the city be barren , I have see but an eel , ' 
 would that be terewth ? " 
 Mrs. Snagsby sob loudly . 
 " or put it , my juvenile friend , " say Chadband , stimulate by the 
 sound , " that the unnatural parent of this slumber heathen - for 
 parent he have , my juvenile friend , beyond a doubt - after cast 
 he forth to the wolf and the vulture , and the wild dog and the 
 young gazelle , and the serpent , go back to their dwelling and 
 have their pipe , and their pot , and their fluting and their 
 dancing , and their malt liquor , and their butcher 's meat and 
 poultry , would that be terewth ? " 
 Mrs. Snagsby reply by deliver herself a prey to spasm , not an 
 unresisting prey , but a crying and a tear one , so that Cook 's 
 court re - echo with her shriek . finally , become cataleptic , 
 she have to be carry up the narrow staircase like a grand piano . 
 after unspeakable suffering , productive of the utmost consternation , 
 she be pronounce , by express from the bedroom , free from pain , 
 though much exhaust , in which state of affair Mr. Snagsby , 
 trample and crush in the piano - forte removal , and extremely 
 timid and feeble , venture to come out from behind the door in 
 the drawing - room . 
 all this time Jo have be stand on the spot where he wake up , 
 ever pick his cap and put bit of fur in his mouth . he 
 spit they out with a remorseful air , for he feel that it be in 
 his nature to be an unimprovable reprobate and that it be no good 
 his try to keep awake , for he will not   never know nothink . though 
 it may be , Jo , that there be a history so interesting and affect 
 even to mind as near the brute as thine , record deed do on 
 this earth for common man , that if the Chadbands , remove their 
 own person from the light , would but show it thee in simple 
 reverence , would but leave it unimproved , would but regard it as 
 be eloquent enough without their modest aid - it might hold thee 
 awake , and thou might learn from it yet ! 
 Jo never hear of any such book . its compiler and the Reverend 
 Chadband be all one to he , except that he know the reverend 
 Chadband and would rather run away from he for an hour than hear 
 he talk for five minute . " it an't   no good my wait here no 
 long , " think Jo . " Mr. Snagsby an't   a - go to say nothink to I 
 to - night . " and downstairs he shuffle . 
 but downstairs be the charitable Guster , hold by the handrail of 
 the kitchen stair and ward off a fit , as yet doubtfully , the 
 same have be induce by Mrs. Snagsby 's screaming . she have she 
 own supper of bread and cheese to hand to Jo , with whom she 
 venture to interchange a word or so for the first time . 
 " here be something to eat , poor boy , " say Guster . 
 " Thank'ee , mum , " say Jo . 
 " be you hungry ? " 
 " Jist ! " say Jo . 
 " what be go of your father and your mother , eh ? " 
 Jo stop in the middle of a bite and look petrify . for this 
 orphan charge of the christian saint whose shrine be at Tooting 
 have pat he on the shoulder , and it be the first time in his 
 life that any decent hand have be so lay upon he . 
 " I never know'd nothink about them , " say Jo . 
 " no more do not   I of mine , " cry Guster . she be repress 
 symptom favourable to the fit when she seem to take alarm at 
 something and vanish down the stair . 
 " Jo , " whisper the law - stationer softly as the boy linger on the 
 step . 
 " here I be , Mr. Snagsby ! " 
 " I do not   know you be go - there be another half - crown , Jo . it 
 be quite right of you to say nothing about the lady the other 
 night when we be out together . it would breed trouble . you 
 can not   be too quiet , Jo . " 
 " I be fly , master ! " 
 and so , good night . 
 a ghostly shade , frille and night - cap , follow the law- 
 stationer to the room he come from and glide high up . and 
 henceforth he begin , go where he will , to be attend by another 
 shadow than his own , hardly less constant than his own , hardly less 
 quiet than his own . and into whatsoever atmosphere of secrecy his 
 own shadow may pass , let all concerned in the secrecy beware ! for 
 the watchful Mrs. Snagsby be there too - bone of his bone , flesh of 
 his flesh , shadow of his shadow . 
 CHAPTER XXVI 
 Sharpshooters 
 Wintry morning , look with dull eye and sallow face upon the 
 neighbourhood of Leicester Square , find its inhabitant unwilling 
 to get out of bed . many of they be not early riser at the 
 bright of time , be bird of night who roost when the sun be 
 high and be wide awake and keen for prey when the star shine out . 
 behind dingy blind and curtain , in upper story and garret , skulk 
 more or less under false name , false hair , false title , false 
 jewellery , and false history , a colony of brigand lie in their 
 first sleep . gentleman of the green - baize road who could discourse 
 from personal experience of foreign galley and home treadmill ; 
 spy of strong government that eternally quake with weakness and 
 miserable fear , break traitor , coward , bully , gamester , 
 shuffler , swindler , and false witness ; some not unmarke by the 
 branding - iron beneath their dirty braid ; all with more cruelty in 
 they than be in Nero , and more crime than be in Newgate . for 
 howsoever bad the devil can be in fustian or smock - frock   and he 
 can be very bad in both , he be a more designing , callous , and 
 intolerable devil when he stick a pin in his shirt - front , call 
 himself a gentleman , back a card or colour , play a game or so of 
 billiard , and know a little about bill and promissory note than 
 in any other form he wear . and in such form Mr. Bucket shall find 
 he , when he will , still pervade the tributary channel of 
 Leicester Square . 
 but the wintry morning want he not and wake he not . it wake 
 Mr. George of the shoot gallery and his familiar . they arise , 
 roll up and stow away their mattress . Mr. George , have shave 
 himself before a look - glass of minute proportion , then march 
 out , bare - headed and bare - cheste , to the pump in the little yard 
 and anon come back shin with yellow soap , friction , drift 
 rain , and exceedingly cold water . as he rub himself upon a large 
 jack - towel , blow like a military sort of diver just come up , his 
 hair curl tighter and tight on his sunburnt temple the more 
 he rub it so that it look as if it never could be loosen by any 
 less coercive instrument than an iron rake or a curry - comb - as he 
 rub , and puff , and polish , and blow , turn his head from 
 side to side the more conveniently to excoriate his throat , and 
 stand with his body well bent forward to keep the wet from his 
 martial leg , Phil , on his knee light a fire , look round as if 
 it be enough washing for he to see all that do , and sufficient 
 renovation for one day to take in the superfluous health his master 
 throw off . 
 when Mr. George be dry , he go to work to brush his head with two 
 hard brush at once , to that unmerciful degree that Phil , 
 shoulder his way round the gallery in the act of sweep it , 
 wink with sympathy . this chafing over , the ornamental part of Mr. 
 George 's toilet be soon perform . he fill his pipe , light it , 
 and march up and down smoking , as his custom be , while Phil , 
 raise a powerful odour of hot roll and coffee , prepare 
 breakfast . he smoke gravely and march in slow time . perhaps 
 this morning 's pipe be devoted to the memory of Gridley in his 
 grave . 
 " and so , Phil , " say George of the shoot gallery after several 
 turn in silence , " you be dream of the country last night ? " 
 Phil , by the by , say as much in a tone of surprise as he scramble 
 out of bed . 
 " yes , guv'ner . " 
 " what be it like ? " 
 " I hardly know what it be like , guv'ner , " say Phil , consider . 
 " how do you know it be the country ? " 
 " on account of the grass , I think . and the swan upon it , " say 
 Phil after further consideration . 
 " what be the swan do on the grass ? " 
 " they be a - eating of it , I expect , " say Phil . 
 the master resume his march , and the man resume his preparation 
 of breakfast . it be not necessarily a lengthened preparation , 
 be limit to the setting forth of very simple breakfast 
 requisite for two and the broiling of a rasher of bacon at the 
 fire in the rusty grate ; but as Phil have to sidle round a 
 considerable part of the gallery for every object he want , and 
 never bring two object at once , it take time under the 
 circumstance . at length the breakfast be ready . Phil announce 
 it , Mr. George knock the ash out of his pipe on the hob , stand 
 his pipe itself in the chimney corner , and sit down to the meal . 
 when he have help himself , Phil follow suit , sit at the 
 extreme end of the little oblong table and take his plate on his 
 knee . either in humility , or to hide his blacken hand , or 
 because it be his natural manner of eat . 
 " the country , " say Mr. George , ply his knife and fork ; " why , I 
 suppose you never clap your eye on the country , Phil ? " 
 " I see the marsh once , " say Phil , contentedly eat his 
 breakfast . 
 " what marsh ? " 
 " the marsh , commander , " return Phil . 
 " where be they ? " 
 " I do not   know where they be , " say Phil ; " but I see them , guv'ner . 
 they be flat . and miste . " 
 Governor and commander be interchangeable term with Phil , 
 expressive of the same respect and deference and applicable to 
 nobody but Mr. George . 
 " I be bear in the country , Phil . " 
 " be you indeed , commander ? " 
 " yes . and breed there . " 
 Phil elevate his one eyebrow , and after respectfully star at 
 his master to express interest , swallow a great gulp of coffee , 
 still star at he . 
 " there be not a bird 's note that I do not   know , " say Mr. George . 
 " not many an english leaf or berry that I could not   name . not many 
 a tree that I could not   climb yet if I be put to it . I be a real 
 country boy , once . my good mother live in the country . " 
 " she must have be a fine old lady , guv'ner , " Phil observe . 
 " Aye ! and not so old either , five and thirty year ago , " say Mr. 
 George . " but I will wager that at ninety she would be near as 
 upright as I , and near as broad across the shoulder . " 
 " do she die at ninety , guv'ner ? " inquire Phil . 
 " no . bosh ! let her rest in peace , God bless she ! " say the 
 trooper . " what set I on about country boy , and runaway , and 
 good - for - nothing ? you , to be sure ! so you never clap your 
 eye upon the country - marsh and dream except . eh ? " 
 Phil shake his head . 
 " do you want to see it ? " 
 " N - no , I do not   know as I do , particular , " say Phil . 
 " the town 's enough for you , eh ? " 
 " why , you see , commander , " say Phil , " I be not   acquaint with 
 anythink else , and I doubt if I be not   a - get too old to take to 
 novelty . " 
 " how old be you , Phil ? " ask the trooper , pause as he convey 
 his smoking saucer to his lip . 
 " I be something with a eight in it , " say Phil . " it can not   be 
 eighty . nor yet eighteen . it be betwixt them , somewhere . " 
 Mr. George , slowly put down his saucer without taste its 
 content , be laughingly begin , " why , what the deuce , Phil - " 
 when he stop , see that Phil be count on his dirty finger . 
 " I be just eight , " say Phil , " agreeable to the parish 
 calculation , when I go with the tinker . I be send on a errand , 
 and I see he a - sittin under a old buildin with a fire all to 
 himself wery comfortable , and he say , ' would you like to come 
 along a me , my man ? ' I say ' yes , ' and he and I and the fire 
 go home to Clerkenwell together . that be April Fool Day . I be 
 able to count up to ten ; and when April Fool Day come round again , 
 I say to myself , ' now , old chap , you be one and a eight in it . ' 
 April Fool Day after that , I say , ' now , old chap , you be two and a 
 eight in it . ' in course of time , I come to ten and a eight in it ; 
 two ten and a eight in it . when it get so high , it get the upper 
 hand of I , but this be how I always know there be a eight in it . " 
 " ah ! " say Mr. George , resume his breakfast . " and where be the 
 tinker ? " 
 " drink put he in the hospital , guv'ner , and the hospital put he - 
 in a glass - case , I have heerd , " Phil reply mysteriously . 
 " by that mean you get promotion ? take the business , Phil ? " 
 " yes , commander , I take the business . such as it be . it be not 
 much of a beat - round Saffron Hill , Hatton Garden , Clerkenwell , 
 Smiffeld , and there - poor neighbourhood , where they use up the 
 kettle till they be past mending . Most of the tramping tinker 
 use to come and lodge at our place ; that be the good part of my 
 master 's earning . but they do not   come to I . I warn't   like he . 
 he could sing them a good song . I could not ! he could play them a 
 tune on any sort of pot you please , so as it be iron or block tin . 
 I never could do nothing with a pot but mend it or bile it - never 
 have a note of music in I . besides , I be too ill - looking , and 
 their wife complain of I . " 
 " they be mighty particular . you would pass muster in a crowd , 
 Phil ! " say the trooper with a pleasant smile . 
 " no , guv'ner , " return Phil , shake his head . " no , I should not . 
 I be passable enough when I go with the tinker , though nothing 
 to boast of then ; but what with blow the fire with my mouth when 
 I be young , and spilee my complexion , and singe my hair off , 
 and swallere the smoke , and what with be nat'rally unfort'nate 
 in the way of run against hot metal and mark myself by sich 
 mean , and what with have turn - up with the tinker as I get 
 old , almost whenever he be too far go in drink - which be 
 almost always - my beauty be queer , wery queer , even at that time . 
 as to since , what with a dozen year in a dark forge where the man 
 be give to larking , and what with be scorch in a accident at 
 a gas - work , and what with be blow out of winder case - filling 
 at the firework business , I be ugly enough to be make a show on ! " 
 resign himself to which condition with a perfectly satisfied 
 manner , Phil beg the favour of another cup of coffee . while 
 drink it , he say , " it be after the case - fill blow - up when I 
 first see you , commander . you remember ? " 
 " I remember , Phil . you be walk along in the sun . " 
 " crawling , guv'ner , again a wall - " 
 " true , Phil - shoulder your way on - " 
 " in a night - cap ! " exclaim Phil , excited . 
 " in a night - cap - " 
 " and hobble with a couple of stick ! " cry Phil , still more 
 excited . 
 " with a couple of stick . when - " 
 " when you stop , you know , " cry Phil , put down his cup and 
 saucer and hastily remove his plate from his knee , " and say to 
 I , ' what , comrade ! you have be in the war ! ' I do not   say much 
 to you , commander , then , for I be take by surprise that a person 
 so strong and healthy and bold as you be should stop to speak to 
 such a limp bag of bone as I be . but you say to I , say 
 you , deliver it out of your chest as hearty as possible , so that 
 it be like a glass of something hot , ' what accident have you meet 
 with ? you have be badly hurt . what be amiss , old boy ? cheer up , 
 and tell we about it ! ' cheer up ! I be cheer already ! I say 
 as much to you , you say more to I , I say more to you , you say 
 more to I , and here I be , commander ! here I be , commander ! " cry 
 Phil , who have start from his chair and unaccountably begin to 
 sidle away . " if a mark 's want , or if it will improve the 
 business , let the customer take aim at I . they can not   spoil my 
 beauty . i'm all right . come on ! if they want a man to box at , 
 let them box at I . let them knock I well about the head . I do not 
 mind . if they want a light - weight to be throw for practice , 
 Cornwall , Devonshire , or Lancashire , let them throw I . they will not 
 hurt ME . I have be throw , all sort of style , all my life ! " 
 with this unexpected speech , energetically deliver and 
 accompany by action illustrative of the various exercise 
 refer to , Phil Squod shoulder his way round three side of the 
 gallery , and abruptly tack off at his commander , make a butt at 
 he with his head , intend to express devotion to his service . he 
 then begin to clear away the breakfast . 
 Mr. George , after laugh cheerfully and clap he on the 
 shoulder , assist in these arrangement and help to get the 
 gallery into business order . that do , he take a turn at the 
 dumb - bell , and afterwards weigh himself and opine that he be 
 get " too fleshy , " engage with great gravity in solitary 
 broadsword practice . meanwhile Phil have fall to work at his 
 usual table , where he screw and unscrew , and clean , and file , 
 and whistle into small aperture , and blacken himself more and 
 more , and seem to do and undo everything that can be do and 
 undo about a gun . 
 Master and man be at length disturb by footstep in the passage , 
 where they make an unusual sound , denote the arrival of unusual 
 company . these step , advance nearer and near to the gallery , 
 bring into it a group at first sight scarcely reconcilable with any 
 day in the year but the fifth of November . 
 it consist of a limp and ugly figure carry in a chair by two 
 bearer and attend by a lean female with a face like a pinch 
 mask , who might be expect immediately to recite the popular 
 verse commemorative of the time when they do contrive to blow Old 
 England up alive but for she keep her lip tightly and defiantly 
 close as the chair be put down . at which point the figure in it 
 gasp , " o Lord ! oh , dear I ! I be shake ! " add , " how de do , my 
 dear friend , how de do ? " Mr. George then descry , in the 
 procession , the venerable Mr. Smallweed out for an airing , attend 
 by his granddaughter Judy as body - guard . 
 " Mr. George , my dear friend , " say Grandfather Smallweed , remove 
 his right arm from the neck of one of his bearer , whom he have 
 nearly throttle come along , " how de do ? you be surprised to see 
 I , my dear friend . " 
 " I should hardly have be more surprised to have see your friend 
 in the city , " return Mr. George . 
 " I be very seldom out , " pant Mr. Smallweed . " I have not   be out 
 for many month . it be inconvenient - and it come expensive . but I 
 long so much to see you , my dear Mr. George . how de do , sir ? " 
 " I be well enough , " say Mr. George . " I hope you be the same . " 
 " you can not   be too well , my dear friend . " Mr. Smallweed take he 
 by both hand . " I have bring my granddaughter Judy . I could not 
 keep she away . she long so much to see you . " 
 " Hum ! she bear it calmly ! " mutter Mr. George . 
 " so we get a hackney - cab , and put a chair in it , and just round the 
 corner they lift I out of the cab and into the chair , and 
 carry I here that I might see my dear friend in his own 
 establishment ! this , " say Grandfather Smallweed , allude to the 
 bearer , who have be in danger of strangulation and who withdraw 
 adjust his windpipe , " be the driver of the cab . he have nothing 
 extra . it be by agreement include in his fare . this person , " the 
 other bearer , " we engage in the street outside for a pint of beer . 
 which be twopence . Judy , give the person twopence . I be not sure 
 you have a workman of your own here , my dear friend , or we need not 
 have employ this person . " 
 Grandfather Smallweed refer to Phil with a glance of considerable 
 terror and a half - subdue " o Lord ! oh , dear I ! " nor in his 
 apprehension , on the surface of thing , without some reason , for 
 Phil , who have never behold the apparition in the black - velvet cap 
 before , have stop short with a gun in his hand with much of the 
 air of a dead shot intent on pick Mr. Smallweed off as an ugly 
 old bird of the crow species . 
 " Judy , my child , " say Grandfather Smallweed , " give the person his 
 twopence . it be a great deal for what he have do . " 
 the person , who be one of those extraordinary specimen of human 
 fungus that spring up spontaneously in the western street of 
 London , ready dress in an old red jacket , with a " mission " for 
 hold horse and call coach , receive his twopence with 
 anything but transport , toss the money into the air , catch it 
 over - hand , and retire . 
 " my dear Mr. George , " say Grandfather Smallweed , " would you be so 
 kind as help to carry I to the fire ? I be accustom to a fire , 
 and I be an old man , and I soon chill . oh , dear I ! " 
 his closing exclamation be jerk out of the venerable gentleman by 
 the suddenness with which Mr. Squod , like a genie , catch he up , 
 chair and all , and deposit he on the hearth - stone . 
 " o Lord ! " say Mr. Smallweed , pant . " oh , dear I ! oh , my 
 star ! my dear friend , your workman be very strong - and very 
 prompt . o Lord , he be very prompt ! Judy , draw I back a little . 
 I be be scorch in the leg , " which indeed be testify to the 
 nose of all present by the smell of his worsted stocking . 
 the gentle Judy , have back her grandfather a little way from 
 the fire , and have shake he up as usual , and have release 
 his overshadowed eye from its black - velvet extinguisher , Mr. 
 Smallweed again say , " oh , dear I ! o Lord ! " and look about and 
 meet Mr. George 's glance , again stretch out both hand . 
 " my dear friend ! so happy in this meeting ! and this be your 
 establishment ? it be a delightful place . it be a picture ! you 
 never find that anything go off here accidentally , do you , my 
 dear friend ? " add Grandfather Smallweed , very ill at ease . 
 " no , no . no fear of that . " 
 " and your workman . he - oh , dear I ! - he never let anything off 
 without mean it , do he , my dear friend ? " 
 " he have never hurt anybody but himself , " say Mr. George , smile . 
 " but he might , you know . he seem to have hurt himself a good 
 deal , and he might hurt somebody else , " the old gentleman return . 
 " he might not   mean it - or he even might . Mr. George , will you order 
 he to leave his infernal fire - arm alone and go away ? " 
 Obedient to a nod from the trooper , Phil retire , empty - handed , to 
 the other end of the gallery . Mr. Smallweed , reassure , fall to 
 rub his leg . 
 " and you be do well , Mr. George ? " he say to the trooper , 
 squarely stand face about towards he with his broadsword in 
 his hand . " you be prosper , please the Powers ? " 
 Mr. George answer with a cool nod , add , " go on . you have not 
 come to say that , I know . " 
 " you be so sprightly , Mr. George , " return the venerable 
 grandfather . " you be such good company . " 
 " ha ha ! go on ! " say Mr. George . 
 " my dear friend ! but that sword look awful gleaming and sharp . 
 it might cut somebody , by accident . it make I shiver , Mr. 
 George . curse he ! " say the excellent old gentleman apart to Judy 
 as the trooper take a step or two away to lay it aside . " he owe 
 me money , and might think of pay off old score in this 
 murdering place . I wish your brimstone grandmother be here , and 
 he would shave her head off . " 
 Mr. George , return , fold his arm , and look down at the old 
 man , slide every moment lower and low in his chair , say 
 quietly , " now for it ! " 
 " Ho ! " cry Mr. Smallweed , rub his hand with an artful 
 chuckle . " yes . now for it . now for what , my dear friend ? " 
 " for a pipe , " say Mr. George , who with great composure set his 
 chair in the chimney - corner , take his pipe from the grate , fill 
 it and light it , and fall to smoke peacefully . 
 this tend to the discomfiture of Mr. Smallweed , who find it so 
 difficult to resume his object , whatever it may be , that he become 
 exasperate and secretly claw the air with an impotent 
 vindictiveness expressive of an intense desire to tear and rend the 
 visage of Mr. George . as the excellent old gentleman 's nail be 
 long and leaden , and his hand lean and veinous , and his eye green 
 and watery ; and , over and above this , as he continue , while he 
 claw , to slide down in his chair and to collapse into a shapeless 
 bundle , he become such a ghastly spectacle , even in the accustomed 
 eye of Judy , that that young virgin pounce at he with something 
 more than the ardour of affection and so shake he up and pat and 
 poke he in diver part of his body , but particularly in that 
 part which the science of self - defence would call his wind , that in 
 his grievous distress he utter enforce sound like a paviour 's 
 rammer . 
 when Judy have by these mean set he up again in his chair , with a 
 white face and a frosty nose   but still claw , she stretch out 
 her weazen forefinger and give Mr. George one poke in the back . 
 the trooper raise his head , she make another poke at her 
 esteemed grandfather , and have thus bring they together , stare 
 rigidly at the fire . 
 " aye , aye ! Ho , ho ! U - u - u - ugh ! " chatter Grandfather Smallweed , 
 swallow his rage . " my dear friend ! "   still claw . 
 " I tell you what , " say Mr. George . " if you want to converse with 
 I , you must speak out . I be one of the rough , and I can not   go 
 about and about . I have not   the art to do it . I be not clever 
 enough . it do not   suit I . when you go wind round and round 
 I , " say the trooper , put his pipe between his lip again , 
 " damme , if I do not   feel as if I be be smother ! " 
 and he inflate his broad chest to its utmost extent as if to 
 assure himself that he be not smother yet . 
 " if you have come to give I a friendly call , " continue Mr. 
 George , " I be oblige to you ; how be you ? if you have come to see 
 whether there be any property on the premise , look about you ; you 
 be welcome . if you want to out with something , out with it ! " 
 the bloom Judy , without remove her gaze from the fire , give 
 her grandfather one ghostly poke . 
 " you see ! it be her opinion too . and why the devil that young 
 woman will not   sit down like a Christian , " say Mr. George with his 
 eye musingly fix on Judy , " I can not   comprehend . " 
 " she keep at my side to attend to I , sir , " say Grandfather 
 Smallweed . " I be an old man , my dear Mr. George , and I need some 
 attention . I can carry my year ; I be not a brimstone poll - parrot " 
  snarl and look unconsciously for the cushion , " but I need 
 attention , my dear friend . " 
 " well ! " return the trooper , wheel his chair to face the old 
 man . " now then ? " 
 " my friend in the city , Mr. George , have do a little business with 
 a pupil of your . " 
 " have he ? " say Mr. George . " I be sorry to hear it . " 
 " yes , sir . " Grandfather Smallweed rub his leg . " he be a fine 
 young soldier now , Mr. George , by the name of Carstone . friend 
 come forward and pay it all up , honourable . " 
 " do they ? " return Mr. George . " do you think your friend in the 
 city would like a piece of advice ? " 
 " I think he would , my dear friend . from you . " 
 " I advise he , then , to do no more business in that quarter . 
 there be no more to be get by it . the young gentleman , to my 
 knowledge , be bring to a dead halt . " 
 " no , no , my dear friend . no , no , Mr. George . no , no , no , sir , " 
 remonstrate Grandfather Smallweed , cunningly rub his spare 
 leg . " not quite a dead halt , I think . he have good friend , and 
 he be good for his pay , and he be good for the selling price of his 
 commission , and he be good for his chance in a lawsuit , and he be 
 good for his chance in a wife , and - oh , do you know , Mr. George , I 
 think my friend would consider the young gentleman good for 
 something yet ? " say Grandfather Smallweed , turn up his velvet 
 cap and scratch his ear like a monkey . 
 Mr. George , who have put aside his pipe and sit with an arm on his 
 chair - back , beat a tattoo on the ground with his right foot as if 
 he be not particularly pleased with the turn the conversation have 
 take . 
 " but to pass from one subject to another , " resume Mr. Smallweed . 
 " ' to promote the conversation , ' as a joker might say . to pass , Mr. 
 George , from the ensign to the captain . " 
 " what be you up to , now ? " ask Mr. George , pause with a frown in 
 stroke the recollection of his moustache . " what captain ? " 
 " our captain . the captain we know of . Captain Hawdon . " 
 " oh ! that be it , be it ? " say Mr. George with a low whistle as he 
 see both grandfather and granddaughter look hard at he . " you 
 be there ! well ? what about it ? come , I will not   be smother any 
 more . speak ! " 
 " my dear friend , " return the old man , " I be apply - Judy , shake 
 I up a little ! - I be apply to yesterday about the captain , and 
 my opinion still be that the captain be not dead . " 
 " Bosh ! " observe Mr. George . 
 " what be your remark , my dear friend ? " inquire the old man with 
 his hand to his ear . 
 " Bosh ! " 
 " Ho ! " say Grandfather Smallweed . " Mr. George , of my opinion you 
 can judge for yourself accord to the question ask of I and 
 the reason give for ask them . now , what do you think the 
 lawyer make the inquiry want ? " 
 " a job , " say Mr. George . 
 " nothing of the kind ! " 
 " can not   be a lawyer , then , " say Mr. George , fold his arm with 
 an air of confirm resolution . 
 " my dear friend , he be a lawyer , and a famous one . he want to see 
 some fragment in Captain Hawdon 's writing . he do not   want to keep 
 it . he only want to see it and compare it with a writing in his 
 possession . " 
 " well ? " 
 " well , Mr. George . happen to remember the advertisement 
 concern Captain Hawdon and any information that could be give 
 respect he , he look it up and come to I - just as you do , my 
 dear friend . will you shake hand ? so glad you come that day ! I 
 should have miss form such a friendship if you have not   come ! " 
 " well , Mr. Smallweed ? " say Mr. George again after go through 
 the ceremony with some stiffness . 
 " I have no such thing . I have nothing but his signature . plague 
 pestilence and famine , battle murder and sudden death upon he , " 
 say the old man , make a curse out of one of his few remembrance 
 of a prayer and squeeze up his velvet cap between his angry 
 hand , " I have half a million of his signature , I think ! but 
 you , " breathlessly recover his mildness of speech as Judy re- 
 adjust the cap on his skittle - ball of a head , " you , my dear Mr. 
 George , be likely to have some letter or paper that would suit the 
 purpose . anything would suit the purpose , write in the hand . " 
 " some writing in that hand , " say the trooper , ponder ; " may be , 
 I have . " 
 " my dear friend ! " 
 " may be , I have not . " 
 " Ho ! " say Grandfather Smallweed , crest - fall . 
 " but if I have bushel of it , I would not show as much as would make 
 a cartridge without know why . " 
 " Sir , I have tell you why . my dear Mr. George , I have tell you 
 why . " 
 " not enough , " say the trooper , shake his head . " I must know 
 more , and approve it . " 
 " then , will you come to the lawyer ? my dear friend , will you come 
 and see the gentleman ? " urge Grandfather Smallweed , pull out a 
 lean old silver watch with hand like the leg of a skeleton . " I 
 tell he it be probable I might call upon he between ten and 
 eleven this forenoon , and it be now half after ten . will you come 
 and see the gentleman , Mr. George ? " 
 " Hum ! " say he gravely . " I do not   mind that . though why this 
 should concern you so much , I do not   know . " 
 " everything concern I that have a chance in it of bring 
 anything to light about he . do not   he take we all in ? do not   he 
 owe we immense sum , all round ? concern I ? who can anything 
 about he concern more than I ? not , my dear friend , " say 
 Grandfather Smallweed , lower his tone , " that I want you to 
 betray anything . far from it . be you ready to come , my dear 
 friend ? " 
 " Aye ! I will come in a moment . I promise nothing , you know . " 
 " no , my dear Mr. George ; no . " 
 " and you mean to say you be go to give I a lift to this place , 
 wherever it be , without charge for it ? " Mr. George inquire , 
 get his hat and thick wash - leather glove . 
 this pleasantry so tickle Mr. Smallweed that he laugh , long and 
 low , before the fire . but ever while he laugh , he glance over 
 his paralytic shoulder at Mr. George and eagerly watch he as he 
 unlock the padlock of a homely cupboard at the distant end of the 
 gallery , look here and there upon the high shelf , and 
 ultimately take something out with a rustling of paper , fold it , 
 and put it in his breast . then Judy poke Mr. Smallweed once , and 
 Mr. Smallweed poke Judy once . 
 " I be ready , " say the trooper , come back . " Phil , you can carry 
 this old gentleman to his coach , and make nothing of he . " 
 " oh , dear I ! o Lord ! stop a moment ! " say Mr. Smallweed . " he be 
 so very prompt ! be you sure you can do it carefully , my worthy 
 man ? " 
 Phil make no reply , but seize the chair and its load , sidle 
 away , tightly hug by the now speechless Mr. Smallweed , and bolt 
 along the passage as if he have an acceptable commission to carry 
 the old gentleman to the near volcano . his short trust , 
 however , terminate at the cab , he deposit he there ; and the 
 fair Judy take her place beside he , and the chair embellish the 
 roof , and Mr. George take the vacant place upon the box . 
 Mr. George be quite confound by the spectacle he behold from 
 time to time as he peep into the cab through the window behind 
 he , where the grim Judy be always motionless , and the old 
 gentleman with his cap over one eye be always slide off the seat 
 into the straw and look upward at he out of his other eye with 
 a helpless expression of be jolt in the back . 
 CHAPTER XXVII 
 More Old Soldiers than one 
 Mr. George have not far to ride with fold arm upon the box , for 
 their destination be Lincoln 's Inn Fields . when the driver stop 
 his horse , Mr. George alight , and look in at the window , say , 
 " what , Mr. Tulkinghorn 's your man , be he ? " 
 " yes , my dear friend . do you know he , Mr. George ? " 
 " why , I have hear of he - see he too , I think . but I do not   know 
 he , and he do not   know I . " 
 there ensue the carrying of Mr. Smallweed upstairs , which be do 
 to perfection with the trooper 's help . he be bear into Mr. 
 Tulkinghorn 's great room and deposit on the Turkey rug before the 
 fire . Mr. Tulkinghorn be not within at the present moment but will 
 be back directly . the occupant of the pew in the hall , have say 
 thus much , stir the fire and leave the triumvirate to warm 
 themselves . 
 Mr. George be mightily curious in respect of the room . he look up 
 at the paint ceiling , look round at the old law - book , 
 contemplate the portrait of the great client , read aloud the 
 name on the box . 
 " ' Sir Leicester Dedlock , Baronet , ' " Mr. George read thoughtfully . 
 " ha ! ' Manor of Chesney Wold . ' Humph ! " Mr. George stand look 
 at these box a long while - as if they be picture - and come 
 back to the fire repeating , " Sir Leicester Dedlock , Baronet , and 
 Manor of Chesney Wold , hey ? " 
 " worth a mint of money , Mr. George ! " whisper Grandfather 
 Smallweed , rub his leg . " powerfully rich ! " 
 " who do you mean ? this old gentleman , or the Baronet ? " 
 " this gentleman , this gentleman . " 
 " so I have hear ; and know a thing or two , I will hold a wager . not 
 bad quarter , either , " say Mr. George , look round again . " see 
 the strong - box yonder ! " 
 this reply be cut short by Mr. Tulkinghorn 's arrival . there be no 
 change in he , of course . rustily drest , with his spectacle in 
 his hand , and their very case wear threadbare . in manner , close 
 and dry . in voice , husky and low . in face , watchful behind a 
 blind ; habitually not uncensorious and contemptuous perhaps . the 
 peerage may have warm worshipper and faithfuller believer than 
 Mr. Tulkinghorn , after all , if everything be know . 
 " good morning , Mr. Smallweed , good morning ! " he say as he come 
 in . " you have bring the sergeant , I see . sit down , sergeant . " 
 as Mr. Tulkinghorn take off his glove and put they in his hat , 
 he look with half - close eye across the room to where the trooper 
 stand and say within himself perchance , " you will do , my friend ! " 
 " sit down , sergeant , " he repeat as he come to his table , which be 
 set on one side of the fire , and take his easy - chair . " cold and 
 raw this morning , cold and raw ! " Mr. Tulkinghorn warm before the 
 bar , alternately , the palm and knuckle of his hand and look 
  from behind that blind which be always down   at the trio sit 
 in a little semicircle before he . 
 " now , I can feel what I be about "   as perhaps he can in two 
 sens , " Mr. Smallweed . " the old gentleman be newly shake up by 
 Judy to bear his part in the conversation . " you have bring our 
 good friend the sergeant , I see . " 
 " yes , sir , " return Mr. Smallweed , very servile to the lawyer 's 
 wealth and influence . 
 " and what do the sergeant say about this business ? " 
 " Mr. George , " say Grandfather Smallweed with a tremulous wave of 
 his shrivelled hand , " this be the gentleman , sir . " 
 Mr. George salute the gentleman but otherwise sit bolt upright 
 and profoundly silent - very forward in his chair , as if the full 
 complement of regulation appendage for a field - day hang about he . 
 Mr. Tulkinghorn proceed , " well , George - I believe your name be 
 George ? " 
 " it be so , Sir . " 
 " what do you say , George ? " 
 " I ask your pardon , sir , " return the trooper , " but I should wish 
 to know what you say ? " 
 " do you mean in point of reward ? " 
 " I mean in point of everything , sir . " 
 this be so very try to Mr. Smallweed 's temper that he suddenly 
 break out with " you be a brimstone beast ! " and as suddenly ask 
 pardon of Mr. Tulkinghorn , excuse himself for this slip of the 
 tongue by say to Judy , " I be think of your grandmother , my 
 dear . " 
 " I suppose , sergeant , " Mr. Tulkinghorn resume as he lean on one 
 side of his chair and cross his leg , " that Mr. Smallweed might 
 have sufficiently explain the matter . it lie in the small 
 compass , however . you serve under Captain Hawdon at one time , and 
 be his attendant in illness , and render he many little 
 service , and be rather in his confidence , I be tell . that be 
 so , be it not ? " 
 " yes , sir , that be so , " say Mr. George with military brevity . 
 " therefore you may happen to have in your possession something - 
 anything , no matter what ; account , instruction , order , a letter , 
 anything - in Captain Hawdon 's writing . I wish to compare his 
 writing with some that I have . if you can give I the opportunity , 
 you shall be reward for your trouble . three , four , five , 
 guineas , you would consider handsome , I dare say . " 
 " noble , my dear friend ! " cry Grandfather Smallweed , screw up 
 his eye . 
 " if not , say how much more , in your conscience as a soldier , you 
 can demand . there be no need for you to part with the writing , 
 against your inclination - though I should prefer to have it . " 
 Mr. George sit square in exactly the same attitude , look at the 
 paint ceiling , and say never a word . the irascible Mr. 
 Smallweed scratch the air . 
 " the question be , " say Mr. Tulkinghorn in his methodical , subdued , 
 uninterested way , " first , whether you have any of Captain Hawdon 's 
 writing ? " 
 " first , whether I have any of Captain Hawdon 's writing , sir , " 
 repeat Mr. George . 
 " secondly , what will satisfy you for the trouble of produce it ? " 
 " secondly , what will satisfy I for the trouble of produce it , 
 sir , " repeat Mr. George . 
 " thirdly , you can judge for yourself whether it be at all like 
 that , " say Mr. Tulkinghorn , suddenly hand he some sheet of 
 write paper tie together . 
 " whether it be at all like that , sir . just so , " repeat Mr. 
 George . 
 all three repetition Mr. George pronounce in a mechanical manner , 
 look straight at Mr. Tulkinghorn ; nor do he so much as glance 
 at the affidavit in Jarndyce and Jarndyce , that have be give to 
 he for his inspection   though he still hold it in his hand , but 
 continue to look at the lawyer with an air of troubled meditation . 
 " well ? " say Mr. Tulkinghorn . " what do you say ? " 
 " well , sir , " reply Mr. George , rise erect and look immense , 
 " I would rather , if you will excuse I , have nothing to do with 
 this . " 
 Mr. Tulkinghorn , outwardly quite undisturbed , demand , " why not ? " 
 " why , sir , " return the trooper . " except on military compulsion , I 
 be not a man of business . among civilian I be what they call in 
 Scotland a ne'er - do - weel . I have no head for paper , sir . I can 
 stand any fire well than a fire of cross question . I mention 
 to Mr. Smallweed , only an hour or so ago , that when I come into 
 thing of this kind I feel as if I be be smother . and that 
 be my sensation , " say Mr. George , look round upon the company , 
 " at the present moment . " 
 with that , he take three stride forward to replace the paper on 
 the lawyer 's table and three stride backward to resume his former 
 station , where he stand perfectly upright , now look at the 
 ground and now at the paint ceiling , with his hand behind he as 
 if to prevent himself from accept any other document whatever . 
 under this provocation , Mr. Smallweed 's favourite adjective of 
 disparagement be so close to his tongue that he begin the word 
 " my dear friend " with the monosyllable " brim , " thus convert the 
 possessive pronoun into brimmy and appear to have an impediment 
 in his speech . once past this difficulty , however , he exhort his 
 dear friend in the tender manner not to be rash , but to do what 
 so eminent a gentleman require , and to do it with a good grace , 
 confident that it must be unobjectionable as well as profitable . 
 Mr. Tulkinghorn merely utter an occasional sentence , as , " you be 
 the good judge of your own interest , sergeant . " " take care you do 
 no harm by this . " " please yourself , please yourself . " " if you 
 know what you mean , that be quite enough . " these he utter with an 
 appearance of perfect indifference as he look over the paper on 
 his table and prepare to write a letter . 
 Mr. George look distrustfully from the paint ceiling to the 
 ground , from the ground to Mr. Smallweed , from Mr. Smallweed to Mr. 
 Tulkinghorn , and from Mr. Tulkinghorn to the paint ceiling again , 
 often in his perplexity change the leg on which he rest . 
 " I do assure you , sir , " say Mr. George , " not to say it 
 offensively , that between you and Mr. Smallweed here , I really be 
 be smother fifty time over . I really be , sir . I be not a 
 match for you gentleman . will you allow I to ask why you want to 
 see the captain 's hand , in the case that I could find any speciman 
 of it ? " 
 Mr. Tulkinghorn quietly shake his head . " no . if you be a man 
 of business , sergeant , you would not need to be inform that there 
 be confidential reason , very harmless in themselves , for many 
 such want in the profession to which I belong . but if you be 
 afraid of do any injury to Captain Hawdon , you may set your mind 
 at rest about that . " 
 " aye ! he be dead , sir . " 
 " be he ? " Mr. Tulkinghorn quietly sit down to write . 
 " well , sir , " say the trooper , look into his hat after another 
 disconcert pause , " I be sorry not to have give you more 
 satisfaction . if it would be any satisfaction to any one that I 
 should be confirm in my judgment that I would rather have nothing 
 to do with this by a friend of mine who have a well head for 
 business than I have , and who be an old soldier , I be willing to 
 consult with he . I - I really be so completely smother myself at 
 present , " say Mr. George , pass his hand hopelessly across his 
 brow , " that I do not   know but what it might be a satisfaction to 
 I . " 
 Mr. Smallweed , hear that this authority be an old soldier , so 
 strongly inculcate the expediency of the trooper 's taking counsel 
 with he , and particularly inform he of its be a question of 
 five guinea or more , that Mr. George engage to go and see he . 
 Mr. Tulkinghorn say nothing either way . 
 " I will consult my friend , then , by your leave , sir , " say the 
 trooper , " and I will take the liberty of look in again with the 
 final answer in the course of the day . Mr. Smallweed , if you wish 
 to be carry downstairs - " 
 " in a moment , my dear friend , in a moment . will you first let I 
 speak half a word with this gentleman in private ? " 
 " certainly , sir . do not   hurry yourself on my account . " the trooper 
 retire to a distant part of the room and resume his curious 
 inspection of the box , strong and otherwise . 
 " if I be not   as weak as a brimstone baby , sir , " whisper 
 Grandfather Smallweed , draw the lawyer down to his level by the 
 lapel of his coat and flash some half - quench green fire out of 
 his angry eye , " I would tear the writing away from he . he be get it 
 button in his breast . I see he put it there . Judy see he put 
 it there . speak up , you crab image for the sign of a walking- 
 stick shop , and say you see he put it there ! " 
 this vehement conjuration the old gentleman accompany with such a 
 thrust at his granddaughter that it be too much for his strength , 
 and he slip away out of his chair , draw Mr. Tulkinghorn with 
 he , until he be arrest by Judy , and well shake . 
 " violence will not do for I , my friend , " Mr. Tulkinghorn then 
 remark coolly . 
 " no , no , I know , I know , sir . but it be chafing and gall - it be - 
 it be bad than your smatter chattering magpie of a grandmother , " 
 to the imperturbable Judy , who only look at the fire , " to know he 
 have get what be want and will not   give it up . he , not to give it up ! 
 he ! a vagabond ! but never mind , sir , never mind . at the most , he 
 have only his own way for a little while . I have he periodically 
 in a vice . I will twist he , sir . I will screw he , sir . if he will not 
 do it with a good grace , I will make he do it with a bad one , sir ! 
 now , my dear Mr. George , " say Grandfather Smallweed , wink at 
 the lawyer hideously as he release he , " I be ready for your kind 
 assistance , my excellent friend ! " 
 Mr. Tulkinghorn , with some shadowy sign of amusement manifest 
 itself through his self - possession , stand on the hearth - rug with 
 his back to the fire , watch the disappearance of Mr. Smallweed 
 and acknowledge the trooper 's parting salute with one slight nod . 
 it be more difficult to get rid of the old gentleman , Mr. George 
 find , than to bear a hand in carry he downstairs , for when he 
 be replace in his conveyance , he be so loquacious on the subject 
 of the guineas and retain such an affectionate hold of his button 
  - having , in truth , a secret longing to rip his coat open and rob 
 he - that some degree of force be necessary on the trooper 's part 
 to effect a separation . it be accomplish at last , and he 
 proceed alone in quest of his adviser . 
 by the cloisterly Temple , and by Whitefriars   there , not without a 
 glance at Hanging - Sword Alley , which would seem to be something in 
 his way , and by Blackfriars Bridge , and Blackfriars Road , Mr. 
 George sedately march to a street of little shop lie somewhere 
 in that ganglion of road from Kent and Surrey , and of street from 
 the bridge of London , centre in the far - fame elephant who have 
 lose his castle form of a thousand four - horse coach to a 
 strong iron monster than he , ready to chop he into mince - meat 
 any day he dare . to one of the little shop in this street , which 
 be a musician 's shop , have a few fiddle in the window , and some 
 Pan 's pipe and a tambourine , and a triangle , and certain elongate 
 scrap of music , Mr. George direct his massive tread . and halt 
 at a few pace from it , as he see a soldierly look woman , with 
 her outer skirt tuck up , come forth with a small wooden tub , and 
 in that tub commence a - whisk and a - splash on the margin of 
 the pavement , Mr. George say to himself , " she be as usual , washing 
 green . I never see she , except upon a baggage - waggon , when she 
 be not   wash green ! " 
 the subject of this reflection be at all event so occupy in 
 washing green at present that she remain unsuspicious of Mr. 
 George 's approach until , lift up herself and her tub together 
 when she have pour the water off into the gutter , she find he 
 stand near she . her reception of he be not flattering . 
 " George , I never see you but I wish you be a hundred mile away ! " 
 the trooper , without remark on this welcome , follow into the 
 musical - instrument shop , where the lady place her tub of green 
 upon the counter , and have shake hand with he , rest her arm 
 upon it . 
 " I never , " she say , " George , consider Matthew Bagnet safe a minute 
 when you be near he . you be that restless and that rove - " 
 " yes ! I know I be , Mrs. Bagnet . I know I be . " 
 " you know you be ! " say Mrs. Bagnet . " what be the use of that ? 
 why be you ? " 
 " the nature of the animal , I suppose , " return the trooper good- 
 humouredly . 
 " ah ! " cry Mrs. Bagnet , something shrilly . " but what satisfaction 
 will the nature of the animal be to I when the animal shall have 
 tempt my mat away from the musical business to New Zealand or 
 Australey ? " 
 Mrs. Bagnet be not at all an ill - look woman . rather large- 
 bone , a little coarse in the grain , and freckle by the sun and 
 wind which have tan her hair upon the forehead , but healthy , 
 wholesome , and bright - eyed . a strong , busy , active , honest - face 
 woman of from forty - five to fifty . clean , hardy , and so 
 economically dress   though substantially   that the only article 
 of ornament of which she stand possessed appear 's to be her 
 wedding - ring , around which her finger have grow to be so large 
 since it be put on that it will never come off again until it 
 shall mingle with Mrs. Bagnet 's dust . 
 " Mrs. Bagnet , " say the trooper , " I be on my parole with you . Mat 
 will get no harm from I . you may trust I so far . " 
 " well , I think I may . but the very look of you be unsettling , " 
 Mrs. Bagnet rejoin . " ah , George , George ! if you have only settle 
 down and marry Joe Pouch 's widow when he die in North America , 
 she'd have comb your hair for you . " 
 " it be a chance for I , certainly , " return the trooper half 
 laughingly , half seriously , " but I shall never settle down into a 
 respectable man now . Joe Pouch 's widow might have do I good - 
 there be something in she , and something of she - but I could not 
 make up my mind to it . if I have have the luck to meet with such a 
 wife as Mat find ! " 
 Mrs. Bagnet , who seem in a virtuous way to be under little reserve 
 with a good sort of fellow , but to be another good sort of fellow 
 herself for that matter , receive this compliment by flick Mr. 
 George in the face with a head of green and take she tub into 
 the little room behind the shop . 
 " why , Quebec , my poppet , " say George , follow , on invitation , 
 into that department . " and little Malta , too ! come and kiss your 
 Bluffy ! " 
 these young lady - not suppose to have be actually christen 
 by the name apply to they , though always so call in the family 
 from the place of their birth in barrack - be respectively 
 employ on three - legged stool , the young   some five or six 
 year old   in learn her letter out of a penny primer , the elder 
  eight or nine perhaps   in teach she and sew with great 
 assiduity . both hail Mr. George with acclamation as an old friend 
 and after some kissing and romp plant their stool beside he . 
 " and how be young Woolwich ? " say Mr. George . 
 " ah ! there now ! " cry Mrs. Bagnet , turn about from her 
 saucepan   for she be cook dinner   with a bright flush on her 
 face . " would you believe it ? got an engagement at the theayter , 
 with his father , to play the fife in a military piece . " 
 " well do , my godson ! " cry Mr. George , slap his thigh . 
 " I believe you ! " say Mrs. Bagnet . " he be a Briton . that be what 
 Woolwich be . a Briton ! " 
 " and Mat blow away at his bassoon , and you be respectable 
 civilian one and all , " say Mr. George . " family people . child 
 grow up . Mat 's old mother in Scotland , and your old father 
 somewhere else , correspond with , and help a little , and - well , 
 well ! to be sure , I do not   know why I should not   be wish a hundred 
 mile away , for I have not much to do with all this ! " 
 Mr. George be become thoughtful , sit before the fire in the 
 whitewash room , which have a sand floor and a barrack smell and 
 contain nothing superfluous and have not a visible speck of dirt or 
 dust in it , from the face of Quebec and Malta to the bright tin 
 pot and pannikin upon the dresser shelf - Mr. George be become 
 thoughtful , sit here while Mrs. Bagnet be busy , when Mr. Bagnet 
 and young Woolwich opportunely come home . Mr. Bagnet be an ex- 
 artilleryman , tall and upright , with shaggy eyebrow and whisker 
 like the fibre of a coco - nut , not a hair upon his head , and a 
 torrid complexion . his voice , short , deep , and resonant , be not at 
 all unlike the tone of the instrument to which he be devote . 
 indeed there may be generally observe in he an unbending , 
 unyielding , brass - bind air , as if he be himself the bassoon of 
 the human orchestra . Young Woolwich be the type and model of a 
 young drummer . 
 both father and son salute the trooper heartily . he say , in due 
 season , that he have come to advise with Mr. Bagnet , Mr. Bagnet 
 hospitably declare that he will hear of no business until after 
 dinner and that his friend shall not partake of his counsel without 
 first partaking of boil pork and green . the trooper yield to 
 this invitation , he and Mr. Bagnet , not to embarrass the domestic 
 preparation , go forth to take a turn up and down the little 
 street , which they promenade with measured tread and fold arm , 
 as if it be a rampart . 
 " George , " say Mr. Bagnet . " you know I . it be my old girl that 
 advise . she have the head . but I never own to it before she . 
 Discipline must be maintain . wait till the green be off her 
 mind . then we will consult . whatever the old girl say , do - do it ! " 
 " I intend to , Mat , " reply the other . " I would soon take she 
 opinion than that of a college . " 
 " college , " return Mr. Bagnet in short sentence , bassoon - like . 
 " what college could you leave - in another quarter of the world - 
 with nothing but a grey cloak and an umbrella - to make its way home 
 to Europe ? the old girl would do it to - morrow . do it once ! " 
 " you be right , " say Mr. George . 
 " what college , " pursue Bagnet , " could you set up in life - with two 
 penn'orth of white lime - a penn'orth of fuller 's earth - a ha'porth 
 of sand - and the rest of the change out of sixpence in money ? 
 that be what the old girl start on . in the present business . " 
 " I be rejoice to hear it be thrive , Mat . " 
 " the old girl , " say Mr. Bagnet , acquiescing , ' save . have a 
 stocking somewhere . with money in it . I never see it . but I know 
 she be get it . wait till the green be off her mind . then she will 
 set you up . " 
 " she be a treasure ! " exclaim Mr. George . 
 " she be more . but I never own to it before she . Discipline must be 
 maintain . it be the old girl that bring out my musical 
 ability . I should have be in the artillery now but for the old 
 girl . six year I hammer at the fiddle . ten at the flute . the 
 old girl say it would not   do ; intention good , but want of 
 flexibility ; try the bassoon . the old girl borrow a bassoon from 
 the bandmaster of the Rifle Regiment . I practise in the trench . 
 get on , get another , get a living by it ! " 
 George remark that she look as fresh as a rose and as sound as an 
 apple . 
 " the old girl , " say Mr. Bagnet in reply , " be a thoroughly fine 
 woman . consequently she be like a thoroughly fine day . get fine 
 as she get on . I never see the old girl 's equal . but I never own 
 to it before she . Discipline must be maintain ! " 
 proceed to converse on indifferent matter , they walk up and 
 down the little street , keep step and time , until summon by 
 Quebec and Malta to do justice to the pork and green , over which 
 Mrs. Bagnet , like a military chaplain , say a short grace . in the 
 distribution of these comestible , as in every other household 
 duty , Mrs. Bagnet develop an exact system , sit with every 
 dish before she , allot to every portion of pork its own portion 
 of pot - liquor , green , potato , and even mustard , and serve it 
 out complete . have likewise serve out the beer from a can and 
 thus supply the mess with all thing necessary , Mrs. Bagnet 
 proceed to satisfy her own hunger , which be in a healthy state . 
 the kit of the mess , if the table furniture may be so denominated , 
 be chiefly compose of utensil of horn and tin that have do duty 
 in several part of the world . Young Woolwich 's knife , in 
 particular , which be of the oyster kind , with the additional 
 feature of a strong shutting - up movement which frequently balk the 
 appetite of that young musician , be mention as have go in 
 various hand the complete round of foreign service . 
 the dinner do , Mrs. Bagnet , assist by the young branch   who 
 polish their own cup and platter , knife and fork , make all 
 the dinner garniture shine as brightly as before and put it all 
 away , first sweep the hearth , to the end that Mr. Bagnet and the 
 visitor may not be retard in the smoking of their pipe . these 
 household care involve much pattening and counter - pattening in the 
 backyard and considerable use of a pail , which be finally so happy 
 as to assist in the ablution of Mrs. Bagnet herself . that old 
 girl reappear by and by , quite fresh , and sit down to her 
 needlework , then and only then - the green be only then to be 
 consider as entirely off her mind - Mr. Bagnet request the 
 trooper to state his case . 
 this Mr. George do with great discretion , appear to address 
 himself to Mr. Bagnet , but have an eye solely on the old girl all 
 the time , as Bagnet have himself . she , equally discreet , busie 
 herself with her needlework . the case fully state , Mr. Bagnet 
 resort to his standard artifice for the maintenance of discipline . 
 " that be the whole of it , be it , George ? " say he . 
 " that be the whole of it . " 
 " you act accord to my opinion ? " 
 " I shall be guide , " reply George , " entirely by it . " 
 " old girl , " say Mr. Bagnet , " give he my opinion . you know it . 
 tell he what it be . " 
 it be that he can not have too little to do with people who be too 
 deep for he and can not be too careful of interference with matter 
 he do not understand - that the plain rule be to do nothing in the 
 dark , to be a party to nothing underhanded or mysterious , and never 
 to put his foot where he can not see the ground . this , in effect , 
 be Mr. Bagnet 's opinion , as deliver through the old girl , and it 
 so relieve Mr. George 's mind by confirm his own opinion and 
 banish his doubt that he compose himself to smoke another pipe 
 on that exceptional occasion and to have a talk over old time with 
 the whole Bagnet family , accord to their various range of 
 experience . 
 through these mean it come to pass that Mr. George do not again 
 rise to his full height in that parlour until the time be draw 
 on when the bassoon and fife be expect by a british public at 
 the theatre ; and as it take time even then for Mr. George , in his 
 domestic character of Bluffy , to take leave of Quebec and Malta and 
 insinuate a sponsorial shilling into the pocket of his godson with 
 felicitation on his success in life , it be dark when Mr. George 
 again turn his face towards Lincoln 's Inn Fields . 
 " a family home , " he ruminate as he march along , " however small 
 it be , make a man like I look lonely . but it be well I never make 
 that evolution of matrimony . I should not   have be fit for it . I 
 be such a vagabond still , even at my present time of life , that I 
 could not   hold to the gallery a month together if it be a regular 
 pursuit or if I do not   camp there , gipsy fashion . come ! I 
 disgrace nobody and cumber nobody ; that be something . I have not 
 do that for many a long year ! " 
 so he whistle it off and march on . 
 arrive in Lincoln 's Inn Fields and mount Mr. Tulkinghorn 's 
 stair , he find the outer door close and the chamber shut , but 
 the trooper not know much about outer door , and the staircase 
 be dark besides , he be yet fumble and grope about , hop to 
 discover a bell - handle or to open the door for himself , when Mr. 
 Tulkinghorn come up the stair   quietly , of course   and angrily 
 ask , " who be that ? what be you do there ? " 
 " I ask your pardon , sir . it be George . the sergeant . " 
 " and could not   George , the sergeant , see that my door be lock ? " 
 " why , no , sir , I could not . at any rate , I do not , " say the 
 trooper , rather nettled . 
 " have you change your mind ? or be you in the same mind ? " Mr. 
 Tulkinghorn demand . but he know well enough at a glance . 
 " in the same mind , sir . " 
 " I think so . that be sufficient . you can go . so you be the 
 man , " say Mr. Tulkinghorn , open his door with the key , " in 
 whose hiding - place Mr. Gridley be find ? " 
 " yes , I be the man , " say the trooper , stop two or three stair 
 down . " what then , sir ? " 
 " what then ? I do not   like your associate . you should not have 
 see the inside of my door this morning if I have think of your 
 be that man . Gridley ? a threaten , murderous , dangerous 
 fellow . " 
 with these word , speak in an unusually high tone for he , the 
 lawyer go into his room and shut the door with a thunder 
 noise . 
 Mr. George take his dismissal in great dudgeon , the great 
 because a clerk come up the stair have hear the last word of 
 all and evidently apply they to he . " a pretty character to 
 bear , " the trooper growl with a hasty oath as he stride 
 downstair . " a threatening , murderous , dangerous fellow ! " and 
 look up , he see the clerk look down at he and mark he 
 as he pass a lamp . this so intensify his dudgeon that for five 
 minute he be in an ill humour . but he whistle that off like the 
 rest of it and march home to the shooting gallery . 
 CHAPTER XXVIII 
 the Ironmaster 
 Sir Leicester Dedlock have get the well , for the time being , of 
 the family gout and be once more , in a literal no less than in a 
 figurative point of view , upon his leg . he be at his place in 
 Lincolnshire ; but the water be out again on the low - lie 
 ground , and the cold and damp steal into Chesney Wold , though well 
 defend , and eke into Sir Leicester 's bone . the blaze fire of 
 faggot and coal - Dedlock timber and antediluvian forest - that blaze 
 upon the broad wide hearth and wink in the twilight on the 
 frown wood , sullen to see how tree be sacrifice , do not 
 exclude the enemy . the hot - water pipe that trail themselves all 
 over the house , the cushion door and window , and the screen 
 and curtain fail to supply the fire ' deficiency and to satisfy 
 Sir Leicester 's need . hence the fashionable intelligence proclaim 
 one morning to the listen earth that Lady Dedlock be expect 
 shortly to return to town for a few week . 
 it be a melancholy truth that even great man have their poor 
 relation . indeed great man have often more than their fair share 
 of poor relation , inasmuch as very red blood of the superior 
 quality , like inferior blood unlawfully shed , will cry aloud and 
 will be hear . Sir Leicester 's cousin , in the remotest degree , 
 be so many murder in the respect that they " will out . " among 
 whom there be cousin who be so poor that one might almost dare 
 to think it would have be the happy for they never to have be 
 plat link upon the Dedlock chain of gold , but to have be make 
 of common iron at first and do base service . 
 Service , however   with a few limited reservation , genteel but not 
 profitable , they may not do , be of the Dedlock dignity . so 
 they visit their rich cousin , and get into debt when they can , 
 and live but shabbily when they can not , and find - the woman no 
 husband , and the man no wife - and ride in borrow carriage , and 
 sit at feast that be never of their own making , and so go through 
 high life . the rich family sum have be divide by so many 
 figure , and they be the something over that nobody know what to 
 do with . 
 everybody on Sir Leicester Dedlock 's side of the question and of 
 his way of thinking would appear to be his cousin more or less . 
 from my Lord Boodle , through the Duke of Foodle , down to Noodle , 
 Sir Leicester , like a glorious spider , stretch his thread of 
 relationship . but while he be stately in the cousinship of the 
 Everybodys , he be a kind and generous man , accord to his 
 dignified way , in the cousinship of the Nobodys ; and at the present 
 time , in despite of the damp , he stay out the visit of several 
 such cousin at Chesney Wold with the constancy of a martyr . 
 of these , foremost in the front rank stand Volumnia Dedlock , a 
 young lady   of sixty   who be doubly highly related , have the 
 honour to be a poor relation , by the mother 's side , to another 
 great family . Miss Volumnia , display in early life a pretty 
 talent for cut ornament out of coloured paper , and also for 
 singing to the guitar in the spanish tongue , and propound french 
 conundrum in country house , pass the twenty year of her 
 existence between twenty and forty in a sufficiently agreeable 
 manner . Lapsing then out of date and be consider to bore 
 mankind by her vocal performance in the spanish language , she 
 retire to Bath , where she live slenderly on an annual present 
 from Sir Leicester and whence she make occasional resurrection in 
 the country house of her cousin . she have an extensive 
 acquaintance at Bath among appal old gentleman with thin leg 
 and nankeen trouser , and be of high standing in that dreary city . 
 but she be a little dread elsewhere in consequence of an 
 indiscreet profusion in the article of rouge and persistency in an 
 obsolete pearl necklace like a rosary of little bird's - egg . 
 in any country in a wholesome state , Volumnia would be a clear case 
 for the pension list . effort have be make to get she on it , and 
 when William Buffy come in , it be fully expect that her name 
 would be put down for a couple of hundred a year . but William 
 Buffy somehow discover , contrary to all expectation , that these 
 be not the time when it could be do , and this be the first 
 clear indication Sir Leicester Dedlock have convey to he that the 
 country be go to piece . 
 there be likewise the Honourable Bob Stables , who can make warm 
 mash with the skill of a veterinary surgeon and be a well shot 
 than most gamekeeper . he have be for some time particularly 
 desirous to serve his country in a post of good emolument , 
 unaccompanie by any trouble or responsibility . in a well- 
 regulate body politic this natural desire on the part of a 
 spirited young gentleman so highly connected would be speedily 
 recognize , but somehow William Buffy find when he come in that 
 these be not time in which he could manage that little matter 
 either , and this be the second indication Sir Leicester Dedlock 
 have convey to he that the country be go to piece . 
 the rest of the cousin be lady and gentleman of various age 
 and capacity , the major part amiable and sensible and likely to 
 have do well enough in life if they could have overcome their 
 cousinship ; as it be , they be almost all a little worst by it , 
 and lounge in purposeless and listless path , and seem to be quite 
 as much at a loss how to dispose of themselves as anybody else can 
 be how to dispose of they . 
 in this society , and where not , my Lady Dedlock reign supreme . 
 beautiful , elegant , accomplished , and powerful in her little world 
  for the world of fashion do not stretch all the way from pole to 
 pole , her influence in Sir Leicester 's house , however haughty and 
 indifferent her manner , be greatly to improve it and refine it . 
 the cousin , even those old cousin who be paralyse when Sir 
 Leicester marry she , do her feudal homage ; and the Honourable Bob 
 Stables daily repeat to some choose person between breakfast and 
 lunch his favourite original remark , that she be the well - groom 
 woman in the whole stud . 
 such the guest in the long drawing - room at Chesney Wold this 
 dismal night when the step on the Ghost 's Walk   inaudible here , 
 however   might be the step of a deceased cousin shut out in the 
 cold . it be near bed - time . bedroom fire blaze brightly all over 
 the house , raise ghost of grim furniture on wall and ceiling . 
 bedroom candlestick bristle on the distant table by the door , and 
 cousin yawn on othman . cousin at the piano , cousin at the 
 soda - water tray , cousin rise from the card - table , cousin 
 gather round the fire . stand on one side of his own peculiar 
 fire   for there be two , Sir Leicester . on the opposite side of 
 the broad hearth , my Lady at her table . Volumnia , as one of the 
 more privileged cousin , in a luxurious chair between they . Sir 
 Leicester glancing , with magnificent displeasure , at the rouge and 
 the pearl necklace . 
 " I occasionally meet on my staircase here , " drawl Volumnia , whose 
 thought perhaps be already hop up it to bed , after a long 
 evening of very desultory talk , " one of the prettiest girl , I 
 think , that I ever see in my life . " 
 " a protegee of my Lady 's , " observe Sir Leicester . 
 " I think so . I feel sure that some uncommon eye must have pick 
 that girl out . she really be a marvel . a dolly sort of beauty 
 perhaps , " say Miss Volumnia , reserve her own sort , " but in its 
 way , perfect ; such bloom I never see ! " 
 Sir Leicester , with his magnificent glance of displeasure at the 
 rouge , appear to say so too . 
 " indeed , " remark my Lady languidly , " if there be any uncommon eye 
 in the case , it be Mrs. Rouncewell 's , and not mine . Rosa be her 
 discovery . " 
 " your maid , I suppose ? " 
 " no . my anything ; pet - secretary - messenger - I do not   know what . " 
 " you like to have she about you , as you would like to have a 
 flower , or a bird , or a picture , or a poodle - no , not a poodle , 
 though - or anything else that be equally pretty ? " say Volumnia , 
 sympathizing . " yes , how charming now ! and how well that 
 delightful old soul Mrs. Rouncewell be look . she must be an 
 immense age , and yet she be as active and handsome ! she be the 
 dear friend I have , positively ! " 
 Sir Leicester feel it to be right and fitting that the housekeeper 
 of Chesney Wold should be a remarkable person . apart from that , he 
 have a real regard for Mrs. Rouncewell and like to hear she 
 praise . so he say , " you be right , Volumnia , " which Volumnia be 
 extremely glad to hear . 
 " she have no daughter of her own , have she ? " 
 " Mrs. Rouncewell ? no , Volumnia . she have a son . indeed , she have 
 two . " 
 my Lady , whose chronic malady of boredom have be sadly aggravate 
 by Volumnia this evening , glance wearily towards the candlestick 
 and heave a noiseless sigh . 
 " and it be a remarkable example of the confusion into which the 
 present age have fall ; of the obliteration of landmark , the 
 opening of floodgate , and the uprooting of distinction , " say Sir 
 Leicester with stately gloom , " that I have be inform by Mr. 
 Tulkinghorn that Mrs. Rouncewell 's son have be invite to go into 
 Parliament . " 
 Miss Volumnia utter a little sharp scream . 
 " yes , indeed , " repeat Sir Leicester . " into Parliament . " 
 " I never hear of such a thing ! good gracious , what be the man ? " 
 exclaim Volumnia . 
 " he be call , I believe - an - ironmaster . " Sir Leicester say it 
 slowly and with gravity and doubt , as not be sure but that he be 
 call a lead - mistress or that the right word may be some other 
 word expressive of some other relationship to some other metal . 
 Volumnia utter another little scream . 
 " he have decline the proposal , if my information from Mr. 
 Tulkinghorn be correct , as I have no doubt it be . Mr. Tulkinghorn 
 be always correct and exact ; still that do not , " say Sir 
 Leicester , " that do not lessen the anomaly , which be fraught with 
 strange consideration - startle consideration , as it appear to 
 I . " 
 Miss Volumnia rise with a look candlestick - ward , Sir Leicester 
 politely perform the grand tour of the drawing - room , bring one , 
 and light it at my Lady 's shaded lamp . 
 " I must beg you , my Lady , " he say while do so , " to remain a few 
 moment , for this individual of whom I speak arrive this evening 
 shortly before dinner and request in a very become note " - Sir 
 Leicester , with his habitual regard to truth , dwell upon it - " I be 
 bind to say , in a very become and well - express note , the 
 favour of a short interview with yourself and MYself on the subject 
 of this young girl . as it appear that he wish to depart to- 
 night , I reply that we would see he before retire . " 
 Miss Volumnia with a third little scream take flight , wish her 
 host - o Lud ! - well rid of the - what be it ? - ironmaster ! 
 the other cousin soon disperse , to the last cousin there . Sir 
 Leicester ring the bell , " make my compliment to Mr. Rouncewell , 
 in the housekeeper 's apartment , and say I can receive he now . " 
 my Lady , who have hear all this with slight attention outwardly , 
 look towards Mr. Rouncewell as he come in . he be a little over 
 fifty perhaps , of a good figure , like his mother , and have a clear 
 voice , a broad forehead from which his dark hair have retire , and a 
 shrewd though open face . he be a responsible - look gentleman 
 dress in black , portly enough , but strong and active . have a 
 perfectly natural and easy air and be not in the least embarrassed 
 by the great presence into which he come . 
 " Sir Leicester and Lady Dedlock , as I have already apologize for 
 intruding on you , I can not do well than be very brief . I thank 
 you , Sir Leicester . " 
 the head of the dedlock have motion towards a sofa between 
 himself and my Lady . Mr. Rouncewell quietly take his seat there . 
 " in these busy time , when so many great undertaking be in 
 progress , people like myself have so many workman in so many place 
 that we be always on the flight . " 
 Sir Leicester be content enough that the ironmaster should feel 
 that there be no hurry there ; there , in that ancient house , root 
 in that quiet park , where the ivy and the moss have have time to 
 mature , and the gnarl and warte elm and the umbrageous oak 
 stand deep in the fern and leaf of a hundred year ; and where the 
 sun - dial on the terrace have dumbly record for century that time 
 which be as much the property of every Dedlock - while he last - 
 as the house and land . Sir Leicester sit down in an easy - chair , 
 oppose his repose and that of Chesney Wold to the restless 
 flight of ironmaster . 
 " Lady Dedlock have be so kind , " proceed Mr. Rouncewell with a 
 respectful glance and a bow that way , " as to place near she a young 
 beauty of the name of Rosa . now , my son have fall in love with 
 Rosa and have ask my consent to his propose marriage to she and 
 to their become engage if she will take he - which I suppose she 
 will . I have never see Rosa until to - day , but I have some 
 confidence in my son 's good sense - even in love . I find she what 
 he represent she , to the good of my judgment ; and my mother speak 
 of she with great commendation . " 
 " she in all respect deserve it , " say my Lady . 
 " I be happy , Lady Dedlock , that you say so , and I need not comment 
 on the value to I of your kind opinion of she . " 
 " that , " observe Sir Leicester with unspeakable grandeur , for he 
 think the ironmaster a little too glib , " must be quite 
 unnecessary . " 
 " quite unnecessary , Sir Leicester . now , my son be a very young 
 man , and Rosa be a very young woman . as I make my way , so my son 
 must make his ; and his be marry at present be out of the 
 question . but suppose I give my consent to his engage himself 
 to this pretty girl , if this pretty girl will engage herself to 
 he , I think it a piece of candour to say at once - I be sure , Sir 
 Leicester and Lady Dedlock , you will understand and excuse I - I 
 should make it a condition that she do not remain at Chesney Wold . 
 therefore , before communicate far with my son , I take the 
 liberty of say that if her removal would be in any way 
 inconvenient or objectionable , I will hold the matter over with he 
 for any reasonable time and leave it precisely where it be . " 
 not remain at Chesney Wold ! make it a condition ! all Sir 
 Leicester 's old misgiving relative to Wat Tyler and the people in 
 the iron district who do nothing but turn out by torchlight come 
 in a shower upon his head , the fine grey hair of which , as well as 
 of his whisker , actually stir with indignation . 
 " be I to understand , sir , " say Sir Leicester , " and be my Lady to 
 understand " - he bring she in thus specially , first as a point of 
 gallantry , and next as a point of prudence , have great reliance 
 on her sense - " be I to understand , Mr. Rouncewell , and be my Lady 
 to understand , sir , that you consider this young woman too good for 
 Chesney Wold or likely to be injure by remain here ? " 
 " certainly not , Sir Leicester , " 
 " I be glad to hear it . " Sir Leicester very lofty indeed . 
 " pray , Mr. Rouncewell , " say my Lady , warn Sir Leicester off 
 with the slight gesture of her pretty hand , as if he be a fly , 
 " explain to I what you mean . " 
 " Willingly , Lady Dedlock . there be nothing I could desire more . " 
 address her composed face , whose intelligence , however , be too 
 quick and active to be conceal by any studied impassiveness , 
 however habitual , to the strong Saxon face of the visitor , a 
 picture of resolution and perseverance , my Lady listen with 
 attention , occasionally slightly bend her head . 
 " I be the son of your housekeeper , Lady Dedlock , and pass my 
 childhood about this house . my mother have live here half a 
 century and will die here I have no doubt . she be one of those 
 example - perhaps as good a one as there be - of love , and 
 attachment , and fidelity in such a nation , which England may well 
 be proud of , but of which no order can appropriate the whole pride 
 or the whole merit , because such an instance bespeak high worth on 
 two side - on the great side assuredly , on the small one no less 
 assuredly . " 
 Sir Leicester snort a little to hear the law lay down in this 
 way , but in his honour and his love of truth , he freely , though 
 silently , admit the justice of the ironmaster 's proposition . 
 " pardon I for say what be so obvious , but I would not   have it 
 hastily suppose , " with the least turn of his eye towards Sir 
 Leicester , " that I be ashamed of my mother 's position here , or 
 want in all just respect for Chesney Wold and the family . I 
 certainly may have desire - I certainly have desire , Lady Dedlock 
  - that my mother should retire after so many year and end her day 
 with I . but as I have find that to sever this strong bond would 
 be to break her heart , I have long abandon that idea . " 
 Sir Leicester very magnificent again at the notion of Mrs. 
 Rouncewell be spirit off from her natural home to end her day 
 with an ironmaster . 
 " I have be , " proceed the visitor in a modest , clear way , " an 
 apprentice and a workman . I have live on workman 's wage , year 
 and year , and beyond a certain point have have to educate myself . 
 my wife be a foreman 's daughter , and plainly bring up . we have 
 three daughter besides this son of whom I have speak , and be 
 fortunately able to give they great advantage than we have have 
 ourselves , we have educate they well , very well . it have be one 
 of our great care and pleasure to make they worthy of any 
 station . " 
 a little boastfulness in his fatherly tone here , as if he add in 
 his heart , " even of the Chesney Wold station . " not a little more 
 magnificence , therefore , on the part of Sir Leicester . 
 " all this be so frequent , Lady Dedlock , where I live , and among the 
 class to which I belong , that what would be generally call 
 unequal marriage be not of such rare occurrence with we as 
 elsewhere . a son will sometimes make it known to his father that 
 he have fall in love , say , with a young woman in the factory . the 
 father , who once work in a factory himself , will be a little 
 disappoint at first very possibly . it may be that he have other 
 view for his son . however , the chance be that have 
 ascertain the young woman to be of unblemished character , he will 
 say to his son , ' I must be quite sure you be in earnest here . 
 this be a serious matter for both of you . therefore I shall have 
 this girl educate for two year , ' or it may be , ' I shall place 
 this girl at the same school with your sister for such a time , 
 during which you will give I your word and honour to see she only 
 so often . if at the expiration of that time , when she have so far 
 profit by her advantage as that you may be upon a fair equality , 
 you be both in the same mind , I will do my part to make you 
 happy . ' I know of several case such as I describe , my Lady , and I 
 think they indicate to I my own course now . " 
 Sir Leicester 's magnificence explode . calmly , but terribly . 
 " Mr. Rouncewell , " say Sir Leicester with his right hand in the 
 breast of his blue coat , the attitude of state in which he be 
 paint in the gallery , " do you draw a parallel between Chesney 
 Wold and a - " here he resist a disposition to choke , " a factory ? " 
 " I need not reply , Sir Leicester , that the two place be very 
 different ; but for the purpose of this case , I think a parallel 
 may be justly draw between they . " 
 Sir Leicester direct his majestic glance down one side of the long 
 drawing - room and up the other before he can believe that he be 
 awake . 
 " be you aware , sir , that this young woman whom my Lady - my Lady - 
 have place near her person be bring up at the village school 
 outside the gate ? " 
 " Sir Leicester , I be quite aware of it . a very good school it be , 
 and handsomely support by this family . " 
 " then , Mr. Rouncewell , " return Sir Leicester , " the application of 
 what you have say be , to I , incomprehensible . " 
 " will it be more comprehensible , Sir Leicester , if I say , " the 
 ironmaster be redden a little , " that I do not regard the village 
 school as teach everything desirable to be know by my son 's 
 wife ? " 
 from the village school of Chesney Wold , intact as it be this 
 minute , to the whole framework of society ; from the whole framework 
 of society , to the aforesaid framework receive tremendous crack 
 in consequence of people   iron - master , lead - mistress , and what 
 not   not mind their catechism , and get out of the station 
 unto which they be call - necessarily and for ever , accord to 
 Sir Leicester 's rapid logic , the first station in which they happen 
 to find themselves ; and from that , to their educate other people 
 out of their station , and so obliterate the landmark , and 
 open the floodgate , and all the rest of it ; this be the swift 
 progress of the Dedlock mind . 
 " my Lady , I beg your pardon . permit I , for one moment ! " she have 
 give a faint indication of intend to speak . " Mr. Rouncewell , 
 our view of duty , and our view of station , and our view of 
 education , and our view of - in short , all our view - be so 
 diametrically opposed , that to prolong this discussion must be 
 repellent to your feeling and repellent to my own . this young 
 woman be honour with my Lady 's notice and favour . if she wish 
 to withdraw herself from that notice and favour or if she choose 
 to place herself under the influence of any one who may in his 
 peculiar opinion - you will allow I to say , in his peculiar 
 opinion , though I readily admit that he be not accountable for 
 they to I - who may , in his peculiar opinion , withdraw she from 
 that notice and favour , she be at any time at liberty to do so . we 
 be oblige to you for the plainness with which you have speak . 
 it will have no effect of itself , one way or other , on the young 
 woman 's position here . beyond this , we can make no term ; and here 
 we beg - if you will be so good - to leave the subject . " 
 the visitor pause a moment to give my Lady an opportunity , but she 
 say nothing . he then rise and reply , " Sir Leicester and Lady 
 Dedlock , allow I to thank you for your attention and only to 
 observe that I shall very seriously recommend my son to conquer his 
 present inclination . good night ! " 
 " Mr. Rouncewell , " say Sir Leicester with all the nature of a 
 gentleman shin in he , " it be late , and the road be dark . I 
 hope your time be not so precious but that you will allow my Lady 
 and myself to offer you the hospitality of Chesney Wold , for to- 
 night at least . " 
 " I hope so , " add my Lady . 
 " I be much oblige to you , but I have to travel all night in order 
 to reach a distant part of the country punctually at an appointed 
 time in the morning . " 
 Therewith the ironmaster take his departure , Sir Leicester ring 
 the bell and my Lady rise as he leave the room . 
 when my Lady go to her boudoir , she sit down thoughtfully by the 
 fire , and inattentive to the Ghost 's Walk , look at Rosa , write 
 in an inner room . presently my Lady call she . 
 " come to I , child . tell I the truth . be you in love ? " 
 " oh ! my Lady ! " 
 my Lady , look at the downcast and blushing face , say smile , 
 " who be it ? be it Mrs. Rouncewell 's grandson ? " 
 " yes , if you please , my Lady . but I do not   know that I be in love 
 with he - yet . " 
 " yet , you silly little thing ! do you know that he love you , yet ? " 
 " I think he like I a little , my Lady . " and Rosa burst into 
 tear . 
 be this Lady Dedlock stand beside the village beauty , smooth 
 her dark hair with that motherly touch , and watch she with eye 
 so full of musing interest ? Aye , indeed it be ! 
 " listen to I , child . you be young and true , and I believe you 
 be attach to I . " 
 " indeed I be , my Lady . indeed there be nothing in the world I 
 would not   do to show how much . " 
 " and I do not   think you would wish to leave I just yet , Rosa , even 
 for a lover ? " 
 " no , my Lady ! oh , no ! " Rosa look up for the first time , quite 
 frighten at the thought . 
 " Confide in I , my child . do not   fear I . I wish you to be happy , 
 and will make you so - if I can make anybody happy on this earth . " 
 Rosa , with fresh tear , kneel at her foot and kiss her hand . my 
 Lady take the hand with which she have catch it , and stand with 
 her eye fix on the fire , put it about and about between her own 
 two hand , and gradually let it fall . see she so absorb , 
 Rosa softly withdraw ; but still my Lady 's eye be on the fire . 
 in search of what ? of any hand that be no more , of any hand that 
 never be , of any touch that might have magically change her life ? 
 or do she listen to the Ghost 's Walk and think what step do it 
 most resemble ? a man 's ? a woman 's ? the pattering of a little 
 child 's foot , ever come on - on - on ? some melancholy influence be 
 upon she , or why should so proud a lady close the door and sit 
 alone upon the hearth so desolate ? 
 Volumnia be away next day , and all the cousin be scatter before 
 dinner . not a cousin of the batch but be amazed to hear from Sir 
 Leicester at breakfast - time of the obliteration of landmark , and 
 opening of floodgate , and crack of the framework of society , 
 manifest through Mrs. Rouncewell 's son . not a cousin of the 
 batch but be really indignant , and connect it with the feebleness 
 of William Buffy when in office , and really do feel deprived of a 
 stake in the country - or the pension list - or something - by fraud 
 and wrong . as to Volumnia , she be hand down the great staircase 
 by Sir Leicester , as eloquent upon the theme as if there be a 
 general rise in the north of England to obtain her rouge - pot and 
 pearl necklace . and thus , with a clatter of maid and valet - for 
 it be one appurtenance of their cousinship that however difficult 
 they may find it to keep themselves , they must keep maid and 
 valet - the cousin disperse to the four wind of heaven ; and the 
 one wintry wind that blow to - day shake a shower from the tree 
 near the deserted house , as if all the cousin have be change 
 into leaf . 
 CHAPTER XXIX 
 the Young Man 
 Chesney Wold be shut up , carpet be roll into great scroll in 
 corner of comfortless room , bright damask do penance in brown 
 holland , carve and gilding put on mortification , and the Dedlock 
 ancestor retire from the light of day again . around and around 
 the house the leaf fall thick , but never fast , for they come 
 circle down with a dead lightness that be sombre and slow . let 
 the gardener sweep and sweep the turf as he will , and press the 
 leaf into full barrow , and wheel they off , still they lie ankle- 
 deep . howl the shrill wind round Chesney Wold ; the sharp rain 
 beat , the windows rattle , and the chimney growl . mist hide in 
 the avenue , veil the point of view , and move in funeral - wise 
 across the rise ground . on all the house there be a cold , blank 
 smell like the smell of a little church , though something dryer , 
 suggest that the dead and bury dedlock walk there in the long 
 night and leave the flavour of their graf behind they . 
 but the house in town , which be rarely in the same mind as Chesney 
 Wold at the same time , seldom rejoice when it rejoice or 
 mourning when it mourn , expect when a Dedlock die - the house 
 in town shin out awakened . as warm and bright as so much state 
 may be , as delicately redolent of pleasant scent that bear no 
 trace of winter as hothouse flower can make it , soft and hush so 
 that the ticking of the clock and the crisp burning of the fire 
 alone disturb the stillness in the room , it seem to wrap those 
 chill bone of Sir Leicester 's in rainbow - colour wool . and Sir 
 Leicester be glad to repose in dignified contentment before the 
 great fire in the library , condescendingly peruse the back of 
 his book or honour the fine art with a glance of approbation . 
 for he have his picture , ancient and modern . some of the Fancy 
 Ball School in which art occasionally condescend to become a 
 master , which would be well catalogue like the miscellaneous 
 article in a sale . as " three high - back chair , a table and 
 cover , long - neck bottle   contain wine , one flask , one spanish 
 female 's costume , three - quarter face portrait of Miss Jogg the 
 model , and a suit of armour contain Don Quixote . " or " one stone 
 terrace   crack , one gondola in distance , one venetian senator 's 
 dress complete , richly embroider white satin costume with profile 
 portrait of Miss Jogg the model , one scimitar superbly mount in 
 gold with jewelled handle , elaborate moorish dress   very rare , and 
 Othello . " 
 Mr. Tulkinghorn come and go pretty often , there be estate 
 business to do , lease to be renew , and so on . he see my Lady 
 pretty often , too ; and he and she be as compose , and as 
 indifferent , and take as little heed of one another , as ever . yet 
 it may be that my Lady fear this Mr. Tulkinghorn and that he know 
 it . it may be that he pursue she doggedly and steadily , with no 
 touch of compunction , remorse , or pity . it may be that her beauty 
 and all the state and brilliancy surround she only give he the 
 great zest for what he be set upon and make he the more 
 inflexible in it . whether he be cold and cruel , whether immovable 
 in what he have make his duty , whether absorb in love of power , 
 whether determined to have nothing hide from he in ground where 
 he have burrow among secret all his life , whether he in his heart 
 despise the splendour of which he be a distant beam , whether he be 
 always treasure up slight and offence in the affability of his 
 gorgeous client - whether he be any of this , or all of this , it may 
 be that my Lady have well have five thousand pair of fashionable 
 eye upon she , in distrustful vigilance , than the two eye of this 
 rusty lawyer with his wisp of neckcloth and his dull black breech 
 tie with ribbon at the knee . 
 Sir Leicester sit in my Lady 's room - that room in which Mr. 
 Tulkinghorn read the affidavit in Jarndyce and Jarndyce - 
 particularly complacent . my Lady , as on that day , sit before the 
 fire with her screen in her hand . Sir Leicester be particularly 
 complacent because he have find in his newspaper some congenial 
 remark bear directly on the floodgate and the framework of 
 society . they apply so happily to the late case that Sir Leicester 
 have come from the library to my Lady 's room expressly to read they 
 aloud . " the man who write this article , " he observe by way of 
 preface , nod at the fire as if he be nod down at the man 
 from a mount , " have a well - balanced mind . " 
 the man 's mind be not so well balanced but that he bore my Lady , 
 who , after a languid effort to listen , or rather a languid 
 resignation of herself to a show of listening , become distraught 
 and fall into a contemplation of the fire as if it be her fire 
 at Chesney Wold , and she have never leave it . Sir Leicester , quite 
 unconscious , read on through his double eye - glass , occasionally 
 stop to remove his glass and express approval , as " very true 
 indeed , " " very properly put , " " I have frequently make the same 
 remark myself , " invariably lose his place after each observation , 
 and go up and down the column to find it again . 
 Sir Leicester be read with infinite gravity and state when the 
 door open , and the Mercury in powder make this strange 
 announcement , " the young man , my Lady , of the name of Guppy . " 
 Sir Leicester pause , stare , repeat in a killing voice , " the 
 young man of the name of Guppy ? " 
 look round , he behold the young man of the name of Guppy , much 
 discomfited and not present a very impressive letter of 
 introduction in his manner and appearance . 
 " pray , " say Sir Leicester to Mercury , " what do you mean by 
 announce with this abruptness a young man of the name of Guppy ? " 
 " I beg your pardon , Sir Leicester , but my Lady say she would see 
 the young man whenever he call . I be not aware that you be 
 here , Sir Leicester . " 
 with this apology , Mercury direct a scornful and indignant look at 
 the young man of the name of Guppy which plainly say , " what do you 
 come call here for and get I into a row ? " 
 " it be quite right . I give he those direction , " say my Lady . 
 " let the young man wait . " 
 " by no mean , my Lady . since he have your order to come , I will 
 not interrupt you . " Sir Leicester in his gallantry retire , rather 
 decline to accept a bow from the young man as he go out and 
 majestically suppose he to be some shoemaker of intrusive 
 appearance . 
 Lady Dedlock look imperiously at her visitor when the servant have 
 leave the room , cast her eye over he from head to foot . she 
 suffer he to stand by the door and ask he what he want . 
 " that your ladyship would have the kindness to oblige I with a 
 little conversation , " return Mr. Guppy , embarrass . 
 " you be , of course , the person who have write I so many 
 letter ? " 
 " several , your ladyship . several before your ladyship condescend 
 to favour I with an answer . " 
 " and could you not take the same mean of render a Conversation 
 unnecessary ? can you not still ? " 
 Mr. Guppy screw his mouth into a silent " no ! " and shake his head . 
 " you have be strangely importunate . if it should appear , after 
 all , that what you have to say do not concern I - and I do not 
 know how it can , and do not   expect that it will - you will allow I 
 to cut you short with but little ceremony . say what you have to 
 say , if you please . " 
 my Lady , with a careless toss of her screen , turn herself towards 
 the fire again , sit almost with she back to the young man of 
 the name of Guppy . 
 " with your ladyship 's permission , then , " say the young man , " I 
 will now enter on my business . Hem ! I be , as I tell your ladyship 
 in my first letter , in the law . be in the law , I have learn 
 the habit of not commit myself in writing , and therefore I do 
 not mention to your ladyship the name of the firm with which I be 
 connect and in which my standing - and I may add income - be 
 tolerably good . I may now state to your ladyship , in confidence , 
 that the name of that firm be Kenge and Carboy , of Lincoln 's Inn , 
 which may not be altogether unknown to your ladyship in connexion 
 with the case in Chancery of Jarndyce and Jarndyce . " 
 my Lady 's figure begin to be expressive of some attention . she 
 have cease to toss the screen and hold it as if she be 
 listen . 
 " now , I may say to your ladyship at once , " say Mr. Guppy , a little 
 embolden , " it be no matter arise out of Jarndyce and Jarndyce 
 that make I so desirous to speak to your ladyship , which conduct I 
 have no doubt do appear , and do appear , obtrusive - in fact , 
 almost blackguardly . " 
 after wait for a moment to receive some assurance to the 
 contrary , and not receive any , Mr. Guppy proceed , " if it have 
 be Jarndyce and Jarndyce , I should have go at once to your 
 ladyship 's solicitor , Mr. Tulkinghorn , of the Fields . I have the 
 pleasure of be acquaint with Mr. Tulkinghorn - at least we move 
 when we meet one another - and if it have be any business of that 
 sort , I should have go to he . " 
 my Lady turn a little round and say , " you have well sit down . " 
 " thank your ladyship . " Mr. Guppy do so . " now , your ladyship " - 
 Mr. Guppy refer to a little slip of paper on which he have make 
 small note of his line of argument and which seem to involve he 
 in the dense obscurity whenever he look at it - " I - oh , yes ! - I 
 place myself entirely in your ladyship 's hand . if your ladyship 
 be to make any complaint to Kenge and Carboy or to Mr. Tulkinghorn 
 of the present visit , I should be place in a very disagreeable 
 situation . that , I openly admit . consequently , I rely upon your 
 ladyship 's honour . " 
 my Lady , with a disdainful gesture of the hand that hold the 
 screen , assure he of his be worth no complaint from she . 
 " thank your ladyship , " say Mr. Guppy ; " quite satisfactory . now - 
 i - dash it ! - the fact be that I put down a head or two here of the 
 order of the point I think of touch upon , and they be write 
 short , and I can not   quite make out what they mean . if your ladyship 
 will excuse I take it to the window half a moment , I - " 
 Mr. Guppy , go to the window , tumble into a pair of love - bird , 
 to whom he say in his confusion , " I beg your pardon , I be sure . " 
 this do not tend to the great legibility of his note . he 
 murmur , grow warm and red and hold the slip of paper now 
 close to his eye , now a long way off , " C.S. what be C.S. for ? oh ! 
 C.S. ! oh , I know ! yes , to be sure ! " and come back enlighten . 
 " I be not aware , " say Mr. Guppy , stand midway between my Lady 
 and his chair , " whether your ladyship ever happen to hear of , or 
 to see , a young lady of the name of Miss Esther Summerson . " 
 my Lady 's eye look at he full . " I see a young lady of that name 
 not long ago . this past autumn . " 
 " now , do it strike your ladyship that she be like anybody ? " ask 
 Mr. Guppy , cross his arm , hold his head on one side , and 
 scratch the corner of his mouth with his memoranda . 
 my Lady remove her eye from he no more . 
 " no . " 
 " not like your ladyship 's family ? " 
 " no . " 
 " I think your ladyship , " say Mr. Guppy , " can hardly remember Miss 
 Summerson 's face ? " 
 " I remember the young lady very well . what have this to do with 
 I ? " 
 " your ladyship , I do assure you that have Miss Summerson 's image 
 imprint on my ' eart - which I mention in confidence - I find , when 
 I have the honour of go over your ladyship 's mansion of Chesney 
 Wold while on a short out in the county of Lincolnshire with a 
 friend , such a resemblance between Miss Esther Summerson and your 
 ladyship 's own portrait that it completely knock I over , so much 
 so that I do not   at the moment even know what it be that knock 
 I over . and now I have the honour of behold your ladyship near 
  I have often , since that , take the liberty of look at your 
 ladyship in your carriage in the park , when I dare say you be not 
 aware of I , but I never see your ladyship so near , it be really 
 more surprising than I think it . " 
 young man of the name of Guppy ! there have be time , when lady 
 live in stronghold and have unscrupulous attendant within call , 
 when that poor life of yours would not have be worth a minute 's 
 purchase , with those beautiful eye look at you as they look at 
 this moment . 
 my Lady , slowly use her little hand - screen as a fan , ask he 
 again what he suppose that his taste for likeness have to do with 
 she . 
 " your ladyship , " reply Mr. Guppy , again refer to his paper , 
 " I be come to that . dash these note ! oh ! ' Mrs. Chadband . ' 
 yes . " Mr. Guppy draw his chair a little forward and seat himself 
 again . my Lady recline in her chair composedly , though with a 
 trifle less of graceful ease than usual perhaps , and never falter 
 in her steady gaze . " a - stop a minute , though ! " Mr. Guppy refer 
 again . " E.S. twice ? oh , yes ! yes , I see my way now , right on . " 
 roll up the slip of paper as an instrument to point his speech 
 with , Mr. Guppy proceed . 
 " your ladyship , there be a mystery about Miss Esther Summerson 's 
 birth and bring up . I be inform of that fact because - which I 
 mention in confidence - I know it in the way of my profession at 
 Kenge and Carboy 's . now , as I have already mention to your 
 ladyship , Miss Summerson 's image be imprint on my ' eart . if I 
 could clear this mystery for she , or prove she to be well related , 
 or find that have the honour to be a remote branch of your 
 ladyship 's family she have a right to be make a party in Jarndyce 
 and Jarndyce , why , I might make a sort of a claim upon Miss 
 Summerson to look with an eye of more dedicated favour on my 
 proposal than she have exactly do as yet . in fact , as yet she 
 have not   favour they at all . " 
 a kind of angry smile just dawn upon my Lady 's face . 
 " now , it be a very singular circumstance , your ladyship , " say Mr. 
 Guppy , " though one of those circumstance that do fall in the way 
 of we professional man - which I may call myself , for though not 
 admit , yet I have have a present of my article make to I by 
 Kenge and Carboy , on my mother 's advance from the principal of 
 her little income the money for the stamp , which come heavy - that 
 I have encounter the person who live as servant with the lady 
 who bring Miss Summerson up before Mr. Jarndyce take charge of 
 she . that lady be a Miss Barbary , your ladyship . " 
 be the dead colour on my Lady 's face reflect from the screen 
 which have a green silk ground and which she hold in she raise 
 hand as if she have forget it , or be it a dreadful paleness that 
 have fall on she ? 
 " do your ladyship , " say Mr. Guppy , " ever happen to hear of Miss 
 Barbary ? " 
 " I do not   know . I think so . yes . " 
 " be Miss Barbary at all connect with your ladyship 's family ? " 
 my Lady 's lip move , but they utter nothing . she shake her head . 
 " not connect ? " say Mr. Guppy . " oh ! not to your ladyship 's 
 knowledge , perhaps ? ah ! but might be ? yes . " after each of these 
 interrogatory , she have incline her head . " very good ! now , this 
 Miss Barbary be extremely close - seem to have be extraordinarily 
 close for a female , female be generally   in common life at 
 least   rather give to conversation - and my witness never have an 
 idea whether she possess a single relative . on one occasion , and 
 only one , she seem to have be confidential to my witness on a 
 single point , and she then tell she that the little girl 's real 
 name be not Esther Summerson , but Esther Hawdon . " 
 " my God ! " 
 Mr. Guppy stare . Lady Dedlock sit before he look he 
 through , with the same dark shade upon her face , in the same 
 attitude even to the holding of the screen , with her lip a little 
 apart , her brow a little contract , but for the moment dead . he 
 see her consciousness return , see a tremor pass across her frame 
 like a ripple over water , see her lip shake , see she compose 
 they by a great effort , see her force herself back to the 
 knowledge of his presence and of what he have say . all this , so 
 quickly , that her exclamation and her dead condition seem to have 
 pass away like the feature of those long - preserve dead body 
 sometimes open up in tomb , which , strike by the air like 
 lightning , vanish in a breath . 
 " your ladyship be acquaint with the name of Hawdon ? " 
 " I have hear it before . " 
 " name of any collateral or remote branch of your ladyship 's 
 family ? " 
 " no . " 
 " now , your ladyship , " say Mr. Guppy , " I come to the last point of 
 the case , so far as I have get it up . it be go on , and I shall 
 gather it up close and close as it go on . your ladyship must 
 know - if your ladyship do not   happen , by any chance , to know 
 already - that there be find dead at the house of a person name 
 Krook , near Chancery Lane , some time ago , a law - writer in great 
 distress . upon which law - writer there be an inquest , and which 
 law - writer be an anonymous character , his name be unknown . 
 but , your ladyship , I have discover very lately that that law- 
 writer 's name be Hawdon . " 
 " and what be that to I ? " 
 " Aye , your ladyship , that be the question ! now , your ladyship , a 
 queer thing happen after that man 's death . a lady start up , a 
 disguised lady , your ladyship , who go to look at the scene of 
 action and go to look at his grave . she hire a crossing- 
 sweeping boy to show it she . if your ladyship would wish to have 
 the boy produce in corroboration of this statement , I can lay my 
 hand upon he at any time . " 
 the wretched boy be nothing to my Lady , and she do not wish to 
 have he produce . 
 " oh , I assure your ladyship it be a very queer start indeed , " say 
 Mr. Guppy . " if you be to hear he tell about the ring that 
 sparkle on her finger when she take her glove off , you would think it 
 quite romantic . " 
 there be diamond glitter on the hand that hold the screen . 
 my Lady trifle with the screen and make they glitter more , again 
 with that expression which in other time might have be so 
 dangerous to the young man of the name of Guppy . 
 " it be suppose , your ladyship , that he leave no rag or scrap 
 behind he by which he could be possibly identify . but he do . 
 he leave a bundle of old letter . " 
 the screen still go , as before . all this time her eye never 
 once release he . 
 " they be take and secrete . and to - morrow night , your ladyship , 
 they will come into my possession . " 
 " still I ask you , what be this to I ? " 
 " your ladyship , I conclude with that . " Mr. Guppy rise . " if you 
 think there be enough in this chain of circumstance put together - 
 in the undoubted strong likeness of this young lady to your 
 ladyship , which be a positive fact for a jury ; in she have be 
 bring up by Miss Barbary ; in Miss Barbary state Miss 
 Summerson 's real name to be Hawdon ; in your ladyship 's know both 
 these name very well ; and in Hawdon 's dying as he do - to give 
 your ladyship a family interest in go far into the case , I 
 will bring these paper here . I do not   know what they be , except 
 that they be old letter : I have never have they in my possession 
 yet . I will bring those paper here as soon as I get they and go 
 over they for the first time with your ladyship . I have tell your 
 ladyship my object . I have tell your ladyship that I should be 
 place in a very disagreeable situation if any complaint be make , 
 and all be in strict confidence . " 
 be this the full purpose of the young man of the name of Guppy , or 
 have he any other ? do his word disclose the length , breadth , 
 depth , of his object and suspicion in come here ; or if not , what 
 do they hide ? he be a match for my Lady there . she may look at 
 he , but he can look at the table and keep that witness - box face of 
 his from tell anything . 
 " you may bring the letter , " say my Lady , " if you choose . " 
 " your ladyship be not very encouraging , upon my word and honour , " 
 say Mr. Guppy , a little injured . 
 " you may bring the letter , " she repeat in the same tone , " if you 
  - please . " 
 " it shall he do . I wish your ladyship good day . " 
 on a table near she be a rich bauble of a casket , bar and 
 clasp like an old strong - chest . she , look at he still , take 
 it to she and unlock it . 
 " oh ! I assure your ladyship I be not actuate by any motif of 
 that sort , " say Mr. Guppy , " and I could not   accept anything of the 
 kind . I wish your ladyship good day , and be much oblige to you 
 all the same . " 
 so the young man make his bow and go downstairs , where the 
 supercilious Mercury do not consider himself call upon to leave 
 his Olympus by the hall - fire to let the young man out . 
 as Sir Leicester bask in his library and doze over his newspaper , 
 be there no influence in the house to startle he , not to say to 
 make the very tree at Chesney Wold fle up their knot arm , 
 the very portrait frown , the very armour stir ? 
 no . word , sob , and cry be but air , and air be so shut in and 
 shut out throughout the house in town that sound need be utter 
 trumpet - tongue indeed by my Lady in her chamber to carry any faint 
 vibration to Sir Leicester 's ear ; and yet this cry be in the 
 house , go upward from a wild figure on its knee . 
 " o my child , my child ! not dead in the first hour of her life , as 
 my cruel sister tell I , but sternly nurture by she , after she have 
 renounce I and my name ! o my child , o my child ! " 
 CHAPTER XXX 
 Esther 's Narrative 
 Richard have be go away some time when a visitor come to pass a 
 few day with we . it be an elderly lady . it be Mrs. Woodcourt , 
 who , have come from Wales to stay with Mrs. Bayham Badger and 
 have write to my guardian , " by her son Allan 's desire , " to 
 report that she have hear from he and that he be well " and send 
 his kind remembrance to all of we , " have be invite by my 
 guardian to make a visit to Bleak House . she stay with we nearly 
 three week . she take very kindly to I and be extremely 
 confidential , so much so that sometimes she almost make I 
 uncomfortable . I have no right , I know very well , to be 
 uncomfortable because she confide in I , and I feel it be 
 unreasonable ; still , with all I could do , I could not quite help it . 
 she be such a sharp little lady and use to sit with her hand 
 fold in each other look so very watchful while she talk to 
 I that perhaps I find that rather irksome . or perhaps it be she 
 be so upright and trim , though I do not   think it be that , 
 because I think that quaintly pleasant . nor can it have be the 
 general expression of her face , which be very sparkling and pretty 
 for an old lady . I do not   know what it be . or at least if I do 
 now , I think I do not then . or at least - but it do not   matter . 
 of a night when I be go upstairs to bed , she would invite I into 
 her room , where she sit before the fire in a great chair ; and , dear 
 I , she would tell I about Morgan ap - Kerrig until I be quite low- 
 spirit ! sometimes she recite a few verse from Crumlinwallinwer 
 and the Mewlinnwillinwodd   if those be the right name , which I dare 
 say they be not , and would become quite fiery with the sentiment 
 they express . though I never know what they be   be in Welsh , 
 far than that they be highly eulogistic of the lineage of 
 Morgan ap - Kerrig . 
 " so , Miss Summerson , " she would say to I with stately triumph , 
 " this , you see , be the fortune inherit by my son . wherever my 
 son go , he can claim kindre with Ap - Kerrig . he may not have 
 money , but he always have what be much well - family , my dear . " 
 I have my doubt of their care so very much for Morgan ap - Kerrig 
 in India and China , but of course I never express they . I use 
 to say it be a great thing to be so highly connected . 
 " it be , my dear , a great thing , " Mrs. Woodcourt would reply . " it 
 have its disadvantage ; my son 's choice of a wife , for instance , be 
 limit by it , but the matrimonial choice of the royal family be 
 limit in much the same manner . " 
 then she would pat I on the arm and smooth my dress , as much as to 
 assure I that she have a good opinion of I , the distance between 
 we notwithstanding . 
 " Poor Mr. Woodcourt , my dear , " she would say , and always with some 
 emotion , for with her lofty pedigree she have a very affectionate 
 heart , " be descend from a great Highland family , the MacCoorts 
 of MacCoort . he serve his king and country as an officer in the 
 Royal Highlanders , and he die on the field . my son be one of the 
 last representative of two old family . with the blessing of 
 heaven he will set they up again and unite they with another old 
 family . " 
 it be in vain for I to try to change the subject , as I use to 
 try , only for the sake of novelty or perhaps because - but I need 
 not be so particular . Mrs. Woodcourt never would let I change it . 
 " my dear , " she say one night , " you have so much sense and you look 
 at the world in a quiet manner so superior to your time of life 
 that it be a comfort to I to talk to you about these family 
 matter of mine . you do not   know much of my son , my dear ; but you 
 know enough of he , I dare say , to recollect he ? " 
 " yes , ma'am . I recollect he . " 
 " yes , my dear . now , my dear , I think you be a judge of character , 
 and I should like to have your opinion of he . " 
 " oh , Mrs. Woodcourt , " say I , " that be so difficult ! " 
 " why be it so difficult , my dear ? " she return . " I do not   see it 
 myself . " 
 " to give an opinion - " 
 " on so slight an acquaintance , my dear . that be true . " 
 I do not   mean that , because Mr. Woodcourt have be at our house a 
 good deal altogether and have become quite intimate with my 
 guardian . I say so , and add that he seem to be very clever in 
 his profession - we think - and that his kindness and gentleness to 
 Miss Flite be above all praise . 
 " you do he justice ! " say Mrs. Woodcourt , press my hand . " you 
 define he exactly . Allan be a dear fellow , and in his profession 
 faultless . I say it , though I be his mother . still , I must 
 confess he be not without fault , love . " 
 " none of we be , " say I. 
 " ah ! but his really be fault that he might correct , and ought to 
 correct , " return the sharp old lady , sharply shake her head . 
 " I be so much attach to you that I may confide in you , my dear , 
 as a third party wholly disintereste , that he be fickleness 
 itself . " 
 I say I should have think it hardly possible that he could have 
 be otherwise than constant to his profession and zealous in the 
 pursuit of it , judge from the reputation he have earn . 
 " you be right again , my dear , " the old lady retort , " but I do not 
 refer to his profession , look you . " 
 " oh ! " say I. 
 " no , " say she . " I refer , my dear , to his social conduct . he be 
 always pay trivial attention to young lady , and always have 
 be , ever since he be eighteen . now , my dear , he have never 
 really care for any one of they and have never mean in do this 
 to do any harm or to express anything but politeness and good 
 nature . still , it be not right , you know ; be it ? " 
 " no , " say I , as she seem to wait for I . 
 " and it might lead to mistaken notion , you see , my dear . " 
 I suppose it might . 
 " therefore , I have tell he many time that he really should be 
 more careful , both in justice to himself and in justice to other . 
 and he have always say , ' Mother , I will be ; but you know I well 
 than anybody else do , and you know I mean no harm - in short , mean 
 nothing . ' all of which be very true , my dear , but be no 
 justification . however , as he be now go so far away and for an 
 indefinite time , and as he will have good opportunity and 
 introduction , we may consider this past and go . and you , my 
 dear , " say the old lady , who be now all nod and smile , 
 " regard your dear self , my love ? " 
 " Me , Mrs. Woodcourt ? " 
 " not to be always selfish , talk of my son , who have go to seek 
 his fortune and to find a wife - when do you mean to seek your 
 fortune and to find a husband , Miss Summerson ? hey , look you ! now 
 you blush ! " 
 I do not   think I do blush - at all event , it be not important if I 
 do - and I say my present fortune perfectly content I and I have 
 no wish to change it . 
 " shall I tell you what I always think of you and the fortune yet to 
 come for you , my love ? " say Mrs. Woodcourt . 
 " if you believe you be a good prophet , " say I. 
 " why , then , it be that you will marry some one very rich and very 
 worthy , much old - five and twenty year , perhaps - than yourself . 
 and you will be an excellent wife , and much beloved , and very 
 happy . " 
 " that be a good fortune , " say I. " but why be it to be mine ? " 
 " my dear , " she return , " there be suitability in it - you be so 
 busy , and so neat , and so peculiarly situate altogether that 
 there be suitability in it , and it will come to pass . and nobody , 
 my love , will congratulate you more sincerely on such a marriage 
 than I shall . " 
 it be curious that this should make I uncomfortable , but I think 
 it do . I know it do . it make I for some part of that night 
 uncomfortable . I be so ashamed of my folly that I do not like to 
 confess it even to Ada , and that make I more uncomfortable still . 
 I would have give anything not to have be so much in the bright 
 old lady 's confidence if I could have possibly decline it . it 
 give I the most inconsistent opinion of she . at one time I 
 think she be a story - teller , and at another time that she be 
 the pink of truth . now I suspect that she be very cunning , next 
 moment I believe her honest Welsh heart to be perfectly innocent 
 and simple . and after all , what do it matter to I , and why do 
 it matter to I ? why could not I , go up to bed with my basket 
 of key , stop to sit down by her fire and accommodate myself for a 
 little while to she , at least as well as to anybody else , and not 
 trouble myself about the harmless thing she say to I ? impel 
 towards she , as I certainly be , for I be very anxious that she 
 should like I and be very glad indeed that she do , why should I 
 harp afterwards , with actual distress and pain , on every word she 
 say and weigh it over and over again in twenty scale ? why be it 
 so worry to I to have she in our house , and confidential to I 
 every night , when I yet feel that it be well and safe somehow 
 that she should be there than anywhere else ? these be 
 perplexity and contradiction that I could not account for . at 
 least , if I could - but I shall come to all that by and by , and it 
 be mere idleness to go on about it now . 
 so when Mrs. Woodcourt go away , I be sorry to lose she but be 
 relieve too . and then Caddy Jellyby come down , and Caddy bring 
 such a packet of domestic news that it give we abundant occupation . 
 First Caddy declare   and would at first declare nothing else   that 
 I be the good adviser that ever be know . this , my pet say , be 
 no news at all ; and this , I say , of course , be nonsense . then 
 Caddy tell we that she be go to be marry in a month and that 
 if Ada and I would be her bridesmaid , she be the happy girl in 
 the world . to be sure , this be news indeed ; and I think we 
 never should have do talk about it , we have so much to say to 
 Caddy , and Caddy have so much to say to we . 
 it seem that Caddy 's unfortunate papa have get over his 
 bankruptcy - " go through the Gazette , " be the expression Caddy 
 use , as if it be a tunnel - with the general clemency and 
 commiseration of his creditor , and have get rid of his affair in 
 some bless manner without succeed in understand they , and 
 have give up everything he possess   which be not worth much , I 
 should think , to judge from the state of the furniture , and have 
 satisfy every one concern that he could do no more , poor man . 
 so , he have be honourably dismiss to " the office " to begin the 
 world again . what he do at the office , I never know ; Caddy say 
 he be a " custom - house and general agent , " and the only thing I 
 ever understand about that business be that when he want money 
 more than usual he go to the dock to look for it , and hardly 
 ever find it . 
 as soon as her papa have tranquillize his mind by become this 
 shorn lamb , and they have remove to a furnished lodging in Hatton 
 Garden   where I find the child , when I afterwards go there , 
 cut the horse hair out of the seat of the chair and choke 
 themselves with it , Caddy have bring about a meeting between he 
 and old Mr. Turveydrop ; and poor Mr. Jellyby , be very humble and 
 meek , have defer to Mr. Turveydrop 's deportment so submissively 
 that they have become excellent friend . by degree , old Mr. 
 Turveydrop , thus familiarize with the idea of his son 's marriage , 
 have work up his parental feeling to the height of contemplate 
 that event as be near at hand and have give his gracious consent 
 to the young couple commence housekeeping at the academy in 
 Newman Street when they would . 
 " and your papa , Caddy . what do he say ? " 
 " oh ! poor Pa , " say Caddy , " only cry and say he hop we might 
 get on well than he and Ma have get on . he do not   say so before 
 Prince , he only say so to I . and he say , ' my poor girl , you 
 have not be very well teach how to make a home for your husband , 
 but unless you mean with all your heart to strive to do it , you have 
 well murder he than marry he - if you really love he . ' " 
 " and how do you reassure he , Caddy ? " 
 " why , it be very distressing , you know , to see poor Pa so low and 
 hear he say such terrible thing , and I could not   help cry 
 myself . but I tell he that I do mean it with all my heart and 
 that I hop our house would be a place for he to come and find 
 some comfort in of an evening and that I hop and think I could 
 be a well daughter to he there than at home . then I mention 
 Peepy 's come to stay with I , and then Pa begin to cry again and 
 say the child be Indians . " 
 " Indians , Caddy ? " 
 " yes , " say Caddy , " wild Indians . and Pa say " - here she begin to 
 sob , poor girl , not at all like the happy girl in the world - 
 " that he be sensible the good thing that could happen to they be 
 their be all tomahawk together . " 
 Ada suggest that it be comfortable to know that Mr. Jellyby do 
 not mean these destructive sentiment . 
 " no , of course I know Pa would not   like his family to be welter 
 in their blood , " say Caddy , " but he mean that they be very 
 unfortunate in be Ma 's child and that he be very unfortunate 
 in be Ma 's husband ; and I be sure that be true , though it seem 
 unnatural to say so . " 
 I ask Caddy if Mrs. Jellyby know that her wedding - day be fix . 
 " oh ! you know what Ma be , Esther , " she return . " it be impossible 
 to say whether she know it or not . she have be tell it often 
 enough ; and when she be tell it , she only give I a placid look , 
 as if I be I do not   know what - a steeple in the distance , " say 
 Caddy with a sudden idea ; " and then she shake her head and say 
 ' oh , Caddy , Caddy , what a tease you be ! ' and go on with the 
 Borrioboola letter . " 
 " and about your wardrobe , Caddy ? " say i. for she be under no 
 restraint with we . 
 " well , my dear Esther , " she return , dry her eye , " I must do 
 the good I can and trust to my dear Prince never to have an unkind 
 remembrance of my come so shabbily to he . if the question 
 concern an outfit for Borrioboola , Ma would know all about it and 
 would be quite excited . be what it be , she neither know nor 
 care . " 
 Caddy be not at all deficient in natural affection for her mother , 
 but mention this with tear as an undeniable fact , which I be 
 afraid it be . we be sorry for the poor dear girl and find so 
 much to admire in the good disposition which have survive under 
 such discouragement that we both at once   I mean Ada and I 
 propose a little scheme that make she perfectly joyful . this be 
 she stay with we for three week , my stay with she for one , 
 and our all three contrive and cut out , and repair , and 
 sewing , and saving , and do the very good we could think of to 
 make the most of her stock . my guardian be as pleased with the 
 idea as Caddy be , we take she home next day to arrange the matter 
 and bring she out again in triumph with her box and all the 
 purchase that could be squeeze out of a ten - pound note , which Mr. 
 Jellyby have find in the dock I suppose , but which he at all 
 event give she . what my guardian would not have give she if we 
 have encourage he , it would be difficult to say , but we think it 
 right to compound for no more than her wedding - dress and bonnet . 
 he agree to this compromise , and if Caddy have ever be happy in 
 her life , she be happy when we sit down to work . 
 she be clumsy enough with her needle , poor girl , and prick her 
 finger as much as she have be use to ink they . she could not 
 help redden a little now and then , partly with the smart and 
 partly with vexation at be able to do no well , but she soon 
 get over that and begin to improve rapidly . so day after day she , 
 and my darling , and my little maid Charley , and a milliner out of 
 the town , and I , sit hard at work , as pleasantly as possible . 
 over and above this , Caddy be very anxious " to learn 
 housekeeping , " as she say . now , mercy upon we ! the idea of she 
 learn housekeeping of a person of my vast experience be such a 
 joke that I laugh , and colour up , and fall into a comical 
 confusion when she propose it . however , I say , " Caddy , I be sure 
 you be very welcome to learn anything that you can learn of ME , my 
 dear , " and I show she all my book and method and all my fidgety 
 way . you would have suppose that I be show she some 
 wonderful invention , by her study of they ; and if you have see 
 she , whenever I jingle my housekeeping key , get up and attend I , 
 certainly you might have think that there never be a great 
 impost than I with a blinder follower than Caddy Jellyby . 
 so what with working and housekeeping , and lesson to Charley , and 
 backgammon in the evening with my guardian , and duet with Ada , the 
 three week slip fast away . then I go home with Caddy to see 
 what could be do there , and Ada and Charley remain behind to 
 take care of my guardian . 
 when I say I go home with Caddy , I mean to the furnish lodging 
 in Hatton Garden . we go to Newman Street two or three time , 
 where preparation be in progress too - a good many , I observe , 
 for enhance the comfort of old Mr. Turveydrop , and a few for 
 put the newly married couple away cheaply at the top of the 
 house - but our great point be to make the furnish lodge decent 
 for the wedding - breakfast and to imbue Mrs. Jellyby beforehand with 
 some faint sense of the occasion . 
 the latter be the more difficult thing of the two because Mrs. 
 Jellyby and an unwholesome boy occupy the front sitting - room   the 
 back one be a mere closet , and it be litter down with waste- 
 paper and borrioboolan document , as an untidy stable might be 
 litter with straw . Mrs. Jellyby sit there all day drink 
 strong coffee , dictating , and hold borrioboolan interview by 
 appointment . the unwholesome boy , who seem to I to be go 
 into a decline , take his meal out of the house . when Mr. Jellyby 
 come home , he usually groan and go down into the kitchen . 
 there he get something to eat if the servant would give he 
 anything , and then , feel that he be in the way , go out and 
 walk about Hatton Garden in the wet . the poor child scramble 
 up and tumble down the house as they have always be accustom to 
 do . 
 the production of these devoted little sacrifice in any 
 presentable condition be quite out of the question at a week 's 
 notice , I propose to Caddy that we should make they as happy as we 
 could on her marriage morning in the attic where they all sleep , 
 and should confine our great effort to her mama and her mama 's 
 room , and a clean breakfast . in truth Mrs. Jellyby require a good 
 deal of attention , the lattice - work up her back have widen 
 considerably since I first know she and her hair look like the 
 mane of a dustman 's horse . 
 think that the display of Caddy 's wardrobe would be the good 
 mean of approach the subject , I invite Mrs. Jellyby to come 
 and look at it spread out on Caddy 's bed in the evening after the 
 unwholesome boy be go . 
 " my dear Miss Summerson , " say she , rise from her desk with her 
 usual sweetness of temper , " these be really ridiculous 
 preparation , though your assist they be a proof of your 
 kindness . there be something so inexpressibly absurd to I in the 
 idea of Caddy be marry ! oh , Caddy , you silly , silly , silly 
 puss ! " 
 she come upstairs with we notwithstanding and look at the clothe 
 in her customary far - off manner . they suggest one distinct idea 
 to she , for she say with her placid smile , and shake her head , 
 " my good Miss Summerson , at half the cost , this weak child might 
 have be equip for Africa ! " 
 on our go downstairs again , Mrs. Jellyby ask I whether this 
 troublesome business be really to take place next Wednesday . and 
 on my replying yes , she say , " will my room be require , my dear 
 Miss Summerson ? for it be quite impossible that I can put my paper 
 away . " 
 I take the liberty of say that the room would certainly be 
 want and that I think we must put the paper away somewhere . 
 " well , my dear Miss Summerson , " say Mrs. Jellyby , " you know well , 
 I dare say . but by oblige I to employ a boy , Caddy have 
 embarrass I to that extent , overwhelm as I be with public 
 business , that I do not   know which way to turn . we have a 
 Ramification meeting , too , on Wednesday afternoon , and the 
 inconvenience be very serious . " 
 " it be not likely to occur again , " say I , smile . " Caddy will be 
 married but once , probably . " 
 " that be true , " Mrs. Jellyby reply ; " that be true , my dear . I 
 suppose we must make the good of it ! " 
 the next question be how Mrs. Jellyby should be dress on the 
 occasion . I think it very curious to see she look on serenely 
 from her writing - table while Caddy and I discuss it , occasionally 
 shake her head at we with a half - reproachful smile like a 
 superior spirit who could just bear with our trifling . 
 the state in which her dress be , and the extraordinary 
 confusion in which she keep they , add not a little to our 
 difficulty ; but at length we devise something not very unlike what 
 a common - place mother might wear on such an occasion . the 
 abstract manner in which Mrs. Jellyby would deliver herself up to 
 have this attire try on by the dressmaker , and the sweetness 
 with which she would then observe to I how sorry she be that I 
 have not turn my thought to Africa , be consistent with the rest 
 of her behaviour . 
 the lodging be rather confine as to space , but I fancy that if 
 Mrs. Jellyby 's household have be the only lodger in Saint Paul 's 
 or Saint Peter 's , the sole advantage they would have find in the 
 size of the building would have be its affording a great deal of 
 room to be dirty in . I believe that nothing belong to the 
 family which it have be possible to break be unbroken at the time 
 of those preparation for Caddy 's marriage , that nothing which it 
 have be possible to spoil in any way be unspoilt , and that no 
 domestic object which be capable of collect dirt , from a dear 
 child 's knee to the door - plate , be without as much dirt as could 
 well accumulate upon it . 
 poor Mr. Jellyby , who very seldom speak and almost always sit when 
 he be at home with his head against the wall , become interested 
 when he see that Caddy and I be attempt to establish some 
 order among all this waste and ruin and take off his coat to help . 
 but such wonderful thing come tumble out of the closet when 
 they be open - bit of mouldy pie , sour bottle , Mrs. Jellyby 's 
 cap , letter , tea , fork , odd boot and shoe of child , 
 firewood , wafer , saucepan - lid , damp sugar in odd and end of 
 paper bag , footstool , blacklead brush , bread , Mrs. Jellyby 's 
 bonnet , book with butter stick to the bind , guttered candle 
 end put out by be turn upside down in broken candlestick , 
 nutshell , head and tail of shrimp , dinner - mat , glove , coffee- 
 ground , umbrella - that he look frightened , and leave off again . 
 but he come regularly every evening and sit without his coat , with 
 his head against the wall , as though he would have help we if he 
 have know how . 
 " Poor Pa ! " say Caddy to I on the night before the great day , when 
 we really have get thing a little to right . " it seem unkind to 
 leave he , Esther . but what could I do if I stay ! since I first 
 know you , I have tidy and tidy over and over again , but it be 
 useless . Ma and Africa , together , upset the whole house directly . 
 we never have a servant who do not   drink . Ma be ruinous to 
 everything . " 
 Mr. Jellyby could not hear what she say , but he seem very low 
 indeed and shed tear , I think . 
 " my heart ache for he ; that it do ! " sob Caddy . " I can not 
 help think to - night , Esther , how dearly I hope to be happy with 
 Prince , and how dearly Pa hop , I dare say , to be happy with Ma . 
 what a disappointed life ! " 
 " my dear Caddy ! " say Mr. Jellyby , look slowly round from the 
 wail . it be the first time , I think , I ever hear he say three 
 word together . 
 " yes , Pa ! " cry Caddy , go to he and embrace he 
 affectionately . 
 " my dear Caddy , " say Mr. Jellyby . " never have - " 
 " not Prince , Pa ? " falter Caddy . " not have Prince ? " 
 " yes , my dear , " say Mr. Jellyby . " have he , certainly . but , 
 never have - " 
 I mention in my account of our first visit in Thavies inn that 
 Richard describe Mr. Jellyby as frequently open his mouth after 
 dinner without say anything . it be a habit of his . he open 
 his mouth now a great many time and shake his head in a melancholy 
 manner . 
 " what do you wish I not to have ? do not   have what , dear Pa ? " ask 
 Caddy , coax he , with her arm round his neck . 
 " never have a mission , my dear child . " 
 Mr. Jellyby groan and lay his head against the wall again , and 
 this be the only time I ever hear he make any approach to 
 express his sentiment on the Borrioboolan question . I suppose 
 he have be more talkative and lively once , but he seem to have 
 be completely exhausted long before I know he . 
 I think Mrs. Jellyby never would have leave off serenely look 
 over her paper and drinking coffee that night . it be twelve 
 o'clock before we could obtain possession of the room , and the 
 clearance it require then be so discourage that Caddy , who be 
 almost tired out , sit down in the middle of the dust and cry . 
 but she soon cheer up , and we do wonder with it before we go 
 to bed . 
 in the morning it look , by the aid of a few flower and a 
 quantity of soap and water and a little arrangement , quite gay . 
 the plain breakfast make a cheerful show , and Caddy be perfectly 
 charming . but when my darling come , I think - and I think now - 
 that I never have see such a dear face as my beautiful pet 's . 
 we make a little feast for the child upstairs , and we put Peepy 
 at the head of the table , and we show they Caddy in her bridal 
 dress , and they clap their hand and hurrah , and Caddy cry 
 to think that she be go away from they and hug they over and 
 over again until we bring Prince up to fetch she away - when , I be 
 sorry to say , Peepy bite he . then there be old Mr. Turveydrop 
 downstair , in a state of deportment not to be express , benignly 
 bless Caddy and give my guardian to understand that his son 's 
 happiness be his own parental work and that he sacrifice personal 
 consideration to ensure it . " my dear sir , " say Mr. Turveydrop , 
 " these young people will live with I ; my house be large enough for 
 their accommodation , and they shall not want the shelter of my 
 roof . I could have wish - you will understand the allusion , Mr. 
 Jarndyce , for you remember my illustrious patron the Prince Regent 
  - I could have wish that my son have marry into a family where 
 there be more deportment , but the will of heaven be do ! " 
 Mr. and Mrs. Pardiggle be of the party - Mr. Pardiggle , an 
 obstinate - look man with a large waistcoat and stubbly hair , who 
 be always talk in a loud bass voice about his mite , or Mrs. 
 Pardiggle 's mite , or their five boy ' mite . Mr. Quale , with his 
 hair brush back as usual and his knob of temple shin very 
 much , be also there , not in the character of a disappointed lover , 
 but as the accept of a young - at least , an unmarried - lady , a 
 Miss Wisk , who be also there . Miss Wisk 's mission , my guardian 
 say , be to show the world that woman 's mission be man 's mission 
 and that the only genuine mission of both man and woman be to be 
 always move declaratory resolution about thing in general at 
 public meeting . the guest be few , but be , as one might 
 expect at Mrs. Jellyby 's , all devoted to public object only . 
 besides those I have mention , there be an extremely dirty lady 
 with her bonnet all awry and the ticketed price of her dress still 
 stick on it , whose neglect home , Caddy tell I , be like a 
 filthy wilderness , but whose church be like a fancy fair . a very 
 contentious gentleman , who say it be his mission to be 
 everybody 's brother but who appear to be on term of coolness 
 with the whole of his large family , complete the party . 
 a party , have less in common with such an occasion , could hardly 
 have be get together by any ingenuity . such a mean mission as 
 the domestic mission be the very last thing to be endure among 
 they ; indeed , Miss Wisk inform we , with great indignation , before 
 we sit down to breakfast , that the idea of woman 's mission lie 
 chiefly in the narrow sphere of home be an outrageous slander on 
 the part of her tyrant , man . one other singularity be that nobody 
 with a mission - except Mr. Quale , whose mission , as I think I have 
 formerly say , be to be in ecstasy with everybody 's mission - 
 care at all for anybody 's mission . Mrs. Pardiggle be as clear 
 that the only one infallible course be her course of pounce upon 
 the poor and apply benevolence to they like a strait - waistcoat ; 
 as Miss Wisk be that the only practical thing for the world be 
 the emancipation of woman from the thraldom of her tyrant , man . 
 Mrs. Jellyby , all the while , sit smile at the limited vision that 
 could see anything but Borrioboola - Gha . 
 but I be anticipate now the purport of our conversation on the 
 ride home instead of first marry Caddy . we all go to church , 
 and Mr. Jellyby give she away . of the air with which old Mr. 
 Turveydrop , with his hat under his left arm   the inside present 
 at the clergyman like a cannon   and his eye crease themselves up 
 into his wig , stand stiff and high - shoulder behind we bridesmaid 
 during the ceremony , and afterwards salute we , I could never say 
 enough to do it justice . Miss Wisk , whom I can not report as 
 prepossess in appearance , and whose manner be grim , listen to 
 the proceeding , as part of woman 's wrong , with a disdainful face . 
 Mrs. Jellyby , with her calm smile and her bright eye , look the 
 least concerned of all the company . 
 we duly come back to breakfast , and Mrs. Jellyby sit at the head of 
 the table and Mr. Jellyby at the foot . Caddy have previously steal 
 upstairs to hug the child again and tell they that her name be 
 Turveydrop . but this piece of information , instead of be an 
 agreeable surprise to Peepy , throw he on his back in such 
 transport of kick grief that I could do nothing on be send 
 for but accede to the proposal that he should be admit to the 
 breakfast table . so he come down and sit in my lap ; and Mrs. 
 Jellyby , after say , in reference to the state of his pinafore , 
 " oh , you naughty Peepy , what a shocking little pig you be ! " be 
 not at all discompose . he be very good except that he bring 
 down Noah with he   out of an ark I have give he before we go to 
 church   and would dip he head first into the wine - glass and then 
 put he in his mouth . 
 my guardian , with his sweet temper and his quick perception and his 
 amiable face , make something agreeable even out of the ungenial 
 company . none of they seem able to talk about anything but his , 
 or she , own one subject , and none of they seem able to talk about 
 even that as part of a world in which there be anything else ; but 
 my guardian turn it all to the merry encouragement of Caddy and 
 the honour of the occasion , and bring we through the breakfast 
 nobly . what we should have do without he , I be afraid to think , 
 for all the company despise the bride and bridegroom and old Mr. 
 Turveydrop - and old Mr. Thurveydrop , in virtue of his deportment , 
 consider himself vastly superior to all the company - it be a 
 very unpromising case . 
 at last the time come when poor Caddy be to go and when all her 
 property be pack on the hire coach and pair that be to take 
 she and her husband to gravesend . it affect we to see Caddy 
 clinging , then , to her deplorable home and hang on her mother 's 
 neck with the great tenderness . 
 " I be very sorry I could not   go on writing from dictation , Ma , " 
 sob Caddy . " I hope you forgive I now . " 
 " oh , Caddy , Caddy ! " say Mrs. Jellyby . " I have tell you over and 
 over again that I have engage a boy , and there be an end of it . " 
 " you be sure you be not the least angry with I , Ma ? say you be 
 sure before I go away , Ma ? " 
 " you foolish Caddy , " return Mrs. Jellyby , " do I look angry , or 
 have I inclination to be angry , or time to be angry ? how can you ? " 
 " take a little care of Pa while I be go , Mama ! " 
 Mrs. Jellyby positively laugh at the fancy . " you romantic 
 child , " say she , lightly pat Caddy 's back . " go along . I be 
 excellent friend with you . now , good - bye , Caddy , and be very 
 happy ! " 
 then Caddy hang upon her father and nurse his cheek against her 
 as if he be some poor dull child in pain . all this take place in 
 the hall . her father release she , take out his pocket 
 handkerchief , and sit down on the stair with his head against the 
 wall . I hope he find some consolation in wall . I almost think 
 he do . 
 and then Prince take her arm in his and turn with great emotion 
 and respect to his father , whose deportment at that moment be 
 overwhelming . 
 " thank you over and over again , father ! " say Prince , kiss his 
 hand . " I be very grateful for all your kindness and consideration 
 regard our marriage , and so , I can assure you , be Caddy . " 
 " very , " sob Caddy . " ve - ry ! " 
 " my dear son , " say Mr. Turveydrop , " and dear daughter , I have do 
 my duty . if the spirit of a sainted wooman hover above we and 
 look down on the occasion , that , and your constant affection , will 
 be my recompense . you will not fail in your duty , my son and 
 daughter , I believe ? " 
 " dear father , never ! " cry Prince . 
 " never , never , dear Mr. Turveydrop ! " say Caddy . 
 " this , " return Mr. Turveydrop , " be as it should be . my child , 
 my home be your , my heart be your , my all be yours . I will never 
 leave you ; nothing but death shall part we . my dear son , you 
 contemplate an absence of a week , I think ? " 
 " a week , dear father . we shall return home this day week . " 
 " my dear child , " say Mr. Turveydrop , " let I , even under the 
 present exceptional circumstance , recommend strict punctuality . 
 it be highly important to keep the connexion together ; and school , 
 if at all neglect , be apt to take offence . " 
 " this day week , father , we shall be sure to be home to dinner . " 
 " good ! " say Mr. Turveydrop . " you will find fire , my dear 
 Caroline , in your own room , and dinner prepare in my apartment . 
 yes , yes , Prince ! " anticipate some self - deny objection on his 
 son 's part with a great air . " you and our Caroline will be strange 
 in the upper part of the premise and will , therefore , dine that 
 day in my apartment . now , bless ye ! " 
 they drive away , and whether I wonder most at Mrs. Jellyby or at 
 Mr. Turveydrop , I do not know . Ada and my guardian be in the 
 same condition when we come to talk it over . but before we drive 
 away too , I receive a most unexpected and eloquent compliment from 
 Mr. Jellyby . he come up to I in the hall , take both my hand , 
 press they earnestly , and open his mouth twice . I be so sure 
 of his meaning that I say , quite flurry , " you be very welcome , 
 sir . pray do not   mention it ! " 
 " I hope this marriage be for the good , guardian , " say I when we 
 three be on our road home . 
 " I hope it be , little woman . patience . we shall see . " 
 " be the wind in the east to - day ? " I venture to ask he . 
 he laugh heartily and answer , " no . " 
 " but it must have be this morning , I think , " say I. 
 he answer " no " again , and this time my dear girl confidently 
 answer " no " too and shake the lovely head which , with its 
 bloom flower against the golden hair , be like the very spring . 
 " much you know of east wind , my ugly darling , " say I , kiss she 
 in my admiration - I could not   help it . 
 well ! it be only their love for I , I know very well , and it be a 
 long time ago . I must write it even if I rub it out again , because 
 it give I so much pleasure . they say there could be no east 
 wind where Somebody be ; they say that wherever Dame Durden go , 
 there be sunshine and summer air . 
 CHAPTER XXXI 
 Nurse and Patient 
 I have not be at home again many day when one evening I go 
 upstairs into my own room to take a peep over Charley 's shoulder 
 and see how she be get on with her copy - book . writing be a 
 try business to Charley , who seem to have no natural power 
 over a pen , but in whose hand every pen appear to become 
 perversely animate , and to go wrong and crooked , and to stop , and 
 splash , and sidle into corner like a saddle - donkey . it be very 
 odd to see what old letter Charley 's young hand have make , they so 
 wrinkle , and shrivel , and tottering , it so plump and round . 
 yet Charley be uncommonly expert at other thing and have as nimble 
 little finger as I ever watch . 
 " well , Charley , " say I , look over a copy of the letter o in 
 which it be represent as square , triangular , pear - shape , and 
 collapse in all kind of way , " we be improve . if we only get 
 to make it round , we shall be perfect , Charley . " 
 then I make one , and Charley make one , and the pen would not   join 
 Charley 's neatly , but twist it up into a knot . 
 " never mind , Charley . we shall do it in time . " 
 Charley lay down her pen , the copy be finish , open and shut 
 she cramp little hand , look gravely at the page , half in pride 
 and half in doubt , and get up , and drop I a curtsy . 
 " thank you , miss . if you please , miss , do you know a poor person 
 of the name of Jenny ? " 
 " a brickmaker 's wife , Charley ? yes . " 
 " she come and speak to I when I be out a little while ago , and 
 say you know she , miss . she ask I if I be not   the young lady 's 
 little maid - mean you for the young lady , miss - and I say yes , 
 miss . " 
 " I think she have leave this neighbourhood altogether , Charley . " 
 " so she have , miss , but she be come back again to where she use to 
 live - she and Liz . do you know another poor person of the name of 
 Liz , miss ? " 
 " I think I do , Charley , though not by name . " 
 " that be what she say ! " return Charley . " they have both come 
 back , miss , and have be tramp high and low . " 
 " tramp high and low , have they , Charley ? " 
 " yes , miss . " if Charley could only have make the letter in her 
 copy as round as the eye with which she look into my face , they 
 would have be excellent . " and this poor person come about the 
 house three or four day , hop to get a glimpse of you , miss - all 
 she want , she say - but you be away . that be when she see I . 
 she see I a - go about , miss , " say Charley with a short laugh of 
 the great delight and pride , " and she think I look like your 
 maid ! " 
 " do she though , really , Charley ? " 
 " yes , miss ! " say Charley . " really and truly . " and Charley , with 
 another short laugh of the pure glee , make her eye very round 
 again and look as serious as become my maid . I be never tired 
 of see Charley in the full enjoyment of that great dignity , 
 stand before I with her youthful face and figure , and her 
 steady manner , and her childish exultation break through it now 
 and then in the pleasant way . 
 " and where do you see she , Charley ? " say I. 
 my little maid 's countenance fall as she reply , " by the doctor 's 
 shop , miss . " for Charley wear her black frock yet . 
 I ask if the brickmaker 's wife be ill , but Charley say no . it 
 be some one else . some one in her cottage who have tramp down to 
 Saint Albans and be tramp he do not   know where . a poor boy , 
 Charley say . no father , no mother , no any one . " like as Tom 
 might have be , miss , if Emma and I have die after father , " say 
 Charley , her round eye fill with tear . 
 " and she be get medicine for he , Charley ? " 
 " she say , miss , " return Charley , " how that he have once do as 
 much for she . " 
 my little maid 's face be so eager and her quiet hand be fold 
 so closely in one another as she stand look at I that I have no 
 great difficulty in read her thought . " well , Charley , " say I , 
 " it appear to I that you and I can do no well than go round to 
 Jenny 's and see what be the matter . " 
 the alacrity with which Charley bring my bonnet and veil , and 
 have dress I , quaintly pin herself into her warm shawl and 
 make herself look like a little old woman , sufficiently express 
 her readiness . so Charley and I , without say anything to any 
 one , go out . 
 it be a cold , wild night , and the tree shudder in the wind . 
 the rain have be thick and heavy all day , and with little 
 intermission for many day . none be fall just then , however . 
 the sky have partly clear , but be very gloomy - even above we , 
 where a few star be shin . in the north and north - west , where 
 the sun have set three hour before , there be a pale dead light 
 both beautiful and awful ; and into it long sullen line of cloud 
 wave up like a sea stricken immovable as it be heave . towards 
 London a lurid glare overhang the whole dark waste , and the 
 contrast between these two light , and the fancy which the redder 
 light engender of an unearthly fire , gleam on all the unseen 
 building of the city and on all the face of its many thousand of 
 wonder inhabitant , be as solemn as might be . 
 I have no thought that night - none , I be quite sure - of what be 
 soon to happen to I . but I have always remember since that when 
 we have stop at the garden - gate to look up at the sky , and when 
 we go upon our way , I have for a moment an undefinable impression 
 of myself as be something different from what I then be . I 
 know it be then and there that I have it . I have ever since 
 connect the feeling with that spot and time and with everything 
 associate with that spot and time , to the distant voice in the 
 town , the barking of a dog , and the sound of wheel come down the 
 miry hill . 
 it be Saturday night , and most of the people belong to the 
 place where we be go be drink elsewhere . we find it 
 quieter than I have previously see it , though quite as miserable . 
 the kiln be burn , and a stifle vapour set towards we with a 
 pale - blue glare . 
 we come to the cottage , where there be a feeble candle in the 
 patch window . we tap at the door and go in . the mother of 
 the little child who have die be sit in a chair on one side of 
 the poor fire by the bed ; and opposite to she , a wretched boy , 
 support by the chimney - piece , be cower on the floor . he hold 
 under his arm , like a little bundle , a fragment of a fur cap ; and 
 as he try to warm himself , he shake until the crazy door and 
 window shake . the place be close than before and have an 
 unhealthy and a very peculiar smell . 
 I have not lift my veil when I first speak to the woman , which be 
 at the moment of our go in . the boy stagger up instantly and 
 star at I with a remarkable expression of surprise and terror . 
 his action be so quick and my be the cause of it be so evident 
 that I stand still instead of advance nearer . 
 " I will not   go no more to the berryin ground , " mutter the boy ; " I 
 be not   a - go there , so I tell you ! " 
 I lift my veil and speak to the woman . she say to I in a low 
 voice , " do not   mind he , ma'am . he will soon come back to his head , " 
 and say to he , " Jo , Jo , what be the matter ? " 
 " I know wot she be come for ! " cry the boy . 
 " who ? " 
 " the lady there . she be come to get I to go along with she to the 
 berryin ground . I will not   go to the berryin ground . I do not   like 
 the name on it . she might go a - berryin ME . " his shivering come on 
 again , and as he lean against the wall , he shake the hovel . 
 " he have be talk off and on about such like all day , ma'am , " 
 say Jenny softly . " why , how you stare ! this be MY lady , Jo . " 
 " be it ? " return the boy doubtfully , and survey I with his arm 
 hold out above his burn eye . " she look to I the t'other one . 
 it be not   the bonnet , nor yet it be not   the gownd , but she look to 
 I the t'other one . " 
 my little Charley , with her premature experience of illness and 
 trouble , have pull off her bonnet and shawl and now go quietly 
 up to he with a chair and sit he down in it like an old sick 
 nurse . except that no such attendant could have show he 
 Charley 's youthful face , which seem to engage his confidence . 
 " I say ! " say the boy . " you tell I . ai not   the lady the t'other 
 lady ? " 
 Charley shake her head as she methodically draw his rag about he 
 and make he as warm as she could . 
 " oh ! " the boy mutter . " then I s'pose she be not . " 
 " I come to see if I could do you any good , " say I. " what be the 
 matter with you ? " 
 " I be a - be froze , " return the boy hoarsely , with his haggard 
 gaze wander about I , " and then burn up , and then froze , and 
 then burn up , ever so many time in a hour . and my head 's all 
 sleepy , and all a - go mad - like - and I be so dry - and my bone 
 be not   half so much bone as pain . 
 " when do he come here ? " I ask the woman . 
 " this morning , ma'am , I find he at the corner of the town . I have 
 know he up in London yonder . had not   I , Jo ? " 
 " Tom - all - Alone 's , " the boy reply . 
 whenever he fix his attention or his eye , it be only for a very 
 little while . he soon begin to droop his head again , and roll it 
 heavily , and speak as if he be half awake . 
 " when do he come from London ? " I ask . 
 " I come from London yes'day , " say the boy himself , now flushed and 
 hot . " I be a - go somewhere . " 
 " where be he go ? " I ask . 
 " somewhere , " repeat the boy in a loud tone . " I have be 
 move on , and move on , more nor ever I be afore , since the 
 t'other one give I the sov'ring . Mrs. Snagsby , she be always a- 
 watching , and a - driving of I - what have I do to she ? - and 
 they be all a - watching and a - driving of I . every one of them be 
 do of it , from the time when I do not   get up , to the time when I 
 do not   go to bed . and I be a - go somewhere . that be where I be a- 
 go . she tell I , down in Tom - all - Alone 's , as she come from 
 Stolbuns , and so I take the Stolbuns Road . it be as good as 
 another . " 
 he always conclude by address Charley . 
 " what be to be do with he ? " say I , take the woman aside . " he 
 could not travel in this state even if he have a purpose and know 
 where he be go ! " 
 " I know no more , ma'am , than the dead , " she reply , glance 
 compassionately at he . " perhaps the dead know well , if they 
 could only tell we . I have   keep he here all day for pity 's sake , 
 and I have   give he broth and physic , and Liz have go to try if any 
 one will take he in   here be my pretty in the bed - her child , but I 
 call it mine ; but I can not   keep he long , for if my husband be to 
 come home and find he here , he would be rough in put he out and 
 might do he a hurt . Hark ! here come Liz back ! " 
 the other woman come hurriedly in as she speak , and the boy get up 
 with a half - obscure sense that he be expect to be go . when 
 the little child awake , and when and how Charley get at it , take it 
 out of bed , and begin to walk about hush it , I do not   know . 
 there she be , do all this in a quiet motherly manner as if she 
 be live in Mrs. Blinder 's attic with Tom and Emma again . 
 the friend have be here and there , and have be play about from 
 hand to hand , and have come back as she go . at first it be too 
 early for the boy to be receive into the proper refuge , and at 
 last it be too late . one official send she to another , and the 
 other send she back again to the first , and so backward and 
 forward , until it appear to I as if both must have be 
 appoint for their skill in evade their duty instead of 
 perform they . and now , after all , she say , breathe quickly , 
 for she have be run and be frighten too , " Jenny , your 
 master 's on the road home , and mine be not far behind , and the Lord 
 help the boy , for we can do no more for he ! " they put a few 
 halfpence together and hurry they into his hand , and so , in an 
 oblivious , half - thankful , half - insensible way , he shuffle out of 
 the house . 
 " give I the child , my dear , " say its mother to Charley , " and 
 thank you kindly too ! Jenny , woman dear , good night ! young lady , 
 if my master do not   fall out with I , I will look down by the kiln 
 by and by , where the boy will be most like , and again in the 
 morning ! " she hurry off , and presently we pass her hushing 
 and sing to her child at her own door and look anxiously 
 along the road for her drunken husband . 
 I be afraid of stay then to speak to either woman , lest I 
 should bring she into trouble . but I say to Charley that we must 
 not leave the boy to die . Charley , who know what to do much well 
 than I do , and whose quickness equal her presence of mind , 
 glide on before I , and presently we come up with Jo , just short 
 of the brick - kiln . 
 I think he must have begin his journey with some small bundle under 
 his arm and must have have it steal or lose it . for he still 
 carry his wretched fragment of fur cap like a bundle , though he 
 go bare - head through the rain , which now fall fast . he stop 
 when we call to he and again show a dread of I when I come 
 up , stand with his lustrous eye fix upon I , and even 
 arrest in his shivering fit . 
 I ask he to come with we , and we would take care that he have 
 some shelter for the night . 
 " I do not   want no shelter , " he say ; " I can lay amongst the warm 
 brick . " 
 " but do not   you know that people die there ? " reply Charley . 
 " they die everywhere , " say the boy . " they die in their 
 lodging - she know where ; I show she - and they die down in Tom- 
 all - Alone be in heap . they die more than they live , accord to 
 what I see . " then he hoarsely whisper Charley , " if she be not   the 
 t'other one , she be not   the forrenner . be there three of them then ? " 
 Charley look at I a little frightened . I feel half frighten 
 at myself when the boy glare on I so . 
 but he turn and follow when I beckon to he , and find that 
 he acknowledge that influence in I , I lead the way straight home . 
 it be not far , only at the summit of the hill . we pass but one 
 man . I doubt if we should have get home without assistance , the 
 boy 's step be so uncertain and tremulous . he make no complaint , 
 however , and be strangely unconcerned about himself , if I may say 
 so strange a thing . 
 leave he in the hall for a moment , shrink into the corner of the 
 window - seat and star with an indifference that scarcely could be 
 call wonder at the comfort and brightness about he , I go into 
 the drawing - room to speak to my guardian . there I find Mr. 
 Skimpole , who have come down by the coach , as he frequently do 
 without notice , and never bring any clothe with he , but always 
 borrow everything he want . 
 they come out with I directly to look at the boy . the servant 
 have gather in the hall too , and he shiver in the window - seat 
 with Charley stand by he , like some wound animal that have 
 be find in a ditch . 
 " this be a sorrowful case , " say my guardian after ask he a 
 question or two and touch he and examine his eye . " what do 
 you say , Harold ? " 
 " you have well turn he out , " say Mr. Skimpole . 
 " what do you mean ? " inquire my guardian , almost sternly . 
 " my dear Jarndyce , " say Mr. Skimpole , " you know what I be : I be a 
 child . be cross to I if I deserve it . but I have a constitutional 
 objection to this sort of thing . I always have , when I be a medical 
 man . he be not safe , you know . there be a very bad sort of fever 
 about he . " 
 Mr. Skimpole have retreat from the hall to the drawing - room again 
 and say this in his airy way , seat on the music - stool as we 
 stand by . 
 " you will say it be childish , " observe Mr. Skimpole , look gaily at 
 we . " well , I dare say it may be ; but I be a child , and I never 
 pretend to be anything else . if you put he out in the road , you 
 only put he where he be before . he will be no bad off than he 
 be , you know . even make he well off , if you like . give he 
 sixpence , or five shilling , or five pound ten - you be 
 arithmetician , and I be not - and get rid of he ! " 
 " and what be he to do then ? " ask my guardian . 
 " upon my life , " say Mr. Skimpole , shrug his shoulder with his 
 engaging smile , " I have not the least idea what he be to do then . 
 but I have no doubt he will do it . " 
 " now , be it not a horrible reflection , " say my guardian , to whom I 
 have hastily explain the unavaile effort of the two woman , " be 
 it not a horrible reflection , " walk up and down and rumple his 
 hair , " that if this wretched creature be a convict prisoner , 
 his hospital would be wide open to he , and he would be as well 
 take care of as any sick boy in the kingdom ? " 
 " my dear Jarndyce , " return Mr. Skimpole , " you will pardon the 
 simplicity of the question , come as it do from a creature who 
 be perfectly simple in worldly matter , but why isn't he a prisoner 
 then ? " 
 my guardian stop and look at he with a whimsical mixture of 
 amusement and indignation in his face . 
 " our young friend be not to be suspect of any delicacy , I should 
 imagine , " say Mr. Skimpole , unabashed and candid . " it seem to I 
 that it would be wise , as well as in a certain kind of way more 
 respectable , if he show some misdirect energy that get he into 
 prison . there would be more of an adventurous spirit in it , and 
 consequently more of a certain sort of poetry . " 
 " I believe , " return my guardian , resume his uneasy walk , " that 
 there be not such another child on earth as yourself . " 
 " do you really ? " say Mr. Skimpole . " I dare say ! but I confess I 
 do not   see why our young friend , in his degree , should not seek to 
 invest himself with such poetry as be open to he . he be no doubt 
 bear with an appetite - probably , when he be in a safe state of 
 health , he have an excellent appetite . very well . at our young 
 friend 's natural dinner hour , most likely about noon , our young 
 friend say in effect to society , ' I be hungry ; will you have the 
 goodness to produce your spoon and feed I ? ' Society , which have 
 take upon itself the general arrangement of the whole system of 
 spoon and professe to have a spoon for our young friend , do not 
 produce that spoon ; and our young friend , therefore , say ' you 
 really must excuse I if I seize it . ' now , this appear to I a 
 case of misdirected energy , which have a certain amount of reason in 
 it and a certain amount of romance ; and I do not   know but what I 
 should be more interested in our young friend , as an illustration 
 of such a case , than merely as a poor vagabond - which any one can 
 be . " 
 " in the meantime , " I venture to observe , " he be get bad . " 
 " in the meantime , " say Mr. Skimpole cheerfully , " as Miss 
 Summerson , with her practical good sense , observe , he be get 
 bad . therefore I recommend your turn he out before he get 
 still bad . " 
 the amiable face with which he say it , I think I shall never 
 forget . 
 " of course , little woman , " observe my guardian , turn to I , " I 
 can ensure his admission into the proper place by merely go 
 there to enforce it , though it be a bad state of thing when , in his 
 condition , that be necessary . but it be grow late , and be a very 
 bad night , and the boy be wear out already . there be a bed in the 
 wholesome loft - room by the stable ; we have well keep he there 
 till morning , when he can be wrap up and remove . we will do 
 that . " 
 " oh ! " say Mr. Skimpole , with his hand upon the key of the piano 
 as we move away . " be you go back to our young friend ? " 
 " yes , " say my guardian . 
 " how I envy you your constitution , Jarndyce ! " return Mr. Skimpole 
 with playful admiration . " you do not   mind these thing ; neither 
 do Miss Summerson . you be ready at all time to go anywhere , 
 and do anything . such be will ! I have no will at all - and no 
 will not   - simply can not . " 
 " you can not   recommend anything for the boy , I suppose ? " say my 
 guardian , look back over his shoulder half angrily ; only half 
 angrily , for he never seem to consider Mr. Skimpole an 
 accountable being . 
 " my dear Jarndyce , I observe a bottle of cool medicine in his 
 pocket , and it be impossible for he to do well than take it . you 
 can tell they to sprinkle a little vinegar about the place where he 
 sleep and to keep it moderately cool and he moderately warm . but 
 it be mere impertinence in I to offer any recommendation . Miss 
 Summerson have such a knowledge of detail and such a capacity for 
 the administration of detail that she know all about it . " 
 we go back into the hall and explain to Jo what we propose to 
 do , which Charley explain to he again and which he receive with 
 the languid unconcern I have already notice , wearily look on at 
 what be do as if it be for somebody else . the servant 
 compassionate his miserable state and be very anxious to help , 
 we soon get the loft - room ready ; and some of the man about the 
 house carry he across the wet yard , well wrap up . it be 
 pleasant to observe how kind they be to he and how there 
 appear to be a general impression among they that frequently 
 call he " Old Chap " be likely to revive his spirit . Charley 
 direct the operation and go to and fro between the loft - room 
 and the house with such little stimulant and comfort as we 
 think it safe to give he . my guardian himself see he before he 
 be leave for the night and report to I when he return to the 
 growlery to write a letter on the boy 's behalf , which a messenger 
 be charge to deliver at day - light in the morning , that he seem 
 easy and incline to sleep . they have fasten his door on the 
 outside , he say , in case of his be delirious , but have so 
 arrange that he could not make any noise without be hear . 
 Ada be in our room with a cold , Mr. Skimpole be leave alone all 
 this time and entertain himself by play snatch of pathetic 
 air and sometimes sing to they   as we hear at a distance   with 
 great expression and feeling . when we rejoin he in the drawing- 
 room he say he would give we a little ballad which have come into 
 his head " apropos of our young friend , " and he sing one about a 
 peasant boy , 
 " throw on the wide world , doom to wander and roam , 
 Bereft of his parent , bereft of a home . " 
 quite exquisitely . it be a song that always make he cry , he tell 
 we . 
 he be extremely gay all the rest of the evening , for he absolutely 
 chirp - those be his delighted word - when he think by what a 
 happy talent for business he be surround . he give we , in his 
 glass of negus , " well health to our young friend ! " and suppose 
 and gaily pursue the case of his be reserve like Whittington 
 to become Lord Mayor of London . in that event , no doubt , he would 
 establish the Jarndyce Institution and the Summerson Almshouses , 
 and a little annual Corporation Pilgrimage to St. Albans . he have 
 no doubt , he say , that our young friend be an excellent boy in 
 his way , but his way be not the Harold Skimpole way ; what Harold 
 Skimpole be , Harold Skimpole have find himself , to his 
 considerable surprise , when he first make his own acquaintance ; he 
 have accept himself with all his failing and have think it sound 
 philosophy to make the good of the bargain ; and he hop we would 
 do the same . 
 Charley 's last report be that the boy be quiet . I could see , 
 from my window , the lantern they have leave he burn quietly ; and 
 I go to bed very happy to think that he be shelter . 
 there be more movement and more talk than usual a little before 
 daybreak , and it awake I . as I be dress , I look out of my 
 window and ask one of our man who have be among the active 
 sympathizer last night whether there be anything wrong about the 
 house . the lantern be still burn in the loft - window . 
 " it be the boy , miss , " say he . 
 " be he bad ? " I inquire . 
 " Gone , miss . 
 " dead ! " 
 " dead , miss ? no . go clean off . " 
 at what time of the night he have go , or how , or why , it seem 
 hopeless ever to divine . the door remain as it have be leave , 
 and the lantern stand in the window , it could only be suppose 
 that he have get out by a trap in the floor which communicate with 
 an empty cart - house below . but he have shut it down again , if that 
 be so ; and it look as if it have not be raise . nothing of 
 any kind be miss . on this fact be clearly ascertain , we 
 all yield to the painful belief that delirium have come upon he 
 in the night and that , allure by some imaginary object or pursue 
 by some imaginary horror , he have stray away in that bad than 
 helpless state ; all of we , that be to say , but Mr. Skimpole , who 
 repeatedly suggest , in his usual easy light style , that it have 
 occur to our young friend that he be not a safe inmate , have 
 a bad kind of fever upon he , and that he have with great natural 
 politeness take himself off . 
 every possible inquiry be make , and every place be search . the 
 brick - kiln be examine , the cottage be visit , the two woman 
 be particularly question , but they know nothing of he , and 
 nobody could doubt that their wonder be genuine . the weather have 
 for some time be too wet and the night itself have be too wet to 
 admit of any tracing by footstep . hedge and ditch , and wall , and 
 rick and stack , be examine by our man for a long distance round , 
 lest the boy should be lie in such a place insensible or dead ; 
 but nothing be see to indicate that he have ever be near . from 
 the time when he be leave in the loft - room , he vanish . 
 the search continue for five day . I do not mean that it cease 
 even then , but that my attention be then divert into a current 
 very memorable to I . 
 as Charley be at her write again in my room in the evening , and 
 as I sit opposite to she at work , I feel the table tremble . 
 look up , I see my little maid shiver from head to foot . 
 " Charley , " say I , " be you so cold ? " 
 " I think I be , miss , " she reply . " I do not   know what it be . I 
 can not   hold myself still . I feel so yesterday at about this same 
 time , miss . do not   be uneasy , I think I be ill . " 
 I hear Ada 's voice outside , and I hurry to the door of 
 communication between my room and our pretty sit - room , and 
 lock it . just in time , for she tap at it while my hand be 
 yet upon the key . 
 Ada call to I to let she in , but I say , " not now , my dearest . 
 go away . there be nothing the matter ; I will come to you 
 presently . " ah ! it be a long , long time before my darling girl 
 and I be companion again . 
 Charley fall ill . in twelve hour she be very ill . I move she 
 to my room , and lay she in my bed , and sit down quietly to nurse 
 she . I tell my guardian all about it , and why I feel it be 
 necessary that I should seclude myself , and my reason for not 
 see my darling above all . at first she come very often to the 
 door , and call to I , and even reproach I with sob and tear ; 
 but I write she a long letter say that she make I anxious and 
 unhappy and implore she , as she love I and wish my mind to be 
 at peace , to come no near than the garden . after that she come 
 beneath the window even oftener than she have come to the door , and 
 if I have learn to love her dear sweet voice before when we be 
 hardly ever apart , how do I learn to love it then , when I stand 
 behind the window - curtain listening and replying , but not so much 
 as look out ! how do I learn to love it afterwards , when the 
 hard time come ! 
 they put a bed for I in our sitting - room ; and by keep the door 
 wide open , I turn the two room into one , now that Ada have 
 vacate that part of the house , and keep they always fresh and 
 airy . there be not a servant in or about the house but be so 
 good that they would all most gladly have come to I at any hour of 
 the day or night without the least fear or unwillingness , but I 
 think it well to choose one worthy woman who be never to see Ada 
 and whom I could trust to come and go with all precaution . through 
 her mean I get out to take the air with my guardian when there be 
 no fear of meet Ada , and want for nothing in the way of 
 attendance , any more than in any other respect . 
 and thus poor Charley sicken and grow bad , and fall into heavy 
 danger of death , and lie severely ill for many a long round of day 
 and night . so patient she be , so uncomplaining , and inspire by 
 such a gentle fortitude that very often as I sit by Charley hold 
 her head in my arm - repose would come to she , so , when it would 
 come to she in no other attitude - I silently pray to our Father 
 in heaven that I might not forget the lesson which this little 
 sister teach I . 
 I be very sorrowful to think that Charley 's pretty look would 
 change and be disfigure , even if she recover - she be such a 
 child with her dimpled face - but that think be , for the great 
 part , lose in her great peril . when she be at the bad , and 
 her mind ramble again to the care of her father 's sick bed and 
 the little child , she still know I so far as that she would be 
 quiet in my arm when she could lie quiet nowhere else , and murmur 
 out the wandering of her mind less restlessly . at those time I 
 use to think , how should I ever tell the two remain baby that 
 the baby who have learn of her faithful heart to be a mother to 
 they in their need be dead ! 
 there be other time when Charley know I well and talk to I , 
 tell I that she send her love to Tom and Emma and that she be 
 sure Tom would grow up to be a good man . at those time Charley 
 would speak to I of what she have read to her father as well as she 
 could to comfort he , of that young man carry out to be bury 
 who be the only son of his mother and she be a widow , of the 
 ruler 's daughter raise up by the gracious hand upon her bed of 
 death . and Charley tell I that when her father die she have 
 kneel down and pray in her first sorrow that he likewise might 
 be raise up and give back to his poor child , and that if she 
 should never get well and should die too , she think it likely 
 that it might come into Tom 's mind to offer the same prayer for 
 she . then would I show Tom how these people of old day have be 
 bring back to life on earth , only that we might know our hope to 
 be restore to heaven ! 
 but of all the various time there be in Charley 's illness , there 
 be not one when she lose the gentle quality I have speak of . 
 and there be many , many when I think in the night of the last 
 high belief in the watch angel , and the last high trust in 
 God , on the part of her poor despise father . 
 and Charley do not die . she flutteringly and slowly turn the 
 dangerous point , after long linger there , and then begin to 
 mend . the hope that never have be give , from the first , of 
 Charley be in outward appearance Charley any more soon begin to 
 be encourage ; and even that prosper , and I see she grow into 
 her old childish likeness again . 
 it be a great morning when I could tell Ada all this as she stand 
 out in the garden ; and it be a great evening when Charley and I at 
 last take tea together in the next room . but on that same evening , 
 I feel that I be stricken cold . 
 happily for both of we , it be not until Charley be safe in bed 
 again and placidly asleep that I begin to think the contagion of 
 her illness be upon I . I have be able easily to hide what I 
 feel at tea - time , but I be past that already now , and I know that 
 I be rapidly follow in Charley 's step . 
 I be well enough , however , to be up early in the morning , and to 
 return my darling 's cheerful blessing from the garden , and to talk 
 with she as long as usual . but I be not free from an impression 
 that I have be walk about the two room in the night , a little 
 beside myself , though know where I be ; and I feel confused at 
 time - with a curious sense of fullness , as if I be become too 
 large altogether . 
 in the evening I be so much bad that I resolve to prepare 
 Charley , with which view I say , " you be get quite strong , 
 Charley , be you not ? ' 
 " oh , quite ! " say Charley . 
 " strong enough to be tell a secret , I think , Charley ? " 
 " quite strong enough for that , miss ! " cry Charley . but Charley 's 
 face fall in the height of her delight , for she see the secret in 
 MY face ; and she come out of the great chair , and fall upon my 
 bosom , and say " oh , miss , it be my doing ! it be my doing ! " and a 
 great deal more out of the fullness of her grateful heart . 
 " now , Charley , " say I after let she go on for a little while , 
 " if I be to be ill , my great trust , humanly speak , be in you . 
 and unless you be as quiet and compose for I as you always be 
 for yourself , you can never fulfil it , Charley . " 
 " if you will let I cry a little long , miss , " say Charley . " oh , 
 my dear , my dear ! if you will only let I cry a little long . oh , 
 my dear ! " - how affectionately and devotedly she pour this out as 
 she clung to my neck , I never can remember without tear - " I will be 
 good . " 
 so I let Charley cry a little long , and it do we both good . 
 " trust in I now , if you please , miss , " say Charley quietly . " I 
 be listen to everything you say . " 
 " it be very little at present , Charley . I shall tell your doctor 
 to - night that I do not   think I be well and that you be go to 
 nurse I . " 
 for that the poor child thank I with her whole heart . " and in 
 the morning , when you hear Miss Ada in the garden , if I should not 
 be quite able to go to the window - curtain as usual , do you go , 
 Charley , and say I be asleep - that I have rather tired myself , and 
 be asleep . at all time keep the room as I have keep it , Charley , 
 and let no one come . " 
 Charley promise , and I lie down , for I be very heavy . I see the 
 doctor that night and ask the favour of he that I wish to ask 
 relative to his say nothing of my illness in the house as yet . 
 I have a very indistinct remembrance of that night melt into 
 day , and of day melt into night again ; but I be just able on 
 the first morning to get to the window and speak to my darling . 
 on the second morning I hear her dear voice - oh , how dear now ! - 
 outside ; and I ask Charley , with some difficulty   speech be 
 painful to I , to go and say I be asleep . I hear her answer 
 softly , " do not   disturb she , Charley , for the world ! " 
 " how do my own Pride look , Charley ? " I inquire . 
 " disappointed , miss , " say Charley , peep through the curtain . 
 " but I know she be very beautiful this morning . " 
 " she be indeed , miss , " answer Charley , peep . " still look 
 up at the window . " 
 with her blue clear eye , God bless they , always loveliest when 
 raise like that ! 
 I call Charley to I and give she her last charge . 
 " now , Charley , when she know I be ill , she will try to make she 
 way into the room . keep she out , Charley , if you love I truly , to 
 the last ! Charley , if you let she in but once , only to look upon 
 I for one moment as I lie here , I shall die . " 
 " I never will ! I never will ! " she promise I . 
 " I believe it , my dear Charley . and now come and sit beside I for 
 a little while , and touch I with your hand . for I can not see you , 
 Charley ; I be blind . " 
 CHAPTER XXXII 
 the Appointed Time 
 it be night in Lincoln 's Inn - perplex and troublous valley of the 
 shadow of the law , where suitor generally find but little day - and 
 fat candle be snuff out in office , and clerk have rattle 
 down the crazy wooden stair and disperse . the bell that ring at 
 nine o'clock have cease its doleful clangour about nothing ; the 
 gate be shut ; and the night - porter , a solemn warder with a mighty 
 power of sleep , keep guard in his lodge . from tier of staircase 
 window clogged lamp like the eye of Equity , blear Argus with a 
 fathomless pocket for every eye and an eye upon it , dimly blink at 
 the star . in dirty upper casement , here and there , hazy little 
 patch of candlelight reveal where some wise draughtsman and 
 conveyancer yet toil for the entanglement of real estate in mesh 
 of sheep - skin , in the average ratio of about a dozen of sheep to an 
 acre of land . over which bee - like industry these benefactor of 
 their specie linger yet , though office - hour be past , that they 
 may give , for every day , some good account at last . 
 in the neighbouring court , where the Lord Chancellor of the rag and 
 bottle shop dwell , there be a general tendency towards beer and 
 supper . Mrs. Piper and Mrs. Perkins , whose respective son , 
 engage with a circle of acquaintance in the game of hide and seek , 
 have be lie in ambush about the by - way of Chancery Lane for 
 some hour and scour the plain of the same thoroughfare to the 
 confusion of passenger - Mrs. Piper and Mrs. Perkins have but now 
 exchange congratulation on the child be abe , and they 
 still linger on a door - step over a few parting word . Mr. Krook 
 and his lodger , and the fact of Mr. Krook 's be " continually in 
 liquor , " and the testamentary prospect of the young man be , as 
 usual , the staple of their conversation . but they have something 
 to say , likewise , of the Harmonic Meeting at the Sol 's arm , where 
 the sound of the piano through the partly open window jingle 
 out into the court , and where Little Swills , after keep the 
 lover of harmony in a roar like a very Yorick , may now be hear 
 take the gruff line in a concerted piece and sentimentally 
 adjure his friend and patron to " listen , listen , listen , tew 
 the wa - ter fall ! " Mrs. Perkins and Mrs. Piper compare opinion on 
 the subject of the young lady of professional celebrity who assist 
 at the Harmonic Meetings and who have a space to herself in the 
 manuscript announcement in the window , Mrs. Perkins possess 
 information that she have be marry a year and a half , though 
 announce as Miss M. Melvilleson , the note siren , and that her 
 baby be clandestinely convey to the Sol 's arm every night to 
 receive its natural nourishment during the entertainment . " soon 
 than which , myself , " say Mrs. Perkins , " I would get my living by 
 sell lucifer . " Mrs. Piper , as in duty bind , be of the same 
 opinion , hold that a private station be well than public 
 applause , and thank heaven for her own   and , by implication , 
 Mrs. Perkins '   respectability . by this time the pot - boy of the 
 Sol 's arm appear with her supper - pint well froth , Mrs. Piper 
 accept that tankard and retire indoor , first give a fair good 
 night to Mrs. Perkins , who have have her own pint in her hand ever 
 since it be fetch from the same hostelry by young Perkins before 
 he be send to bed . now there be a sound of put up shop- 
 shutter in the court and a smell as of the smoking of pipe ; and 
 shoot star be see in upper window , far indicate 
 retirement to rest . now , too , the policeman begin to push at 
 door ; to try fastening ; to be suspicious of bundle ; and to 
 administer his beat , on the hypothesis that every one be either 
 rob or be rob . 
 it be a close night , though the damp cold be search too , and 
 there be a laggard mist a little way up in the air . it be a fine 
 steaming night to turn the slaughter - house , the unwholesome 
 trade , the sewerage , bad water , and burial - ground to account , and 
 give the registrar of death some extra business . it may be 
 something in the air - there be plenty in it - or it may be something 
 in himself that be in fault ; but Mr. Weevle , otherwise Jobling , be 
 very ill at ease . he come and go between his own room and the 
 open street door twenty time an hour . he have be do so ever 
 since it fall dark . since the Chancellor shut up his shop , which 
 he do very early to - night , Mr. Weevle have be down and up , and 
 down and up   with a cheap tight velvet skull - cap on his head , 
 make his whisker look out of all proportion , oftener than 
 before . 
 it be no phenomenon that Mr. Snagsby should be ill at ease too , for 
 he always be so , more or less , under the oppressive influence of 
 the secret that be upon he . impel by the mystery of which he 
 be a partaker and yet in which he be not a sharer , Mr. Snagsby 
 haunt what seem to be its fountain - head - the rag and bottle shop 
 in the court . it have an irresistible attraction for he . even 
 now , come round by the Sol 's arm with the intention of pass 
 down the court , and out at the Chancery Lane end , and so 
 terminate his unpremeditated after - supper stroll of ten minute ' 
 long from his own door and back again , Mr. Snagsby approach . 
 " what , Mr. Weevle ? " say the stationer , stop to speak . " be 
 you there ? " 
 " aye ! " say Weevle , " here I be , Mr. Snagsby . " 
 " air yourself , as I be do , before you go to bed ? " the 
 stationer inquire . 
 " why , there be not much air to be get here ; and what there be , be 
 not very freshen , " Weevle answer , glance up and down the 
 court . 
 " very true , sir . do not   you observe , " say Mr. Snagsby , pause to 
 sniff and taste the air a little , " do not   you observe , Mr. Weevle , 
 that you be - not to put too fine a point upon it - that you be 
 rather greasy here , sir ? " 
 " why , I have notice myself that there be a queer kind of flavour 
 in the place to - night , " Mr. Weevle rejoin . " I suppose it be chop 
 at the Sol 's arm . " 
 " chop , do you think ? oh ! chop , eh ? " Mr. Snagsby sniff and 
 taste again . " well , sir , I suppose it be . but I should say their 
 cook at the Sol want a little look after . she have be 
 burn them , sir ! and I do not   think " - Mr. Snagsby sniff and 
 taste again and then spit and wipe his mouth - " I do not   think - 
 not to put too fine a point upon it - that they be quite fresh 
 when they be show the gridiron . " 
 " that be very likely . it be a tainting sort of weather . " 
 " it be a tainting sort of weather , " say Mr. Snagsby , " and I find 
 it sink to the spirit . " 
 " by George ! I find it give I the horror , " return Mr. Weevle . 
 " then , you see , you live in a lonesome way , and in a lonesome room , 
 with a black circumstance hang over it , " say Mr. Snagsby , 
 look in past the other 's shoulder along the dark passage and 
 then fall back a step to look up at the house . " I could not   live 
 in that room alone , as you do , sir . I should get so fidgety and 
 worry of an evening , sometimes , that I should be drive to come 
 to the door and stand here soon than sit there . but then it be 
 very true that you do not   see , in your room , what I see there . 
 that make a difference . " 
 " I know quite enough about it , " return Tony . 
 " it be not agreeable , be it ? " pursue Mr. Snagsby , cough his 
 cough of mild persuasion behind his hand . " Mr. Krook ought to 
 consider it in the rent . I hope he do , I be sure . " 
 " I hope he do , " say Tony . " but I doubt it . " 
 " you find the rent too high , do you , sir ? " return the stationer . 
 " rent be high about here . I do not   know how it be exactly , but 
 the law seem to put thing up in price . not , " add Mr. Snagsby 
 with his apologetic cough , " that I mean to say a word against the 
 profession I get my living by . " 
 Mr. Weevle again glance up and down the court and then look at 
 the stationer . Mr. Snagsby , blankly catch his eye , look upward 
 for a star or so and cough a cough expressive of not exactly 
 see his way out of this conversation . 
 " it be a curious fact , sir , " he observe , slowly rub his hand , 
 " that he should have be - " 
 " who be he ? " interrupt Mr. Weevle . 
 " the deceased , you know , " say Mr. Snagsby , twitch his head and 
 right eyebrow towards the staircase and tap his acquaintance on 
 the button . 
 " ah , to be sure ! " return the other as if he be not over - fond of 
 the subject . " I think we have do with he . " 
 " I be only go to say it be a curious fact , sir , that he should 
 have come and live here , and be one of my writer , and then that 
 you should come and live here , and be one of my writer too . which 
 there be nothing derogatory , but far from it in the appellation , " 
 say Mr. Snagsby , break off with a mistrust that he may have 
 unpolitely assert a kind of proprietorship in Mr. Weevle , 
 " because I have know writer that have go into brewer ' house 
 and do really very respectable indeed . eminently respectable , 
 sir , " add Mr. Snagsby with a misgiving that he have not improve 
 the matter . 
 " it be a curious coincidence , as you say , " answer Weevle , once more 
 glance up and down the court . 
 " seem a fate in it , do not   there ? " suggest the stationer . 
 " there do . " 
 " just so , " observe the stationer with his confirmatory cough . 
 " quite a fate in it . quite a fate . well , Mr. Weevle , I be afraid 
 I must bid you good night " - Mr. Snagsby speak as if it make he 
 desolate to go , though he have be cast about for any mean of 
 escape ever since he stop to speak - " my little woman will be 
 look for I else . good night , sir ! " 
 if Mr. Snagsby hasten home to save his little woman the trouble of 
 look for he , he might set his mind at rest on that score . his 
 little woman have have her eye upon he round the Sol 's arm all this 
 time and now glide after he with a pocket handkerchief wrap 
 over her head , honour Mr. Weevle and his doorway with a search 
 glance as she go past . 
 " you will know I again , ma'am , at all event , " say Mr. Weevle to 
 himself ; " and I can not   compliment you on your appearance , whoever 
 you be , with your head tie up in a bundle . be this fellow never 
 come ! " 
 this fellow approach as he speak . Mr. Weevle softly hold up 
 his finger , and draw he into the passage , and close the street 
 door . then they go upstairs , Mr. Weevle heavily , and Mr. Guppy 
  for it be he   very lightly indeed . when they be shut into the 
 back room , they speak low . 
 " I think you have go to Jericho at least instead of come 
 here , " say Tony . 
 " why , I say about ten . " 
 " you say about ten , " Tony repeat . " yes , so you do say about 
 ten . but accord to my count , it be ten time ten - it be a hundred 
 o'clock . I never have such a night in my life ! " 
 " what have be the matter ? " 
 " that be it ! " say Tony . " nothing have be the matter . but here 
 have I be stew and fume in this jolly old crib till I have 
 have the horror fall on I as thick as hail . there be a blessed- 
 look candle ! " say Tony , point to the heavily burn taper 
 on his table with a great cabbage head and a long winding - sheet . 
 " that be easily improve , " Mr. Guppy observe as he take the 
 snuffer in hand . 
 " be it ? " return his friend . " not so easily as you think . it have 
 be smoulder like that ever since it be light . " 
 " why , what be the matter with you , Tony ? " inquire Mr. Guppy , 
 look at he , snuffer in hand , as he sit down with his elbow on 
 the table . 
 " William Guppy , " reply the other , " I be in the down . it be this 
 unbearably dull , suicidal room - and old Boguey downstair , I 
 suppose . " Mr. Weevle moodily push the snuffer - tray from he 
 with his elbow , lean his head on his hand , put his foot on the 
 fender , and look at the fire . Mr. Guppy , observe he , slightly 
 toss his head and sit down on the other side of the table in an 
 easy attitude . 
 " be not   that Snagsby talk to you , Tony ? " 
 " yes , and he - yes , it be Snagsby , " say Mr. Weevle , alter the 
 construction of his sentence . 
 " on business ? " 
 " no . no business . he be only saunter by and stop to 
 prose . " 
 " I think it be Snagsby , " say Mr. Guppy , " and think it as well 
 that he should not   see I , so I wait till he be go . " 
 " there we go again , William G. ! " cry Tony , look up for an 
 instant . " so mysterious and secret ! by George , if we be go 
 to commit a murder , we could not   have more mystery about it ! " 
 Mr. Guppy affect to smile , and with the view of change the 
 conversation , look with an admiration , real or pretended , round 
 the room at the Galaxy Gallery of British Beauty , terminate his 
 survey with the portrait of Lady Dedlock over the mantelshelf , in 
 which she be represent on a terrace , with a pedestal upon the 
 terrace , and a vase upon the pedestal , and her shawl upon the vase , 
 and a prodigious piece of fur upon the shawl , and her arm on the 
 prodigious piece of fur , and a bracelet on her arm . 
 " that be very like Lady Dedlock , " say Mr. Guppy . " it be a speaking 
 likeness . " 
 " I wish it be , " growl Tony , without change his position . " I 
 should have some fashionable conversation , here , then . " 
 find by this time that his friend be not to be wheedle into a 
 more sociable humour , Mr. Guppy put about upon the ill - use tack 
 and remonstrate with he . 
 " Tony , " say he , " I can make allowance for lowness of spirit , for 
 no man know what it be when it do come upon a man well than I 
 do , and no man perhaps have a well right to know it than a man who 
 have an unrequited image imprint on his ' eart . but there be 
 bound to these thing when an unoffending party be in question , 
 and I will acknowledge to you , Tony , that I do not   think your manner 
 on the present occasion be hospitable or quite gentlemanly . " 
 " this be strong language , William Guppy , " return Mr. Weevle . 
 " Sir , it may be , " retort Mr. William Guppy , " but I feel strongly 
 when I use it . " 
 Mr. Weevle admit that he have be wrong and beg Mr. William Guppy 
 to think no more about it . Mr. William Guppy , however , have get 
 the advantage , can not quite release it without a little more 
 injure remonstrance . 
 " no ! dash it , Tony , " say that gentleman , " you really ought to be 
 careful how you wound the feeling of a man who have an unrequited 
 image imprint on his ' eart and who be not altogether happy in 
 those chord which vibrate to the tender emotion . you , Tony , 
 possess in yourself all that be calculate to charm the eye and 
 allure the taste . it be not - happily for you , perhaps , and I may 
 wish that I could say the same - it be not your character to hover 
 around one flower . the ole garden be open to you , and your airy 
 pinion carry you through it . still , Tony , far be it from I , I be 
 sure , to wound even your feeling without a cause ! " 
 Tony again entreat that the subject may be no long pursue , 
 say emphatically , " William Guppy , drop it ! " Mr. Guppy 
 acquiesce , with the reply , " I never should have take it up , Tony , 
 of my own accord . " 
 " and now , " say Tony , stir the fire , " touch this same bundle 
 of letter . be not   it an extraordinary thing of Krook to have 
 appoint twelve o'clock to - night to hand them over to I ? " 
 " very . what do he do it for ? " 
 " what do he do anything for ? he do not   know . say to - day be his 
 birthday and he would hand them over to - night at twelve o'clock . he will 
 have drink himself blind by that time . he have be at it all day . " 
 " he have not   forget the appointment , I hope ? " 
 " Forgotten ? trust he for that . he never forget anything . I see 
 he to - night , about eight - help he to shut up his shop - and he 
 have get the letter then in his hairy cap . he pull it off and 
 show them I . when the shop be closed , he take they out of his 
 cap , hang his cap on the chair - back , and stand turn they over 
 before the fire . I hear he a little while afterwards , through 
 the floor here , hum like the wind , the only song he know - 
 about Bibo , and old Charon , and Bibo be drunk when he die , or 
 something or other . he have be as quiet since as an old rat 
 asleep in his hole . " 
 " and you be to go down at twelve ? " 
 " at twelve . and as I tell you , when you come it seem to I a 
 hundred . " 
 " Tony , " say Mr. Guppy after consider a little with his leg 
 cross , " he can not   read yet , can he ? " 
 " Read ! he will never read . he can make all the letter separately , 
 and he know most of they separately when he see they ; he have get 
 on that much , under I ; but he can not   put they together . he be too 
 old to acquire the knack of it now - and too drunk . " 
 " Tony , " say Mr. Guppy , uncrossing and recrosse his leg , " how do 
 you suppose he spell out that name of Hawdon ? " 
 " he never spelt it out . you know what a curious power of eye he 
 have and how he have be use to employ himself in copy thing by 
 eye alone . he imitate it , evidently from the direction of a 
 letter , and ask I what it mean . " 
 " Tony , " say Mr. Guppy , uncrossing and recrosse his leg again , 
 ' should you say that the original be a man 's writing or a 
 woman 's ? " 
 " a woman 's . fifty to one a lady 's - slope a good deal , and the end 
 of the letter ' n , ' long and hasty . " 
 Mr. Guppy have be bite his thumb - nail during this dialogue , 
 generally change the thumb when he have change the cross leg . as 
 he be go to do so again , he happen to look at his coat - sleeve . 
 it take his attention . he star at it , aghast . 
 " why , Tony , what on earth be go on in this house to - night ? be 
 there a chimney on fire ? " 
 " chimney on fire ! " 
 " ah ! " return Mr. Guppy . " see how the soot 's fall . see here , 
 on my arm ! see again , on the table here ! confound the stuff , it 
 will not   blow off - smear like black fat ! " 
 they look at one another , and Tony go listen to the door , and 
 a little way upstairs , and a little way downstairs . come back and 
 say it be all right and all quiet , and quote the remark he lately 
 make to Mr. Snagsby about their cook chop at the Sol 's arm . 
 " and it be then , " resume Mr. Guppy , still glance with 
 remarkable aversion at the coat - sleeve , as they pursue their 
 conversation before the fire , lean on opposite side of the 
 table , with their head very near together , " that he tell you of 
 his have take the bundle of letter from his lodger 's 
 portmanteau ? " 
 " that be the time , sir , " answer Tony , faintly adjust his 
 whisker . " Whereupon I write a line to my dear boy , the Honourable 
 William Guppy , inform he of the appointment for to - night and 
 advise he not to call before , Boguey be a slyboot . " 
 the light vivacious tone of fashionable life which be usually 
 assume by Mr. Weevle sit so ill upon he to - night that he 
 abandon that and his whisker together , and after look over his 
 shoulder , appear to yield himself up a prey to the horror again . 
 " you be to bring the letter to your room to read and compare , and 
 to get yourself into a position to tell he all about they . that be 
 the arrangement , be not   it , Tony ? " ask Mr. Guppy , anxiously bite 
 his thumb - nail . 
 " you can not   speak too low . yes . that be what he and I agree . " 
 " I tell you what , Tony - " 
 " you can not   speak too low , " say Tony once more . Mr. Guppy nod his 
 sagacious head , advance it yet close , and drop into a whisper . 
 " I tell you what . the first thing to be do be to make another 
 packet like the real one so that if he should ask to see the real 
 one while it be in my possession , you can show he the dummy . " 
 " and suppose he detect the dummy as soon as he see it , which with 
 his biting screw of an eye be about five hundred time more likely 
 than not , " suggest Tony . 
 " then we will face it out . they do not   belong to he , and they never 
 do . you find that , and you place they in my hand - a legal 
 friend of yours - for security . if he force we to it , they will be 
 producible , will not   they ? " 
 " ye - es , " be Mr. Weevle 's reluctant admission . 
 " why , Tony , " remonstrate his friend , " how you look ! you do not 
 doubt William Guppy ? you do not   suspect any harm ? " 
 " I do not   suspect anything more than I know , William , " return the 
 other gravely . 
 " and what do you know ? " urge Mr. Guppy , raise his voice a 
 little ; but on his friend 's once more warn he , " I tell you , you 
 can not   speak too low , " he repeat his question without any sound at 
 all , form with his lip only the word , " what do you know ? " 
 " I know three thing . first , I know that here we be whisper in 
 secrecy , a pair of conspirator . " 
 " well ! " say Mr. Guppy . " and we have well be that than a pair of 
 noodle , which we should be if we be do anything else , for 
 it be the only way of do what we want to do . secondly ? " 
 " secondly , it be not make out to I how it be likely to be 
 profitable , after all . " 
 Mr. Guppy cast up his eye at the portrait of Lady Dedlock over 
 the mantelshelf and reply , " Tony , you be ask to leave that to 
 the honour of your friend . besides its be calculate to serve 
 that friend in those chord of the human mind which - which need not 
 be call into agonizing vibration on the present occasion - your 
 friend be no fool . what be that ? " 
 " it be eleven o'clock strike by the bell of Saint Paul 's . listen 
 and you will hear all the bell in the city jangling . " 
 both sit silent , listen to the metal voice , near and distant , 
 resound from tower of various height , in tone more various 
 than their situation . when these at length cease , all seem more 
 mysterious and quiet than before . one disagreeable result of 
 whispering be that it seem to evoke an atmosphere of silence , 
 haunt by the ghost of sound - strange crack and ticking , the 
 rustling of garment that have no substance in they , and the tread 
 of dreadful foot that would leave no mark on the sea - sand or the 
 winter snow . so sensitive the two friend happen to be that the 
 air be full of these phantom , and the two look over their 
 shoulder by one consent to see that the door be shut . 
 " yes , Tony ? " say Mr. Guppy , draw nearer to the fire and bite 
 his unsteady thumb - nail . " you be go to say , thirdly ? " 
 " it be far from a pleasant thing to be plot about a dead man in 
 the room where he die , especially when you happen to live in it . " 
 " but we be plot nothing against he , Tony . " 
 " may be not , still I do not   like it . live here by yourself and see 
 how you like it . " 
 " as to dead man , Tony , " proceed Mr. Guppy , evade this proposal , 
 " there have be dead man in most room . " 
 " I know there have , but in most room you let they alone , and - and 
 they let you alone , " Tony answer . 
 the two look at each other again . Mr. Guppy make a hurried remark 
 to the effect that they may be do the deceased a service , that 
 he hop so . there be an oppressive blank until Mr. Weevle , by 
 stir the fire suddenly , make Mr. Guppy start as if his heart 
 have be stir instead . 
 " Fah ! here be more of this hateful soot hang about , " say he . 
 " let we open the window a bit and get a mouthful of air . it be too 
 close . " 
 he raise the sash , and they both rest on the window - sill , half in 
 and half out of the room . the neighbouring house be too near to 
 admit of their see any sky without crane their neck and 
 look up , but light in frowsy window here and there , and the 
 rolling of distant carriage , and the new expression that there be 
 of the stir of man , they find to be comfortable . Mr. Guppy , 
 noiselessly tap on the window - sill , resume his whispering in 
 quite a light - comedy tone . 
 " by the by , Tony , do not   forget old smallweed , " mean the young 
 of that name . " I have not let he into this , you know . that 
 grandfather of his be too keen by half . it run in the family . " 
 " I remember , " say Tony . " I be up to all that . " 
 " and as to Krook , " resume Mr. Guppy . " now , do you suppose he 
 really have get hold of any other paper of importance , as he have 
 boast to you , since you have be such ally ? " 
 Tony shake his head . " I do not   know . can not   imagine . if we get 
 through this business without rouse his suspicion , I shall be 
 well inform , no doubt . how can I know without see they , 
 when he do not   know himself ? he be always spell out word from 
 they , and chalk they over the table and the shop - wall , and 
 ask what this be and what that be ; but his whole stock from 
 begin to end may easily be the waste - paper he buy it as , for 
 anything I can say . it be a monomania with he to think he be 
 possess of document . he have be go to learn to read they 
 this last quarter of a century , I should judge , from what he tell 
 I . " 
 " how do he first come by that idea , though ? that be the question , " 
 Mr. Guppy suggest with one eye shut , after a little forensic 
 meditation . " he may have find paper in something he buy , 
 where paper be not suppose to be , and may have get it into his 
 shrewd head from the manner and place of their concealment that 
 they be worth something . " 
 " or he may have be take in , in some pretended bargain . or he 
 may have be muddle altogether by long star at whatever he have 
 get , and by drink , and by hang about the Lord Chancellor 's Court 
 and hearing of document for ever , " return Mr. Weevle . 
 Mr. Guppy sit on the window - sill , nod his head and 
 balance all these possibility in his mind , continue 
 thoughtfully to tap it , and clasp it , and measure it with his hand , 
 until he hastily draw his hand away . 
 " what , in the devil 's name , " he say , " be this ! look at my 
 finger ! " 
 a thick , yellow liquor defile they , which be offensive to the 
 touch and sight and more offensive to the smell . a stagnant , 
 sicken oil with some natural repulsion in it that make they 
 both shudder . 
 " what have you be do here ? what have you be pour out of 
 window ? " 
 " I pour out of window ! nothing , I swear ! never , since I have 
 be here ! " cry the lodger . 
 and yet look here - and look here ! when he bring the candle here , 
 from the corner of the window - sill , it slowly drip and creep away 
 down the brick , here lie in a little thick nauseous pool . 
 " this be a horrible house , " say Mr. Guppy , shut down the 
 window . " give I some water or I shall cut my hand off . " 
 he so wash , and rub , and scrub , and smell , and wash , that he 
 have not long restore himself with a glass of brandy and stand 
 silently before the fire when Saint Paul 's bell strike twelve and 
 all those other bell strike twelve from their tower of various 
 height in the dark air , and in their many tone . when all be 
 quiet again , the lodger say , " it be the appoint time at last . 
 shall I go ? " 
 Mr. Guppy nod and give he a " lucky touch " on the back , but not 
 with the washed hand , though it be his right hand . 
 he go downstairs , and Mr. Guppy try to compose himself before 
 the fire for wait a long time . but in no more than a minute or 
 two the stair creak and Tony come swiftly back . 
 " have you got they ? " 
 " got they ! no . the old man be not there . " 
 he have be so horribly frightened in the short interval that his 
 terror seize the other , who make a rush at he and ask loudly , 
 " what be the matter ? " 
 " I could not   make he hear , and I softly open the door and look 
 in . and the burn smell be there - and the soot be there , and the 
 oil be there - and he be not there ! " Tony end this with a groan . 
 Mr. Guppy take the light . they go down , more dead than alive , and 
 hold one another , push open the door of the back shop . the cat 
 have retreat close to it and stand snarling , not at they , at 
 something on the ground before the fire . there be a very little 
 fire leave in the grate , but there be a smoulder , suffocate 
 vapour in the room and a dark , greasy coat on the wall and 
 ceiling . the chair and table , and the bottle so rarely absent 
 from the table , all stand as usual . on one chair - back hang the old 
 man 's hairy cap and coat . 
 " look ! " whisper the lodger , point his friend 's attention to 
 these object with a trembling finger . " I tell you so . when I see 
 he last , he take his cap off , take out the little bundle of old 
 letter , hang his cap on the back of the chair - his coat be there 
 already , for he have pull that off before he go to put the 
 shutter up - and I leave he turn the letter over in his hand , 
 stand just where that crumble black thing be upon the floor . " 
 be he hang somewhere ? they look up . no . 
 " see ! " whisper Tony . " at the foot of the same chair there lie a 
 dirty bit of thin red cord that they tie up pen with . that go 
 round the letter . he undo it slowly , leer and laugh at I , 
 before he begin to turn they over , and throw it there . I see it 
 fall . " 
 " what be the matter with the cat ? " say Mr. Guppy . " look at she ! " 
 " mad , I think . and no wonder in this evil place . " 
 they advance slowly , look at all these thing . the cat remain 
 where they find she , still snarl at the something on the ground 
 before the fire and between the two chair . what be it ? hold up 
 the light . 
 here be a small burn patch of flooring ; here be the tinder from a 
 little bundle of burn paper , but not so light as usual , seem to 
 be steep in something ; and here be - be it the cinder of a small 
 charred and broken log of wood sprinkle with white ash , or be it 
 coal ? oh , horror , he be here ! and this from which we run away , 
 strike out the light and overturn one another into the street , 
 be all that represent he . 
 help , help , help ! come into this house for heaven 's sake ! plenty 
 will come in , but none can help . the Lord Chancellor of that 
 court , true to his title in his last act , have die the death of all 
 lord chancellor in all court and of all authority in all place 
 under all name soever , where false pretence be make , and where 
 injustice be do . call the death by any name your Highness will , 
 attribute it to whom you will , or say it might have be prevent 
 how you will , it be the same death eternally - inborn , inbreed , 
 engender in the corrupted humour of the vicious body itself , and 
 that only - spontaneous combustion , and none other of all the death 
 that can be die . 
 CHAPTER XXXIII 
 interloper 
 now do those two gentleman not very neat about the cuff and 
 button who attend the last coroner 's inquest at the Sol 's Arms 
 reappear in the precinct with surprising swiftness   being , in 
 fact , breathlessly fetch by the active and intelligent beadle , 
 and institute perquisition through the court , and dive into the 
 Sol 's parlour , and write with ravenous little pen on tissue - paper . 
 now do they note down , in the watch of the night , how the 
 neighbourhood of Chancery Lane be yesterday , at about midnight , 
 throw into a state of the most intense agitation and excitement by 
 the follow alarming and horrible discovery . now do they set 
 forth how it will doubtless be remember that some time back a 
 painful sensation be create in the public mind by a case of 
 mysterious death from opium occur in the first floor of the 
 house occupy as a rag , bottle , and general marine store shop , by 
 an eccentric individual of intemperate habit , far advanced in 
 life , name Krook ; and how , by a remarkable coincidence , Krook be 
 examine at the inquest , which it may be recollect be hold on 
 that occasion at the Sol 's arm , a well - conduct tavern 
 immediately adjoin the premise in question on the west side and 
 license to a highly respectable landlord , Mr. James George Bogsby . 
 now do they show   in as many word as possible   how during some 
 hour of yesterday evening a very peculiar smell be observe by 
 the inhabitant of the court , in which the tragical occurrence 
 which form the subject of that present account transpire ; and 
 which odour be at one time so powerful that Mr. Swills , a comic 
 vocalist professionally engage by Mr. J. G. Bogsby , have himself 
 state to our reporter that he mention to Miss M. Melvilleson , a 
 lady of some pretension to musical ability , likewise engage by 
 Mr. J. G. Bogsby to sing at a series of concert call Harmonic 
 Assemblies , or meeting , which it would appear be hold at the 
 Sol 's arm under Mr. Bogsby 's direction pursuant to the Act of 
 George the Second , that he   Mr. Swills   find his voice seriously 
 affect by the impure state of the atmosphere , his jocose 
 expression at the time be that he be like an empty post - office , 
 for he have not   a single note in he . how this account of Mr. Swills 
 be entirely corroborate by two intelligent married female 
 reside in the same court and know respectively by the name of 
 Mrs. Piper and Mrs. Perkins , both of whom observe the foetid 
 effluvia and regard they as be emit from the premise in 
 the occupation of Krook , the unfortunate decease . all this and a 
 great deal more the two gentleman who have form an amicable 
 partnership in the melancholy catastrophe write down on the spot ; 
 and the boy population of the court   out of bed in a moment   swarm 
 up the shutter of the Sol 's arm parlour , to behold the top of 
 their head while they be about it . 
 the whole court , adult as well as boy , be sleepless for that night , 
 and can do nothing but wrap up its many head , and talk of the ill- 
 fat house , and look at it . Miss Flite have be bravely rescue 
 from her chamber , as if it be in flame , and accommodate with a 
 bed at the Sol 's arm . the Sol neither turn off its gas nor shut 
 its door all night , for any kind of public excitement make good 
 for the Sol and cause the court to stand in need of comfort . the 
 house have not do so much in the stomachic article of clove or in 
 brandy - and - water warm since the inquest . the moment the pot - boy 
 hear what have happen , he roll up his shirt - sleeve tight to 
 his shoulder and say , " there will be a run upon we ! " in the first 
 outcry , young Piper dash off for the fire - engine and return in 
 triumph at a jolting gallop perch up aloft on the Phoenix and 
 hold on to that fabulous creature with all his might in the 
 midst of helmet and torch . one helmet remain behind after 
 careful investigation of all chink and cranny and slowly pace 
 up and down before the house in company with one of the two 
 policeman who have likewise be leave in charge thereof . to this 
 trio everybody in the court possess of sixpence have an insatiate 
 desire to exhibit hospitality in a liquid form . 
 Mr. Weevle and his friend Mr. Guppy be within the bar at the Sol 
 and be worth anything to the Sol that the bar contain if they 
 will only stay there . " this be not a time , " say Mr. Bogsby , " to 
 haggle about money , " though he look something sharply after it , 
 over the counter ; " give your order , you two gentleman , and you be 
 welcome to whatever you put a name to . " 
 thus entreat , the two gentleman   Mr. Weevle especially   put name 
 to so many thing that in course of time they find it difficult to 
 put a name to anything quite distinctly , though they still relate 
 to all new - comer some version of the night they have have of it , 
 and of what they say , and what they think , and what they see . 
 meanwhile , one or other of the policeman often flit about the 
 door , and push it open a little way at the full length of his 
 arm , look in from outer gloom . not that he have any suspicion , 
 but that he may as well know what they be up to in there . 
 thus night pursue its leaden course , find the court still out 
 of bed through the unwonted hour , still treat and be 
 treat , still conduct itself similarly to a court that have have 
 a little money leave it unexpectedly . thus night at length with 
 slow - retreat step depart , and the lamp - light go his 
 round , like an executioner to a despotic king , strike off the 
 little head of fire that have aspire to lessen the darkness . 
 thus the day cometh , whether or no . 
 and the day may discern , even with its dim London eye , that the 
 court have be up all night . over and above the face that have 
 fall drowsily on table and the heel that lie prone on hard 
 floor instead of bed , the brick and mortar physiognomy of the 
 very court itself look wear and jade . and now the neighbourhood , 
 wake up and begin to hear of what have happen , come 
 stream in , half dress , to ask question ; and the two policeman 
 and the helmet   who be far less impressible externally than the 
 court   have enough to do to keep the door . 
 " good gracious , gentleman ! " say Mr. Snagsby , come up . " what be 
 this I hear ! " 
 " why , it be true , " return one of the policeman . " that be what it 
 be . now move on here , come ! " 
 " why , good gracious , gentleman , " say Mr. Snagsby , somewhat 
 promptly back away , " I be at this door last night betwixt ten 
 and eleven o'clock in conversation with the young man who lodge 
 here . " 
 " indeed ? " return the policeman . " you will find the young man next 
 door then . now move on here , some of you , " 
 " not hurt , I hope ? " say Mr. Snagsby . 
 " Hurt ? no . what be to hurt he ! " 
 Mr. Snagsby , wholly unable to answer this or any question in his 
 troubled mind , repair to the Sol 's arm and find Mr. Weevle 
 languish over tea and toast with a considerable expression on 
 he of exhausted excitement and exhausted tobacco - smoke . 
 " and Mr. Guppy likewise ! " quoth Mr. Snagsby . " dear , dear , dear ! 
 what a fate there seem in all this ! and my light - " 
 Mr. Snagsby 's power of speech desert he in the formation of the 
 word " my little woman . " for to see that injure female walk into 
 the Sol 's arm at that hour of the morning and stand before the 
 beer - engine , with her eye fix upon he like an accuse spirit , 
 strike he dumb . 
 " my dear , " say Mr. Snagsby when his tongue be loosen , " will you 
 take anything ? a little - not to put too fine a point upon it - drop 
 of shrub ? " 
 " no , " say Mrs. Snagsby . 
 " my love , you know these two gentleman ? " 
 " yes ! " say Mrs. Snagsby , and in a rigid manner acknowledge their 
 presence , still fix Mr. Snagsby with her eye . 
 the devoted Mr. Snagsby can not bear this treatment . he take Mrs. 
 Snagsby by the hand and lead she aside to an adjacent cask . 
 " my little woman , why do you look at I in that way ? pray do not   do 
 it . " 
 " I can not   help my look , " say Mrs. Snagsby , " and if I could I 
 would not . " 
 Mr. Snagsby , with his cough of meekness , rejoin , " would not   you 
 really , my dear ? " and meditate . then cough his cough of trouble 
 and say , " this be a dreadful mystery , my love ! " still fearfully 
 disconcert by Mrs. Snagsby 's eye . 
 " it be , " return Mrs. Snagsby , shake her head , " a dreadful 
 mystery . " 
 " my little woman , " urge Mr. Snagsby in a piteous manner , " do not 
 for goodness ' sake speak to I with that bitter expression and look 
 at I in that search way ! I beg and entreat of you not to do 
 it . good Lord , you do not   suppose that I would go spontaneously 
 combust any person , my dear ? " 
 " I can not   say , " return Mrs. Snagsby . 
 on a hasty review of his unfortunate position , Mr. Snagsby " can not 
 say " either . he be not prepared positively to deny that he may 
 have have something to do with it . he have have something - he do not 
 know what - to do with so much in this connexion that be mysterious 
 that it be possible he may even be implicate , without know it , 
 in the present transaction . he faintly wipe his forehead with his 
 handkerchief and gasp . 
 " my life , " say the unhappy stationer , " would you have any 
 objection to mention why , be in general so delicately 
 circumspect in your conduct , you come into a wine - vault before 
 breakfast ? " 
 " why do you come here ? " inquire Mrs. Snagsby . 
 " my dear , merely to know the right of the fatal accident which have 
 happen to the venerable party who have be - combust . " Mr. 
 Snagsby have make a pause to suppress a groan . " I should then have 
 relate they to you , my love , over your french roll . " 
 " I dare say you would ! you relate everything to I , Mr. Snagsby . " 
 " Every - my lit - " 
 " I should be glad , " say Mrs. Snagsby after contemplate his 
 increase confusion with a severe and sinister smile , " if you would 
 come home with I ; I think you may be safe there , Mr. Snagsby , 
 than anywhere else . " 
 " my love , I do not   know but what I may be , I be sure . I be ready to 
 go . " 
 Mr. Snagsby cast his eye forlornly round the bar , give Messrs. 
 Weevle and Guppy good morning , assure they of the satisfaction 
 with which he see they uninjured , and accompany Mrs. Snagsby 
 from the Sol 's arm . before night his doubt whether he may not be 
 responsible for some inconceivable part in the catastrophe which be 
 the talk of the whole neighbourhood be almost resolve into 
 certainty by Mrs. Snagsby 's pertinacity in that fix gaze . his 
 mental suffering be so great that he entertain wander idea 
 of deliver himself up to justice and require to be clear if 
 innocent and punish with the utmost rigour of the law if guilty . 
 Mr. Weevle and Mr. Guppy , have take their breakfast , step into 
 Lincoln 's Inn to take a little walk about the square and clear as 
 many of the dark cobwebs out of their brain as a little walk may . 
 " there can be no more favourable time than the present , Tony , " say 
 Mr. Guppy after they have broodingly make out the four side of the 
 square , " for a word or two between we upon a point on which we 
 must , with very little delay , come to an understanding . " 
 " now , I tell you what , William G. ! " return the other , eye his 
 companion with a bloodshot eye . " if it be a point of conspiracy , 
 you need not   take the trouble to mention it . I have have enough of 
 that , and I be not   go to have any more . we shall have you take 
 fire next or blow up with a bang . " 
 this supposititious phenomenon be so very disagreeable to Mr. Guppy 
 that his voice quake as he say in a moral way , " Tony , I should 
 have think that what we go through last night would have be a 
 lesson to you never to be personal any more as long as you live . " 
 to which Mr. Weevle return , " William , I should have think it 
 would have be a lesson to you never to conspire any more as long 
 as you live . " to which Mr. Guppy say , " who be conspire ? " to 
 which Mr. Jobling reply , " why , you be ! " to which Mr. Guppy 
 retort , " no , I be not . " to which Mr. Jobling retort again , " yes , 
 you be ! " to which Mr. Guppy retort , " who say so ? " to which Mr. 
 Jobling retort , " I say so ! " to which Mr. Guppy retort , " oh , 
 indeed ? " to which Mr. Jobling retort , " yes , indeed ! " and both 
 be now in a heated state , they walk on silently for a while to 
 cool down again . 
 " Tony , " say Mr. Guppy then , " if you hear your friend out instead 
 of fly at he , you would not   fall into mistake . but your temper 
 be hasty and you be not considerate . possess in yourself , 
 Tony , all that be calculate to charm the eye - " 
 " oh ! blow the eye ! " cry Mr. Weevle , cut he short . " say what 
 you have get to say ! " 
 find his friend in this morose and material condition , Mr. Guppy 
 only express the fine feeling of his soul through the tone of 
 injury in which he recommence , " Tony , when I say there be a point 
 on which we must come to an understanding pretty soon , I say so 
 quite apart from any kind of conspire , however innocent . you 
 know it be professionally arrange beforehand in all case that be 
 try what fact the witness be to prove . be it or be it not 
 desirable that we should know what fact we be to prove on the 
 inquiry into the death of this unfortunate old mo - gentleman ? " 
  Mr. Guppy be go to say " mogul , " but think " gentleman " well 
 suit to the circumstance . 
 " what fact ? the fact . " 
 " the fact bear on that inquiry . those be " - Mr. Guppy tell 
 they off on his finger - " what we know of his habit , when you see 
 he last , what his condition be then , the discovery that we make , 
 and how we make it . " 
 " yes , " say Mr. Weevle . " those be about the fact . " 
 " we make the discovery in consequence of his having , in his 
 eccentric way , an appointment with you at twelve o'clock at night , 
 when you be to explain some writing to he as you have often do 
 before on account of his not be able to read . I , spend the 
 evening with you , be call down - and so forth . the inquiry be 
 only into the circumstance touch the death of the deceased , 
 it be not necessary to go beyond these fact , I suppose you will 
 agree ? " 
 " no ! " return Mr. Weevle . " I suppose not . " 
 " and this be not a conspiracy , perhaps ? " say the injure Guppy . 
 " no , " return his friend ; " if it be nothing bad than this , I 
 withdraw the observation . " 
 " now , Tony , " say Mr. Guppy , take his arm again and walk he 
 slowly on , " I should like to know , in a friendly way , whether you 
 have yet think over the many advantage of your continue to 
 live at that place ? " 
 " what do you mean ? " say Tony , stop . 
 " whether you have yet think over the many advantage of your 
 continue to live at that place ? " repeat Mr. Guppy , walk he 
 on again . 
 " at what place ? that place ? " point in the direction of the rag 
 and bottle shop . 
 Mr. Guppy nod . 
 " why , I would not   pass another night there for any consideration 
 that you could offer I , " say Mr. Weevle , haggardly star . 
 " do you mean it though , Tony ? " 
 " mean it ! do I look as if I mean it ? I feel as if I do ; I know 
 that , " say Mr. Weevle with a very genuine shudder . 
 " then the possibility or probability - for such it must be 
 consider - of your never be disturb in possession of those 
 effect lately belong to a lone old man who seem to have no 
 relation in the world , and the certainty of your be able to find 
 out what he really have get store up there , do not   weigh with you at 
 all against last night , Tony , if I understand you ? " say Mr. Guppy , 
 bite his thumb with the appetite of vexation . 
 " certainly not . talk in that cool way of a fellow 's living there ? " 
 cry Mr. Weevle indignantly . " go and live there yourself . " 
 " oh ! I , Tony ! " say Mr. Guppy , soothe he . " I have never live 
 there and could not   get a lodging there now , whereas you have get 
 one . " 
 " you be welcome to it , " rejoin his friend , " and - ugh ! - you may 
 make yourself at home in it . " 
 " then you really and truly at this point , " say Mr. Guppy , " give up 
 the whole thing , if I understand you , Tony ? " 
 " you never , " return Tony with a most convincing steadfastness , 
 ' say a truer word in all your life . I do ! " 
 while they be so conversing , a hackney - coach drive into the 
 square , on the box of which vehicle a very tall hat make itself 
 manifest to the public . inside the coach , and consequently not so 
 manifest to the multitude , though sufficiently so to the two 
 friend , for the coach stop almost at their foot , be the 
 venerable Mr. Smallweed and Mrs. Smallweed , accompany by their 
 granddaughter Judy . 
 an air of haste and excitement pervade the party , and as the tall 
 hat   surmount Mr. Smallweed the young   alight , Mr. Smallweed 
 the elder poke his head out of window and bawl to Mr. Guppy , " how 
 de do , sir ! how de do ! " 
 " what do Chick and his family want here at this time of the 
 morning , I wonder ! " say Mr. Guppy , nod to his familiar . 
 " my dear sir , " cry Grandfather Smallweed , " would you do I a 
 favour ? would you and your friend be so very obleeging as to carry 
 I into the public - house in the court , while Bart and his sister 
 bring their grandmother along ? would you do an old man that good 
 turn , sir ? " 
 Mr. Guppy look at his friend , repeat inquiringly , " the public- 
 house in the court ? " and they prepare to bear the venerable burden 
 to the Sol 's arm . 
 " there be your fare ! " say the patriarch to the coachman with a 
 fierce grin and shake his incapable fist at he . " ask I for a 
 penny more , and I will have my lawful revenge upon you . my dear 
 young man , be easy with I , if you please . allow I to catch you 
 round the neck . I will not   squeeze you tight than I can help . oh , 
 Lord ! oh , dear I ! oh , my bone ! " 
 it be well that the Sol be not far off , for Mr. Weevle present an 
 apoplectic appearance before half the distance be accomplish . 
 with no bad aggravation of his symptom , however , than the 
 utterance of diver croak sound expressive of obstructed 
 respiration , he fulil his share of the porterage and the 
 benevolent old gentleman be deposit by his own desire in the 
 parlour of the Sol 's arm . 
 " oh , Lord ! " gasp Mr. Smallweed , look about he , breathless , 
 from an arm - chair . " oh , dear I ! oh , my bone and back ! oh , my 
 ache and pain ! sit down , you dancing , prance , shambling , 
 scramble poll - parrot ! sit down ! " 
 this little apostrophe to Mrs. Smallweed be occasion by a 
 propensity on the part of that unlucky old lady whenever she find 
 herself on her foot to amble about and ' set " to inanimate object , 
 accompany herself with a chatter noise , as in a witch dance . 
 a nervous affection have probably as much to do with these 
 demonstration as any imbecile intention in the poor old woman , but 
 on the present occasion they be so particularly lively in 
 connexion with the Windsor arm - chair , fellow to that in which Mr. 
 Smallweed be seat , that she only quite desist when she 
 grandchild have hold she down in it , her lord in the meanwhile 
 bestow upon she , with great volubility , the endear epithet of 
 " a pig - head jackdaw , " repeat a surprising number of time . 
 " my dear sir , " Grandfather Smallweed then proceed , address Mr. 
 Guppy , " there have be a calamity here . have you hear of it , 
 either of you ? " 
 " hear of it , sir ! why , we discover it . " 
 " you discover it . you two discover it ! Bart , they discover 
 it ! " 
 the two discoverer stare at the Smallweeds , who return the 
 compliment . 
 " my dear friend , " whine Grandfather Smallweed , put out both 
 his hand , " I owe you a thousand thank for discharge the 
 melancholy office of discover the ash of Mrs. Smallweed 's 
 brother . " 
 " Eh ? " say Mr. Guppy . 
 " Mrs. Smallweed 's brother , my dear friend - her only relation . we 
 be not on term , which be to be deplore now , but he never would 
 be on term . he be not fond of we . he be eccentric - he be very 
 eccentric . unless he have leave a will   which be not at all likely 
 I shall take out letter of administration . I have come down to 
 look after the property ; it must be seal up , it must be 
 protect . I have come down , " repeat Grandfather Smallweed , 
 hook the air towards he with all his ten finger at once , " to 
 look after the property . " 
 " I think , small , " say the disconsolate Mr. Guppy , " you might have 
 mention that the old man be your uncle . " 
 " you two be so close about he that I think you would like I 
 to be the same , " return that old bird with a secretly glisten 
 eye . " besides , I be not   proud of he . " 
 " besides which , it be nothing to you , you know , whether he be or 
 not , " say Judy . also with a secretly glisten eye . 
 " he never see I in his life to know I , " observe small ; " I do not 
 know why I should introduce HIM , I be sure ! " 
 " no , he never communicate with we , which be to be deplore , " the 
 old gentleman strike in , " but I have come to look after the 
 property - to look over the paper , and to look after the property . 
 we shall make good our title . it be in the hand of my solicitor . 
 Mr. Tulkinghorn , of Lincoln 's Inn Fields , over the way there , be so 
 good as to act as my solicitor ; and grass do not   grow under his 
 foot , I can tell ye . Krook be Mrs. Smallweed 's only brother ; she 
 have no relation but Krook , and Krook have no relation but Mrs. 
 Smallweed . I be speak of your brother , you brimstone black- 
 beetle , that be seventy - six year of age . " 
 Mrs. Smallweed instantly begin to shake her head and pipe up , 
 " seventy - six pound seven and sevenpence ! seventy - six thousand bag 
 of money ! seventy - six hundred thousand million of parcel of bank- 
 note ! " 
 " will somebody give I a quart pot ? " exclaim she exasperate 
 husband , look helplessly about he and find no missile within 
 his reach . " will somebody obleege I with a spittoon ? will 
 somebody hand I anything hard and bruise to pelt at she ? you 
 hag , you cat , you dog , you brimstone barker ! " here Mr. Smallweed , 
 work up to the high pitch by his own eloquence , actually 
 throw Judy at her grandmother in default of anything else , by 
 butt that young virgin at the old lady with such force as he can 
 muster and then drop into his chair in a heap . 
 " shake I up , somebody , if you will he so good , " say the voice from 
 within the faintly struggle bundle into which he have collapse . 
 " I have come to look after the property . shake I up , and call in 
 the police on duty at the next house to be explain to about the 
 property . my solicitor will be here presently to protect the 
 property . transportation or the gallow for anybody who shall 
 touch the property ! " as his dutiful grandchild set he up , 
 panting , and put he through the usual restorative process of 
 shake and punch , he still repeat like an echo , " the - the 
 property ! the property ! property ! " 
 Mr. Weevle and Mr. Guppy look at each other , the former as have 
 relinquish the whole affair , the latter with a discomfited 
 countenance as have entertain some linger expectation yet . 
 but there be nothing to be do in opposition to the Smallweed 
 interest . Mr. Tulkinghorn 's clerk come down from his official pew 
 in the chamber to mention to the police that Mr. Tulkinghorn be 
 answerable for its be all correct about the next of kin and that 
 the paper and effect will be formally take possession of in due 
 time and course . Mr. Smallweed be at once permit so far to 
 assert his supremacy as to be carry on a visit of sentiment into 
 the next house and upstairs into Miss Flite 's deserted room , where 
 he look like a hideous bird of prey newly add to her aviary . 
 the arrival of this unexpected heir soon take wind in the court 
 still make good for the Sol and keep the court upon its mettle . 
 Mrs. Piper and Mrs. Perkins think it hard upon the young man if 
 there really be no will , and consider that a handsome present ought 
 to be make he out of the estate . Young Piper and young Perkins , 
 as member of that restless juvenile circle which be the terror of 
 the foot - passenger in Chancery Lane , crumble into ash behind the 
 pump and under the archway all day long , where wild yell and 
 hooting take place over their remain . Little Swills and Miss M. 
 Melvilleson enter into affable conversation with their patron , 
 feel that these unusual occurrence level the barrier between 
 professional and non - professional . Mr. Bogsby put up " the 
 popular song of King Death , with chorus by the whole strength of 
 the company , " as the great harmonic feature of the week and 
 announce in the bill that " J. G. B. be induce to do so at a 
 considerable extra expense in consequence of a wish which have be 
 very generally express at the bar by a large body of respectable 
 individual and in homage to a late melancholy event which have 
 arouse so much sensation . " there be one point connect with the 
 deceased upon which the court be particularly anxious , namely , that 
 the fiction of a full - sized coffin should be preserve , though 
 there be so little to put in it . upon the undertaker 's state in 
 the Sol 's bar in the course of the day that he have receive order 
 to construct " a six - footer , " the general solicitude be much 
 relieve , and it be consider that Mr. Smallweed 's conduct do 
 he great honour . 
 out of the court , and a long way out of it , there be considerable 
 excitement too , for man of science and philosophy come to look , and 
 carriage set down doctor at the corner who arrive with the same 
 intent , and there be more learn talk about inflammable gas and 
 phosphurette hydrogen than the court have ever imagine . some of 
 these authority   of course the wise   hold with indignation that 
 the deceased have no business to die in the alleged manner ; and 
 be remind by other authority of a certain inquiry into the 
 evidence for such death reprint in the sixth volume of the 
 Philosophical Transactions ; and also of a book not quite unknown on 
 english medical jurisprudence ; and likewise of the italian case of 
 the Countess Cornelia Baudi as set forth in detail by one 
 Bianchini , prebendary of Verona , who write a scholarly work or so 
 and be occasionally hear of in his time as have gleam of 
 reason in he ; and also of the testimony of Messrs. Fodere and 
 Mere , two pestilent frenchman who would investigate the subject ; 
 and far , of the corroborative testimony of Monsieur Le Cat , a 
 rather celebrated french surgeon once upon a time , who have the 
 unpoliteness to live in a house where such a case occur and even 
 to write an account of it - still they regard the late Mr. Krook 's 
 obstinacy in go out of the world by any such by - way as wholly 
 unjustifiable and personally offensive . the less the court 
 understand of all this , the more the court like it , and the 
 great enjoyment it have in the stock in trade of the Sol 's arm . 
 then there come the artist of a picture newspaper , with a 
 foreground and figure ready draw for anything from a wreck on the 
 cornish coast to a review in Hyde Park or a meeting in Manchester , 
 and in Mrs. Perkins ' own room , memorable evermore , he then and 
 there throw in upon the block Mr. Krook 's house , as large as life ; 
 in fact , considerably large , make a very temple of it . 
 similarly , be permit to look in at the door of the fatal 
 chamber , he depict that apartment as three - quarter of a mile long 
 by fifty yard high , at which the court be particularly charm . 
 all this time the two gentleman before mention pop in and out of 
 every house and assist at the philosophical disputation - go 
 everywhere and listen to everybody - and yet be always dive into 
 the Sol 's parlour and write with the ravenous little pen on the 
 tissue - paper . 
 at last come the coroner and his inquiry , like as before , except 
 that the coroner cherish this case as be out of the common way 
 and tell the gentleman of the jury , in his private capacity , that 
 " that would seem to be an unlucky house next door , gentleman , a 
 destine house ; but so we sometimes find it , and these be 
 mystery we can not   account for ! " after which the six - footer come 
 into action and be much admire . 
 in all these proceeding Mr. Guppy have so slight a part , except 
 when he give his evidence , that he be move on like a private 
 individual and can only haunt the secret house on the outside , 
 where he have the mortification of see Mr. Smallweed padlock 
 the door , and of bitterly know himself to be shut out . but 
 before these proceeding draw to a close , that be to say , on the 
 night next after the catastrophe , Mr. Guppy have a thing to say that 
 must be say to Lady Dedlock . 
 for which reason , with a sink heart and with that hang - dog sense 
 of guilt upon he which dread and watch enfold in the Sol 's 
 arm have produce , the young man of the name of Guppy present 
 himself at the town mansion at about seven o'clock in the evening 
 and request to see her ladyship . Mercury reply that she be 
 go out to dinner ; do not   he see the carriage at the door ? yes , 
 he do see the carriage at the door ; but he want to see my Lady 
 too . 
 Mercury be dispose , as he will presently declare to a fellow- 
 gentleman in wait , " to pitch into the young man " ; but his 
 instruction be positive . therefore he sulkily suppose that the 
 young man must come up into the library . there he leave the young 
 man in a large room , not over - light , while he make report of he . 
 Mr. Guppy look into the shade in all direction , discover 
 everywhere a certain charred and whiten little heap of coal or 
 wood . presently he hear a rustling . be it - ? no , it be no ghost , 
 but fair flesh and blood , most brilliantly dress . 
 " I have to beg your ladyship 's pardon , " Mr. Guppy stammer , very 
 downcast . " this be an inconvenient time - " 
 " I tell you , you could come at any time . " she take a chair , 
 look straight at he as on the last occasion . 
 " thank your ladyship . your ladyship be very affable . " 
 " you can sit down . " there be not much affability in her tone . 
 " I do not   know , your ladyship , that it be worth while my sit down 
 and detain you , for I - I have not get the letter that I 
 mention when I have the honour of wait on your ladyship . " 
 " have you come merely to say so ? " 
 " merely to say so , your ladyship . " Mr. Guppy besides be 
 depressed , disappointed , and uneasy , be put at a further 
 disadvantage by the splendour and beauty of her appearance . 
 she know its influence perfectly , have study it too well to miss 
 a grain of its effect on any one . as she look at he so steadily 
 and coldly , he not only feel conscious that he have no guide in the 
 least perception of what be really the complexion of her thought , 
 but also that he be be every moment , as it be , remove far 
 and far from she . 
 she will not speak , it be plain . so he must . 
 " in short , your ladyship , " say Mr. Guppy like a meanly penitent 
 thief , " the person I be to have have the letter of , have come to a 
 sudden end , and - " he stop . Lady Dedlock calmly finish the 
 sentence . 
 " and the letter be destroy with the person ? " 
 Mr. Guppy would say no if he could - as he be unable to hide . 
 " I believe so , your ladyship . " 
 if he could see the least sparkle of relief in her face now ? no , 
 he could see no such thing , even if that brave outside do not 
 utterly put he away , and he be not look beyond it and about 
 it . 
 he falter an awkward excuse or two for his failure . 
 " be this all you have to say ? " inquire Lady Dedlock , have hear 
 he out - or as nearly out as he can stumble . 
 Mr. Guppy think that be all . 
 " you have well be sure that you wish to say nothing more to I , 
 this be the last time you will have the opportunity . " 
 Mr. Guppy be quite sure . and indeed he have no such wish at 
 present , by any mean . 
 " that be enough . I will dispense with excuse . good evening to 
 you ! " and she ring for Mercury to show the young man of the name 
 of Guppy out . 
 but in that house , in that same moment , there happen to be an old 
 man of the name of Tulkinghorn . and that old man , come with his 
 quiet footstep to the library , have his hand at that moment on the 
 handle of the door - come in - and come face to face with the young 
 man as he be leave the room . 
 one glance between the old man and the lady , and for an instant the 
 blind that be always down fly up . Suspicion , eager and sharp , 
 look out . another instant , close again . 
 " I beg your pardon , Lady Dedlock . I beg your pardon a thousand 
 time . it be so very unusual to find you here at this hour . I 
 suppose the room be empty . I beg your pardon ! " 
 " stay ! " she negligently call he back . " remain here , I beg . I 
 be go out to dinner . I have nothing more to say to this young 
 man ! " 
 the disconcerted young man bow , as he go out , and cringingly 
 hop that Mr. Tulkinghorn of the Fields be well . 
 " aye , aye ? " say the lawyer , look at he from under his bent 
 brow , though he have no need to look again - not he . " from Kenge 
 and Carboy 's , surely ? " 
 " Kenge and Carboy 's , Mr. Tulkinghorn . name of Guppy , sir . " 
 " to be sure . why , thank you , Mr. Guppy , I be very well ! " 
 " happy to hear it , sir . you can not   be too well , sir , for the credit 
 of the profession . " 
 " thank you , Mr. Guppy ! " 
 Mr. Guppy sneak away . Mr. Tulkinghorn , such a foil in his old- 
 fashioned rusty black to Lady Dedlock 's brightness , hand she down 
 the staircase to her carriage . he return rub his chin , and 
 rub it a good deal in the course of the evening . 
 CHAPTER XXXIV 
 a turn of the Screw 
 " now , what , " say Mr. George , " may this be ? be it blank cartridge 
 or ball ? a flash in the pan or a shot ? " 
 an open letter be the subject of the trooper 's speculation , and it 
 seem to perplex he mightily . he look at it at arm 's length , 
 bring it close to he , hold it in his right hand , hold it in his 
 leave hand , read it with his head on this side , with his head on 
 that side , contract his eyebrow , elevate they , still can not 
 satisfy himself . he smooth it out upon the table with his heavy 
 palm , and thoughtfully walk up and down the gallery , make a 
 halt before it every now and then to come upon it with a fresh eye . 
 even that will not   do . " be it , " Mr. George still muse , " blank 
 cartridge or ball ? " 
 Phil Squod , with the aid of a brush and paint - pot , be employ in 
 the distance whiten the target , softly whistle in quick - march 
 time and in drum - and - fife manner that he must and will go back 
 again to the girl he leave behind he . 
 " Phil ! " the trooper beckon as he call he . 
 Phil approach in his usual way , sidle off at first as if he 
 be go anywhere else and then bear down upon his commander 
 like a bayonet - charge . certain splash of white show in high 
 relief upon his dirty face , and he scrap his one eyebrow with the 
 handle of the brush . 
 " Attention , Phil ! listen to this . " 
 " steady , commander , steady . " 
 " ' Sir . allow I to remind you   though there be no legal necessity 
 for my do so , as you be aware   that the bill at two month ' 
 date draw on yourself by Mr. Matthew Bagnet , and by you accept , 
 for the sum of ninety - seven pound four shilling and ninepence , 
 will become due to - morrow , when you will please be prepare to take 
 up the same on presentation . your , Joshua Smallweed . ' what do 
 you make of that , Phil ? " 
 " Mischief , guv'ner . " 
 " why ? " 
 " I think , " reply Phil after pensively trace out a cross - wrinkle 
 in his forehead with the brush - handle , " that mischeevious 
 consequence be always mean when money be ask for . " 
 " Lookye , Phil , " say the trooper , sit on the table . " first and 
 last , I have pay , I may say , half as much again as this principal 
 in interest and one thing and another . " 
 Phil intimate by sidle back a pace or two , with a very 
 unaccountable wrench of his wry face , that he do not regard the 
 transaction as be make more promising by this incident . 
 " and lookye far , Phil , " say the trooper , stay his premature 
 conclusion with a wave of his hand . " there have always be an 
 understanding that this bill be to be what they call renew . and 
 it have be renew no end of time . what do you say now ? " 
 " I say that I think the time be come to a end at last . " 
 " you do ? humph ! I be much of the same mind myself . " 
 " Joshua Smallweed be he that be bring here in a chair ? " 
 " the same . " 
 " Guv'ner , " say Phil with exceed gravity , " he be a leech in his 
 disposition , he be a screw and a wice in his action , a snake in 
 his twisting , and a lobster in his claw . " 
 have thus expressively utter his sentiment , Mr. Squod , after 
 wait a little to ascertain if any further remark be expect of 
 he , get back by his usual series of movement to the target he 
 have in hand and vigorously signify through his former musical 
 medium that he must and he will return to that ideal young lady . 
 George , have fold the letter , walk in that direction . 
 " there be a way , commander , " say Phil , look cunningly at he , 
 " of settle this . " 
 " pay the money , I suppose ? I wish I could . " 
 Phil shake his head . " no , guv'ner , no ; not so bad as that . there 
 be a way , " say Phil with a highly artistic turn of his brush ; 
 " what I be a - do at present . " 
 " whitewash . " 
 Phil nod . 
 " a pretty way that would be ! do you know what would become of the 
 Bagnets in that case ? do you know they would be ruin to pay off 
 my old score ? YOU'RE a moral character , " say the trooper , eye 
 he in his large way with no small indignation ; " upon my life you 
 be , Phil ! " 
 Phil , on one knee at the target , be in course of protest 
 earnestly , though not without many allegorical scoop of his brush 
 and smoothing of the white surface round the rim with his thumb , 
 that he have forget the Bagnet responsibility and would not so 
 much as injure a hair of the head of any member of that worthy 
 family when step be audible in the long passage without , and a 
 cheerful voice be hear to wonder whether George be at home . Phil , 
 with a look at his master , hobble up , say , " here be the guv'ner , 
 Mrs. Bagnet ! here he be ! " and the old girl herself , accompany by 
 Mr. Bagnet , appear . 
 the old girl never appear in walk trim , in any season of the 
 year , without a grey cloth cloak , coarse and much worn but very 
 clean , which be , undoubtedly , the identical garment render so 
 interesting to Mr. Bagnet by have make its way home to Europe 
 from another quarter of the globe in company with Mrs. Bagnet and 
 an umbrella . the latter faithful appendage be also invariably a 
 part of the old girl 's presence out of door . it be of no colour 
 know in this life and have a corrugated wooden crook for a handle , 
 with a metallic object let into its prow , or beak , resemble a 
 little model of a fanlight over a street door or one of the oval 
 glass out of a pair of spectacle , which ornamental object have 
 not that tenacious capacity of stick to its post that might be 
 desire in an article long associate with the british army . the 
 old girl 's umbrella be of a flabby habit of waist and seem to be 
 in need of stay - an appearance that be possibly referable to its 
 have serve through a series of year at home as a cupboard and 
 on journey as a carpet bag . she never put it up , have the 
 great reliance on her well - prove cloak with its capacious hood , 
 but generally use the instrument as a wand with which to point out 
 joint of meat or bunch of green in marketing or to arrest the 
 attention of tradesman by a friendly poke . without her market- 
 basket , which be a sort of wicker well with two flap lid , she 
 never stir abroad . attend by these her trusty companion , 
 therefore , her honest sunburnt face look cheerily out of a rough 
 straw bonnet , Mrs. Bagnet now arrive , fresh - coloured and bright , 
 in George 's Shooting Gallery . 
 " well , George , old fellow , " say she , " and how do you do , this 
 sunshiny morning ? " 
 give he a friendly shake of the hand , Mrs. Bagnet draw a long 
 breath after her walk and sit down to enjoy a rest . have a 
 faculty , mature on the top of baggage - waggon and in other such 
 position , of rest easily anywhere , she perch on a rough 
 bench , untie her bonnet - string , push back her bonnet , cross 
 her arm , and look perfectly comfortable . 
 Mr. Bagnet in the meantime have shake hand with his old comrade 
 and with Phil , on whom Mrs. Bagnet likewise bestow a good - humour 
 nod and smile . 
 " now , George , " say Mrs. Bagnet briskly , " here we be , Lignum and 
 myself " - she often speak of her husband by this appellation , on 
 account , as it be suppose , of Lignum Vitae have be his old 
 regimental nickname when they first become acquainted , in 
 compliment to the extreme hardness and toughness of his 
 physiognomy - " just look in , we have , to make it all correct as 
 usual about that security . give he the new bill to sign , George , 
 and he will sign it like a man . " 
 " I be come to you this morning , " observe the trooper 
 reluctantly . 
 " yes , we think you would come to we this morning , but we turn out 
 early and leave Woolwich , the good of boy , to mind his sister and 
 come to you instead - as you see ! for Lignum , he be tie so close 
 now , and get so little exercise , that a walk do he good . but 
 what be the matter , George ? " ask Mrs. Bagnet , stop in her 
 cheerful talk . " you do not   look yourself . " 
 " I be not quite myself , " return the trooper ; " I have be a little 
 put out , Mrs. Bagnet . " 
 her bright quick eye catch the truth directly . " George ! " hold 
 up her forefinger . " do not   tell I there be anything wrong about 
 that security of Lignum 's ! do not   do it , George , on account of the 
 child ! " 
 the trooper look at she with a troubled visage . 
 " George , " say Mrs. Bagnet , use both her arm for emphasis and 
 occasionally bring down her open hand upon her knee . " if you 
 have allow anything wrong to come to that security of Lignum 's , 
 and if you have let he in for it , and if you have put we in danger 
 of be sell up - and I see sell up in your face , George , as plain 
 as print - you have do a shameful action and have deceive we 
 cruelly . I tell you , cruelly , George . there ! " 
 Mr. Bagnet , otherwise as immovable as a pump or a lamp - post , put 
 his large right hand on the top of his bald head as if to defend it 
 from a shower - bath and look with great uneasiness at Mrs. Bagnet . 
 " George , " say that old girl , " I wonder at you ! George , I be 
 ashamed of you ! George , I could not   have believe you would have 
 do it ! I always know you to be a rolling stone that gather no 
 moss , but I never think you would have take away what little 
 moss there be for Bagnet and the child to lie upon . you know 
 what a hard - work , steady - go chap he be . you know what Quebec 
 and Malta and Woolwich be , and I never do think you would , or 
 could , have have the heart to serve we so . oh , George ! " Mrs. 
 Bagnet gather up her cloak to wipe her eye on in a very genuine 
 manner , " how could you do it ? " 
 Mrs. Bagnet cease , Mr. Bagnet remove his hand from his head as 
 if the shower - bath be over and look disconsolately at Mr. 
 George , who have turn quite white and look distressfully at the 
 grey cloak and straw bonnet . 
 " Mat , " say the trooper in a subdue voice , address he but 
 still look at his wife , " I be sorry you take it so much to 
 heart , because I do hope it be not so bad as that come to . I 
 certainly have , this morning , receive this letter " - which he read 
 aloud - " but I hope it may be set right yet . as to a rolling stone , 
 why , what you say be true . I be a rolling stone , and I never 
 roll in anybody 's way , I fully believe , that I roll the least 
 good to . but it be impossible for an old vagabond comrade to like 
 your wife and family well than I like them , Mat , and I trust 
 you will look upon I as forgivingly as you can . do not   think I have 
 keep anything from you . I have not   have the letter more than a 
 quarter of an hour . " 
 " old girl , " murmur Mr. Bagnet after a short silence , " will you 
 tell he my opinion ? " 
 " oh ! why do not   he marry , " Mrs. Bagnet answer , half laugh and 
 half cry , " Joe Pouch 's widder in North America ? then he 
 would not   have get himself into these trouble . " 
 " the old girl , " say Mr. Bagnet , " put it correct - why do not   you ? " 
 " well , she have a well husband by this time , I hope , " return the 
 trooper . " anyhow , here I stand , this present day , not married to 
 Joe Pouch 's widder . what shall I do ? you see all I have get about 
 I . it be not mine ; it be your . give the word , and I will sell off 
 every morsel . if I could have hop it would have bring in 
 nearly the sum want , I would have sell all long ago . do not   believe 
 that I will leave you or yours in the lurch , Mat . I would sell myself 
 first . I only wish , " say the trooper , give himself a 
 disparaging blow in the chest , " that I know of any one who would buy 
 such a second - hand piece of old store . " 
 " old girl , " murmur Mr. Bagnet , " give he another bit of my mind . " 
 " George , " say the old girl , " you be not so much to be blame , on 
 full consideration , except for ever take this business without 
 the mean . " 
 " and that be like I ! " observe the penitent trooper , shake his 
 head . " like I , I know . " 
 " silence ! the old girl , " say Mr. Bagnet , " be correct - in her way 
 of give my opinion - hear I out ! " 
 " that be when you never ought to have ask for the security , 
 George , and when you never ought to have get it , all thing 
 consider . but what be do can not   be undo . you be always an 
 honourable and straightforward fellow , as far as lay in your 
 power , though a little flighty . on the other hand , you can not   admit 
 but what it be natural in we to be anxious with such a thing hang 
 over our head . so forget and forgive all round , George . Come ! 
 forget and forgive all round ! " 
 Mrs. Bagnet , give he one of her honest hand and give she 
 husband the other , Mr. George give each of they one of his and 
 hold they while he speak . 
 " I do assure you both , there be nothing I would not   do to discharge 
 this obligation . but whatever I have be able to scrape together 
 have go every two month in keep it up . we have live plainly 
 enough here , Phil and I. but the gallery do not   quite do what be 
 expect of it , and it be not - in short , it be not the mint . it be 
 wrong in I to take it ? well , so it be . but I be in a manner 
 draw into that step , and I think it might steady I , and set I 
 up , and you will try to overlook my have such expectation , and 
 upon my soul , I be very much oblige to you , and very much ashamed 
 of myself . " with these concluding word , Mr. George give a shake 
 to each of the hand he hold , and relinquish they , back a pace 
 or two in a broad - cheste , upright attitude , as if he have make a 
 final confession and be immediately go to be shoot with all 
 military honour . 
 " George , hear I out ! " say Mr. Bagnet , glance at his wife . " old 
 girl , go on ! " 
 Mr. Bagnet , be in this singular manner hear out , have merely to 
 observe that the letter must be attend to without any delay , that 
 it be advisable that George and he should immediately wait on Mr. 
 Smallweed in person , and that the primary object be to save and 
 hold harmless Mr. Bagnet , who have none of the money . Mr. George , 
 entirely assent , put on his hat and prepare to march with Mr. 
 Bagnet to the enemy 's camp . 
 " do not   you mind a woman 's hasty word , George , " say Mrs. Bagnet , 
 pat he on the shoulder . " I trust my old Lignum to you , and I 
 be sure you will bring he through it . " 
 the trooper return that this be kindly say and that he will bring 
 Lignum through it somehow . upon which Mrs. Bagnet , with her cloak , 
 basket , and umbrella , go home , bright - eyed again , to the rest of 
 her family , and the comrade sally forth on the hopeful errand of 
 mollify Mr. Smallweed . 
 whether there be two people in England less likely to come 
 satisfactorily out of any negotiation with Mr. Smallweed than Mr. 
 George and Mr. Matthew Bagnet may be very reasonably question . 
 also , notwithstanding their martial appearance , broad square 
 shoulder , and heavy tread , whether there be within the same 
 limit two more simple and unaccustomed child in all the 
 Smallweedy affair of life . as they proceed with great gravity 
 through the street towards the region of Mount Pleasant , Mr. 
 Bagnet , observe his companion to be thoughtful , consider it a 
 friendly part to refer to Mrs. Bagnet 's late sally . 
 " George , you know the old girl - she be as sweet and as mild as milk . 
 but touch she on the child - or myself - and she be off like 
 gunpowder . " 
 " it do her credit , Mat ! " 
 " George , " say Mr. Bagnet , look straight before he , " the old 
 girl - can not   do anything - that do not   do her credit . more or less . 
 I never say so . Discipline must he maintain . " 
 " she be worth her weight in gold , " say the trooper . 
 " in gold ? " say Mr. Bagnet . " I will tell you what . the old girl 's 
 weight - be twelve stone six . would I take that weight - in any 
 metal - for the old girl ? no . why not ? because the old girl 's 
 metal be far more precious - than the precious metal . and she be 
 all metal ! " 
 " you be right , Mat ! " 
 " when she take I - and accept of the ring - she ' list under I 
 and the child - heart and head , for life . she be that earnest , " 
 say Mr. Bagnet , " and true to her colour - that , touch we with a 
 finger - and she turn out - and stand to her arm . if the old girl 
 fire wide - once in a way - at the call of duty - look over it , 
 George . for she be loyal ! " 
 " why , bless she , Mat , " return the trooper , " I think the high of 
 she for it ! " 
 " you be right ! " say Mr. Bagnet with the warm enthusiasm , 
 though without relax the rigidity of a single muscle . " think as 
 high of the old girl - as the rock of Gibraltar - and still you will be 
 think low - of such merit . but I never own to it before she . 
 Discipline must be maintain . " 
 these encomium bring they to Mount Pleasant and to Grandfather 
 Smallweed 's house . the door be open by the perennial Judy , who , 
 have survey they from top to toe with no particular favour , but 
 indeed with a malignant sneer , leave they stand there while she 
 consult the oracle as to their admission . the oracle may be 
 infer to give consent from the circumstance of her return 
 with the word on her honey lip that they can come in if they want 
 to it . thus privileged , they come in and find Mr. Smallweed with 
 his foot in the drawer of his chair as if it be a paper foot - bath 
 and Mrs. Smallweed obscure with the cushion like a bird that be 
 not to sing . 
 " my dear friend , " say Grandfather Smallweed with those two lean 
 affectionate arm of his stretch forth . " how de do ? how de do ? 
 who be our friend , my dear friend ? " 
 " why this , " return George , not able to be very conciliatory at 
 first , " be Matthew Bagnet , who have oblige I in that matter of 
 our , you know . " 
 " oh ! Mr. Bagnet ? surely ! " the old man look at he under his 
 hand . 
 " hope you be well , Mr. Bagnet ? fine man , Mr. George ! Military 
 air , sir ! " 
 no chair be offer , Mr. George bring one forward for Bagnet 
 and one for himself . they sit down , Mr. Bagnet as if he have no 
 power of bend himself , except at the hip , for that purpose . 
 " Judy , " say Mr. Smallweed , " bring the pipe . " 
 " why , I do not   know , " Mr. George interpose , " that the young woman 
 need give herself that trouble , for to tell you the truth , I be not 
 inclined to smoke it to - day . " 
 " be not   you ? " return the old man . " Judy , bring the pipe . " 
 " the fact be , Mr. Smallweed , " proceed George , " that I find myself 
 in rather an unpleasant state of mind . it appear to I , sir , that 
 your friend in the city have be play trick . " 
 " oh , dear no ! " say Grandfather Smallweed . " he never do that ! " 
 " do not   he ? well , I be glad to hear it , because I think it might 
 be his doing . this , you know , I be speak of . this letter . " 
 Grandfather Smallweed smile in a very ugly way in recognition of 
 the letter . 
 " what do it mean ? " ask Mr. George . 
 " Judy , " say the old man . " have you get the pipe ? give it to I . 
 do you say what do it mean , my good friend ? " 
 " Aye ! now , come , come , you know , Mr. Smallweed , " urge the trooper , 
 constrain himself to speak as smoothly and confidentially as he 
 can , hold the open letter in one hand and rest the broad 
 knuckle of the other on his thigh , " a good lot of money have pass 
 between we , and we be face to face at the present moment , and be 
 both well aware of the understanding there have always be . I be 
 prepared to do the usual thing which I have do regularly and to 
 keep this matter go . I never get a letter like this from you 
 before , and I have be a little put about by it this morning , 
 because here be my friend Matthew Bagnet , who , you know , have none of 
 the money - " 
 " I don't know it , you know , " say the old man quietly . 
 " why , con - find you - it , I mean - I tell you so , do not   I ? " 
 " oh , yes , you tell I so , " return Grandfather Smallweed . " but I 
 do not   know it . " 
 " well ! " say the trooper , swallow his fire . " I know it . " 
 Mr. Smallweed reply with excellent temper , " ah ! that be quite 
 another thing ! " and add , " but it do not   matter . Mr. Bagnet 's 
 situation be all one , whether or no . " 
 the unfortunate George make a great effort to arrange the affair 
 comfortably and to propitiate Mr. Smallweed by take he upon his 
 own term . 
 " that be just what I mean . as you say , Mr. Smallweed , here be 
 Matthew Bagnet liable to be fix whether or no . now , you see , 
 that make his good lady very uneasy in her mind , and I too , for 
 whereas I be a harum - scarum sort of a good - for - nought that more 
 kick than halfpence come natural to , why he be a steady family man , 
 do not   you see ? now , Mr. Smallweed , " say the trooper , gain 
 confidence as he proceed in his soldierly mode of do business , 
 " although you and I be good friend enough in a certain sort of a 
 way , I be well aware that I can not   ask you to let my friend Bagnet 
 off entirely . " 
 " oh , dear , you be too modest . you can ask I anything , Mr. 
 George . "   there be an ogreish kind of jocularity in Grandfather 
 Smallweed to - day . 
 " and you can refuse , you mean , eh ? or not you so much , perhaps , as 
 your friend in the city ? ha ha ha ! " 
 " ha ha ha ! " echo Grandfather Smallweed . in such a very hard 
 manner and with eye so particularly green that Mr. Bagnet 's 
 natural gravity be much deepen by the contemplation of that 
 venerable man . 
 " come ! " say the sanguine George . " I be glad to find we can be 
 pleasant , because I want to arrange this pleasantly . here be my 
 friend Bagnet , and here be I. we will settle the matter on the spot , 
 if you please , Mr. Smallweed , in the usual way . and you will ease my 
 friend Bagnet 's mind , and his family 's mind , a good deal if you will 
 just mention to he what our understanding be . " 
 here some shrill spectre cry out in a mocking manner , " oh , good 
 gracious ! oh ! " unless , indeed , it be the sportive Judy , who be 
 find to be silent when the startled visitor look round , but whose 
 chin have receive a recent toss , expressive of derision and 
 contempt . Mr. Bagnet 's gravity become yet more profound . 
 " but I think you ask I , Mr. George " - old Smallweed , who all this 
 time have have the pipe in his hand , be the speaker now - " I think you 
 ask I , what do the letter mean ? " 
 " why , yes , I do , " return the trooper in his off - hand way , " but I 
 do not   care to know particularly , if it be all correct and pleasant . " 
 Mr. Smallweed , purposely balk himself in an aim at the trooper 's 
 head , throw the pipe on the ground and break it to piece . 
 " that be what it mean , my dear friend . I will smash you . I will 
 crumble you . I will powder you . go to the devil ! " 
 the two friend rise and look at one another . Mr. Bagnet 's gravity 
 have now attain its profound point . 
 " go to the devil ! " repeat the old man . " I will have no more of your 
 pipe - smoking and swaggering . what ? you be an independent 
 dragoon , too ! go to my lawyer   you remember where ; you have be 
 there before   and show your independence now , will you ? come , my 
 dear friend , there be a chance for you . open the street door , Judy ; 
 put these blusterer out ! call in help if they do not   go . put them 
 out ! " 
 he vociferate this so loudly that Mr. Bagnet , lay his hand on 
 the shoulder of his comrade before the latter can recover from his 
 amazement , get he on the outside of the street door , which be 
 instantly slam by the triumphant Judy . utterly confound , Mr. 
 George awhile stand look at the knocker . Mr. Bagnet , in a 
 perfect abyss of gravity , walk up and down before the little 
 parlour window like a sentry and look in every time he pass , 
 apparently revolve something in his mind . 
 " come , Mat , " say Mr. George when he have recover himself , " we 
 must try the lawyer . now , what do you think of this rascal ? " 
 Mr. Bagnet , stop to take a farewell look into the parlour , 
 reply with one shake of his head direct at the interior , " if my 
 old girl have be here - I would have tell he ! " have so discharge 
 himself of the subject of his cogitation , he fall into step and 
 march off with the trooper , shoulder to shoulder . 
 when they present themselves in Lincoln 's Inn Fields , Mr. 
 Tulkinghorn be engaged and not to be see . he be not at all 
 willing to see they , for when they have wait a full hour , and the 
 clerk , on his bell be rung , take the opportunity of mention 
 as much , he bring forth no more encouraging message than that Mr. 
 Tulkinghorn have nothing to say to they and they have well not 
 wait . they do wait , however , with the perseverance of military 
 tactic , and at last the bell ring again and the client in 
 possession come out of Mr. Tulkinghorn 's room . 
 the client be a handsome old lady , no other than Mrs. Rouncewell , 
 housekeeper at Chesney Wold . she come out of the sanctuary with a 
 fair old - fashioned curtsy and softly shut the door . she be 
 treat with some distinction there , for the clerk step out of his 
 pew to show she through the outer office and to let she out . the 
 old lady be thank he for his attention when she observe the 
 comrade in wait . 
 " I beg your pardon , sir , but I think those gentleman be military ? " 
 the clerk refer the question to they with his eye , and Mr. 
 George not turn round from the almanac over the fire - place . Mr. 
 Bagnet take upon himself to reply , " yes , ma'am . formerly . " 
 " I think so . I be sure of it . my heart warm , gentleman , at 
 the sight of you . it always do at the sight of such . God bless 
 you , gentleman ! you will excuse an old woman , but I have a son once 
 who go for a soldier . a fine handsome youth he be , and good in 
 his bold way , though some people do disparage he to his poor 
 mother . I ask your pardon for trouble you , sir . God bless you , 
 gentleman ! " 
 " same to you , ma'am ! " return Mr. Bagnet with right good will . 
 there be something very touch in the earnestness of the old 
 lady 's voice and in the tremble that go through her quaint old 
 figure . but Mr. George be so occupy with the almanac over the 
 fire - place   calculate the come month by it perhaps   that he 
 do not look round until she have go away and the door be close 
 upon she . 
 " George , " Mr. Bagnet gruffly whisper when he do turn from the 
 almanac at last . " do not   be cast down ! ' why , soldier , why - should 
 we be melancholy , boy ? ' cheer up , my hearty ! " 
 the clerk have now again go in to say that they be still there 
 and Mr. Tulkinghorn be hear to return with some irascibility , 
 " let them come in then ! " they pass into the great room with the 
 paint ceiling and find he stand before the fire . 
 " now , you man , what do you want ? Sergeant , I tell you the last 
 time I see you that I do not   desire your company here . " 
 Sergeant reply - dash within the last few minute as to his 
 usual manner of speech , and even as to his usual carriage - that he 
 have receive this letter , have be to Mr. Smallweed about it , and 
 have be refer there . 
 " I have nothing to say to you , " rejoin Mr. Tulkinghorn . " if you 
 get into debt , you must pay your debt or take the consequence . 
 you have no occasion to come here to learn that , I suppose ? " 
 Sergeant be sorry to say that he be not prepare with the money . 
 " very well ! then the other man - this man , if this be he - must pay 
 it for you . " 
 Sergeant be sorry to add that the other man be not prepare with 
 the money either . 
 " very well ! then you must pay it between you or you must both be 
 sue for it and both suffer . you have have the money and must 
 refund it . you be not to pocket other people 's pound , shilling , 
 and penny and escape scot - free . " 
 the lawyer sit down in his easy - chair and stir the fire . Mr. 
 George hop he will have the goodness to - 
 " I tell you , sergeant , I have nothing to say to you . I do not   like 
 your associate and do not   want you here . this matter be not at all 
 in my course of practice and be not in my office . Mr. Smallweed be 
 good enough to offer these affair to I , but they be not in my 
 way . you must go to Melchisedech 's in Clifford 's Inn . " 
 " I must make an apology to you , sir , " say Mr. George , " for 
 press myself upon you with so little encouragement - which be 
 almost as unpleasant to I as it can be to you - but would you let 
 I say a private word to you ? " 
 Mr. Tulkinghorn rise with his hand in his pocket and walk into 
 one of the window recess . " now ! I have no time to waste . " in 
 the midst of his perfect assumption of indifference , he direct a 
 sharp look at the trooper , take care to stand with his own back 
 to the light and to have the other with his face towards it . 
 " well , sir , " say Mr. George , " this man with I be the other party 
 implicate in this unfortunate affair - nominally , only nominally - 
 and my sole object be to prevent his getting into trouble on my 
 account . he be a most respectable man with a wife and family , 
 formerly in the Royal Artillery - " 
 " my friend , I do not   care a pinch of snuff for the whole Royal 
 Artillery establishment - officer , man , tumbril , waggon , horse , 
 gun , and ammunition . " 
 " ' tis likely , sir . but I care a good deal for Bagnet and his wife 
 and family be injure on my account . and if I could bring they 
 through this matter , I should have no help for it but to give up 
 without any other consideration what you want of I the other 
 day . " 
 " have you get it here ? " 
 " I have get it here , sir . " 
 " Sergeant , " the lawyer proceed in his dry passionless manner , far 
 more hopeless in the dealing with than any amount of vehemence , 
 " make up your mind while I speak to you , for this be final . after 
 I have finish speak I have close the subject , and I will not   re- 
 open it . understand that . you can leave here , for a few day , 
 what you say you have bring here if you choose ; you can take it 
 away at once if you choose . in case you choose to leave it here , I 
 can do this for you - I can replace this matter on its old footing , 
 and I can go so far besides as to give you a write undertaking 
 that this man Bagnet shall never be trouble in any way until you 
 have be proceed against to the utmost , that your mean shall be 
 exhaust before the creditor look to his . this be in fact all 
 but free he . have you decide ? " 
 the trooper put his hand into his breast and answer with a long 
 breath , " I must do it , sir . " 
 so Mr. Tulkinghorn , put on his spectacle , sit down and write 
 the undertaking , which he slowly read and explain to Bagnet , who 
 have all this time be star at the ceiling and who put his hand 
 on his bald head again , under this new verbal shower - bath , and 
 seem exceedingly in need of the old girl through whom to express 
 his sentiment . the trooper then take from his breast - pocket a 
 fold paper , which he lay with an unwilling hand at the lawyer 's 
 elbow . " ' tis only a letter of instruction , sir . the last I ever 
 have from he . " 
 look at a millstone , Mr. George , for some change in its expression , 
 and you will find it quite as soon as in the face of Mr. 
 Tulkinghorn when he open and read the letter ! he refold it and 
 lay it in his desk with a countenance as unperturbable as death . 
 nor have he anything more to say or do but to nod once in the same 
 frigid and discourteous manner and to say briefly , " you can go . 
 show these man out , there ! " be show out , they repair to Mr. 
 Bagnet 's residence to dine . 
 boil beef and green constitute the day 's variety on the former 
 repast of boil pork and green , and Mrs. Bagnet serve out the 
 meal in the same way and season it with the good of temper , be 
 that rare sort of old girl that she receive Good to her arm 
 without a hint that it might be well and catch light from any 
 little spot of darkness near she . the spot on this occasion be the 
 darken brow of Mr. George ; he be unusually thoughtful and 
 depressed . at first Mrs. Bagnet trust to the combine endearment 
 of Quebec and Malta to restore he , but find those young lady 
 sensible that their exist Bluffy be not the Bluffy of their 
 usual frolicsome acquaintance , she wink off the light infantry and 
 leave he to deploy at leisure on the open ground of the domestic 
 hearth . 
 but he do not . he remain in close order , clouded and depressed . 
 during the lengthy cleaning up and pattene process , when he and 
 Mr. Bagnet be supply with their pipe , he be no well than he 
 be at dinner . he forget to smoke , look at the fire and ponder , 
 let his pipe out , fill the breast of Mr. Bagnet with perturbation 
 and dismay by show that he have no enjoyment of tobacco . 
 therefore when Mrs. Bagnet at last appear , rosy from the 
 invigorate pail , and sit down to her work , Mr. Bagnet growl , 
 " old girl ! " and wink monition to she to find out what be the 
 matter . 
 " why , George ! " say Mrs. Bagnet , quietly thread her needle . 
 " how low you be ! " 
 " be I ? not good company ? well , I be afraid I be not . " 
 " he be not   at all like Bluffy , mother ! " cry little Malta . 
 " because he be not   well , I think , mother , " add Quebec . 
 " sure that be a bad sign not to be like Bluffy , too ! " return the 
 trooper , kiss the young damsel . " but it be true , " with a sigh , 
 " true , I be afraid . these little one be always right ! " 
 " George , " say Mrs. Bagnet , work busily , " if I think you cross 
 enough to think of anything that a shrill old soldier 's wife - who 
 could have bite her tongue off afterwards and ought to have do 
 it almost - say this morning , I do not   know what I should not   say to 
 you now . " 
 " my kind soul of a darling , " return the trooper . " not a morsel of 
 it . " 
 " because really and truly , George , what I say and mean to say be 
 that I trust Lignum to you and be sure you would bring he through 
 it . and you have bring he through it , noble ! " 
 " Thankee , my dear ! " say George . " I be glad of your good opinion . " 
 in give Mrs. Bagnet 's hand , with her work in it , a friendly 
 shake - for she take her seat beside he - the trooper 's attention be 
 attract to her face . after look at it for a little while as 
 she ply her needle , he look to young Woolwich , sit on his 
 stool in the corner , and beckon that fifer to he . 
 " see there , my boy , " say George , very gently smooth the 
 mother 's hair with his hand , " there be a good love forehead for 
 you ! all bright with love of you , my boy . a little touch by the 
 sun and the weather through follow your father about and take 
 care of you , but as fresh and wholesome as a ripe apple on a tree . " 
 Mr. Bagnet 's face express , so far as in its wooden material lie , 
 the high approbation and acquiescence . 
 " the time will come , my boy , " pursue the trooper , " when this hair 
 of your mother 's will be grey , and this forehead all cross and 
 re - cross with wrinkle , and a fine old lady she will be then . take 
 care , while you be young , that you can think in those day , ' I 
 never whiten a hair of her dear head - I never mark a sorrowful 
 line in her face ! ' for of all the many thing that you can think 
 of when you be a man , you have well have that by you , Woolwich ! " 
 Mr. George conclude by rise from his chair , seat the boy 
 beside his mother in it , and say , with something of a hurry 
 about he , that he will smoke his pipe in the street a bit . 
 CHAPTER XXXV 
 Esther 's Narrative 
 I lay ill through several week , and the usual tenor of my life 
 become like an old remembrance . but this be not the effect of 
 time so much as of the change in all my habit make by the 
 helplessness and inaction of a sick - room . before I have be 
 confine to it many day , everything else seem to have retire 
 into a remote distance where there be little or no separation 
 between the various stage of my life which have be really divide 
 by year . in fall ill , I seem to have cross a dark lake and 
 to have leave all my experience , mingle together by the great 
 distance , on the healthy shore . 
 my housekeeping duty , though at first it cause I great anxiety 
 to think that they be unperforme , be soon as far off as the 
 old of the old duty at Greenleaf or the summer afternoon when 
 I go home from school with my portfolio under my arm , and my 
 childish shadow at my side , to my godmother 's house . I have never 
 know before how short life really be and into how small a space 
 the mind could put it . 
 while I be very ill , the way in which these division of time 
 become confused with one another distress my mind exceedingly . 
 at once a child , an eld girl , and the little woman I have be so 
 happy as , I be not only oppress by care and difficulty 
 adapt to each station , but by the great perplexity of endlessly 
 try to reconcile they . I suppose that few who have not be in 
 such a condition can quite understand what I mean or what painful 
 unrest arise from this source . 
 for the same reason I be almost afraid to hint at that time in my 
 disorder - it seem one long night , but I believe there be both 
 night and day in it - when I labour up colossal staircase , ever 
 strive to reach the top , and ever turn , as I have see a worm 
 in a garden path , by some obstruction , and labour again . I know 
 perfectly at interval , and I think vaguely at most time , that I 
 be in my bed ; and I talk with Charley , and feel her touch , and 
 know she very well ; yet I would find myself complain , " oh , more 
 of these never - end stair , Charley - more and more - pile up to 
 the sky ' , I think ! " and labour on again . 
 dare I hint at that bad time when , string together somewhere in 
 great black space , there be a flaming necklace , or ring , or starry 
 circle of some kind , of which I be one of the bead ! and when my 
 only prayer be to be take off from the rest and when it be such 
 inexplicable agony and misery to be a part of the dreadful thing ? 
 perhaps the less I say of these sick experience , the less tedious 
 and the more intelligible I shall be . I do not recall they to make 
 other unhappy or because I be now the least unhappy in remember 
 they . it may be that if we know more of such strange affliction 
 we might be the well able to alleviate their intensity . 
 the repose that succeed , the long delicious sleep , the blissful 
 rest , when in my weakness I be too calm to have any care for 
 myself and could have hear   or so I think now   that I be die , 
 with no other emotion than with a pitying love for those I leave 
 behind - this state can be perhaps more widely understood . I be in 
 this state when I first shrink from the light as it twinkle on I 
 once more , and know with a boundless joy for which no word be 
 rapturous enough that I should see again . 
 I have hear my Ada cry at the door , day and night ; I have hear 
 she call to I that I be cruel and do not love she ; I have 
 hear she pray and implore to be let in to nurse and comfort 
 I and to leave my bedside no more ; but I have only say , when I 
 could speak , " never , my sweet girl , never ! " and I have over and over 
 again remind Charley that she be to keep my darling from the 
 room whether I live or die . Charley have be true to I in that 
 time of need , and with her little hand and her great heart have keep 
 the door fast . 
 but now , my sight strengthening and the glorious light come every 
 day more fully and brightly on I , I could read the letter that my 
 dear write to I every morning and evening and could put they to my 
 lip and lie my cheek upon they with no fear of hurt she . I 
 could see my little maid , so tender and so careful , go about the 
 two room set everything in order and speak cheerfully to 
 Ada from the open window again . I could understand the stillness 
 in the house and the thoughtfulness it express on the part of all 
 those who have always be so good to I . I could weep in the 
 exquisite felicity of my heart and be as happy in my weakness as 
 ever I have be in my strength . 
 by and by my strength begin to be restore . instead of lie , with 
 so strange a calmness , watch what be do for I , as if it be 
 do for some one else whom I be quietly sorry for , I help it a 
 little , and so on to a little more and much more , until I become 
 useful to myself , and interested , and attach to life again . 
 how well I remember the pleasant afternoon when I be raise in bed 
 with pillow for the first time to enjoy a great tea - drinking with 
 Charley ! the little creature - send into the world , surely , to 
 minister to the weak and sick - be so happy , and so busy , and 
 stop so often in her preparation to lay her head upon my bosom , 
 and fondle I , and cry with joyful tear she be so glad , she be 
 so glad , that I be oblige to say , " Charley , if you go on in this 
 way , I must lie down again , my darling , for I be weak than I 
 think I be ! " so Charley become as quiet as a mouse and take she 
 bright face here and there across and across the two room , out of 
 the shade into the divine sunshine , and out of the sunshine into 
 the shade , while I watch she peacefully . when all her 
 preparation be conclude and the pretty tea - table with its 
 little delicacy to tempt I , and its white cloth , and its 
 flower , and everything so lovingly and beautifully arrange for I 
 by Ada downstairs , be ready at the bedside , I feel sure I be 
 steady enough to say something to Charley that be not new to my 
 thought . 
 first I compliment Charley on the room , and indeed it be so 
 fresh and airy , so spotless and neat , that I could scarce believe I 
 have be lie there so long . this delight Charley , and her face 
 be bright than before . 
 " yet , Charley , " say I , look round , " I miss something , surely , 
 that I be accustom to ? " 
 poor little Charley look round too and pretend to shake she 
 head as if there be nothing absent . 
 " be the picture all as they use to be ? " I ask she . 
 " every one of they , miss , " say Charley . 
 " and the furniture , Charley ? " 
 " except where I have move it about to make more room , miss . " 
 " and yet , " say I , " I miss some familiar object . ah , I know what 
 it be , Charley ! it be the look - glass . " 
 Charley get up from the table , make as if she have forget 
 something , and go into the next room ; and I hear her sob there . 
 I have think of this very often . I be now certain of it . I 
 could thank God that it be not a shock to I now . I call 
 Charley back , and when she come - at first pretend to smile , but 
 as she draw near to I , look grieve - I take she in my arm 
 and say , " it matter very little , Charley . I hope I can do 
 without my old face very well . " 
 I be presently so far advanced as to be able to sit up in a great 
 chair and even giddily to walk into the adjoining room , lean on 
 Charley . the mirror be go from its usual place in that room 
 too , but what I have to bear be none the hard to bear for that . 
 my guardian have throughout be earnest to visit I , and there be 
 now no good reason why I should deny myself that happiness . he 
 come one morning , and when he first come in , could only hold I in 
 his embrace and say , " my dear , dear girl ! " I have long know - who 
 could know well ? - what a deep fountain of affection and 
 generosity his heart be ; and be it not worth my trivial suffering 
 and change to fill such a place in it ? " oh , yes ! " I think . " he 
 have see I , and he love I well than he do ; he have see I and 
 be even fonder of I than he be before ; and what have I to mourn 
 for ! " 
 he sit down by I on the sofa , support I with his arm . for a 
 little while he sit with his hand over his face , but when he 
 remove it , fall into his usual manner . there never can have be , 
 there never can be , a pleasanter manner . 
 " my little woman , " say he , " what a sad time this have be . such 
 an inflexible little woman , too , through all ! " 
 " only for the good , guardian , " say I. 
 " for the good ? " he repeat tenderly . " of course , for the good . 
 but here have Ada and I been perfectly forlorn and miserable ; here 
 have your friend Caddy be come and go late and early ; here 
 have every one about the house be utterly lose and deject ; here 
 have even poor Rick be write - to I too - in his anxiety for 
 you ! " 
 I have read of Caddy in Ada 's letter , but not of Richard . I tell 
 he so . 
 " why , no , my dear , " he reply . " I have think it well not to 
 mention it to she . " 
 " and you speak of his writing to you , " say I , repeat his 
 emphasis . " as if it be not natural for he to do so , guardian ; 
 as if he could write to a well friend ! " 
 " he think he could , my love , " return my guardian , " and to many a 
 well . the truth be , he write to I under a sort of protest while 
 unable to write to you with any hope of an answer - write coldly , 
 haughtily , distantly , resentfully . well , dear little woman , we 
 must look forbearingly on it . he be not to blame . Jarndyce and 
 Jarndyce have warp he out of himself and pervert I in his 
 eye . I have know it do as bad deed , and bad , many a time . if 
 two angel could be concern in it , I believe it would change 
 their nature . " 
 " it have not change your , guardian . " 
 " oh , yes , it have , my dear , " he say laughingly . " it have make the 
 south wind easterly , I do not   know how often . Rick mistrust and 
 suspect I - go to lawyer , and be teach to mistrust and suspect 
 I . hear I have conflicting interest , claim clash against 
 his and what not . whereas , heaven know that if I could get out of 
 the mountain of wiglomeration on which my unfortunate name have 
 be so long bestow   which I can not    or could level they by the 
 extinction of my own original right   which I can not   either , and no 
 human power ever can , anyhow , I believe , to such a pass have we 
 get , I would do it this hour . I would rather restore to poor Rick 
 his proper nature than be endow with all the money that dead 
 suitor , broken , heart and soul , upon the wheel of Chancery , have 
 leave unclaimed with the Accountant - General - and that be money 
 enough , my dear , to be cast into a pyramid , in memory of Chancery 's 
 transcendent wickedness . " 
 " be it possible , guardian , " I ask , amazed , " that Richard can be 
 suspicious of you ? " 
 " ah , my love , my love , " he say , " it be in the subtle poison of 
 such abuse to breed such disease . his blood be infect , and 
 object lose their natural aspect in his sight . it be not his 
 fault . " 
 " but it be a terrible misfortune , guardian . " 
 " it be a terrible misfortune , little woman , to be ever draw within 
 the influence of Jarndyce and Jarndyce . I know none great . by 
 little and little he have be induce to trust in that rotten reed , 
 and it communicate some portion of its rottenness to everything 
 around he . but again I say with all my soul , we must be patient 
 with poor Rick and not blame he . what a troop of fine fresh 
 heart like his have I see in my time turn by the same mean ! " 
 I could not help express something of my wonder and regret that 
 his benevolent , disinterested intention have prosper so little . 
 " we must not say so , Dame Durden , " he cheerfully reply ; " Ada be 
 the happy , I hope , and that be much . I do think that I and both 
 these young creature might be friend instead of distrustful foe 
 and that we might so far counter - act the suit and prove too strong 
 for it . but it be too much to expect . Jarndyce and Jarndyce be 
 the curtain of Rick 's cradle . " 
 " but , guardian , may we not hope that a little experience will teach 
 he what a false and wretched thing it be ? " 
 " we will hope so , my Esther , " say Mr. Jarndyce , " and that it may 
 not teach he so too late . in any case we must not be hard on he . 
 there be not many grow and mature man live while we speak , 
 good man too , who if they be throw into this same court as 
 suitor would not be vitally change and depreciate within three 
 year - within two - within one . how can we stand amazed at poor 
 Rick ? a young man so unfortunate , " here he fall into a low tone , 
 as if he be think aloud , " can not at first believe   who could ? 
 that chancery be what it be . he look to it , flushed and fitfully , 
 to do something with his interest and bring they to some 
 settlement . it procrastinate , disappoint , try , torture he ; 
 wear out his sanguine hope and patience , thread by thread ; but he 
 still look to it , and hanker after it , and find his whole world 
 treacherous and hollow . well , well , well ! enough of this , my 
 dear ! " 
 he have support I , as at first , all this time , and his tenderness 
 be so precious to I that I lean my head upon his shoulder and 
 love he as if he have be my father . I resolve in my own mind 
 in this little pause , by some mean , to see Richard when I grow 
 strong and try to set he right . 
 " there be well subject than these , " say my guardian , " for such 
 a joyful time as the time of our dear girl 's recovery . and I have a 
 commission to broach one of they as soon as I should begin to talk . 
 when shall Ada come to see you , my love ? " 
 I have be think of that too . a little in connexion with the 
 absent mirror , but not much , for I know my love girl would be 
 change by no change in my look . 
 " dear guardian , " say I , " as I have shut she out so long - though 
 indeed , indeed , she be like the light to I - " 
 " I know it well , Dame Durden , well . " 
 he be so good , his touch express such endearing compassion and 
 affection , and the tone of his voice carry such comfort into my 
 heart that I stop for a little while , quite unable to go on . 
 " yes , yes , you be tired , " say he . " rest a little . " 
 " as I have keep Ada out so long , " I begin afresh after a short 
 while , " I think I should like to have my own way a little long , 
 guardian . it would be good to be away from here before I see she . 
 if Charley and I be to go to some country lodge as soon as I 
 can move , and if I have a week there in which to grow strong and 
 to be revive by the sweet air and to look forward to the happiness 
 of have Ada with I again , I think it would be well for we . " 
 I hope it be not a poor thing in I to wish to be a little more 
 use to my altered self before I meet the eye of the dear girl I 
 long so ardently to see , but it be the truth . I do . he 
 understand I , I be sure ; but I be not afraid of that . if it 
 be a poor thing , I know he would pass it over . 
 " our spoilt little woman , " say my guardian , ' shall have her own 
 way even in her inflexibility , though at the price , I know , of 
 tear downstairs . and see here ! here be Boythorn , heart of 
 chivalry , breathe such ferocious vow as never be breathe on 
 paper before , that if you do not   go and occupy his whole house , he 
 have already turn out of it expressly for that purpose , by 
 heaven and by earth he will pull it down and not leave one brick 
 standing on another ! " 
 and my guardian put a letter in my hand , without any ordinary 
 beginning such as " my dear Jarndyce , " but rush at once into the 
 word , " I swear if Miss Summerson do not come down and take 
 possession of my house , which I vacate for she this day at one 
 o'clock , P.M. , " and then with the utmost seriousness , and in the 
 most emphatic term , go on to make the extraordinary declaration 
 he have quote . we do not appreciate the writer the less for 
 laugh heartily over it , and we settle that I should send he a 
 letter of thank on the morrow and accept his offer . it be a most 
 agreeable one to I , for all the place I could have think of , I 
 should have like to go to none so well as Chesney Wold . 
 " now , little housewife , " say my guardian , look at his watch , " I 
 be strictly time before I come upstairs , for you must not be 
 tired too soon ; and my time have wan away to the last minute . I 
 have one other petition . little Miss Flite , hear a rumour that 
 you be ill , make nothing of walk down here - twenty mile , poor 
 soul , in a pair of dancing shoe - to inquire . it be heaven 's 
 mercy we be at home , or she would have walk back again . " 
 the old conspiracy to make I happy ! everybody seem to be in it ! 
 " now , pet , " say my guardian , " if it would not be irksome to you to 
 admit the harmless little creature one afternoon before you save 
 Boythorn 's otherwise devoted house from demolition , I believe you 
 would make her prouder and well pleased with herself than i - 
 though my eminent name be Jarndyce - could do in a lifetime . " 
 I have no doubt he know there would be something in the simple 
 image of the poor afflict creature that would fall like a gentle 
 lesson on my mind at that time . I feel it as he speak to I . I 
 could not tell he heartily enough how ready I be to receive she . 
 I have always pity she , never so much as now . I have always be 
 glad of my little power to soothe she under her calamity , but 
 never , never , half so glad before . 
 we arrange a time for Miss Flite to come out by the coach and 
 share my early dinner . when my guardian leave I , I turn my face 
 away upon my couch and pray to be forgive if I , surround by 
 such blessing , have magnify to myself the little trial that I have 
 to undergo . the childish prayer of that old birthday when I have 
 aspire to be industrious , contented , and true - hearted and to do 
 good to some one and win some love to myself if I could come back 
 into my mind with a reproachful sense of all the happiness I have 
 since enjoy and all the affectionate heart that have be turn 
 towards I . if I be weak now , what have I profit by those 
 mercy ? I repeat the old childish prayer in its old childish 
 word and find that its old peace have not depart from it . 
 my guardian now come every day . in a week or so more I could walk 
 about our room and hold long talk with Ada from behind the 
 window - curtain . yet I never see she , for I have not as yet the 
 courage to look at the dear face , though I could have do so 
 easily without she see I . 
 on the appoint day Miss Flite arrive . the poor little creature 
 run into my room quite forgetful of her usual dignity , and cry 
 from her very heart of heart , " my dear Fitz Jarndyce ! " fall upon 
 my neck and kiss I twenty time . 
 " dear I ! " say she , put her hand into her reticule , " I have 
 nothing here but document , my dear Fitz Jarndyce ; I must borrow a 
 pocket handkerchief . " 
 Charley give her one , and the good creature certainly make use of 
 it , for she hold it to her eye with both hand and sit so , 
 shed tear for the next ten minute . 
 " with pleasure , my dear Fitz Jarndyce , " she be careful to explain . 
 " not the least pain . pleasure to see you well again . pleasure at 
 have the honour of be admit to see you . I be so much 
 fonder of you , my love , than of the Chancellor . though I do attend 
 court regularly . by the by , my dear , mention pocket 
 handkerchief - " 
 Miss Flite here look at Charley , who have be to meet she at the 
 place where the coach stop . Charley glance at I and look 
 unwilling to pursue the suggestion . 
 " Ve - ry right ! " say Miss Flite , " Ve - ry correct . truly ! highly 
 indiscreet of I to mention it ; but my dear Miss Fitz Jarndyce , I 
 be afraid I be at time   between ourselves , you would not   think it 
 a little - ramble you know , " say Miss Flite , touch her 
 forehead . " nothing more . " 
 " what be you go to tell I ? " say I , smile , for I see she 
 want to go on . " you have rouse my curiosity , and now you must 
 gratify it . " 
 Miss Flite look at Charley for advice in this important crisis , 
 who say , " if you please , ma'am , you have well tell then , " and 
 therein gratify Miss Flite beyond measure . 
 " so sagacious , our young friend , " say she to I in her mysterious 
 way . " Diminutive . but ve - ry sagacious ! well , my dear , it be a 
 pretty anecdote . nothing more . still I think it charming . who 
 should follow we down the road from the coach , my dear , but a poor 
 person in a very ungenteel bonnet - " 
 " Jenny , if you please , miss , " say Charley . 
 " just so ! " Miss Flite acquiesce with the great suavity . 
 " Jenny . ye - es ! and what do she tell our young friend but that 
 there have be a lady with a veil inquire at her cottage after my 
 dear Fitz Jarndyce 's health and take a handkerchief away with she 
 as a little keepsake merely because it be my amiable Fitz 
 Jarndyce 's ! now , you know , so very prepossess in the lady with 
 the veil ! " 
 " if you please , miss , " say Charley , to whom I look in some 
 astonishment , " Jenny say that when her baby die , you leave a 
 handkerchief there , and that she put it away and keep it with the 
 baby 's little thing . I think , if you please , partly because it 
 be your , miss , and partly because it have cover the baby . " 
 " diminutive , " whisper Miss Flite , make a variety of motion 
 about her own forehead to express intellect in Charley . " but ex- 
 ceedingly sagacious ! and so dear ! my love , she be clear than any 
 counsel I ever hear ! " 
 " yes , Charley , " I return . " I remember it . well ? " 
 " well , miss , " say Charley , " and that be the handkerchief the lady 
 take . and Jenny want you to know that she would not   have make away 
 with it herself for a heap of money but that the lady take it and 
 leave some money instead . Jenny do not   know she at all , if you 
 please , miss ! " 
 " why , who can she be ? " say I. 
 " my love , " Miss Flite suggest , advance her lip to my ear with 
 her most mysterious look , " in MY opinion - do not   mention this to our 
 diminutive friend - she be the Lord Chancellor 's wife . he be married , 
 you know . and I understand she lead he a terrible life . throw 
 his lordship 's paper into the fire , my dear , if he will not   pay the 
 jeweller ! " 
 I do not think very much about this lady then , for I have an 
 impression that it might be Caddy . besides , my attention be 
 divert by my visitor , who be cold after her ride and look 
 hungry and who , our dinner be bring in , require some little 
 assistance in array herself with great satisfaction in a 
 pitiable old scarf and a much - worn and often - mend pair of glove , 
 which she have bring down in a paper parcel . I have to preside , 
 too , over the entertainment , consist of a dish of fish , a roast 
 fowl , a sweetbread , vegetable , pudding , and Madeira ; and it be so 
 pleasant to see how she enjoy it , and with what state and 
 ceremony she do honour to it , that I be soon think of nothing 
 else . 
 when we have finish and have our little dessert before we , 
 embellish by the hand of my dear , who would yield the 
 superintendence of everything prepare for I to no one , Miss Flite 
 be so very chatty and happy that I think I would lead she to her 
 own history , as she be always pleased to talk about herself . I 
 begin by say " you have attend on the Lord Chancellor many 
 year , Miss Flite ? " 
 " oh , many , many , many year , my dear . but I expect a judgment . 
 shortly . " 
 there be an anxiety even in her hopefulness that make I doubtful 
 if I have do right in approach the subject . I think I would 
 say no more about it . 
 " my father expect a judgment , " say Miss Flite . " my brother . my 
 sister . they all expect a judgment . the same that I expect . " 
 " they be all - " 
 " ye - es . Dead of course , my dear , " say she . 
 as I see she would go on , I think it well to try to be 
 serviceable to she by meet the theme rather than avoid it . 
 " would it not be wise , " say I , " to expect this judgment no more ? " 
 " why , my dear , " she answer promptly , " of course it would ! " 
 " and to attend the court no more ? " 
 " equally of course , " say she . " very wear to be always in 
 expectation of what never come , my dear Fitz Jarndyce ! wear , I 
 assure you , to the bone ! " 
 she slightly show I her arm , and it be fearfully thin indeed . 
 " but , my dear , " she go on in her mysterious way , " there be a 
 dreadful attraction in the place . hush ! do not   mention it to our 
 diminutive friend when she come in . or it may frighten she . with 
 good reason . there be a cruel attraction in the place . you can't 
 leave it . and you must expect . " 
 I try to assure she that this be not so . she hear I patiently 
 and smilingly , but be ready with her own answer . 
 " aye , aye , aye ! you think so because I be a little rambling . ve- 
 ry absurd , to be a little rambling , be it not ? ve - ry confusing , 
 too . to the head . I find it so . but , my dear , I have be there 
 many year , and I have notice . it be the mace and seal upon the 
 table . " 
 what could they do , do she think ? I mildly ask she . 
 " draw , " return Miss Flite . " draw people on , my dear . draw peace 
 out of they . sense out of they . good look out of they . good 
 quality out of they . I have feel they even draw my rest away 
 in the night . cold and glitter devil ! " 
 she tap I several time upon the arm and nod good - humouredly 
 as if she be anxious I should understand that I have no cause to 
 fear she , though she speak so gloomily , and confide these awful 
 secret to I . 
 " let I see , " say she . " I will tell you my own case . before they 
 ever draw I - before I have ever see they - what be it I use to 
 do ? tambourine playing ? no . tambour work . I and my sister 
 work at tambour work . our father and our brother have a builder 's 
 business . we all live together . Ve - ry respectably , my dear ! 
 first , our father be draw - slowly . home be draw with he . in 
 a few year he be a fierce , sour , angry bankrupt without a kind 
 word or a kind look for any one . he have be so different , fitz 
 Jarndyce . he be draw to a debtor ' prison . there he die . then 
 our brother be draw - swiftly - to drunkenness . and rag . and 
 death . then my sister be draw . hush ! never ask to what ! then 
 I be ill and in misery , and hear , as I have often hear before , 
 that this be all the work of Chancery . when I get well , I go 
 to look at the monster . and then I find out how it be , and I be 
 draw to stay there . " 
 have get over her own short narrative , in the delivery of which 
 she have speak in a low , strained voice , as if the shock be fresh 
 upon she , she gradually resume her usual air of amiable 
 importance . 
 " you do not   quite credit I , my dear ! well , well ! you will , some 
 day . I be a little rambling . but I have notice . I have see 
 many new face come , unsuspicious , within the influence of the mace 
 and seal in these many year . as my father 's come there . as my 
 brother 's . as my sister 's . as my own . I hear Conversation Kenge 
 and the rest of they say to the new face , ' here 's little Miss 
 Flite . oh , you be new here ; and you must come and be present to 
 little Miss Flite ! ' Ve - ry good . proud I be sure to have the 
 honour ! and we all laugh . but , Fitz Jarndyce , I know what will 
 happen . I know , far well than they do , when the attraction have 
 begin . I know the sign , my dear . I see they begin in Gridley . 
 and I see they end . Fitz Jarndyce , my love , " speak low again , 
 " I see they begin in our friend the ward in Jarndyce . let some 
 one hold he back . or he will be draw to ruin . " 
 she look at I in silence for some moment , with her face 
 gradually soften into a smile . seem to fear that she have 
 be too gloomy , and seem also to lose the connexion in her 
 mind , she say politely as she sip her glass of wine , " yes , my 
 dear , as I be say , I expect a judgment shortly . then I shall 
 release my bird , you know , and confer estate . " 
 I be much impressed by her allusion to Richard and by the sad 
 meaning , so sadly illustrate in her poor pinched form , that make 
 its way through all her incoherence . but happily for she , she be 
 quite complacent again now and beam with nod and smile . 
 " but , my dear , " she say , gaily , reach another hand to put it 
 upon mine . " you have not congratulate I on my physician . 
 positively not once , yet ! " 
 I be oblige to confess that I do not quite know what she mean . 
 " my physician , Mr. Woodcourt , my dear , who be so exceedingly 
 attentive to I . though his service be render quite 
 gratuitously . until the Day of Judgment . I mean the judgment that 
 will dissolve the spell upon I of the mace and seal . " 
 " Mr. Woodcourt be so far away , now , " say I , " that I think the 
 time for such congratulation be past , Miss Flite . " 
 " but , my child , " she return , " be it possible that you do not   know 
 what have happen ? " 
 " no , " say I. 
 " not what everybody have be talk of , my beloved Fitz Jarndyce ! " 
 " no , " say I. " you forget how long I have be here . " 
 " true ! my dear , for the moment - true . I blame myself . but my 
 memory have be draw out of I , with everything else , by what I 
 mention . Ve - ry strong influence , be it not ? well , my dear , 
 there have be a terrible shipwreck over in those East Indian 
 sea . " 
 " Mr. Woodcourt shipwreck ! " 
 " do not   be agitate , my dear . he be safe . an awful scene . death 
 in all shape . hundred of dead and die . fire , storm , and 
 darkness . number of the drown throw upon a rock . there , and 
 through it all , my dear physician be a hero . calm and brave 
 through everything . save many life , never complain in hunger 
 and thirst , wrap naked people in his spare clothe , take the 
 lead , show they what to do , govern they , tend the sick , 
 bury the dead , and bring the poor survivor safely off at last ! 
 my dear , the poor emaciated creature all but worship he . they 
 fall down at his foot when they get to the land and bless he . 
 the whole country ring with it . stay ! where be my bag of 
 document ? I have get it there , and you shall read it , you shall 
 read it ! " 
 and I do read all the noble history , though very slowly and 
 imperfectly then , for my eye be so dim that I could not see 
 the word , and I cry so much that I be many time oblige to lay 
 down the long account she have cut out of the newspaper . I feel so 
 triumphant ever to have know the man who have do such generous 
 and gallant deed , I feel such glowing exultation in his renown , I 
 so admire and love what he have do , that I envy the storm - wear 
 people who have fall at his foot and bless he as their 
 preserver . I could myself have kneel down then , so far away , and 
 bless he in my rapture that he should be so truly good and 
 brave . I feel that no one - mother , sister , wife - could honour he 
 more than I. I do , indeed ! 
 my poor little visitor make I a present of the account , and when 
 as the evening begin to close in she rise to take she leave , lest 
 she should miss the coach by which she be to return , she be still 
 full of the shipwreck , which I have not yet sufficiently compose 
 myself to understand in all its detail . 
 " my dear , " say she as she carefully fold up her scarf and 
 glove , " my brave physician ought to have a title bestow upon 
 he . and no doubt he will . you be of that opinion ? " 
 that he well deserve one , yes . that he would ever have one , no . 
 " why not , Fitz Jarndyce ? " she ask rather sharply . 
 I say it be not the custom in England to confer title on man 
 distinguish by peaceful service , however good and great , unless 
 occasionally when they consist of the accumulation of some very 
 large amount of money . 
 " why , good gracious , " say Miss Flite , " how can you say that ? 
 surely you know , my dear , that all the great ornament of 
 England in knowledge , imagination , active humanity , and improvement 
 of every sort be add to its nobility ! look round you , my dear , 
 and consider . you must be ramble a little now , I think , if you 
 do not   know that this be the great reason why title will always 
 last in the land ! " 
 I be afraid she believe what she say , for there be moment when 
 she be very mad indeed . 
 and now I must part with the little secret I have thus far try to 
 keep . I have think , sometimes , that Mr. Woodcourt love I and 
 that if he have be rich he would perhaps have tell I that he 
 love I before he go away . I have think , sometimes , that if he 
 have do so , I should have be glad of it . but how much well it 
 be now that this have never happen ! what should I have suffer 
 if I have have to write to he and tell he that the poor face he have 
 know as mine be quite go from I and that I freely release he 
 from his bondage to one whom he have never see ! 
 oh , it be so much well as it be ! with a great pang mercifully 
 spar I , I could take back to my heart my childish prayer to be 
 all he have so brightly show himself ; and there be nothing to be 
 undo : no chain for I to break or for he to drag ; and I could 
 go , please God , my lowly way along the path of duty , and he could 
 go his nobler way upon its broad road ; and though we be apart 
 upon the journey , I might aspire to meet he , unselfishly , 
 innocently , well far than he have think I when I find some 
 favour in his eye , at the journey 's end . 
 CHAPTER XXXVI 
 Chesney Wold 
 Charley and I do not set off alone upon our expedition into 
 Lincolnshire . my guardian have make up his mind not to lose sight 
 of I until I be safe in Mr. Boythorn 's house , so he accompany 
 we , and we be two day upon the road . I find every breath of 
 air , and every scent , and every flower and leaf and blade of grass , 
 and every pass cloud , and everything in nature , more beautiful 
 and wonderful to I than I have ever find it yet . this be my 
 first gain from my illness . how little I have lose , when the wide 
 world be so full of delight for I . 
 my guardian intend to go back immediately , we appoint , on our 
 way down , a day when my dear girl should come . I write she a 
 letter , of which he take charge , and he leave we within half an hour 
 of our arrival at our destination , on a delightful evening in the 
 early summer - time . 
 if a good fairy have build the house for I with a wave of her wand , 
 and I have be a princess and she favour god - child , I could not 
 have be more consider in it . so many preparation be make 
 for I and such an endearing remembrance be show of all my little 
 taste and liking that I could have sit down , overcome , a dozen 
 time before I have revisit half the room . I do well than 
 that , however , by show they all to Charley instead . Charley 's 
 delight calm mine ; and after we have have a walk in the garden , and 
 Charley have exhaust her whole vocabulary of admire expression , 
 I be as tranquilly happy as I ought to have be . it be a great 
 comfort to be able to say to myself after tea , " Esther , my dear , I 
 think you be quite sensible enough to sit down now and write a 
 note of thank to your host . " he have leave a note of welcome for 
 I , as sunny as his own face , and have confide his bird to my care , 
 which I know to be his high mark of confidence . accordingly I 
 write a little note to he in London , tell he how all his 
 favourite plant and tree be look , and how the most 
 astonishing of bird have chirp the honour of the house to I in 
 the most hospitable manner , and how , after sing on my shoulder , 
 to the inconceivable rapture of my little maid , he be then at 
 roost in the usual corner of his cage , but whether dream or no I 
 could not report . my note finish and send off to the post , I 
 make myself very busy in unpack and arrange ; and I send 
 Charley to bed in good time and tell she I should want she no more 
 that night . 
 for I have not yet look in the glass and have never ask to have 
 my own restore to I . I know this to be a weakness which must be 
 overcome , but I have always say to myself that I would begin afresh 
 when I get to where I now be . therefore I have want to be alone , 
 and therefore I say , now alone , in my own room , " Esther , if you 
 be to be happy , if you be to have any right to pray to be true- 
 hearted , you must keep your word , my dear . " I be quite resolve 
 to keep it , but I sit down for a little while first to reflect upon 
 all my blessing . and then I say my prayer and think a little 
 more . 
 my hair have not be cut off , though it have be in danger more 
 than once . it be long and thick . I let it down , and shake it 
 out , and go up to the glass upon the dressing - table . there be a 
 little muslin curtain draw across it . I draw it back and stand 
 for a moment look through such a veil of my own hair that I 
 could see nothing else . then I put my hair aside and look at the 
 reflection in the mirror , encourage by see how placidly it 
 look at I . I be very much change - oh , very , very much . at 
 first my face be so strange to I that I think I should have put 
 my hand before it and start back but for the encouragement I 
 have mention . very soon it become more familiar , and then I know 
 the extent of the alteration in it well than I have do at first . 
 it be not like what I have expect , but I have expect nothing 
 definite , and I dare say anything definite would have surprise I . 
 I have never be a beauty and have never think myself one , but I 
 have be very different from this . it be all go now . Heaven 
 be so good to I that I could let it go with a few not bitter 
 tear and could stand there arrange my hair for the night quite 
 thankfully . 
 one thing trouble I , and I consider it for a long time before I 
 go to sleep . I have keep Mr. Woodcourt 's flower . when they be 
 wither I have dry they and put they in a book that I be fond 
 of . nobody know this , not even Ada . I be doubtful whether I have 
 a right to preserve what he have send to one so different - whether 
 it be generous towards he to do it . I wish to be generous to 
 he , even in the secret depth of my heart , which he would never 
 know , because I could have love he - could have be devote to 
 he . at last I come to the conclusion that I might keep they if I 
 treasure they only as a remembrance of what be irrevocably past 
 and go , never to be look back on any more , in any other light . 
 I hope this may not seem trivial . I be very much in earnest . 
 I take care to be up early in the morning and to be before the 
 glass when Charley come in on tiptoe . 
 " dear , dear , miss ! " cry Charley , start . " be that you ? " 
 " yes , Charley , " say I , quietly put up my hair . " and I be very 
 well indeed , and very happy . " 
 I see it be a weight off Charley 's mind , but it be a great 
 weight off mine . I know the bad now and be compose to it . I 
 shall not conceal , as I go on , the weakness I could not quite 
 conquer , but they always pass from I soon and the happy frame 
 of mind stay by I faithfully . 
 wish to be fully re - establish in my strength and my good 
 spirit before Ada come , I now lay down a little series of plan 
 with Charley for be in the fresh air all day long . we be to 
 be out before breakfast , and be to dine early , and be to be out 
 again before and after dinner , and be to talk in the garden after 
 tea , and be to go to rest betime , and be to climb every hill 
 and explore every road , lane , and field in the neighbourhood . as 
 to restorative and strengthen delicacy , Mr. Boythorn 's good 
 housekeeper be for ever trot about with something to eat or 
 drink in her hand ; I could not even be hear of as rest in the 
 park but she would come trot after I with a basket , her 
 cheerful face shin with a lecture on the importance of frequent 
 nourishment . then there be a pony expressly for my riding , a 
 chubby pony with a short neck and a mane all over his eye who 
 could canter - when he would - so easily and quietly that he be a 
 treasure . in a very few day he would come to I in the paddock 
 when I call he , and eat out of my hand , and follow I about . we 
 arrive at such a capital understanding that when he be jog 
 with I lazily , and rather obstinately , down some shady lane , if I 
 pat his neck and say , " Stubbs , I be surprised you do not   canter 
 when you know how much I like it ; and I think you might oblige I , 
 for you be only get stupid and go to sleep , " he would give 
 his head a comical shake or two and set off directly , while Charley 
 would stand still and laugh with such enjoyment that her laughter 
 be like music . I do not   know who have give Stubbs his name , but it 
 seem to belong to he as naturally as his rough coat . once we 
 put he in a little chaise and drive he triumphantly through the 
 green lane for five mile ; but all at once , as we be extoll 
 he to the sky , he seem to take it ill that he should have be 
 accompany so far by the circle of tantalize little gnat that 
 have be hover round and round his ear the whole way without 
 appear to advance an inch , and stop to think about it . I 
 suppose he come to the decision that it be not to be bear , for he 
 steadily refuse to move until I give the rein to Charley and get 
 out and walk , when he follow I with a sturdy sort of good 
 humour , put his head under my arm and rub his ear against 
 my sleeve . it be in vain for I to say , " now , Stubbs , I feel 
 quite sure from what I know of you that you will go on if I ride a 
 little while , " for the moment I leave he , he stand stock still 
 again . consequently I be oblige to lead the way , as before ; and 
 in this order we return home , to the great delight of the 
 village . 
 Charley and I have reason to call it the most friendly of village , 
 I be sure , for in a week 's time the people be so glad to see we 
 go by , though ever so frequently in the course of a day , that there 
 be face of greeting in every cottage . I have know many of the 
 grow people before and almost all the child , but now the very 
 steeple begin to wear a familiar and affectionate look . among my 
 new friend be an old old woman who live in such a little 
 thatched and whitewash dwell that when the outside shutter be 
 turn up on its hinge , it shut up the whole house - front . this 
 old lady have a grandson who be a sailor , and I write a letter to 
 he for she and draw at the top of it the chimney - corner in which 
 she have bring he up and where his old stool yet occupy its old 
 place . this be consider by the whole village the most wonderful 
 achievement in the world , but when an answer come back all the way 
 from Plymouth , in which he mention that he be go to take the 
 picture all the way to America , and from America would write again , 
 I get all the credit that ought to have be give to the post- 
 office and be invest with the merit of the whole system . 
 thus , what with be so much in the air , play with so many 
 child , gossip with so many people , sit on invitation in 
 so many cottage , go on with Charley 's education , and write 
 long letter to Ada every day , I have scarcely any time to think 
 about that little loss of mine and be almost always cheerful . if 
 I do think of it at odd moment now and then , I have only to be 
 busy and forget it . I feel it more than I have hop I should once 
 when a child say , " Mother , why be the lady not a pretty lady now 
 like she use to be ? " but when I find the child be not less fond 
 of I , and draw its soft hand over my face with a kind of pity 
 protection in its touch , that soon set I up again . there be 
 many little occurrence which suggest to I , with great 
 consolation , how natural it be to gentle heart to be considerate 
 and delicate towards any inferiority . one of these particularly 
 touch I . I happen to stroll into the little church when a 
 marriage be just conclude , and the young couple have to sign the 
 register . 
 the bridegroom , to whom the pen be hand first , make a rude cross 
 for his mark ; the bride , who come next , do the same . now , I have 
 know the bride when I be last there , not only as the prettiest 
 girl in the place , but as have quite distinguish herself in the 
 school , and I could not help look at she with some surprise . 
 she come aside and whisper to I , while tear of honest love and 
 admiration stand in her bright eye , " he be a dear good fellow , 
 miss ; but he can not   write yet - he be go to learn of I - and I 
 would not   shame he for the world ! " why , what have I to fear , I 
 think , when there be this nobility in the soul of a labour 
 man 's daughter ! 
 the air blow as freshly and revivingly upon I as it have ever 
 blow , and the healthy colour come into my new face as it have come 
 into my old one . Charley be wonderful to see , she be so radiant 
 and so rosy ; and we both enjoy the whole day and sleep soundly 
 the whole night . 
 there be a favourite spot of mine in the park - wood of Chesney 
 Wold where a seat have be erect command a lovely view . the 
 wood have be clear and open to improve this point of sight , 
 and the bright sunny landscape beyond be so beautiful that I 
 rest there at least once every day . a picturesque part of the 
 Hall , call the Ghost 's Walk , be see to advantage from this 
 high ground ; and the startling name , and the old legend in the 
 Dedlock family which I have hear from Mr. Boythorn account for 
 it , mingle with the view and give it something of a mysterious 
 interest in addition to its real charm . there be a bank here , 
 too , which be a famous one for violet ; and as it be a daily 
 delight of Charley 's to gather wild flower , she take as much to 
 the spot as I do . 
 it would be idle to inquire now why I never go close to the house 
 or never go inside it . the family be not there , I have hear on 
 my arrival , and be not expect . I be far from be incurious 
 or uninterested about the building ; on the contrary , I often sit in 
 this place wonder how the room range and whether any echo like 
 a footstep really do resound at time , as the story say , upon the 
 lonely Ghost 's Walk . the indefinable feeling with which Lady 
 Dedlock have impress I may have have some influence in keep I 
 from the house even when she be absent . I be not sure . her face 
 and figure be associate with it , naturally ; but I can not say 
 that they repel I from it , though something do . for whatever 
 reason or no reason , I have never once go near it , down to the day 
 at which my story now arrive . 
 I be rest at my favourite point after a long ramble , and 
 Charley be gather violet at a little distance from I . I have 
 be look at the Ghost 's Walk lie in a deep shade of masonry 
 afar off and picture to myself the female shape that be say to 
 haunt it when I become aware of a figure approach through the 
 wood . the perspective be so long and so darken by leaf , and 
 the shadow of the branch on the ground make it so much more 
 intricate to the eye , that at first I could not discern what figure 
 it be . by little and little it reveal itself to be a woman 's - a 
 lady 's - Lady Dedlock 's . she be alone and come to where I sit 
 with a much quick step , I observe to my surprise , than be usual 
 with she . 
 I be flutter by she be unexpectedly so near   she be almost 
 within speak distance before I know she   and would have rise to 
 continue my walk . but I could not . I be render motionless . 
 not so much by her hurried gesture of entreaty , not so much by she 
 quick advance and outstretche hand , not so much by the great 
 change in her manner and the absence of her haughty self - restraint , 
 as by a something in her face that I have pin for and dreamed of 
 when I be a little child , something I have never see in any face , 
 something I have never see in hers before . 
 a dread and faintness fall upon I , and I call to Charley . Lady 
 Dedlock stop upon the instant and change back almost to what I 
 have know she . 
 " Miss Summerson , I be afraid I have startle you , " she say , now 
 advance slowly . " you can scarcely be strong yet . you have be 
 very ill , I know . I have be much concerned to hear it . " 
 I could no more have remove my eye from her pale face than I 
 could have stir from the bench on which I sit . she give I her 
 hand , and its deadly coldness , so at variance with the enforced 
 composure of her feature , deepen the fascination that 
 overpower I . I can not say what be in my whirling thought . 
 " you be recover again ? " she ask kindly . 
 " I be quite well but a moment ago , Lady Dedlock . " 
 " be this your young attendant ? " 
 " yes . " 
 " will you send she on before and walk towards your house with I ? " 
 " Charley , " say I , " take your flower home , and I will follow you 
 directly . " 
 Charley , with her good curtsy , blushingly tie on her bonnet and 
 go her way . when she be go , Lady Dedlock sit down on the seat 
 beside I . 
 I can not tell in any word what the state of my mind be when I see 
 in her hand my handkerchief with which I have cover the dead baby . 
 I look at she , but I could not see she , I could not hear she , I 
 could not draw my breath . the beating of my heart be so violent 
 and wild that I feel as if my life be break from I . but when 
 she catch I to her breast , kiss I , weep over I , compassionate 
 I , and call I back to myself ; when she fall down on her knee 
 and cry to I , " oh , my child , my child , I be your wicked and 
 unhappy mother ! oh , try to forgive I ! " - when I see she at my foot 
 on the bare earth in her great agony of mind , I feel , through all my 
 tumult of emotion , a burst of gratitude to the providence of God 
 that I be so change as that I never could disgrace she by any 
 trace of likeness , as that nobody could ever now look at I and look 
 at she and remotely think of any near tie between we . 
 I raise my mother up , pray and beseech she not to stoop 
 before I in such affliction and humiliation . I do so in break , 
 incoherent word , for besides the trouble I be in , it frighten 
 I to see she at MY foot . I tell she - or I try to tell she - that 
 if it be for I , her child , under any circumstance to take upon 
 I to forgive she , I do it , and have do it , many , many year . I 
 tell she that my heart overflow with love for she , that it be 
 natural love which nothing in the past have change or could change . 
 that it be not for I , then rest for the first time on my 
 mother 's bosom , to take she to account for have give I life , 
 but that my duty be to bless she and receive she , though the whole 
 world turn from she , and that I only ask her leave to do it . I 
 hold my mother in my embrace , and she hold I in her , and among 
 the still wood in the silence of the summer day there seem to be 
 nothing but our two troubled mind that be not at peace . 
 " to bless and receive I , " groan my mother , " it be far too late . 
 I must travel my dark road alone , and it will lead I where it 
 will . from day to day , sometimes from hour to hour , I do not see 
 the way before my guilty foot . this be the earthly punishment I 
 have bring upon myself . I bear it , and I hide it . " 
 even in the thinking of her endurance , she draw her habitual air of 
 proud indifference about she like a veil , though she soon cast it 
 off again . 
 " I must keep this secret , if by any mean it can be keep , not 
 wholly for myself . I have a husband , wretched and dishonour 
 creature that I be ! " 
 these word she utter with a suppress cry of despair , more 
 terrible in its sound than any shriek . cover her face with her 
 hand , she shrink down in my embrace as if she be unwilling that 
 I should touch she ; nor could I , by my utmost persuasion or by any 
 endearment I could use , prevail upon she to rise . she say , no , 
 no , no , she could only speak to I so ; she must be proud and 
 disdainful everywhere else ; she would be humble and ashame there , 
 in the only natural moment of her life . 
 my unhappy mother tell I that in my illness she have be nearly 
 frantic . she have but then know that her child be live . she 
 could not have suspect I to be that child before . she have 
 follow I down here to speak to I but once in all her life . we 
 never could associate , never could communicate , never probably from 
 that time forth could interchange another word on earth . she put 
 into my hand a letter she have write for my reading only and say 
 when I have read it and destroy it - but not so much for her sake , 
 since she ask nothing , as for her husband 's and my own - I must 
 evermore consider she as dead . if I could believe that she love 
 I , in this agony in which I see she , with a mother 's love , she 
 ask I to do that , for then I might think of she with a great 
 pity , imagine what she suffer . she have put herself beyond all 
 hope and beyond all help . whether she preserve her secret until 
 death or it come to be discover and she bring dishonour and 
 disgrace upon the name she have take , it be her solitary struggle 
 always ; and no affection could come near she , and no human creature 
 could render she any aid . 
 " but be the secret safe so far ? " I ask . " be it safe now , dearest 
 mother ? " 
 " no , " reply my mother . " it have be very near discovery . it be 
 save by an accident . it may be lose by another accident - to- 
 morrow , any day . " 
 " do you dread a particular person ? " 
 " hush ! do not tremble and cry so much for I . I be not worthy of 
 these tear , " say my mother , kiss my hand . " I dread one 
 person very much . " 
 " an enemy ? " 
 " not a friend . one who be too passionless to be either . he be Sir 
 Leicester Dedlock 's lawyer , mechanically faithful without 
 attachment , and very jealous of the profit , privilege , and 
 reputation of be master of the mystery of great house . " 
 " has he any suspicion ? " 
 " many . " 
 " not of you ? " I say alarmed . 
 " yes ! he be always vigilant and always near I . I may keep he at 
 a standstill , but I can never shake he off . " 
 " have he so little pity or compunction ? " 
 " he have none , and no anger . he be indifferent to everything but 
 his calling . his calling be the acquisition of secret and the 
 hold possession of such power as they give he , with no sharer 
 or opponent in it . " 
 " could you trust in he ? " 
 " I shall never try . the dark road I have tread for so many year 
 will end where it will . I follow it alone to the end , whatever the 
 end be . it may be near , it may be distant ; while the road last , 
 nothing turn I . " 
 " dear mother , be you so resolve ? " 
 " I be resolve . I have long outbidden folly with folly , pride with 
 pride , scorn with scorn , insolence with insolence , and have 
 outlive many vanity with many more . I will outlive this danger , 
 and outdie it , if I can . it have close around I almost as awfully 
 as if these wood of Chesney Wold have close around the house , but 
 my course through it be the same . I have but one ; I can have but 
 one . " 
 " Mr. Jarndyce - " I be begin when my mother hurriedly 
 inquire , " do he suspect ? " 
 " no , " say I. " No , indeed ! be assure that he do not ! " and I 
 tell she what he have relate to I as his knowledge of my story . 
 " but he be so good and sensible , " say I , " that perhaps if he know - " 
 my mother , who until this time have make no change in her position , 
 raise her hand up to my lip and stop I . 
 " Confide fully in he , " she say after a little while . " you have 
 my free consent - a small gift from such a mother to her injured 
 child ! - but do not tell I of it . some pride be leave in I even 
 yet . " 
 I explain , as nearly as I could then , or can recall now - for my 
 agitation and distress throughout be so great that I scarcely 
 understand myself , though every word that be utter in the 
 mother 's voice , so unfamiliar and so melancholy to I , which in my 
 childhood I have never learn to love and recognize , have never be 
 sing to sleep with , have never hear a blessing from , have never have 
 a hope inspire by , make an enduring impression on my memory - I say 
 I explain , or try to do it , how I have only hop that Mr. 
 Jarndyce , who have be the good of father to I , might be able to 
 afford some counsel and support to she . but my mother answer no , 
 it be impossible ; no one could help she . through the desert that 
 lie before she , she must go alone . 
 " my child , my child ! " she say . " for the last time ! these kiss 
 for the last time ! these arm upon my neck for the last time ! we 
 shall meet no more . to hope to do what I seek to do , I must be 
 what I have be so long . such be my reward and doom . if you hear 
 of Lady Dedlock , brilliant , prosperous , and flatter , think of 
 your wretched mother , conscience - stricken , underneath that mask ! 
 think that the reality be in her suffering , in her useless remorse , 
 in she murder within her breast the only love and truth of which 
 it be capable ! and then forgive she if you can , and cry to heaven 
 to forgive she , which it never can ! " 
 we hold one another for a little space yet , but she be so firm 
 that she take my hand away , and put they back against my breast , 
 and with a last kiss as she hold they there , release they , and 
 go from I into the wood . I be alone , and calm and quiet below 
 I in the sun and shade lie the old house , with its terrace and 
 turret , on which there have seem to I to be such complete repose 
 when I first see it , but which now look like the obdurate and 
 unpitying watcher of my mother 's misery . 
 stun as I be , as weak and helpless at first as I have ever be 
 in my sick chamber , the necessity of guard against the danger of 
 discovery , or even of the remotest suspicion , do I service . I 
 take such precaution as I could to hide from Charley that I have 
 be cry , and I constrain myself to think of every sacred 
 obligation that there be upon I to be careful and collect . it 
 be not a little while before I could succeed or could even 
 restrain burst of grief , but after an hour or so I be well and 
 feel that I might return . I go home very slowly and tell 
 Charley , whom I find at the gate look for I , that I have be 
 tempt to extend my walk after Lady Dedlock have leave I and that I 
 be over - tired and would lie down . safe in my own room , I read the 
 letter . I clearly derive from it - and that be much then - that I 
 have not be abandon by my mother . her elder and only sister , 
 the godmother of my childhood , discover sign of life in I when 
 I have be lay aside as dead , have in her stern sense of duty , with 
 no desire or willingness that I should live , rear I in rigid 
 secrecy and have never again behold my mother 's face from within a 
 few hour of my birth . so strangely do I hold my place in this 
 world that until within a short time back I have never , to my own 
 mother 's knowledge , breathe - have be bury - have never be 
 endow with life - have never bear a name . when she have first see 
 I in the church she have be startle and have think of what 
 would have be like I if it have ever live , and have live on , but 
 that be all then . 
 what more the letter tell I need not to be repeat here . it have 
 its own time and place in my story . 
 my first care be to burn what my mother have write and to consume 
 even its ash . I hope it may not appear very unnatural or bad in 
 I that I then become heavily sorrowful to think I have ever be 
 rear . that I feel as if I know it would have be well and 
 happy for many people if indeed I have never breathe . that I have 
 a terror of myself as the danger and the possible disgrace of my 
 own mother and of a proud family name . that I be so confused and 
 shake as to be possess by a belief that it be right and have 
 be intend that I should die in my birth , and that it be wrong 
 and not intend that I should be then alive . 
 these be the real feeling that I have . I fall asleep wear out , 
 and when I awake I cry afresh to think that I be back in the 
 world with my load of trouble for other . I be more than ever 
 frightened of myself , think anew of she against whom I be a 
 witness , of the owner of Chesney Wold , of the new and terrible 
 meaning of the old word now moan in my ear like a surge upon 
 the shore , " your mother , Esther , be your disgrace , and you be 
 her . the time will come - and soon enough - when you will 
 understand this well , and will feel it too , as no one save a 
 woman can . " with they , those other word return , " pray daily 
 that the sin of other be not visit upon your head . " I could 
 not disentangle all that be about I , and I feel as if the blame 
 and the shame be all in I , and the visitation have come down . 
 the day wan into a gloomy evening , overcast and sad , and I still 
 contend with the same distress . I go out alone , and after 
 walk a little in the park , watch the dark shade fall on 
 the tree and the fitful flight of the bat , which sometimes almost 
 touch I , be attract to the house for the first time . perhaps 
 I might not have go near it if I have be in a strong frame of 
 mind . as it be , I take the path that lead close by it . 
 I do not dare to linger or to look up , but I pass before the 
 terrace garden with its fragrant odour , and its broad walk , and 
 its well - keep bed and smooth turf ; and I see how beautiful and 
 grave it be , and how the old stone balustrade and parapet , and 
 wide flight of shallow step , be seam by time and weather ; and 
 how the train moss and ivy grow about they , and around the old 
 stone pedestal of the sun - dial ; and I hear the fountain fall . 
 then the way go by long line of dark window diversify by 
 turrete tower and porch of eccentric shape , where old stone 
 lion and grotesque monster bristle outside den of shadow and 
 snarl at the evening gloom over the escutcheon they hold in 
 their grip . thence the path wind underneath a gateway , and 
 through a court - yard where the principal entrance be   I hurry 
 quickly on , and by the stable where none but deep voice seem 
 to be , whether in the murmuring of the wind through the strong mass 
 of ivy hold to a high red wall , or in the low complaining of the 
 weathercock , or in the barking of the dog , or in the slow striking 
 of a clock . so , encounter presently a sweet smell of lime , 
 whose rustle I could hear , I turn with the turning of the path 
 to the south front , and there above I be the balustrade of the 
 Ghost 's Walk and one light window that might be my mother 's . 
 the way be pave here , like the terrace overhead , and my footstep 
 from be noiseless make an echo sound upon the flag . 
 stop to look at nothing , but see all I do see as I go , I 
 be pass quickly on , and in a few moment should have pass the 
 light window , when my echo footstep bring it suddenly into 
 my mind that there be a dreadful truth in the legend of the 
 Ghost 's Walk , that it be I who be to bring calamity upon the 
 stately house and that my warning foot be haunt it even then . 
 seize with an augmented terror of myself which turn I cold , I 
 run from myself and everything , retrace the way by which I have 
 come , and never pause until I have gain the lodge - gate , and the 
 park lie sullen and black behind I . 
 not before I be alone in my own room for the night and have again 
 be deject and unhappy there do I begin to know how wrong and 
 thankless this state be . but from my darling who be come on 
 the morrow , I find a joyful letter , full of such love 
 anticipation that I must have be of marble if it have not move 
 I ; from my guardian , too , I find another letter , ask I to 
 tell Dame Durden , if I should see that little woman anywhere , that 
 they have mop most pitiably without she , that the housekeeping be 
 go to rack and ruin , that nobody else could manage the key , and 
 that everybody in and about the house declare it be not the same 
 house and be become rebellious for her return . two such letter 
 together make I think how far beyond my desert I be beloved and 
 how happy I ought to be . that make I think of all my past life ; 
 and that bring I , as it ought to have do before , into a well 
 condition . 
 for I see very well that I could not have be intend to die , or 
 I should never have live ; not to say should never have be 
 reserve for such a happy life . I see very well how many thing 
 have work together for my welfare , and that if the sin of the 
 father be sometimes visit upon the child , the phrase do 
 not mean what I have in the morning fear it mean . I know I be 
 as innocent of my birth as a queen of hers and that before my 
 heavenly Father I should not be punish for birth nor a queen 
 reward for it . I have have experience , in the shock of that very 
 day , that I could , even thus soon , find comfort reconcilement 
 to the change that have fall on I . I renew my resolution and 
 pray to be strengthen in they , pour out my heart for myself 
 and for my unhappy mother and feel that the darkness of the 
 morning be pass away . it be not upon my sleep ; and when the 
 next day 's light awake I , it be go . 
 my dear girl be to arrive at five o'clock in the afternoon . how 
 to help myself through the intermediate time well than by take 
 a long walk along the road by which she be to come , I do not 
 know ; so Charley and I and Stubbs - Stubbs saddle , for we never 
 drive he after the one great occasion - make a long expedition 
 along that road and back . on our return , we hold a great review of 
 the house and garden and see that everything be in its prettiest 
 condition , and have the bird out ready as an important part of the 
 establishment . 
 there be more than two full hour yet to elapse before she could 
 come , and in that interval , which seem a long one , I must confess 
 I be nervously anxious about my altered look . I love my darling 
 so well that I be more concerned for their effect on she than on 
 any one . I be not in this slight distress because I at all 
 repine - I be quite certain I do not , that day - but , I think , 
 would she be wholly prepare ? when she first see I , might she not 
 be a little shocked and disappointed ? might it not prove a little 
 bad than she expect ? might she not look for her old Esther and 
 not find she ? might she not have to grow use to I and to begin 
 all over again ? 
 I know the various expression of my sweet girl 's face so well , and 
 it be such an honest face in its loveliness , that I be sure 
 beforehand she could not hide that first look from I . and I 
 consider whether , if it should signify any one of these meaning , 
 which be so very likely , could I quite answer for myself ? 
 well , I think I could . after last night , I think I could . but 
 to wait and wait , and expect and expect , and think and think , be 
 such bad preparation that I resolve to go along the road again and 
 meet she . 
 so I say to Charley , " Charley , I will go by myself and walk along 
 the road until she come . " Charley highly approve of anything 
 that please I , I go and leave she at home . 
 but before I get to the second milestone , I have be in so many 
 palpitation from see dust in the distance   though I know it be 
 not , and could not , be the coach yet   that I resolve to turn back 
 and go home again . and when I have turn , I be in such fear of 
 the coach come up behind I   though I still know that it neither 
 would , nor could , do any such thing   that I run the great part of 
 the way to avoid be overtake . 
 then , I consider , when I have get safe back again , this be a nice 
 thing to have do ! now I be hot and have make the bad of it 
 instead of the good . 
 at last , when I believe there be at least a quarter of an hour 
 more yet , Charley all at once cry out to I as I be tremble in 
 the garden , " here she come , miss ! here she be ! " 
 I do not mean to do it , but I run upstairs into my room and hide 
 myself behind the door . there I stand tremble , even when I hear 
 my darling call as she come upstairs , " Esther , my dear , my love , 
 where be you ? little woman , dear Dame Durden ! " 
 she run in , and be run out again when she see I . ah , my 
 angel girl ! the old dear look , all love , all fondness , all 
 affection . nothing else in it - no , nothing , nothing ! 
 oh , how happy I be , down upon the floor , with my sweet beautiful 
 girl down upon the floor too , hold my scarred face to her lovely 
 cheek , bath it with tear and kiss , rock I to and fro like 
 a child , call I by every tender name that she could think of , 
 and press I to her faithful heart . 
 CHAPTER XXXVII 
 Jarndyce and Jarndyce 
 if the secret I have to keep have be mine , I must have confide it 
 to Ada before we have be long together . but it be not mine , and 
 I do not feel that I have a right to tell it , even to my guardian , 
 unless some great emergency arise . it be a weight to bear alone ; 
 still my present duty appear to be plain , and blest in the 
 attachment of my dear , I do not want an impulse and encouragement 
 to do it . though often when she be asleep and all be quiet , the 
 remembrance of my mother keep I wake and make the night 
 sorrowful , I do not yield to it at another time ; and Ada find I 
 what I use to be - except , of course , in that particular of which I 
 have say enough and which I have no intention of mention any 
 more just now , if I can help it . 
 the difficulty that I feel in be quite compose that first 
 evening when Ada ask I , over our work , if the family be at the 
 house , and when I be oblige to answer yes , I believe so , for 
 Lady Dedlock have speak to I in the wood the day before 
 yesterday , be great . Greater still when Ada ask I what she have 
 say , and when I reply that she have be kind and interested , and 
 when Ada , while admit her beauty and elegance , remark upon 
 her proud manner and her imperious chilling air . but Charley 
 help I through , unconsciously , by tell we that Lady Dedlock 
 have only stay at the house two night on her way from London to 
 visit at some other great house in the next county and that she have 
 leave early on the morning after we have see she at our view , as we 
 call it . Charley verify the adage about little pitcher , I be 
 sure , for she hear of more saying and doing in a day than would 
 have come to my ear in a month . 
 we be to stay a month at Mr. Boythorn 's . my pet have scarcely 
 be there a bright week , as I recollect the time , when one evening 
 after we have finish help the gardener in water his flower , 
 and just as the candle be light , Charley , appear with a 
 very important air behind Ada 's chair , beckon I mysteriously out 
 of the room . 
 " oh ! if you please , miss , " say Charley in a whisper , with her eye 
 at their roundest and large . " you be want at the Dedlock 
 Arms . " 
 " why , Charley , " say I , " who can possibly want I at the public- 
 house ? " 
 " I do not   know , miss , " return Charley , put her head forward 
 and fold her hand tight upon the band of her little apron , 
 which she always do in the enjoyment of anything mysterious or 
 confidential , " but it be a gentleman , miss , and his compliment , and 
 will you please to come without say anything about it . " 
 " whose compliment , Charley ? " 
 " his'n , miss , " return Charley , whose grammatical education be 
 advance , but not very rapidly . 
 " and how do you come to be the messenger , Charley ? " 
 " I be not the messenger , if you please , miss , " return my little 
 maid . " it be W. Grubble , miss . " 
 " and who be W. Grubble , Charley ? " 
 " Mister Grubble , miss , " return Charley . " do not   you know , miss ? 
 the Dedlock Arms , by W. Grubble , " which Charley deliver as if she 
 be slowly spell out the sign . 
 " Aye ? the landlord , Charley ? " 
 " yes , miss . if you please , miss , his wife be a beautiful woman , 
 but she break her ankle , and it never join . and her brother 's 
 the sawyer that be put in the cage , miss , and they expect he will 
 drink himself to death entirely on beer , " say Charley . 
 not know what might be the matter , and be easily apprehensive 
 now , I think it well to go to this place by myself . I bid 
 Charley be quick with my bonnet and veil and my shawl , and have 
 put they on , go away down the little hilly street , where I be as 
 much at home as in Mr. Boythorn 's garden . 
 Mr. Grubble be stand in his shirt - sleeve at the door of his 
 very clean little tavern wait for I . he lift off his hat 
 with both hand when he see I come , and carry it so , as if it 
 be an iron vessel   it look as heavy , precede I along the 
 sand passage to his good parlour , a neat carpet room with more 
 plant in it than be quite convenient , a coloured print of Queen 
 Caroline , several shell , a good many tea - tray , two stuff and 
 dry fish in glass case , and either a curious egg or a curious 
 pumpkin   but I do not   know which , and I doubt if many people do 
 hang from his ceiling . I know Mr. Grubble very well by sight , 
 from his often stand at his door . a pleasant - look , stoutish , 
 middle - aged man who never seem to consider himself cozily dress 
 for his own fire - side without his hat and top - boot , but who never 
 wear a coat except at church . 
 he snuff the candle , and back away a little to see how it 
 look , back out of the room - unexpectedly to I , for I be go 
 to ask he by whom he have be send . the door of the opposite 
 parlour being then open , I hear some voice , familiar in my ear 
 I think , which stop . a quick light step approach the room 
 in which I be , and who should stand before I but Richard ! 
 " my dear Esther ! " he say . " my good friend ! " and he really be so 
 warm - hearted and earnest that in the first surprise and pleasure of 
 his brotherly greeting I could scarcely find breath to tell he 
 that Ada be well . 
 " answer my very thought - always the same dear girl ! " say 
 Richard , lead I to a chair and seat himself beside I . 
 I put my veil up , but not quite . 
 " always the same dear girl ! " say Richard just as heartily as 
 before . 
 I put up my veil altogether , and lay my hand on Richard 's sleeve 
 and look in his face , tell he how much I thank he for his 
 kind welcome and how greatly I rejoice to see he , the more so 
 because of the determination I have make in my illness , which I now 
 convey to he . 
 " my love , " say Richard , " there be no one with whom I have a 
 great wish to talk than you , for I want you to understand I . " 
 " and I want you , Richard , " say I , shake my head , " to understand 
 some one else . " 
 " since you refer so immediately to John Jarndyce , " say Richard , 
 " - I suppose you mean he ? " 
 " of course I do . " 
 " then I may say at once that I be glad of it , because it be on that 
 subject that I be anxious to be understand . by you , mind - you , my 
 dear ! I be not accountable to Mr. Jarndyce or Mr. Anybody . " 
 I be pain to find he take this tone , and he observe it . 
 " well , well , my dear , " say Richard , " we will not   go into that now . I 
 want to appear quietly in your country - house here , with you under 
 my arm , and give my charming cousin a surprise . I suppose your 
 loyalty to John Jarndyce will allow that ? " 
 " my dear Richard , " I return , " you know you would be heartily 
 welcome at his house - your home , if you will but consider it so ; 
 and you be as heartily welcome here ! " 
 " speak like the good of little woman ! " cry Richard gaily . 
 I ask he how he like his profession . 
 " oh , I like it well enough ! " say Richard . " it be all right . it 
 do as well as anything else , for a time . I do not   know that I 
 shall care about it when I come to be settle , but I can sell out 
 then and - however , never mind all that botheration at present . " 
 so young and handsome , and in all respect so perfectly the 
 opposite of Miss Flite ! and yet , in the clouded , eager , seek 
 look that pass over he , so dreadfully like she ! 
 " I be in town on leave just now , " say Richard . 
 " indeed ? " 
 " yes . I have run over to look after my - my Chancery interest 
 before the long vacation , " say Richard , force a careless laugh . 
 " we be begin to spin along with that old suit at last , I 
 promise you . " 
 no wonder that I shake my head ! 
 " as you say , it be not a pleasant subject . " Richard speak with the 
 same shade cross his face as before . " let it go to the four 
 wind for to - night . puff ! go ! who do you suppose be with I ? " 
 " be it Mr. Skimpole 's voice I hear ? " 
 " that be the man ! he do I more good than anybody . what a 
 fascinating child it be ! " 
 I ask Richard if any one know of their come down together . he 
 answer , no , nobody . he have be to call upon the dear old 
 infant - so he call Mr. Skimpole - and the dear old infant have tell 
 he where we be , and he have tell the dear old infant he be bent 
 on come to see we , and the dear old infant have directly want to 
 come too ; and so he have bring he . " and he be worth - not to say 
 his sordid expense - but thrice his weight in gold , " say Richard . 
 " he be such a cheery fellow . no worldliness about he . fresh and 
 green - hearted ! " 
 I certainly do not see the proof of Mr. Skimpole 's worldliness in 
 his have his expense pay by Richard , but I make no remark about 
 that . indeed , he come in and turn our conversation . he be 
 charm to see I , say he have be shed delicious tear of joy 
 and sympathy at interval for six week on my account , have never 
 be so happy as in hearing of my progress , begin to understand the 
 mixture of good and evil in the world now , feel that he appreciate 
 health the more when somebody else be ill , do not   know but what it 
 might be in the scheme of thing that a should squint to make b 
 happy in look straight or that C should carry a wooden leg to 
 make d well satisfied with his flesh and blood in a silk 
 stocking . 
 " my dear Miss Summerson , here be our friend Richard , " say Mr. 
 Skimpole , " full of the bright vision of the future , which he 
 evoke out of the darkness of Chancery . now that be delightful , 
 that be inspirit , that be full of poetry ! in old time the wood 
 and solitude be make joyous to the shepherd by the imaginary 
 piping and dancing of Pan and the nymph . this present shepherd , 
 our pastoral Richard , brighten the dull Inns of Court by make 
 Fortune and her train sport through they to the melodious note of 
 a judgment from the bench . that be very pleasant , you know ! some 
 ill - condition growling fellow may say to I , ' what be the use of 
 these legal and equitable abuse ? how do you defend they ? ' I 
 reply , ' my growling friend , I don't defend they , but they be very 
 agreeable to I . there be a shepherd - youth , a friend of mine , who 
 transmute they into something highly fascinating to my simplicity . 
 I do not   say it be for this that they exist - for I be a child among 
 you worldly grumbler , and not call upon to account to you or 
 myself for anything - but it may be so . ' " 
 I begin seriously to think that Richard could scarcely have find a 
 bad friend than this . it make I uneasy that at such a time when 
 he most require some right principle and purpose he should have 
 this captivate looseness and put - off of everything , this airy 
 dispense with all principle and purpose , at his elbow . I think 
 I could understand how such a nature as my guardian 's , experienced 
 in the world and force to contemplate the miserable evasion and 
 contention of the family misfortune , find an immense relief in 
 Mr. Skimpole 's avowal of his weakness and display of guileless 
 candour ; but I could not satisfy myself that it be as artless as 
 it seem or that it do not serve Mr. Skimpole 's idle turn quite 
 as well as any other part , and with less trouble . 
 they both walk back with I , and Mr. Skimpole leave we at the 
 gate , I walk softly in with Richard and say , " Ada , my love , I 
 have bring a gentleman to visit you . " it be not difficult to 
 read the blushing , startled face . she love he dearly , and he 
 know it , and I know it . it be a very transparent business , that 
 meeting as cousin only . 
 I almost mistrust myself as grow quite wicked in my 
 suspicion , but I be not so sure that Richard love she dearly . 
 he admire she very much - any one must have do that - and I dare 
 say would have renew their youthful engagement with great pride 
 and ardour but that he know how she would respect her promise to my 
 guardian . still I have a torment idea that the influence upon 
 he extend even here , that he be postpone his good truth and 
 earnestness in this as in all thing until Jarndyce and Jarndyce 
 should be off his mind . ah I ! what Richard would have be 
 without that blight , I never shall know now ! 
 he tell Ada , in his most ingenuous way , that he have not come to 
 make any secret inroad on the term she have accept   rather too 
 implicitly and confidingly , he think   from Mr. Jarndyce , that he 
 have come openly to see she and to see I and to justify himself for 
 the present term on which he stand with Mr. Jarndyce . as the dear 
 old infant would be with we directly , he beg that I would make 
 an appointment for the morning , when he might set himself right 
 through the mean of an unreserved conversation with I . I 
 propose to walk with he in the park at seven o'clock , and this 
 be arrange . Mr. Skimpole soon afterwards appear and make we 
 merry for an hour . he particularly request to see little 
 coavinse   mean Charley   and tell she , with a patriarchal air , 
 that he have give she late father all the business in his power and 
 that if one of her little brother would make haste to get set up 
 in the same profession , he hop he should still be able to put a 
 good deal of employment in his way . 
 " for I be constantly be take in these net , " say Mr. Skimpole , 
 look beamingly at we over a glass of wine - and - water , " and be 
 constantly be bail out - like a boat . or pay off - like a 
 ship 's company . somebody always do it for I . I can not   do it , 
 you know , for I never have any money . but somebody do it . I get 
 out by somebody 's mean ; I be not like the starling ; I get out . if 
 you be to ask I who somebody be , upon my word I could not   tell 
 you . let we drink to somebody . God bless he ! " 
 Richard be a little late in the morning , but I have not to wait for 
 he long , and we turn into the park . the air be bright and dewy 
 and the sky without a cloud . the bird sing delightfully ; the 
 sparkle in the fern , the grass , and tree , be exquisite to see ; 
 the richness of the wood seem to have increase twenty - fold 
 since yesterday , as if , in the still night when they have look so 
 massively hush in sleep , nature , through all the minute detail 
 of every wonderful leaf , have be more wakeful than usual for the 
 glory of that day . 
 " this be a lovely place , " say Richard , look round . " none of 
 the jar and discord of law - suit here ! " 
 but there be other trouble . 
 " I tell you what , my dear girl , " say Richard , " when I get affair 
 in general settle , I shall come down here , I think , and rest . " 
 " would it not be well to rest now ? " I ask . 
 " oh , as to rest now , " say Richard , " or as to do anything 
 very definite NOW , that be not easy . in short , it can not   be do ; I 
 can not   do it at least . " 
 " why not ? " say I. 
 " you know why not , Esther . if you be live in an unfinished 
 house , liable to have the roof put on or take off - to be from top 
 to bottom pull down or build up - to - morrow , next day , next week , 
 next month , next year - you would find it hard to rest or settle . 
 so do I. now ? there be no now for us suitor . " 
 I could almost have believe in the attraction on which my poor 
 little wandering friend have expatiate when I see again the 
 darken look of last night . terrible to think it have in it also a 
 shade of that unfortunate man who have die . 
 " my dear Richard , " say I , " this be a bad beginning of our 
 conversation . " 
 " I know you would tell I so , Dame Durden . " 
 " and not I alone , dear Richard . it be not I who caution you 
 once never to found a hope or expectation on the family curse . " 
 " there you come back to John Jarndyce ! " say Richard impatiently . 
 " well ! we must approach he soon or later , for he be the staple 
 of what I have to say , and it be as well at once . my dear Esther , 
 how can you be so blind ? do not   you see that he be an interested 
 party and that it may be very well for he to wish I to know 
 nothing of the suit , and care nothing about it , but that it may not 
 be quite so well for I ? " 
 " oh , Richard , " I remonstrate , " be it possible that you can ever 
 have see he and hear he , that you can ever have live under his 
 roof and know he , and can yet breathe , even to I in this 
 solitary place where there be no one to hear we , such unworthy 
 suspicion ? " 
 he redden deeply , as if his natural generosity feel a pang of 
 reproach . he be silent for a little while before he reply in a 
 subdue voice , " Esther , I be sure you know that I be not a mean 
 fellow and that I have some sense of suspicion and distrust be 
 poor quality in one of my year . " 
 " I know it very well , " say I. " I be not more sure of anything . " 
 " that be a dear girl , " retort Richard , " and like you , because it 
 give I comfort . I have need to get some scrap of comfort out of 
 all this business , for it be a bad one at the good , as I have no 
 occasion to tell you . " 
 " I know perfectly , " say I. " I know as well , Richard - what shall I 
 say ? as well as you do - that such misconstruction be foreign to 
 your nature . and I know , as well as you know , what so change it . " 
 " come , sister , come , " say Richard a little more gaily , " you will 
 be fair with I at all event . if I have the misfortune to be 
 under that influence , so have he . if it have a little twisted I , it 
 may have a little twisted he too . I do not   say that he be not an 
 honourable man , out of all this complication and uncertainty ; I be 
 sure he be . but it taint everybody . you know it taint 
 everybody . you have hear he say so fifty time . then why should 
 he escape ? " 
 " because , " say I , " his be an uncommon character , and he have 
 resolutely keep himself outside the circle , Richard . " 
 " oh , because and because ! " reply Richard in his vivacious way . 
 " I be not sure , my dear girl , but that it may be wise and specious 
 to preserve that outward indifference . it may cause other party 
 interested to become lax about their interest ; and people may die 
 off , and point may drag themselves out of memory , and many thing 
 may smoothly happen that be convenient enough . " 
 I be so touch with pity for Richard that I could not reproach 
 he any more , even by a look . I remember my guardian 's 
 gentleness towards his error and with what perfect freedom from 
 resentment he have speak of they . 
 " Esther , " Richard resume , " you be not to suppose that I have come 
 here to make underhanded charge against John Jarndyce . I have 
 only come to justify myself . what I say be , it be all very well 
 and we get on very well while I be a boy , utterly regardless of 
 this same suit ; but as soon as I begin to take an interest in it 
 and to look into it , then it be quite another thing . then John 
 Jarndyce discover that Ada and I must break off and that if I 
 do not   amend that very objectionable course , I be not fit for she . 
 now , Esther , I do not   mean to amend that very objectionable course : 
 I will not hold John Jarndyce 's favour on those unfair term of 
 compromise , which he have no right to dictate . whether it please 
 he or displease he , I must maintain my right and Ada 's . I have 
 be think about it a good deal , and this be the conclusion I 
 have come to . " 
 poor dear Richard ! he have indeed be think about it a good 
 deal . his face , his voice , his manner , all show that too 
 plainly . 
 " so I tell he honourably   you be to know I have write to he 
 about all this   that we be at issue and that we have well be at 
 issue openly than covertly . I thank he for his goodwill and his 
 protection , and he go his road , and I go mine . the fact be , our 
 road be not the same . under one of the will in dispute , I 
 should take much more than he . I do not   mean to say that it be the 
 one to be establish , but there it be , and it have its chance . " 
 " I have not to learn from you , my dear Richard , " say I , " of your 
 letter . I have hear of it already without an offended or angry 
 word . " 
 " indeed ? " reply Richard , soften . " I be glad I say he be an 
 honourable man , out of all this wretched affair . but I always say 
 that and have never doubt it . now , my dear Esther , I know these 
 view of mine appear extremely harsh to you , and will to Ada when 
 you tell she what have pass between we . but if you have go into 
 the case as I have , if you have only apply yourself to the paper 
 as I do when I be at Kenge 's , if you only know what an 
 accumulation of charge and counter - charge , and suspicion and 
 cros - suspicion , they involve , you would think I moderate in 
 comparison . " 
 " perhaps so , " say I. " but do you think that , among those many 
 paper , there be much truth and justice , Richard ? " 
 " there be truth and justice somewhere in the case , Esther - " 
 " or be once , long ago , " say I. 
 " be - be - must be somewhere , " pursue Richard impetuously , " and must 
 be bring out . to allow Ada to be make a bribe and hush - money of 
 be not the way to bring it out . you say the suit be change I ; 
 John Jarndyce say it change , have change , and will change 
 everybody who have any share in it . then the great right I have 
 on my side when I resolve to do all I can to bring it to an end . " 
 " all you can , Richard ! do you think that in these many year no 
 other have do all they could ? have the difficulty grow easy 
 because of so many failure ? " 
 " it can not   last for ever , " return Richard with a fierceness 
 kindling in he which again present to I that last sad reminder . 
 " I be young and earnest , and energy and determination have do 
 wonder many a time . other have only half throw themselves into 
 it . I devote myself to it . I make it the object of my life . " 
 " oh , Richard , my dear , so much the bad , so much the bad ! " 
 " no , no , no , do not   you be afraid for I , " he return 
 affectionately . " you be a dear , good , wise , quiet , bless girl ; 
 but you have your prepossession . so I come round to John 
 Jarndyce . I tell you , my good Esther , when he and I be on those 
 term which he find so convenient , we be not on natural term . " 
 " be division and animosity your natural term , Richard ? " 
 " no , I do not   say that . I mean that all this business put we on 
 unnatural term , with which natural relation be incompatible . 
 see another reason for urge it on ! I may find out when it be over 
 that I have be mistake in John Jarndyce . my head may be clear 
 when I be free of it , and I may then agree with what you say to- 
 day . very well . then I shall acknowledge it and make he 
 reparation . " 
 everything postpone to that imaginary time ! everything hold in 
 confusion and indecision until then ! 
 " now , my good of confidante , " say Richard , " I want my cousin Ada 
 to understand that I be not captious , fickle , and wilful about John 
 Jarndyce , but that I have this purpose and reason at my back . I 
 wish to represent myself to she through you , because she have a 
 great esteem and respect for her cousin John ; and I know you will 
 soften the course I take , even though you disapprove of it ; and - 
 and in short , " say Richard , who have be hesitate through these 
 word , " I - I do not   like to represent myself in this litigious , 
 contentious , doubt character to a confide girl like Ada , " 
 I tell he that he be more like himself in those latter word than 
 in anything he have say yet . 
 " why , " acknowledge Richard , " that may be true enough , my love . I 
 rather feel it to be so . but I shall be able to give myself fair- 
 play by and by . I shall come all right again , then , do not   you be 
 afraid . " 
 I ask he if this be all he wish I to tell Ada . 
 " not quite , " say Richard . " I be bind not to withhold from she 
 that John Jarndyce answer my letter in his usual manner , 
 address I as ' my dear Rick , ' try to argue I out of my 
 opinion , and tell I that they should make no difference in 
 he .   all very well of course , but not alter the case .   I also 
 want Ada to know that if I see she seldom just now , I be look 
 after her interest as well as my own - we two be in the same 
 boat exactly - and that I hope she will not suppose from any fly 
 rumour she may hear that I be at all light - headed or imprudent ; on 
 the contrary , I be always look forward to the termination of the 
 suit , and always plan in that direction . be of age now and 
 have take the step I have take , I consider myself free from any 
 accountability to John Jarndyce ; but Ada be still a ward of the 
 court , I do not   yet ask she to renew our engagement . when she be 
 free to act for herself , I shall be myself once more and we shall 
 both be in very different worldly circumstance , I believe . if you 
 tell she all this with the advantage of your considerate way , you 
 will do I a very great and a very kind service , my dear Esther ; 
 and I shall knock Jarndyce and Jarndyce on the head with great 
 vigour . of course I ask for no secrecy at Bleak House . " 
 " Richard , " say I , " you place great confidence in I , but I fear 
 you will not take advice from I ? " 
 " it be impossible that I can on this subject , my dear girl . on any 
 other , readily . " 
 as if there be any other in his life ! as if his whole career and 
 character be not be dye one colour ! 
 " but I may ask you a question , Richard ? " 
 " I think so , " say he , laugh . " I do not   know who may not , if you 
 may not . " 
 " you say , yourself , you be not lead a very settle life . " 
 " how can I , my dear Esther , with nothing settle ! " 
 " be you in debt again ? " 
 " why , of course I be , " say Richard , astonish at my simplicity . 
 " be it of course ? " 
 " my dear child , certainly . I can not   throw myself into an object so 
 completely without expense . you forget , or perhaps you do not   know , 
 that under either of the will Ada and I take something . it be only 
 a question between the large sum and the small . I shall be 
 within the mark any way . bless your heart , my excellent girl , " 
 say Richard , quite amused with I , " I shall be all right ! I shall 
 pull through , my dear ! " 
 I feel so deeply sensible of the danger in which he stand that I 
 try , in Ada 's name , in my guardian 's , in my own , by every fervent 
 mean that I could think of , to warn he of it and to show he some 
 of his mistake . he receive everything I say with patience and 
 gentleness , but it all rebound from he without take the least 
 effect . I could not wonder at this after the reception his 
 preoccupied mind have give to my guardian 's letter , but I 
 determine to try Ada 's influence yet . 
 so when our walk bring we round to the village again , and I go 
 home to breakfast , I prepare Ada for the account I be go to 
 give she and tell she exactly what reason we have to dread that 
 Richard be lose himself and scatter his whole life to the 
 wind . it make she very unhappy , of course , though she have a far , 
 far great reliance on his correct his error than I could 
 have - which be so natural and love in my dear ! - and she 
 presently write he this little letter : 
 my dear cousin , 
 Esther have tell I all you say to she this morning . I write this 
 to repeat most earnestly for myself all that she say to you and to 
 let you know how sure I be that you will soon or later find our 
 cousin John a pattern of truth , sincerity , and goodness , when you 
 will deeply , deeply grieve to have do he   without intend it 
 so much wrong . 
 I do not quite know how to write what I wish to say next , but I 
 trust you will understand it as I mean it . I have some fear , my 
 dear cousin , that it may be partly for my sake you be now 
 lay up so much unhappiness for yourself - and if for yourself , 
 for I . in case this should be so , or in case you should entertain 
 much thought of I in what you be do , I most earnestly entreat 
 and beg you to desist . you can do nothing for my sake that will 
 make I half so happy as for ever turn your back upon the shadow 
 in which we both be bear . do not be angry with I for say 
 this . pray , pray , dear Richard , for my sake , and for your own , and 
 in a natural repugnance for that source of trouble which have its 
 share in make we both orphan when we be very young , pray , 
 pray , let it go for ever . we have reason to know by this time that 
 there be no good in it and no hope , that there be nothing to be get 
 from it but sorrow . 
 my dear cousin , it be needless for I to say that you be quite 
 free and that it be very likely you may find some one whom you will 
 love much well than your first fancy . I be quite sure , if you 
 will let I say so , that the object of your choice would greatly 
 prefer to follow your fortune far and wide , however moderate or 
 poor , and see you happy , do your duty and pursue your chosen 
 way , than to have the hope of be , or even to be , very rich with 
 you   if such a thing be possible   at the cost of drag year 
 of procrastination and anxiety and of your indifference to other 
 aim . you may wonder at my say this so confidently with so 
 little knowledge or experience , but I know it for a certainty from 
 my own heart . 
 ever , my dear cousin , your most affectionate 
 Ada 
 this note bring Richard to we very soon , but it make little 
 change in he if any . we would fairly try , he say , who be right 
 and who be wrong - he would show we - we should see ! he be 
 animate and glowing , as if Ada 's tenderness have gratify he ; but 
 I could only hope , with a sigh , that the letter might have some 
 strong effect upon his mind on re - perusal than it assuredly have 
 then . 
 as they be to remain with we that day and have take their place 
 to return by the coach next morning , I seek an opportunity of 
 speak to Mr. Skimpole . our out - of - door life easily throw one in 
 my way , and I delicately say that there be a responsibility in 
 encourage Richard . 
 " Responsibility , my dear Miss Summerson ? " he repeat , catch at 
 the word with the pleasantest smile . " I be the last man in the 
 world for such a thing . I never be responsible in my life - I 
 can not   be . " 
 " I be afraid everybody be oblige to be , " say I timidly enough , he 
 be so much old and more clever than I. 
 " no , really ? " say Mr. Skimpole , receive this new light with a 
 most agreeable jocularity of surprise . " but every man be not 
 oblige to be solvent ? I be not . I never be . see , my dear Miss 
 Summerson , " he take a handful of loose silver and halfpence from 
 his pocket , " there be so much money . I have not an idea how much . 
 I have not the power of counting . call it four and ninepence - call 
 it four pound nine . they tell I I owe more than that . I dare say 
 I do . I dare say I owe as much as good - natured people will let I 
 owe . if they do not   stop , why should I ? there you have Harold 
 Skimpole in little . if that be responsibility , I be responsible . " 
 the perfect ease of manner with which he put the money up again and 
 look at I with a smile on his refined face , as if he have be 
 mention a curious little fact about somebody else , almost make 
 I feel as if he really have nothing to do with it . 
 " now , when you mention responsibility , " he resume , " I be dispose 
 to say that I never have the happiness of know any one whom I 
 should consider so refreshingly responsible as yourself . you 
 appear to I to be the very touchstone of responsibility . when I 
 see you , my dear Miss Summerson , intent upon the perfect working of 
 the whole little orderly system of which you be the centre , I feel 
 inclined to say to myself - in fact I do say to myself very often - 
 that be responsibility ! " 
 it be difficult , after this , to explain what I mean ; but I 
 persist so far as to say that we all hop he would check and not 
 confirm Richard in the sanguine view he entertain just then . 
 " most willingly , " he retort , " if I could . but , my dear Miss 
 Summerson , I have no art , no disguise . if he take I by the hand 
 and lead I through Westminster Hall in an airy procession after 
 fortune , I must go . if he say , ' Skimpole , join the dance ! ' I 
 must join it . common sense would not , I know , but I have no common 
 sense . " 
 it be very unfortunate for Richard , I say . 
 " do you think so ! " return Mr. Skimpole . " do not   say that , do not 
 say that . let we suppose he keep company with Common Sense - an 
 excellent man - a good deal wrinkle - dreadfully practical - change 
 for a ten - pound note in every pocket - rule account - book in his 
 hand - say , upon the whole , resemble a tax - gatherer . our dear 
 Richard , sanguine , ardent , overleap obstacle , burst with 
 poetry like a young bud , say to this highly respectable companion , 
 ' I see a golden prospect before I ; it be very bright , it be very 
 beautiful , it be very joyous ; here I go , bound over the landscape 
 to come at it ! ' the respectable companion instantly knock he 
 down with the rule account - book ; tell he in a literal , prosaic 
 way that he see no such thing ; show he it be nothing but fee , 
 fraud , horsehair wig , and black gown . now you know that be a 
 painful change - sensible in the last degree , I have no doubt , but 
 disagreeable . I can not   do it . I have not   get the rule account- 
 book , I have none of the tax - gather element in my composition , 
 I be not at all respectable , and I do not   want to be . Odd perhaps , 
 but so it be ! " 
 it be idle to say more , so I propose that we should join Ada and 
 Richard , who be a little in advance , and I give up Mr. Skimpole 
 in despair . he have be over the Hall in the course of the morning 
 and whimsically describe the family picture as we walk . there 
 be such portentous shepherdess among the Ladies Dedlock dead 
 and go , he tell we , that peaceful crook become weapon of 
 assault in their hand . they tend their flock severely in 
 buckram and powder and put their sticking - plaster patch on to 
 terrify commoner as the chief of some other tribe put on their 
 war - paint . there be a Sir Somebody Dedlock , with a battle , a 
 sprung - mine , volume of smoke , flash of lightning , a town on 
 fire , and a stormed fort , all in full action between his horse 's 
 two hind leg , show , he suppose , how little a Dedlock make of 
 such trifle . the whole race he represent as have evidently 
 be , in life , what he call ' stuff people " - a large collection , 
 glassy eye , set up in the most approve manner on their various 
 twig and perch , very correct , perfectly free from animation , and 
 always in glass case . 
 I be not so easy now during any reference to the name but that I 
 feel it a relief when Richard , with an exclamation of surprise , 
 hurry away to meet a stranger whom he first descry come 
 slowly towards we . 
 " dear I ! " say Mr. Skimpole . " vhole ! " 
 we ask if that be a friend of Richard 's . 
 " friend and legal adviser , " say Mr. Skimpole . " now , my dear Miss 
 Summerson , if you want common sense , responsibility , and 
 respectability , all united - if you want an exemplary man - Vholes be 
 the man . " 
 we have not know , we say , that Richard be assist by any 
 gentleman of that name . 
 " when he emerge from legal infancy , " return Mr. Skimpole , " he 
 part from our conversational friend Kenge and take up , I believe , 
 with Vholes . indeed , I know he do , because I introduce he to 
 vhole . " 
 " have you know he long ? " ask Ada . 
 " vhole ? my dear Miss Clare , I have have that kind of acquaintance 
 with he which I have have with several gentleman of his profession . 
 he have do something or other in a very agreeable , civil manner - 
 take proceeding , I think , be the expression - which end in the 
 proceeding of his take I . somebody be so good as to step in 
 and pay the money - something and fourpence be the amount ; I forget 
 the pound and shilling , but I know it end with fourpence , 
 because it strike I at the time as be so odd that I could owe 
 anybody fourpence - and after that I bring they together . vhole 
 ask I for the introduction , and I give it . now I come to think 
 of it , " he look inquiringly at we with his frank smile as he 
 make the discovery , " vhole bribe I , perhaps ? he give I 
 something and call it commission . be it a five - pound note ? do 
 you know , I think it must have be a five - pound note ! " 
 his further consideration of the point be prevent by Richard 's 
 come back to we in an excited state and hastily represent Mr. 
 Vholes - a sallow man with pinch lip that look as if they be 
 cold , a red eruption here and there upon his face , tall and thin , 
 about fifty year of age , high - shoulder , and stoop . dress 
 in black , black - gloved , and button to the chin , there be nothing 
 so remarkable in he as a lifeless manner and a slow , fix way he 
 have of look at Richard . 
 " I hope I do not   disturb you , lady , " say Mr. Vholes , and now I 
 observe that he be far remarkable for an inward manner of 
 speak . " I arrange with Mr. Carstone that he should always know 
 when his cause be in the Chancellor 's paper , and be inform by 
 one of my clerk last night after post time that it stand , rather 
 unexpectedly , in the paper for to - morrow , I put myself into the 
 coach early this morning and come down to confer with he . " 
 " yes , " say Richard , flushed , and look triumphantly at Ada and 
 I , " we do not   do these thing in the old slow way now . we spin 
 along now ! Mr. Vholes , we must hire something to get over to the 
 post town in , and catch the mail to - night , and go up by it ! " 
 " anything you please , sir , " return Mr. Vholes . " I be quite at 
 your service . " 
 " let I see , " say Richard , look at his watch . " if I run down 
 to the Dedlock , and get my portmanteau fasten up , and order a 
 gig , or a chaise , or whatever be to be get , we shall have an hour 
 then before start . I will come back to tea . Cousin Ada , will you 
 and Esther take care of Mr. Vholes when I be go ? " 
 he be away directly , in his heat and hurry , and be soon lose in 
 the dusk of evening . we who be leave walk on towards the house . 
 " be Mr. Carstone 's presence necessary to - morrow , Sir ? " say I. 
 " can it do any good ? " 
 " no , miss , " Mr. Vholes reply . " I be not aware that it can . " 
 both Ada and I express our regret that he should go , then , only 
 to be disappoint . 
 " Mr. Carstone have lay down the principle of watch his own 
 interest , " say Mr. Vholes , " and when a client lay down his own 
 principle , and it be not immoral , it devolve upon I to carry it 
 out . I wish in business to be exact and open . I be a widower with 
 three daughter - Emma , Jane , and Caroline - and my desire be so to 
 discharge the duty of life as to leave they a good name . this 
 appear to be a pleasant spot , miss . " 
 the remark be make to I in consequence of my be next he as 
 we walk , I assent and enumerate its chief attraction . 
 " indeed ? " say Mr. Vholes . " I have the privilege of support an 
 aged father in the Vale of Taunton - his native place - and I admire 
 that country very much . I have no idea there be anything so 
 attractive here . " 
 to keep up the conversation , I ask Mr. Vholes if he would like to 
 live altogether in the country . 
 " there , miss , " say he , " you touch I on a tender string . my 
 health be not good   my digestion be much impaired , and if I have 
 only myself to consider , I should take refuge in rural habit , 
 especially as the care of business have prevent I from ever 
 come much into contact with general society , and particularly 
 with lady ' society , which I have most wish to mix in . but with 
 my three daughter , Emma , Jane , and Caroline - and my aged father - I 
 can not afford to be selfish . it be true I have no long to 
 maintain a dear grandmother who die in her hundred and second 
 year , but enough remain to render it indispensable that the mill 
 should be always go . " 
 it require some attention to hear he on account of his inward 
 speaking and his lifeless manner . 
 " you will excuse my have mention my daughter , " he say . " they 
 be my weak point . I wish to leave the poor girl some little 
 independence , as well as a good name . " 
 we now arrive at Mr. Boythorn 's house , where the tea - table , all 
 prepare , be await we . Richard come in restless and hurry 
 shortly afterwards , and lean over Mr. Vholes 's chair , whisper 
 something in his ear . Mr. Vholes reply aloud - or as nearly aloud 
 I suppose as he have ever reply to anything - " you will drive I , 
 will you , sir ? it be all the same to I , sir . anything you 
 please . I be quite at your service . " 
 we understand from what follow that Mr. Skimpole be to be leave 
 until the morning to occupy the two place which have be already 
 pay for . as Ada and I be both in low spirit concern Richard 
 and very sorry so to part with he , we make it as plain as we 
 politely could that we should leave Mr. Skimpole to the Dedlock 
 arm and retire when the night - traveller be go . 
 Richard 's high spirit carry everything before they , we all go 
 out together to the top of the hill above the village , where he have 
 order a gig to wait and where we find a man with a lantern 
 standing at the head of the gaunt pale horse that have be 
 harness to it . 
 I never shall forget those two seat side by side in the lantern 's 
 light , Richard all flush and fire and laughter , with the rein in 
 his hand ; Mr. Vholes quite still , black - gloved , and button up , 
 look at he as if he be look at his prey and charm it . 
 I have before I the whole picture of the warm dark night , the 
 summer lightning , the dusty track of road close in by hedgerow 
 and high tree , the gaunt pale horse with his ear prick up , and 
 the driving away at speed to Jarndyce and Jarndyce . 
 my dear girl tell I that night how Richard 's be thereafter 
 prosperous or ruin , befriended or desert , could only make this 
 difference to she , that the more he need love from one unchanging 
 heart , the more love that unchanging heart would have to give he ; 
 how he think of she through his present error , and she would 
 think of he at all time - never of herself if she could devote 
 herself to he , never of her own delight if she could minister to 
 his . 
 and she keep her word ? 
 I look along the road before I , where the distance already 
 shorten and the journey 's end be grow visible ; and true and 
 good above the dead sea of the Chancery suit and all the ashy fruit 
 it cast ashore , I think I see my darling . 
 CHAPTER XXXVIII 
 a Struggle 
 when our time come for return to Bleak House again , we be 
 punctual to the day and be receive with an overpowering welcome . 
 I be perfectly restore to health and strength , and find my 
 housekeeping key lay ready for I in my room , ring myself in as 
 if I have be a new year , with a merry little peal . " once more , 
 duty , duty , Esther , " say I ; " and if you be not overjoyed to do 
 it , more than cheerfully and contentedly , through anything and 
 everything , you ought to be . that be all I have to say to you , my 
 dear ! " 
 the first few morning be morning of so much bustle and 
 business , devote to such settlement of account , such repeat 
 journey to and fro between the growlery and all other part of the 
 house , so many rearrangement of drawer and press , and such a 
 general new begin altogether , that I have not a moment 's 
 leisure . but when these arrangement be complete and everything 
 be in order , I pay a visit of a few hour to London , which 
 something in the letter I have destroy at Chesney Wold have induce 
 I to decide upon in my own mind . 
 I make Caddy Jellyby - her maiden name be so natural to I that I 
 always call she by it - the pretext for this visit and write she a 
 note previously ask the favour of her company on a little 
 business expedition . leave home very early in the morning , I get 
 to London by stage - coach in such good time that I get to Newman 
 Street with the day before I . 
 Caddy , who have not see I since her wedding - day , be so glad and 
 so affectionate that I be half inclined to fear I should make she 
 husband jealous . but he be , in his way , just as bad - I mean as 
 good ; and in short it be the old story , and nobody would leave I 
 any possibility of do anything meritorious . 
 the eld Mr. Turveydrop be in bed , I find , and Caddy be mill 
 his chocolate , which a melancholy little boy who be an apprentice 
  - it seem such a curious thing to be apprentice to the trade of 
 dancing - be wait to carry upstairs . her father - in - law be 
 extremely kind and considerate , Caddy tell I , and they live most 
 happily together .   when she speak of their live together , she 
 mean that the old gentleman have all the good thing and all the 
 good lodging , while she and her husband have what they could get , 
 and be poke into two corner room over the Mews . 
 " and how be your mama , Caddy ? " say I. 
 " why , I hear of she , Esther , " reply Caddy , " through Pa , but I see 
 very little of she . we be good friend , I be glad to say , but Ma 
 think there be something absurd in my have marry a dancing- 
 master , and she be rather afraid of its extend to she . " 
 it strike I that if Mrs. Jellyby have discharge her own natural 
 duty and obligation before she sweep the horizon with a 
 telescope in search of other , she would have take the good 
 precaution against become absurd , but I need scarcely observe 
 that I keep this to myself . 
 " and your papa , Caddy ? " 
 " he come here every evening , " return Caddy , " and be so fond of 
 sit in the corner there that it be a treat to see he . " 
 look at the corner , I plainly perceive the mark of Mr. 
 Jellyby 's head against the wall . it be consolatory to know that 
 he have find such a resting - place for it . 
 " and you , Caddy , " say I , " you be always busy , I will be bind ? " 
 " well , my dear , " return Caddy , " I be indeed , for to tell you a 
 grand secret , I be qualify myself to give lesson . Prince 's 
 health be not strong , and I want to be able to assist he . what 
 with school , and class here , and private pupil , and the 
 apprentice , he really have too much to do , poor fellow ! " 
 the notion of the apprentice be still so odd to I that I ask 
 Caddy if there be many of they . 
 " Four , " say Caddy . " one in - door , and three out . they be very 
 good child ; only when they get together they will play - 
 child - like - instead of attend to their work . so the little 
 boy you see just now waltz by himself in the empty kitchen , and 
 we distribute the other over the house as well as we can . " 
 " that be only for their step , of course ? " say I. 
 " only for their step , " say Caddy . " in that way they practise , so 
 many hour at a time , whatever step they happen to be upon . they 
 dance in the academy , and at this time of year we do figure at 
 five every morning . " 
 " why , what a laborious life ! " I exclaim . 
 " I assure you , my dear , " return Caddy , smile , " when the out- 
 door apprentice ring we up in the morning   the bell ring into our 
 room , not to disturb old Mr. Turveydrop , and when I put up the 
 window and see they stand on the door - step with their little 
 pump under their arm , I be actually remind of the Sweeps . " 
 all this present the art to I in a singular light , to be sure . 
 Caddy enjoy the effect of her communication and cheerfully 
 recount the particular of her own study . 
 " you see , my dear , to save expense I ought to know something of the 
 piano , and I ought to know something of the kit too , and 
 consequently I have to practise those two instrument as well as 
 the detail of our profession . if Ma have be like anybody else , I 
 might have have some little musical knowledge to begin upon . 
 however , I have not   any ; and that part of the work be , at first , a 
 little discouraging , I must allow . but I have a very good ear , and 
 I be use to drudgery - I have to thank Ma for that , at all event - 
 and where there be a will there be a way , you know , Esther , the world 
 over . " say these word , Caddy laughingly sit down at a little 
 jingle square piano and really rattle off a quadrille with great 
 spirit . then she good - humouredly and blushingly get up again , and 
 while she still laugh herself , say , " do not   laugh at I , please ; 
 that be a dear girl ! " 
 I would soon have cry , but I do neither . I encourage she and 
 praise she with all my heart . for I conscientiously believe , 
 dancing - master 's wife though she be , and dancing - mistress though 
 in her limited ambition she aspire to be , she have strike out a 
 natural , wholesome , love course of industry and perseverance that 
 be quite as good as a mission . 
 " my dear , " say Caddy , delight , " you can not   think how you cheer 
 I . I shall owe you , you do not   know how much . what change , 
 Esther , even in my small world ! you recollect that first night , 
 when I be so unpolite and inky ? who would have think , then , of 
 my ever teach people to dance , of all other possibility and 
 impossibility ! " 
 her husband , who have leave we while we have this chat , now come 
 back , preparatory to exercise the apprentice in the ball - room , 
 Caddy inform I she be quite at my disposal . but it be not my 
 time yet , I be glad to tell she , for I should have be vex to 
 take she away then . therefore we three adjourn to the 
 apprentice together , and I make one in the dance . 
 the apprentice be the queer little people . besides the 
 melancholy boy , who , I hop , have not be make so by waltzing 
 alone in the empty kitchen , there be two other boy and one dirty 
 little limp girl in a gauzy dress . such a precocious little girl , 
 with such a dowdy bonnet on   that , too , of a gauzy texture , who 
 bring she sandalled shoe in an old threadbare velvet reticule . 
 such mean little boy , when they be not dance , with string , and 
 marble , and cramp - bone in their pocket , and the most untidy leg 
 and foot - and heel particularly . 
 I ask Caddy what have make their parent choose this profession 
 for they . Caddy say she do not   know ; perhaps they be design 
 for teacher , perhaps for the stage . they be all people in 
 humble circumstance , and the melancholy boy 's mother keep a 
 ginger - beer shop . 
 we dance for an hour with great gravity , the melancholy child 
 do wonder with his low extremity , in which there appear 
 to be some sense of enjoyment though it never rise above his waist . 
 Caddy , while she be observant of her husband and be evidently 
 found upon he , have acquire a grace and self - possession of her 
 own , which , unite to her pretty face and figure , be uncommonly 
 agreeable . she already relieve he of much of the instruction of 
 these young people , and he seldom interfere except to walk his 
 part in the figure if he have anything to do in it . he always 
 play the tune . the affectation of the gauzy child , and her 
 condescension to the boy , be a sight . and thus we dance an hour 
 by the clock . 
 when the practice be conclude , Caddy 's husband make himself ready 
 to go out of town to a school , and Caddy run away to get ready to 
 go out with I . I sit in the ball - room in the interval , 
 contemplate the apprentice . the two out - door boy go upon the 
 staircase to put on their half - boot and pull the in - door boy 's 
 hair , as I judge from the nature of his objection . return 
 with their jacket button and their pump stick in they , they 
 then produce packet of cold bread and meat and bivouac under a 
 paint lyre on the wall . the little gauzy child , have whisk 
 her sandal into the reticule and put on a trodden - down pair of 
 shoe , shake her head into the dowdy bonnet at one shake , and 
 answer my inquiry whether she like dance by reply , " not 
 with boy , " tie it across her chin , and go home contemptuous . 
 " Old Mr. Turveydrop be so sorry , " say Caddy , " that he have not 
 finish dress yet and can not have the pleasure of see you 
 before you go . you be such a favourite of his , Esther . " 
 I express myself much oblige to he , but do not think it 
 necessary to add that I readily dispense with this attention . 
 " it take he a long time to dress , " say Caddy , " because he be 
 very much look up to in such thing , you know , and have a 
 reputation to support . you can not   think how kind he be to Pa. he 
 talk to Pa of an evening about the Prince Regent , and I never see 
 Pa so interested . " 
 there be something in the picture of Mr. Turveydrop bestow his 
 deportment on Mr. Jellyby that quite take my fancy . I ask Caddy 
 if he bring she papa out much . 
 " no , " say Caddy , " I do not   know that he do that , but he talk to 
 Pa , and Pa greatly admire he , and listen , and like it . of 
 course I be aware that Pa have hardly any claim to deportment , but 
 they get on together delightfully . you can not   think what good 
 companion they make . I never see Pa take snuff before in my life , 
 but he take one pinch out of Mr. Turveydrop 's box regularly and 
 keep put it to his nose and take it away again all the 
 evening . " 
 that old Mr. Turveydrop should ever , in the chance and change of 
 life , have come to the rescue of Mr. Jellyby from Borrioboola - Gha 
 appear to I to be one of the pleasantest of oddity . 
 " as to Peepy , " say Caddy with a little hesitation , " whom I be 
 most afraid of - next to have any family of my own , Esther - as an 
 inconvenience to Mr. Turveydrop , the kindness of the old gentleman 
 to that child be beyond everything . he ask to see he , my dear ! 
 he let he take the newspaper up to he in bed ; he give he the 
 crust of his toast to eat ; he send he on little errand about 
 the house ; he tell he to come to I for sixpence . in short , " 
 say Caddy cheerily , " and not to prose , I be a very fortunate girl 
 and ought to be very grateful . where be we go , Esther ? " 
 " to the Old Street Road , " say I , " where I have a few word to say 
 to the solicitor 's clerk who be send to meet I at the coach- 
 office on the very day when I come to London and first see you , my 
 dear . now I think of it , the gentleman who bring we to your 
 house . " 
 " then , indeed , I seem to be naturally the person to go with you , " 
 return Caddy . 
 to the Old Street Road we go and there inquire at Mrs. Guppy 's 
 residence for Mrs. Guppy . Mrs. Guppy , occupy the parlour and 
 have indeed be visibly in danger of crack herself like a nut 
 in the front - parlour door by peep out before she be ask for , 
 immediately present herself and request we to walk in . she be 
 an old lady in a large cap , with rather a red nose and rather an 
 unsteady eye , but smile all over . her close little sit - room 
 be prepare for a visit , and there be a portrait of her son in it 
 which , I have almost write here , be more like than life : it 
 insist upon he with such obstinacy , and be so determined not to 
 let he off . 
 not only be the portrait there , but we find the original there 
 too . he be dress in a great many colour and be discover at 
 a table read law - paper with his forefinger to his forehead . 
 " Miss Summerson , " say Mr. Guppy , rise , " this be indeed an oasis . 
 Mother , will you be so good as to put a chair for the other lady 
 and get out of the gangway . " 
 Mrs. Guppy , whose incessant smiling give she quite a waggish 
 appearance , do as her son request and then sit down in a corner , 
 hold her pocket handkerchief to her chest , like a fomentation , 
 with both hand . 
 I present Caddy , and Mr. Guppy say that any friend of mine be 
 more than welcome . I then proceed to the object of my visit . 
 " I take the liberty of send you a note , sir , " say I. 
 Mr. Guppy acknowledge the receipt by take it out of his breast- 
 pocket , put it to his lip , and return it to his pocket with 
 a bow . Mr. Guppy 's mother be so divert that she roll her head 
 as she smile and make a silent appeal to Caddy with her elbow . 
 " could I speak to you alone for a moment ? " say I. 
 anything like the jocoseness of Mr. Guppy 's mother just now , I 
 think I never see . she make no sound of laughter , but she roll 
 her head , and shake it , and put she handkerchief to her mouth , and 
 appeal to Caddy with her elbow , and her hand , and her shoulder , 
 and be so unspeakably entertain altogether that it be with some 
 difficulty she could marshal Caddy through the little folding - door 
 into her bedroom adjoining . 
 " Miss Summerson , " say Mr. Guppy , " you will excuse the waywardness 
 of a parent ever mindful of a son 's appiness . my mother , though 
 highly exasperating to the feeling , be actuate by maternal 
 dictate . " 
 I could hardly have believe that anybody could in a moment have 
 turn so red or change so much as Mr. Guppy do when I now put up 
 my veil . 
 " I ask the favour of see you for a few moment here , " say I , 
 " in preference to call at Mr. Kenge 's because , remember what 
 you say on an occasion when you speak to I in confidence , I 
 fear I might otherwise cause you some embarrassment , Mr. Guppy . " 
 I cause he embarrassment enough as it be , I be sure . I never 
 see such faltering , such confusion , such amazement and apprehension . 
 " Miss Summerson , " stammer Mr. Guppy , " I - I - beg your pardon , but 
 in our profession - we - we - find it necessary to be explicit . you 
 have refer to an occasion , miss , when I - when I do myself the 
 honour of make a declaration which - " 
 something seem to rise in his throat that he could not possibly 
 swallow . he put his hand there , cough , make face , try again 
 to swallow it , cough again , make face again , look all round 
 the room , and flutter his paper . 
 " a kind of giddy sensation have come upon I , miss , " he explain , 
 " which rather knock I over . I - er - a little subject to this sort 
 of thing - er - by George ! " 
 I give he a little time to recover . he consume it in put his 
 hand to his forehead and take it away again , and in back his 
 chair into the corner behind he . 
 " my intention be to remark , miss , " say Mr. Guppy , " dear me - 
 something bronchial , I think - hem ! - to remark that you be so good 
 on that occasion as to repel and repudiate that declaration . you - 
 you would not   perhaps object to admit that ? though no witness be 
 present , it might be a satisfaction to - to your mind - if you be to 
 put in that admission . " 
 " there can be no doubt , " say I , " that I decline your proposal 
 without any reservation or qualification whatever , Mr. Guppy . " 
 " thank you , miss , " he return , measure the table with his 
 troubled hand . " so far that be satisfactory , and it do you 
 credit . er - this be certainly bronchial ! - must be in the tubes - 
 er - you would not   perhaps be offend if I be to mention - not that 
 it be necessary , for your own good sense or any person 's sense must 
 show them that - if I be to mention that such declaration on my part 
 be final , and there terminate ? " 
 " I quite understand that , " say I. 
 " perhaps - er - it may not be worth the form , but it might be a 
 satisfaction to your mind - perhaps you would not   object to admit 
 that , miss ? " say Mr. Guppy . 
 " I admit it most fully and freely , " say I. 
 " thank you , " return Mr. Guppy . " very honourable , I be sure . I 
 regret that my arrangement in life , combine with circumstance 
 over which I have no control , will put it out of my power ever to 
 fall back upon that offer or to renew it in any shape or form 
 whatever , but it will ever be a retrospect entwine - er - with 
 friendship 's bower . " Mr. Guppy 's bronchitis come to his relief 
 and stop his measurement of the table . 
 " I may now perhaps mention what I wish to say to you ? " I begin . 
 " I shall be honour , I be sure , " say Mr. Guppy . " I be so 
 persuade that your own good sense and right feeling , miss , will - 
 will keep you as square as possible - that I can have nothing but 
 pleasure , I be sure , in hear any observation you may wish to 
 offer . " 
 " you be so good as to imply , on that occasion - " 
 " excuse I , miss , " say Mr. Guppy , " but we have well not travel 
 out of the record into implication . I can not admit that I imply 
 anything . " 
 " you say on that occasion , " I recommence , " that you might 
 possibly have the mean of advance my interest and promote my 
 fortune by make discovery of which I should be the subject . I 
 presume that you found that belief upon your general knowledge of 
 my be an orphan girl , indebte for everything to the benevolence 
 of Mr. Jarndyce . now , the beginning and the end of what I have 
 come to beg of you be , Mr. Guppy , that you will have the kindness 
 to relinquish all idea of so serve I . I have think of this 
 sometimes , and I have think of it most lately - since I have be 
 ill . at length I have decide , in case you should at any time 
 recall that purpose and act upon it in any way , to come to you and 
 assure you that you be altogether mistaken . you could make no 
 discovery in reference to I that would do I the least service or 
 give I the least pleasure . I be acquaint with my personal 
 history , and I have it in my power to assure you that you never can 
 advance my welfare by such mean . you may , perhaps , have abandon 
 this project a long time . if so , excuse my give you unnecessary 
 trouble . if not , I entreat you , on the assurance I have give you , 
 henceforth to lay it aside . I beg you to do this , for my peace . " 
 " I be bind to confess , " say Mr. Guppy , " that you express 
 yourself , miss , with that good sense and right feeling for which I 
 give you credit . nothing can be more satisfactory than such right 
 feeling , and if I mistook any intention on your part just now , I 
 be prepared to tender a full apology . I should wish to be 
 understand , miss , as hereby offer that apology - limit it , as 
 your own good sense and right feeling will point out the necessity 
 of , to the present proceeding . " 
 I must say for Mr. Guppy that the snuffling manner he have have upon 
 he improve very much . he seem truly glad to be able to do 
 something I ask , and he look ashamed . 
 " if you will allow I to finish what I have to say at once so that 
 I may have no occasion to resume , " I go on , see he about to 
 speak , " you will do I a kindness , sir . I come to you as privately 
 as possible because you announce this impression of yours to I in 
 a confidence which I have really wish to respect - and which I 
 always have respect , as you remember . I have mention my 
 illness . there really be no reason why I should hesitate to say 
 that I know very well that any little delicacy I might have have in 
 make a request to you be quite removed . therefore I make the 
 entreaty I have now prefer , and I hope you will have sufficient 
 consideration for I to accede to it . " 
 I must do Mr. Guppy the further justice of say that he have 
 look more and more ashamed and that he look most ashamed and 
 very earnest when he now reply with a burn face , " upon my word 
 and honour , upon my life , upon my soul , Miss Summerson , as I be a 
 living man , I will act accord to your wish ! I will never go another 
 step in opposition to it . I will take my oath to it if it will be 
 any satisfaction to you . in what I promise at this present time 
 touch the matter now in question , " continue Mr. Guppy rapidly , 
 as if he be repeat a familiar form of word , " I speak the 
 truth , the whole truth , and nothing but the truth , so - " 
 " I be quite satisfied , " say I , rise at this point , " and I thank 
 you very much . Caddy , my dear , I be ready ! " 
 Mr. Guppy 's mother return with Caddy   now make I the recipient 
 of her silent laughter and her nudge , and we take our leave . Mr. 
 Guppy see we to the door with the air of one who be either 
 imperfectly awake or walk in his sleep ; and we leave he there , 
 star . 
 but in a minute he come after we down the street without any hat , 
 and with his long hair all blow about , and stop we , say 
 fervently , " Miss Summerson , upon my honour and soul , you may depend 
 upon I ! " 
 " I do , " say I , " quite confidently . " 
 " I beg your pardon , miss , " say Mr. Guppy , go with one leg and 
 stay with the other , " but this lady be present - your own 
 witness - it might be a satisfaction to your mind   which I should 
 wish to set at rest   if you be to repeat those admission . " 
 " well , Caddy , " say I , turn to she , " perhaps you will not be 
 surprised when I tell you , my dear , that there never have be any 
 engagement - " 
 " no proposal or promise of marriage whatsoever , " suggest Mr. 
 Guppy . 
 " no proposal or promise of marriage whatsoever , " say I , " between 
 this gentleman - " 
 " William Guppy , of Penton Place , Pentonville , in the county of 
 Middlesex , " he murmur . 
 " between this gentleman , Mr. William Guppy , of Penton Place , 
 Pentonville , in the county of Middlesex , and myself . " 
 " thank you , miss , " say Mr. Guppy . " very full - er - excuse I - 
 lady 's name , Christian and surname both ? " 
 I give they . 
 " married woman , I believe ? " say Mr. Guppy . " married woman . thank 
 you . formerly Caroline Jellyby , spinster , then of Thavies Inn , 
 within the city of London , but extra - parochial ; now of Newman 
 Street , Oxford Street . much oblige . " 
 he run home and come run back again . 
 " touch that matter , you know , I really and truly be very sorry 
 that my arrangement in life , combine with circumstance over 
 which I have no control , should prevent a renewal of what be 
 wholly terminate some time back , " say Mr. Guppy to I forlornly 
 and despondently , " but it could not   be . now could it , you know ! I 
 only put it to you . " 
 I reply it certainly could not . the subject do not admit of a 
 doubt . he thank I and run to his mother 's again - and back 
 again . 
 " it be very honourable of you , miss , I be sure , " say Mr. Guppy . 
 " if an altar could be erect in the bower of friendship - but , 
 upon my soul , you may rely upon I in every respect save and except 
 the tender passion only ! " 
 the struggle in Mr. Guppy 's breast and the numerous oscillation it 
 occasion he between his mother 's door and we be sufficiently 
 conspicuous in the windy street   particularly as his hair want 
 cut   to make we hurry away . I do so with a lightened heart ; 
 but when we last look back , Mr. Guppy be still oscillate in 
 the same troubled state of mind . 
 CHAPTER XXXIX 
 Attorney and Client 
 the name of Mr. Vholes , precede by the legend Ground - Floor , be 
 inscribe upon a door - post in Symond 's Inn , Chancery Lane - a 
 little , pale , wall - eye , woebegone inn like a large dust - binn of 
 two compartment and a sifter . it look as if Symond be a 
 spar man in his way and construct his inn of old building 
 material which take kindly to the dry rot and to dirt and all 
 thing decay and dismal , and perpetuate Symond 's memory with 
 congenial shabbiness . quarter in this dingy hatchment 
 commemorative of Symond be the legal bearing of Mr. Vholes . 
 Mr. Vholes 's office , in disposition retire and in situation 
 retire , be squeeze up in a corner and blink at a dead wall . 
 three foot of knotty - floor dark passage bring the client to Mr. 
 Vholes 's jet - black door , in an angle profoundly dark on the 
 bright midsummer morning and encumber by a black bulk - head of 
 cellarage staircase against which belate civilian generally 
 strike their brow . Mr. Vholes 's chamber be on so small a scale 
 that one clerk can open the door without get off his stool , 
 while the other who elbow he at the same desk have equal 
 facility for poke the fire . a smell as of unwholesome sheep 
 blend with the smell of must and dust be referable to the 
 nightly   and often daily   consumption of mutton fat in candle and 
 to the fretting of parchment form and skin in greasy drawer . 
 the atmosphere be otherwise stale and close . the place be last 
 paint or whitewash beyond the memory of man , and the two 
 chimney smoke , and there be a loose outer surface of soot 
 everywhere , and the dull crack window in their heavy frame have 
 but one piece of character in they , which be a determination to be 
 always dirty and always shut unless coerce . this account for the 
 phenomenon of the weak of the two usually have a bundle of 
 firewood thrust between its jaw in hot weather . 
 Mr. Vholes be a very respectable man . he have not a large business , 
 but he be a very respectable man . he be allow by the great 
 attorney who have make good fortune or be make they to be a 
 most respectable man . he never miss a chance in his practice , 
 which be a mark of respectability . he never take any pleasure , 
 which be another mark of respectability . he be reserve and 
 serious , which be another mark of respectability . his digestion be 
 impaired , which be highly respectable . and he be make hay of the 
 grass which be flesh , for his three daughter . and his father be 
 dependent on he in the Vale of Taunton . 
 the one great principle of the english law be to make business for 
 itself . there be no other principle distinctly , certainly , and 
 consistently maintain through all its narrow turning . view by 
 this light it become a coherent scheme and not the monstrous maze 
 the laity be apt to think it . let they but once clearly perceive 
 that its grand principle be to make business for itself at their 
 expense , and surely they will cease to grumble . 
 but not perceive this quite plainly - only see it by half in a 
 confused way - the laity sometimes suffer in peace and pocket , with a 
 bad grace , and do grumble very much . then this respectability of 
 Mr. Vholes be bring into powerful play against they . " repeal this 
 statute , my good sir ? " say Mr. Kenge to a smart client . " repeal 
 it , my dear sir ? never , with my consent . alter this law , sir , and 
 what will be the effect of your rash proceeding on a class of 
 practitioner very worthily represent , allow I to say to you , by 
 the opposite attorney in the case , Mr. Vholes ? Sir , that class of 
 practitioner would be sweep from the face of the earth . now you 
 can not afford - I will say , the social system can not afford - to lose 
 an order of man like Mr. Vholes . diligent , persevere , steady , 
 acute in business . my dear sir , I understand your present feeling 
 against the exist state of thing , which I grant to be a little 
 hard in your case ; but I can never raise my voice for the demolition 
 of a class of man like Mr. Vholes . " the respectability of Mr. 
 Vholes have even be cite with crush effect before parliamentary 
 committee , as in the follow blue minute of a distinguished 
 attorney 's evidence . " question   number five hundred and seventeen 
 thousand eight hundred and sixty - nine : if I understand you , these 
 form of practice indisputably occasion delay ? answer : yes , some 
 delay . question : and great expense ? answer : Most assuredly they 
 can not be go through for nothing . question : and unspeakable 
 vexation ? answer : I be not prepared to say that . they have never 
 give I any vexation ; quite the contrary . question : but you think 
 that their abolition would damage a class of practitioner ? answer : 
 I have no doubt of it . question : can you instance any type of that 
 class ? answer : yes . I would unhesitatingly mention Mr. Vholes . 
 he would be ruin . question : Mr. Vholes be consider , in the 
 profession , a respectable man ? answer : " - which prove fatal to the 
 inquiry for ten year - " Mr. Vholes be consider , in the profession , 
 a most respectable man . " 
 so in familiar conversation , private authority no less 
 disintereste will remark that they do not   know what this age be 
 come to , that we be plunge down precipice , that now here be 
 something else go , that these change be death to people like 
 Vholes - a man of undoubted respectability , with a father in the 
 Vale of Taunton , and three daughter at home . take a few step 
 more in this direction , say they , and what be to become of Vholes 's 
 father ? be he to perish ? and of Vholes 's daughter ? be they to 
 be shirt - maker , or governess ? as though , Mr. Vholes and his 
 relation be minor cannibal chief and it be propose to 
 abolish cannibalism , indignant champion be to put the case thus : 
 make man - eat unlawful , and you starve the Vholeses ! 
 in a word , Mr. Vholes , with his three daughter and his father in 
 the Vale of Taunton , be continually do duty , like a piece of 
 timber , to shore up some decay foundation that have become a 
 pitfall and a nuisance . and with a great many people in a great 
 many instance , the question be never one of a change from wrong to 
 right   which be quite an extraneous consideration , but be always 
 one of injury or advantage to that eminently respectable legion , 
 vhole . 
 the Chancellor be , within these ten minute , " up " for the long 
 vacation . Mr. Vholes , and his young client , and several blue bag 
 hastily stuff out of all regularity of form , as the large sort 
 of serpent be in their first gorge state , have return to the 
 official den . Mr. Vholes , quiet and unmoved , as a man of so much 
 respectability ought to be , take off his close black glove as if 
 he be skin his hand , lift off his tight hat as if he be 
 scalp himself , and sit down at his desk . the client throw his 
 hat and glove upon the ground - toss they anywhere , without 
 look after they or care where they go ; fling himself into a 
 chair , half sighing and half groan ; rest his ache head upon 
 his hand and look the portrait of young despair . 
 " again nothing do ! " say Richard . " nothing , nothing do ! " 
 " do not   say nothing do , sir , " return the placid vhole . " that be 
 scarcely fair , sir , scarcely fair ! " 
 " why , what be do ? " say Richard , turn gloomily upon he . 
 " that may not be the whole question , " return Vholes , " the question 
 may branch off into what be do , what be do ? " 
 " and what be do ? " ask the moody client . 
 vhole , sit with his arm on the desk , quietly bring the 
 tip of his five right finger to meet the tip of his five left 
 finger , and quietly separate they again , and fixedly and slowly 
 look at his client , reply , " a good deal be do , sir . we 
 have put our shoulder to the wheel , Mr. Carstone , and the wheel be 
 go round . " 
 " yes , with ixion on it . how be I to get through the next four or 
 five accurse month ? " exclaim the young man , rise from his 
 chair and walk about the room . 
 " Mr. C. , " return Vholes , follow he close with his eye 
 wherever he go , " your spirit be hasty , and I be sorry for it on 
 your account . excuse I if I recommend you not to chafe so much , 
 not to be so impetuous , not to wear yourself out so . you should 
 have more patience . you should sustain yourself well . " 
 " I ought to imitate you , in fact , Mr. Vholes ? " say Richard , 
 sit down again with an impatient laugh and beat the devil 's 
 tattoo with his boot on the patternless carpet . 
 " Sir , " return Vholes , always look at the client as if he be 
 make a linger meal of he with his eye as well as with his 
 professional appetite . " Sir , " return Vholes with his inward 
 manner of speech and his bloodless quietude , " I should not have have 
 the presumption to propose myself as a model for your imitation or 
 any man 's . let I but leave the good name to my three daughter , 
 and that be enough for I ; I be not a self - seeker . but since you 
 mention I so pointedly , I will acknowledge that I should like to 
 impart to you a little of my - come , sir , you be disposed to call 
 it insensibility , and I be sure I have no objection - say 
 insensibility - a little of my insensibility . " 
 " Mr. Vholes , " explain the client , somewhat abash , " I have no 
 intention to accuse you of insensibility . " 
 " I think you have , sir , without know it , " return the equable 
 vhole . " very naturally . it be my duty to attend to your 
 interest with a cool head , and I can quite understand that to your 
 excited feeling I may appear , at such time as the present , 
 insensible . my daughter may know I well ; my aged father may 
 know I well . but they have know I much long than you have , 
 and the confide eye of affection be not the distrustful eye of 
 business . not that I complain , sir , of the eye of business being 
 distrustful ; quite the contrary . in attend to your interest , I 
 wish to have all possible check upon I ; it be right that I should 
 have they ; I court inquiry . but your interest demand that I 
 should be cool and methodical , Mr. Carstone ; and I can not be 
 otherwise - no , sir , not even to please you . " 
 Mr. Vholes , after glance at the official cat who be patiently 
 watch a mouse 's hole , fix his charmed gaze again on his young 
 client and proceed in his button - up , half - audible voice as if 
 there be an unclean spirit in he that will neither come out nor 
 speak out , " what be you to do , sir , you inquire , during the 
 vacation . I should hope you gentleman of the army may find many 
 mean of amuse yourself if you give your mind to it . if you 
 have ask I what I be to do during the vacation , I could have 
 answer you more readily . I be to attend to your interest . I be 
 to be find here , day by day , attend to your interest . that be 
 my duty , Mr. C. , and term - time or vacation make no difference to 
 I . if you wish to consult I as to your interest , you will find 
 I here at all time alike . other professional man go out of town . 
 I do not . not that I blame they for go ; I merely say I do not   go . 
 this desk be your rock , sir ! " 
 Mr. Vholes give it a rap , and it sound as hollow as a coffin . 
 not to Richard , though . there be encouragement in the sound to 
 he . perhaps Mr. Vholes know there be . 
 " I be perfectly aware , Mr. Vholes , " say Richard , more familiarly 
 and good - humouredly , " that you be the most reliable fellow in the 
 world and that to have to do with you be to have to do with a man 
 of business who be not to be hoodwink . but put yourself in my 
 case , drag on this dislocate life , sink deep and deep 
 into difficulty every day , continually hop and continually 
 disappoint , conscious of change upon change for the bad in 
 myself , and of no change for the well in anything else , and you 
 will find it a dark - look case sometimes , as I do . " 
 " you know , " say Mr. Vholes , " that I never give hope , sir . I tell 
 you from the first , Mr. C. , that I never give hope . particularly 
 in a case like this , where the great part of the cost come out 
 of the estate , I should not be considerate of my good name if I 
 give hope . it might seem as if cost be my object . still , when 
 you say there be no change for the well , I must , as a bare matter 
 of fact , deny that . " 
 " aye ? " return Richard , brightening . " but how do you make it out ? " 
 " Mr. Carstone , you be represent by - " 
 " you say just now - a rock . " 
 " yes , sir , " say Mr. Vholes , gently shake his head and rap 
 the hollow desk , with a sound as if ash be fall on ash , 
 and dust on dust , " a rock . that be something . you be separately 
 represent , and no long hide and lose in the interest of 
 other . that be something . the suit do not sleep ; we wake it up , 
 we air it , we walk it about . that be something . it be not all 
 Jarndyce , in fact as well as in name . that be something . nobody 
 have it all his own way now , sir . and that be something , surely . " 
 Richard , his face flush suddenly , strike the desk with his 
 clench hand . 
 " Mr. Vholes ! if any man have tell I when I first go to John 
 Jarndyce 's house that he be anything but the disinterested friend 
 he seem - that he be what he have gradually turn out to be - I 
 could have find no word strong enough to repel the slander ; I 
 could not have defend he too ardently . so little do I know of 
 the world ! whereas now I do declare to you that he become to I 
 the embodiment of the suit ; that in place of its be an 
 abstraction , it be John Jarndyce ; that the more I suffer , the more 
 indignant I be with he ; that every new delay and every new 
 disappointment be only a new injury from John Jarndyce 's hand . " 
 " no , no , " say Vholes . " do not   say so . we ought to have patience , 
 all of we . besides , I never disparage , sir . I never disparage . " 
 " Mr. Vholes , " return the angry client . " you know as well as I 
 that he would have strangle the suit if he could . " 
 " he be not active in it , " Mr. Vholes admit with an appearance of 
 reluctance . " he certainly be not active in it . but however , but 
 however , he might have have amiable intention . who can read the 
 heart , Mr. C. ! " 
 " you can , " return Richard . 
 " I , Mr. C. ? " 
 " well enough to know what his intention be . be or be not our 
 interest conflicting ? tell - I - that ! " say Richard , accompany 
 his last three word with three rap on his rock of trust . 
 " Mr. C. , " return Vholes , immovable in attitude and never wink 
 his hungry eye , " I should be want in my duty as your 
 professional adviser , I should be depart from my fidelity to 
 your interest , if I represent those interest as identical with 
 the interest of Mr. Jarndyce . they be no such thing , sir . I 
 never impute motif ; I both have and be a father , and I never 
 impute motif . but I must not shrink from a professional duty , 
 even if it sow dissension in family . I understand you to be 
 now consult I professionally as to your interest ? you be so ? 
 I reply , then , they be not identical with those of Mr. Jarndyce . " 
 " of course they be not ! " cry Richard . " you find that out long 
 ago . " 
 " Mr. C. , " return Vholes , " I wish to say no more of any third party 
 than be necessary . I wish to leave my good name unsullie , 
 together with any little property of which I may become possess 
 through industry and perseverance , to my daughter Emma , Jane , and 
 Caroline . I also desire to live in amity with my professional 
 brother . when Mr. Skimpole do I the honour , sir - I will not say 
 the very high honour , for I never stoop to flattery - of bring we 
 together in this room , I mention to you that I could offer no 
 opinion or advice as to your interest while those interest be 
 entrust to another member of the profession . and I speak in such 
 term as I be bind to speak of Kenge and Carboy 's office , which 
 stand high . you , sir , think fit to withdraw your interest from 
 that keep nevertheless and to offer they to I . you bring 
 they with clean hand , sir , and I accept they with clean hand . 
 those interest be now paramount in this office . my digestive 
 function , as you may have hear I mention , be not in a good 
 state , and rest might improve they ; but I shall not rest , sir , 
 while I be your representative . whenever you want I , you will 
 find I here . summon I anywhere , and I will come . during the 
 long vacation , sir , I shall devote my leisure to study your 
 interest more and more closely and to make arrangement for 
 move heaven and earth   include , of course , the Chancellor 
 after Michaelmas term ; and when I ultimately congratulate you , 
 sir , " say Mr. Vholes with the severity of a determined man , " when 
 I ultimately congratulate you , sir , with all my heart , on your 
 accession to fortune - which , but that I never give hope , I might 
 say something furth about - you will owe I nothing beyond 
 whatever little balance may be then outstanding of the cost as 
 between solicitor and client not include in the tax cost 
 allow out of the estate . I pretend to no claim upon you , Mr. C. , 
 but for the zealous and active discharge - not the languid and 
 routine discharge , sir : that much credit I stipulate for - of my 
 professional duty . my duty prosperously end , all between we be 
 end . " 
 vhole finally add , by way of rider to this declaration of his 
 principle , that as Mr. Carstone be about to rejoin his regiment , 
 perhaps Mr. C. will favour he with an order on his agent for 
 twenty pound on account . 
 " for there have be many little consultation and attendance of 
 late , sir , " observe Vholes , turn over the leaf of his diary , 
 " and these thing mount up , and I do not   profess to be a man of 
 capital . when we first enter on our present relation I state 
 to you openly - it be a principle of mine that there never can be 
 too much openness between solicitor and client - that I be not a 
 man of capital and that if capital be your object you have well 
 leave your paper in Kenge 's office . no , Mr. C. , you will find 
 none of the advantage or disadvantage of capital here , sir . 
 this , " Vholes give the desk one hollow blow again , " be your rock ; 
 it pretend to be nothing more . " 
 the client , with his dejection insensibly relieve and his vague 
 hope rekindle , take pen and ink and write the draft , not 
 without perplexed consideration and calculation of the date it may 
 bear , imply scant effect in the agent 's hand . all the while , 
 Vholes , button up in body and mind , look at he attentively . 
 all the while , Vholes 's official cat watch the mouse 's hole . 
 lastly , the client , shake hand , beseech Mr. Vholes , for 
 heaven 's sake and earth 's sake , to do his utmost to " pull he 
 through " the Court of Chancery . Mr. Vholes , who never give hope , 
 lay his palm upon the client 's shoulder and answer with a smile , 
 " always here , sir . personally , or by letter , you will always find 
 I here , sir , with my shoulder to the wheel . " thus they part , and 
 Vholes , leave alone , employ himself in carry sundry little 
 matter out of his diary into his draft bill book for the ultimate 
 behoof of his three daughter . so might an industrious fox or bear 
 make up his account of chicken or stray traveller with an eye to 
 his cub , not to disparage by that word the three raw - visage , 
 lank , and button - up maiden who dwell with the parent Vholes in 
 an earthy cottage situate in a damp garden at Kennington . 
 Richard , emerge from the heavy shade of Symond 's inn into the 
 sunshine of Chancery Lane - for there happen to be sunshine there 
 to - day - walk thoughtfully on , and turn into Lincoln 's Inn , and 
 pass under the shadow of the Lincoln 's inn tree . on many such 
 lounger have the speckle shadow of those tree often fall ; on 
 the like bent head , the bite nail , the lower eye , the 
 linger step , the purposeless and dreamy air , the good consuming 
 and consume , the life turn sour . this lounger be not shabby 
 yet , but that may come . Chancery , which know no wisdom but in 
 precedent , be very rich in such precedent ; and why should one be 
 different from ten thousand ? 
 yet the time be so short since his depreciation begin that as he 
 saunter away , reluctant to leave the spot for some long month 
 together , though he hat it , Richard himself may feel his own case 
 as if it be a startling one . while his heart be heavy with 
 corroding care , suspense , distrust , and doubt , it may have room for 
 some sorrowful wonder when he recall how different his first visit 
 there , how different he , how different all the colour of his mind . 
 but injustice breed injustice ; the fighting with shadow and be 
 defeat by they necessitate the setting up of substance to 
 combat ; from the impalpable suit which no man alive can understand , 
 the time for that be long go by , it have become a gloomy relief 
 to turn to the palpable figure of the friend who would have save 
 he from this ruin and make HIM his enemy . Richard have tell Vholes 
 the truth . be he in a harden or a softened mood , he still lay 
 his injury equally at that door ; he be thwart , in that 
 quarter , of a set purpose , and that purpose could only originate in 
 the one subject that be resolve his existence into itself ; 
 besides , it be a justification to he in his own eye to have an 
 embody antagonist and oppressor . 
 be Richard a monster in all this , or would Chancery be find rich 
 in such precedent too if they could be get for citation from the 
 Recording Angel ? 
 two pair of eye not unused to such people look after he , as , 
 bite his nail and brooding , he cross the square and be 
 swallow up by the shadow of the southern gateway . Mr. Guppy and 
 Mr. Weevle be the possessor of those eye , and they have be 
 lean in conversation against the low stone parapet under the 
 tree . he pass close by they , see nothing but the ground . 
 " William , " say Mr. Weevle , adjust his whisker , " there be 
 combustion go on there ! it be not a case of spontaneous , but 
 it be smoulder combustion it be . " 
 " ah ! " say Mr. Guppy . " he would not   keep out of Jarndyce , and I 
 suppose he be over head and ear in debt . I never know much of he . 
 he be as high as the monument when he be on trial at our place . 
 a good riddance to I , whether as clerk or client ! well , Tony , 
 that as I be mention be what they be up to . " 
 Mr. Guppy , refolde his arm , resettle himself against the 
 parapet , as resume a conversation of interest . 
 " they be still up to it , sir , " say Mr. Guppy , ' still take 
 stock , still examine paper , still go over the heap and heap 
 of rubbish . at this rate they will be at it these seven year . " 
 " and Small be help ? " 
 " Small leave we at a week 's notice . tell Kenge his grandfather 's 
 business be too much for the old gentleman and he could well 
 himself by undertake it . there have be a coolness between 
 myself and Small on account of his be so close . but he say you 
 and I begin it , and as he have I there - for we do - I put our 
 acquaintance on the old footing . that be how I come to know what 
 they be up to . " 
 " you have not   look in at all ? " 
 " Tony , " say Mr. Guppy , a little disconcert , " to be unreserve 
 with you , I do not   greatly relish the house , except in your company , 
 and therefore I have not ; and therefore I propose this little 
 appointment for our fetch away your thing . there go the hour 
 by the clock ! Tony " - Mr. Guppy become mysteriously and tenderly 
 eloquent - " it be necessary that I should impress upon your mind 
 once more that circumstance over which I have no control have make 
 a melancholy alteration in my most cherished plan and in that 
 unrequited image which I formerly mention to you as a friend . 
 that image be shatter , and that idol be lay low . my only wish 
 now in connexion with the object which I have an idea of carry 
 out in the court with your aid as a friend be to let them alone and 
 bury them in oblivion . do you think it possible , do you think it at 
 all likely   I put it to you , Tony , as a friend , from your 
 knowledge of that capricious and deep old character who fall a prey 
 to the - spontaneous element , do you , Tony , think it at all likely 
 that on second thought he put those letter away anywhere , after 
 you see he alive , and that they be not destroy that night ? " 
 Mr. Weevle reflect for some time . shake his head . decidedly 
 think not . 
 " Tony , " say Mr. Guppy as they walk towards the court , " once again 
 understand I , as a friend . without enter into further 
 explanation , I may repeat that the idol be down . I have no 
 purpose to serve now but burial in oblivion . to that I have 
 pledge myself . I owe it to myself , and I owe it to the shatter 
 image , as also to the circumstance over which I have no control . 
 if you be to express to I by a gesture , by a wink , that you see 
 lie anywhere in your late lodging any paper that so much as 
 look like the paper in question , I would pitch they into the 
 fire , sir , on my own responsibility . " 
 Mr. Weevle nod . Mr. Guppy , much elevated in his own opinion by 
 have deliver these observation , with an air in part forensic 
 and in part romantic - this gentleman have a passion for 
 conduct anything in the form of an examination , or deliver 
 anything in the form of a sum up or a speech - accompany his 
 friend with dignity to the court . 
 never since it have be a court have it have such a Fortunatus ' purse 
 of gossip as in the proceeding at the rag and bottle shop . 
 regularly , every morning at eight , be the eld Mr. Smallweed 
 bring down to the corner and carry in , accompany by Mrs. 
 Smallweed , Judy , and Bart ; and regularly , all day , do they all 
 remain there until nine at night , solace by gipsy dinner , not 
 abundant in quantity , from the cook 's shop , rummage and 
 search , dig , delving , and diving among the treasure of the 
 late lamented . what those treasure be they keep so secret that 
 the court be madden . in its delirium it imagine guineas pour 
 out of tea - pot , crown - piece overflow punch - bowl , old chair 
 and mattress stuff with Bank of England note . it possess 
 itself of the sixpenny history   with highly colour fold 
 frontispiece   of Mr. Daniel Dancer and his sister , and also of Mr. 
 Elwes , of Suffolk , and transfer all the fact from those authentic 
 narrative to Mr. Krook . twice when the dustman be call in to 
 carry off a cartload of old paper , ash , and broken bottle , the 
 whole court assemble and pry into the basket as they come 
 forth . many time the two gentleman who write with the ravenous 
 little pen on the tissue - paper be see prowl in the 
 neighbourhood - shy of each other , their late partnership be 
 dissolve . the Sol skilfully carry a vein of the prevailing 
 interest through the harmonic night . Little Swills , in what be 
 professionally know as " patter " allusion to the subject , be 
 receive with loud applause ; and the same vocalist " gag " in the 
 regular business like a man inspire . even Miss M. Melvilleson , in 
 the revive caledonian melody of " we be a - nodding , " point the 
 sentiment that " the dog love broo "   whatever the nature of that 
 refreshment may be   with such archness and such a turn of the head 
 towards next door that she be immediately understand to mean Mr. 
 Smallweed love to find money , and be nightly honour with a 
 double encore . for all this , the court discover nothing ; and as 
 Mrs. Piper and Mrs. Perkins now communicate to the late lodger whose 
 appearance be the signal for a general rally , it be in one 
 continual ferment to discover everything , and more . 
 Mr. Weevle and Mr. Guppy , with every eye in the court 's head upon 
 they , knock at the closed door of the late lamented 's house , in a 
 high state of popularity . but be contrary to the court 's 
 expectation admit , they immediately become unpopular and be 
 consider to mean no good . 
 the shutter be more or less close all over the house , and the 
 ground - floor be sufficiently dark to require candle . introduce 
 into the back shop by Mr. Smallweed the young , they , fresh from 
 the sunlight , can at first see nothing save darkness and shadow ; 
 but they gradually discern the eld Mr. Smallweed seat in his 
 chair upon the brink of a well or grave of waste - paper , the 
 virtuous Judy groping therein like a female sexton , and Mrs. 
 Smallweed on the level ground in the vicinity snow up in a heap 
 of paper fragment , print , and manuscript which would appear to be 
 the accumulate compliment that have be send fly at she in 
 the course of the day . the whole party , Small include , be 
 blacken with dust and dirt and present a fiendish appearance not 
 relieve by the general aspect of the room . there be more litter 
 and lumber in it than of old , and it be dirty if possible ; 
 likewise , it be ghostly with trace of its dead inhabitant and even 
 with his chalk writing on the wall . 
 on the entrance of visitor , Mr. Smallweed and Judy simultaneously 
 fold their arm and stop in their research . 
 " Aha ! " croak the old gentleman . " how de do , gentleman , how de do ! 
 come to fetch your property , Mr. Weevle ? that be well , that be well . 
 ha ! ha ! we should have be force to sell you up , sir , to pay 
 your warehouse room if you have leave it here much long . you feel 
 quite at home here again , I dare say ? glad to see you , glad to see 
 you ! " 
 Mr. Weevle , thank he , cast an eye about . Mr. Guppy 's eye 
 follow Mr. Weevle 's eye . Mr. Weevle 's eye come back without any 
 new intelligence in it . Mr. Guppy 's eye come back and meet Mr. 
 Smallweed 's eye . that engage old gentleman be still murmur , 
 like some wound - up instrument run down , " how de do , sir - how 
 de - how - " and then have run down , he lapse into grinning 
 silence , as Mr. Guppy start at see Mr. Tulkinghorn stand in 
 the darkness opposite with his hand behind he . 
 " Gentleman so kind as to act as my solicitor , " say Grandfather 
 Smallweed . " I be not the sort of client for a gentleman of such 
 note , but he be so good ! " 
 Mr. Guppy , slightly nudge his friend to take another look , make 
 a shuffle bow to Mr. Tulkinghorn , who return it with an easy 
 nod . Mr. Tulkinghorn be look on as if he have nothing else to do 
 and be rather amuse by the novelty . 
 " a good deal of property here , sir , I should say , " Mr. Guppy 
 observe to Mr. Smallweed . 
 " principally rag and rubbish , my dear friend ! rag and rubbish ! 
 I and Bart and my granddaughter Judy be endeavour to make out 
 an inventory of what be worth anything to sell . but we have not   come 
 to much as yet ; we - have not   - come - to - hah ! " 
 Mr. Smallweed have run down again , while Mr. Weevle 's eye , attend 
 by Mr. Guppy 's eye , have again go round the room and come back . 
 " well , sir , " say Mr. Weevle . " we will not   intrude any long if 
 you will allow we to go upstairs . " 
 " anywhere , my dear sir , anywhere ! you be at home . make yourself 
 so , pray ! " 
 as they go upstairs , Mr. Guppy lift his eyebrow inquiringly and 
 look at Tony . Tony shake his head . they find the old room very 
 dull and dismal , with the ash of the fire that be burn on 
 that memorable night yet in the discolour grate . they have a 
 great disinclination to touch any object , and carefully blow the 
 dust from it first . nor be they desirous to prolong their visit , 
 pack the few movable with all possible speed and never speak 
 above a whisper . 
 " look here , " say Tony , recoil . " here be that horrible cat 
 come in ! " 
 Mr. Guppy retreat behind a chair . " Small tell I of she . she 
 go leap and bound and tear about that night like a 
 dragon , and get out on the house - top , and roam about up there for 
 a fortnight , and then come tumble down the chimney very thin . 
 do you ever see such a brute ? look as if she know all about it , 
 do not   she ? almost look as if she be Krook . shoohoo ! get out , 
 you goblin ! " 
 Lady Jane , in the doorway , with her tiger snarl from ear to ear and 
 her club of a tail , show no intention of obeying ; but Mr. 
 Tulkinghorn stumble over she , she spit at his rusty leg , and 
 swear wrathfully , take she arch back upstairs . possibly to 
 roam the house - top again and return by the chimney . 
 " Mr. Guppy , " say Mr. Tulkinghorn , " could I have a word with you ? " 
 Mr. Guppy be engage in collect the Galaxy Gallery of British 
 Beauty from the wall and deposit those work of art in their old 
 ignoble band - box . " Sir , " he return , redden , " I wish to act 
 with courtesy towards every member of the profession , and 
 especially , I be sure , towards a member of it so well know as 
 yourself - I will truly add , sir , so distinguished as yourself . 
 still , Mr. Tulkinghorn , sir , I must stipulate that if you have any 
 word with I , that word be speak in the presence of my friend . " 
 " oh , indeed ? " say Mr. Tulkinghorn . 
 " yes , sir . my reason be not of a personal nature at all , but 
 they be amply sufficient for myself . " 
 " no doubt , no doubt . " Mr. Tulkinghorn be as imperturbable as the 
 hearthstone to which he have quietly walk . " the matter be not of 
 that consequence that I need put you to the trouble of make any 
 condition , Mr. Guppy . " he pause here to smile , and his smile be 
 as dull and rusty as his pantaloon . " you be to be congratulate , 
 Mr. Guppy ; you be a fortunate young man , sir . " 
 " pretty well so , Mr. Tulkinghorn ; I do not   complain . " 
 " Complain ? high friend , free admission to great house , and 
 access to elegant lady ! why , Mr. Guppy , there be people in 
 London who would give their ear to be you . " 
 Mr. Guppy , look as if he would give his own reddening and still 
 redden ear to be one of those people at present instead of 
 himself , reply , " Sir , if I attend to my profession and do what be 
 right by Kenge and Carboy , my friend and acquaintance be of no 
 consequence to they nor to any member of the profession , not 
 except Mr. Tulkinghorn of the Fields . I be not under any 
 obligation to explain myself far ; and with all respect for you , 
 sir , and without offence - I repeat , without offence - " 
 " oh , certainly ! " 
 " - I do not   intend to do it . " 
 " quite so , " say Mr. Tulkinghorn with a calm nod . " very good ; I 
 see by these portrait that you take a strong interest in the 
 fashionable great , sir ? " 
 he address this to the astounded Tony , who admit the soft 
 impeachment . 
 " a virtue in which few englishman be deficient , " observe Mr. 
 Tulkinghorn . he have be stand on the hearthstone with his back 
 to the smoke chimney - piece , and now turn round with his glass 
 to his eye . " who be this ? ' Lady Dedlock . ' ha ! a very good 
 likeness in its way , but it want force of character . good day to 
 you , gentleman ; good day ! " 
 when he have walk out , Mr. Guppy , in a great perspiration , nerve 
 himself to the hasty completion of the taking down of the Galaxy 
 Gallery , conclude with Lady Dedlock . 
 " Tony , " he say hurriedly to his astonished companion , " let we be 
 quick in put the thing together and in get out of this 
 place . it be in vain long to conceal from you , Tony , that 
 between myself and one of the member of a swan - like aristocracy 
 whom I now hold in my hand , there have be undivulge communication 
 and association . the time might have be when I might have 
 reveal it to you . it never will be more . it be due alike to the 
 oath I have take , alike to the shattered idol , and alike to 
 circumstance over which I have no control , that the whole should 
 be bury in oblivion . I charge you as a friend , by the interest 
 you have ever testify in the fashionable intelligence , and by any 
 little advance with which I may have be able to accommodate you , 
 so to bury it without a word of inquiry ! " 
 this charge Mr. Guppy deliver in a state little short of forensic 
 lunacy , while his friend show a daze mind in his whole head of 
 hair and even in his cultivate whisker . 
 CHAPTER XL 
 National and Domestic 
 England have be in a dreadful state for some week . Lord Coodle 
 would go out , Sir Thomas Doodle would not   come in , and there be 
 nobody in Great Britain   to speak of   except Coodle and Doodle , 
 there have be no government . it be a mercy that the hostile 
 meeting between those two great man , which at one time seem 
 inevitable , do not come off , because if both pistol have take 
 effect , and Coodle and Doodle have kill each other , it be to be 
 presume that England must have wait to be govern until young 
 Coodle and young Doodle , now in frock and long stocking , be 
 grow up . this stupendous national calamity , however , be avert 
 by Lord Coodle 's make the timely discovery that if in the heat of 
 debate he have say that he scorn and despise the whole ignoble 
 career of Sir Thomas Doodle , he have merely mean to say that party 
 difference should never induce he to withhold from it the tribute 
 of his warm admiration ; while it as opportunely turn out , on 
 the other hand , that Sir Thomas Doodle have in his own bosom 
 expressly book Lord Coodle to go down to posterity as the mirror 
 of virtue and honour . still England have be some week in the 
 dismal strait of have no pilot   as be well observe by Sir 
 Leicester Dedlock   to weather the storm ; and the marvellous part of 
 the matter be that England have not appear to care very much about 
 it , but have go on eat and drink and marry and give in 
 marriage as the old world do in the day before the flood . but 
 Coodle know the danger , and Doodle know the danger , and all their 
 follower and hanger - on have the clear possible perception of 
 the danger . at last Sir Thomas Doodle have not only condescend to 
 come in , but have do it handsomely , bring in with he all his 
 nephews , all his male cousin , and all his brother - in - law . so 
 there be hope for the old ship yet . 
 Doodle have find that he must throw himself upon the country , 
 chiefly in the form of sovereign and beer . in this metamorphose 
 state he be available in a good many place simultaneously and can 
 throw himself upon a considerable portion of the country at one 
 time . Britannia be much occupy in pocket Doodle in the 
 form of sovereign , and swallow Doodle in the form of beer , and 
 in swear herself black in the face that she do neither - 
 plainly to the advancement of her glory and morality - the London 
 season come to a sudden end , through all the Doodleites and 
 coodleite disperse to assist Britannia in those religious 
 exercise . 
 hence Mrs. Rouncewell , housekeeper at Chesney Wold , foresee , 
 though no instruction have yet come down , that the family may 
 shortly be expect , together with a pretty large accession 
 of cousin and other who can in any way assist the great 
 constitutional work . and hence the stately old dame , take time 
 by the forelock , lead he up and down the staircase , and along 
 the gallery and passage , and through the room , to witness 
 before he grow any old that everything be ready , that floor be 
 rub bright , carpet spread , curtain shake out , bed puff and 
 pat , still - room and kitchen clear for action - all thing 
 prepare as beseem the Dedlock dignity . 
 this present summer evening , as the sun go down , the preparation 
 be complete . dreary and solemn the old house look , with so many 
 appliance of habitation and with no inhabitant except the 
 picture form upon the wall . so do these come and go , a Dedlock 
 in possession might have ruminate pass along ; so do they see 
 this gallery hush and quiet , as I see it now ; so think , as I 
 think , of the gap that they would make in this domain when they 
 be go ; so find it , as I find it , difficult to believe that it 
 could be without they ; so pass from my world , as I pass from 
 theirs , now close the reverberate door ; so leave no blank to 
 miss they , and so die . 
 through some of the fiery window beautiful from without , and set , 
 at this sunset hour , not in dull - grey stone but in a glorious house 
 of gold , the light exclude at other window pour in rich , lavish , 
 overflow like the summer plenty in the land . then do the frozen 
 Dedlocks thaw . strange movement come upon their feature as the 
 shadow of leaf play there . a dense justice in a corner be 
 beguile into a wink . a star baronet , with a truncheon , get a 
 dimple in his chin . down into the bosom of a stony shepherdess 
 there steal a fleck of light and warmth that would have do it 
 good a hundred year ago . one ancestress of Volumnia , in high- 
 heeled shoe , very like she - cast the shadow of that virgin 
 event before her full two century - shoot out into a halo and 
 become a saint . a maid of honour of the court of Charles the 
 Second , with large round eye   and other charm to correspond , 
 seem to bathe in glow water , and it ripple as it glow . 
 but the fire of the sun be die . even now the floor be dusky , and 
 shadow slowly mount the wall , bring the dedlock down like age 
 and death . and now , upon my Lady 's picture over the great chimney- 
 piece , a weird shade fall from some old tree , that turn it pale , 
 and flutter it , and look as if a great arm hold a veil or hood , 
 watch an opportunity to draw it over she . higher and dark 
 rise shadow on the wall - now a red gloom on the ceiling - now the 
 fire be out . 
 all that prospect , which from the terrace look so near , have move 
 solemnly away and change - not the first nor the last of beautiful 
 thing that look so near and will so change - into a distant 
 phantom . light mist arise , and the dew fall , and all the sweet 
 scent in the garden be heavy in the air . now the wood settle 
 into great mass as if they be each one profound tree . and now 
 the moon rise to separate they , and to glimmer here and there in 
 horizontal line behind their stem , and to make the avenue a 
 pavement of light among high cathedral arch fantastically break . 
 now the moon be high ; and the great house , need habitation more 
 than ever , be like a body without life . now it be even awful , 
 steal through it , to think of the live people who have sleep in 
 the solitary bedroom , to say nothing of the dead . now be the time 
 for shadow , when every corner be a cavern and every downward step a 
 pit , when the stain glass be reflect in pale and fade hue 
 upon the floor , when anything and everything can be make of the 
 heavy staircase beam except their own proper shape , when the 
 armour have dull light upon it not easily to be distinguish from 
 stealthy movement , and when bar helmet be frightfully 
 suggestive of head inside . but of all the shadow in Chesney 
 Wold , the shadow in the long drawing - room upon my Lady 's picture be 
 the first to come , the last to be disturb . at this hour and by 
 this light it change into threaten hand raise up and menacing 
 the handsome face with every breath that stir . 
 " she be not well , ma'am , " say a groom in Mrs. Rouncewell 's 
 audience - chamber . 
 " my Lady not well ! what be the matter ? " 
 " why , my Lady have be but poorly , ma'am , since she be last here - 
 I do not   mean with the family , ma'am , but when she be here as a 
 bird of passage like . my Lady have not be out much , for she , and 
 have keep her room a good deal . " 
 " Chesney Wold , Thomas , " rejoin the housekeeper with proud 
 complacency , " will set my Lady up ! there be no fine air and no 
 healthy soil in the world ! " 
 Thomas may have his own personal opinion on this subject , probably 
 hint they in his manner of smooth his sleek head from the nape 
 of his neck to his temple , but he forbear to express they far 
 and retire to the servant ' hall to regale on cold meat - pie and 
 ale . 
 this groom be the pilot - fish before the nobler shark . next 
 evening , down come Sir Leicester and my Lady with their large 
 retinue , and down come the cousin and other from all the point 
 of the compass . thenceforth for some week backward and forward 
 rush mysterious man with no name , who fly about all those 
 particular part of the country on which Doodle be at present 
 throw himself in an auriferous and malty shower , but who be 
 merely person of a restless disposition and never do anything 
 anywhere . 
 on these national occasion Sir Leicester find the cousin useful . 
 a well man than the Honourable Bob Stables to meet the Hunt at 
 dinner , there could not possibly be . Better get up gentleman than 
 the other cousin to ride over to polling - booth and husting here 
 and there , and show themselves on the side of England , it would be 
 hard to find . Volumnia be a little dim , but she be of the true 
 descent ; and there be many who appreciate her sprightly 
 conversation , her french conundrum so old as to have become in the 
 cycle of time almost new again , the honour of take the fair 
 Dedlock in to dinner , or even the privilege of her hand in the 
 dance . on these national occasion dancing may be a patriotic 
 service , and Volumnia be constantly see hop about for the good 
 of an ungrateful and unpensione country . 
 my Lady take no great pain to entertain the numerous guest , and 
 be still unwell , rarely appear until late in the day . but at 
 all the dismal dinner , leaden lunch , basilisk ball , and other 
 melancholy pageant , her mere appearance be a relief . as to Sir 
 Leicester , he conceive it utterly impossible that anything can be 
 want , in any direction , by any one who have the good fortune to 
 be receive under that roof ; and in a state of sublime satisfaction , 
 he move among the company , a magnificent refrigerator . 
 Daily the cousin trot through dust and canter over roadside turf , 
 away to husting and polling - booth   with leather glove and 
 hunting - whip for the county and kid glove and rid - cane for 
 the borough , and daily bring back report on which Sir Leicester 
 hold forth after dinner . daily the restless man who have no 
 occupation in life present the appearance of be rather busy . 
 Daily Volumnia have a little cousinly talk with Sir Leicester on the 
 state of the nation , from which Sir Leicester be disposed to 
 conclude that Volumnia be a more reflect woman than he have 
 think she . 
 " how be we get on ? " say Miss Volumnia , clasp her hand . 
 " be we safe ? " 
 the mighty business be nearly over by this time , and Doodle will 
 throw himself off the country in a few day more . Sir Leicester 
 have just appear in the long drawing - room after dinner , a bright 
 particular star surround by cloud of cousin . 
 " Volumnia , " reply Sir Leicester , who have a list in his hand , " we 
 be do tolerably . " 
 " only tolerably ! " 
 although it be summer weather , Sir Leicester always have his own 
 particular fire in the evening . he take his usual screened seat 
 near it and repeat with much firmness and a little displeasure , as 
 who should say , I be not a common man , and when I say tolerably , it 
 must not be understand as a common expression , " Volumnia , we be 
 do tolerably . " 
 " at least there be no opposition to you , " Volumnia assert with 
 confidence . 
 " no , Volumnia . this distracted country have lose its sens in many 
 respect , I grieve to say , but - " 
 " it be not so mad as that . I be glad to hear it ! " 
 Volumnia 's finish the sentence restore she to favour . Sir 
 Leicester , with a gracious inclination of his head , seem to say to 
 himself , " a sensible woman this , on the whole , though occasionally 
 precipitate . " 
 in fact , as to this question of opposition , the fair Dedlock 's 
 observation be superfluous , Sir Leicester on these occasion 
 always deliver in his own candidateship , as a kind of handsome 
 wholesale order to be promptly execute . two other little seat 
 that belong to he he treat as retail order of less importance , 
 merely send down the man and signify to the tradespeople , 
 " you will have the goodness to make these material into two 
 member of Parliament and to send they home when do . " 
 " I regret to say , Volumnia , that in many place the people have 
 show a bad spirit , and that this opposition to the government have 
 be of a most determined and most implacable description . " 
 " W - r - retch ! " say Volumnia . 
 " even , " proceed Sir Leicester , glance at the circumjacent 
 cousin on sofas and othman , " even in many - in fact , in most - of 
 those place in which the government have carry it against a 
 faction - " 
  note , by the way , that the coodleite be always a faction with 
 the Doodleites , and that the Doodleites occupy exactly the same 
 position towards the coodleite . 
 " - even in they I be shocked , for the credit of Englishmen , to be 
 constrain to inform you that the party have not triumph without 
 be put to an enormous expense . hundred , " say Sir Leicester , 
 eye the cousin with increase dignity and swell 
 indignation , " hundred of thousand of pound ! " 
 if Volumnia have a fault , it be the fault of be a trifle too 
 innocent , see that the innocence which would go extremely well 
 with a sash and tucker be a little out of keep with the rouge 
 and pearl necklace . Howbeit , impel by innocence , she ask , 
 " what for ? " 
 " Volumnia , " remonstrate Sir Leicester with his utmost severity . 
 " Volumnia ! " 
 " no , no , I do not   mean what for , " cry Volumnia with her favourite 
 little scream . " how stupid I be ! I mean what a pity ! " 
 " I be glad , " return Sir Leicester , " that you do mean what a pity . " 
 Volumnia hasten to express her opinion that the shocking people 
 ought to be try as traitor and make to support the party . 
 " I be glad , Volumnia , " repeat Sir Leicester , unmindful of these 
 mollifying sentiment , " that you do mean what a pity . it be 
 disgraceful to the elector . but as you , though inadvertently and 
 without intend so unreasonable a question , ask I ' what for ? ' 
 let I reply to you . for necessary expense . and I trust to your 
 good sense , Volumnia , not to pursue the subject , here or 
 elsewhere . " 
 Sir Leicester feel it incumbent on he to observe a crush 
 aspect towards Volumnia because it be whisper abroad that these 
 necessary expense will , in some two hundred election petition , be 
 unpleasantly connect with the word bribery , and because some 
 graceless joker have consequently suggest the omission from the 
 Church service of the ordinary supplication in behalf of the High 
 Court of Parliament and have recommend instead that the prayer 
 of the congregation be request for six hundred and fifty - eight 
 gentleman in a very unhealthy state . 
 " I suppose , " observe Volumnia , have take a little time to 
 recover her spirit after her late castigation , " I suppose Mr. 
 Tulkinghorn have be work to death . " 
 " I do not   know , " say Sir Leicester , open his eye , " why Mr. 
 Tulkinghorn should be work to death . I do not   know what Mr. 
 Tulkinghorn 's engagement may be . he be not a candidate . " 
 Volumnia have think he might have be employ . Sir Leicester 
 could desire to know by whom , and what for . Volumnia , abash 
 again , suggest , by somebody - to advise and make arrangement . Sir 
 Leicester be not aware that any client of Mr. Tulkinghorn have be 
 in need of his assistance . 
 Lady Dedlock , seat at an open window with her arm upon its 
 cushion ledge and look out at the evening shadow fall on 
 the park , have seem to attend since the lawyer 's name be 
 mention . 
 a languid cousin with a moustache in a state of extreme debility 
 now observe from his couch that man tell he ya'as'dy that 
 Tulkinghorn have go down t ' that iron place t ' give legal ' pinion 
 'bout something , and that contest be over t ' day , ' twould be 
 highly jawlly thing if Tulkinghorn should ' pear with news that 
 coodle man be floor . 
 Mercury in attendance with coffee inform Sir Leicester , hereupon , 
 that Mr. Tulkinghorn have arrive and be take dinner . my Lady 
 turn her head inward for the moment , then look out again as 
 before . 
 Volumnia be charm to hear that her delight be come . he be so 
 original , such a stolid creature , such an immense be for know 
 all sort of thing and never tell they ! Volumnia be persuade 
 that he must be a Freemason . be sure he be at the head of a lodge , 
 and wear short apron , and be make a perfect idol of with 
 candlestick and trowel . these lively remark the fair Dedlock 
 deliver in her youthful manner , while make a purse . 
 " he have not be here once , " she add , ' since I come . I really have 
 some thought of break my heart for the inconstant creature . I 
 have almost make up my mind that he be dead . " 
 it may be the gathering gloom of evening , or it may be the darker 
 gloom within herself , but a shade be on my Lady 's face , as if she 
 think , " I would he be ! " 
 " Mr. Tulkinghorn , " say Sir Leicester , " be always welcome here and 
 always discreet wheresoever he be . a very valuable person , and 
 deservedly respected . " 
 the debilitated cousin suppose he be " ' normously rich fler . " 
 " he have a stake in the country , " say Sir Leicester , " I have no 
 doubt . he be , of course , handsomely pay , and he associate almost 
 on a footing of equality with the high society . " 
 everybody start . for a gun be fire close by . 
 " good gracious , what be that ? " cry Volumnia with her little 
 wither scream . 
 " a rat , " say my Lady . " and they have shoot he . " 
 enter Mr. Tulkinghorn , follow by mercury with lamp and 
 candle . 
 " no , no , " say Sir Leicester , " I think not . my Lady , do you object 
 to the twilight ? " 
 on the contrary , my Lady prefer it . 
 " Volumnia ? " 
 oh ! nothing be so delicious to Volumnia as to sit and talk in the 
 dark . 
 " then take they away , " say Sir Leicester . " tulkinghorn , I beg 
 your pardon . how do you do ? " 
 Mr. Tulkinghorn with his usual leisurely ease advance , render his 
 pass homage to my Lady , shake Sir Leicester 's hand , and 
 subside into the chair proper to he when he have anything to 
 communicate , on the opposite side of the Baronet 's little 
 newspaper - table . Sir Leicester be apprehensive that my Lady , not 
 be very well , will take cold at that open window . my Lady be 
 oblige to he , but would rather sit there for the air . Sir 
 Leicester rise , adjust her scarf about she , and return to his 
 seat . Mr. Tulkinghorn in the meanwhile take a pinch of snuff . 
 " now , " say Sir Leicester . " how have that contest go ? " 
 " oh , hollow from the beginning . not a chance . they have bring 
 in both their people . you be beat out of all reason . three to 
 one . " 
 it be a part of Mr. Tulkinghorn 's policy and mastery to have no 
 political opinion ; indeed , no opinion . therefore he say " you " 
 be beat , and not " we . " 
 Sir Leicester be majestically wroth . Volumnia never hear of such 
 a thing . ' the debilitated cousin hold that it be sort of thing 
 that be sure tapn slong vote - giv'n - Mob . 
 " it be the place , you know , " Mr. Tulkinghorn go on to say in the 
 fast - increase darkness when there be silence again , " where they 
 want to put up Mrs. Rouncewell 's son . " 
 " a proposal which , as you correctly inform I at the time , he have 
 the become taste and perception , " observe Sir Leicester , " to 
 decline . I can not say that I by any mean approve of the 
 sentiment express by Mr. Rouncewell when he be here for some 
 half - hour in this room , but there be a sense of propriety in his 
 decision which I be glad to acknowledge . " 
 " ha ! " say Mr. Tulkinghorn . " it do not prevent he from be 
 very active in this election , though . " 
 Sir Leicester be distinctly hear to gasp before speak . " do I 
 understand you ? do you say that Mr. Rouncewell have be very 
 active in this election ? " 
 " uncommonly active . " 
 " against - " 
 " oh , dear yes , against you . he be a very good speaker . plain and 
 emphatic . he make a damaging effect , and have great influence . in 
 the business part of the proceeding he carry all before he . " 
 it be evident to the whole company , though nobody can see he , that 
 Sir Leicester be star majestically . 
 " and he be much assisted , " say Mr. Tulkinghorn as a wind - up , " by 
 his son . " 
 " by his son , sir ? " repeat Sir Leicester with awful politeness . 
 " by his son . " 
 " the son who wish to marry the young woman in my Lady 's service ? " 
 " that son . he have but one . " 
 " then upon my honour , " say Sir Leicester after a terrific pause 
 during which he have be hear to snort and feel to stare , " then 
 upon my honour , upon my life , upon my reputation and principle , 
 the floodgate of society be burst open , and the water have - a - 
 obliterate the landmark of the framework of the cohesion by which 
 thing be hold together ! " 
 General burst of cousinly indignation . Volumnia think it be 
 really high time , you know , for somebody in power to step in and do 
 something strong . debilitated cousin think - country 's go - 
 Dayvle - steeple - chase pace . 
 " I beg , " say Sir Leicester in a breathless condition , " that we may 
 not comment far on this circumstance . comment be superfluous . 
 my Lady , let I suggest in reference to that young woman - " 
 " I have no intention , " observe my Lady from her window in a low 
 but decide tone , " of part with she . " 
 " that be not my meaning , " return Sir Leicester . " I be glad to 
 hear you say so . I would suggest that as you think she worthy of 
 your patronage , you should exert your influence to keep she from 
 these dangerous hand . you might show she what violence would be 
 do in such association to her duty and principle , and you 
 might preserve she for a well fate . you might point out to she 
 that she probably would , in good time , find a husband at Chesney 
 Wold by whom she would not be - " Sir Leicester add , after a 
 moment 's consideration , " drag from the altar of her 
 forefather . " 
 these remark he offer with his unvarying politeness and deference 
 when he address himself to his wife . she merely move her head 
 in reply . the moon be rise , and where she sit there be a little 
 stream of cold pale light , in which her head be see . 
 " it be worthy of remark , " say Mr. Tulkinghorn , " however , that 
 these people be , in their way , very proud . " 
 " proud ? " Sir Leicester doubt his hearing . 
 " I should not be surprised if they all voluntarily abandon the 
 girl - yes , lover and all - instead of she abandon they , suppose 
 she remain at Chesney Wold under such circumstance . " 
 " well ! " say Sir Leicester tremulously . " well ! you should know , 
 Mr. Tulkinghorn . you have be among they . " 
 " really , Sir Leicester , " return the lawyer , " I state the fact . 
 why , I could tell you a story - with Lady Dedlock 's permission . " 
 her head concede it , and Volumnia be enchant . a story ! oh , he 
 be go to tell something at last ! a ghost in it , Volumnia hop ? 
 " no . real flesh and blood . " Mr. Tulkinghorn stop for an instant 
 and repeat with some little emphasis graft upon his usual 
 monotony , " real flesh and blood , Miss Dedlock . Sir Leicester , 
 these particular have only lately become known to I . they be 
 very brief . they exemplify what I have say . I suppress name for 
 the present . Lady Dedlock will not think I ill - bred , I hope ? " 
 by the light of the fire , which be low , he can be see look 
 towards the moonlight . by the light of the moon Lady Dedlock can 
 be see , perfectly still . 
 " a townsman of this Mrs. Rouncewell , a man in exactly parallel 
 circumstance as I be tell , have the good fortune to have a daughter 
 who attract the notice of a great lady . I speak of really a 
 great lady , not merely great to he , but marry to a gentleman of 
 your condition , Sir Leicester . " 
 Sir Leicester condescendingly say , " yes , Mr. Tulkinghorn , " 
 imply that then she must have appear of very considerable 
 moral dimension indeed in the eye of an iron - master . 
 " the lady be wealthy and beautiful , and have a liking for the girl , 
 and treat she with great kindness , and keep she always near she . 
 now this lady preserve a secret under all her greatness , which she 
 have preserve for many year . in fact , she have in early life be 
 engage to marry a young rake - he be a captain in the army - 
 nothing connect with whom come to any good . she never do marry 
 he , but she give birth to a child of which he be the father . " 
 by the light of the fire he can be see look towards the 
 moonlight . by the moonlight , Lady Dedlock can be see in profile , 
 perfectly still . 
 " the captain in the army be dead , she believe herself safe ; but 
 a train of circumstance with which I need not trouble you lead to 
 discovery . as I receive the story , they begin in an imprudence on 
 her own part one day when she be take by surprise , which show 
 how difficult it be for the firmest of we   she be very firm   to be 
 always guard . there be great domestic trouble and amazement , 
 you may suppose ; I leave you to imagine , Sir Leicester , the 
 husband 's grief . but that be not the present point . when Mr. 
 Rouncewell 's townsman hear of the disclosure , he no more allow 
 the girl to be patronize and honour than he would have suffer 
 she to be trodden underfoot before his eye . such be his pride , 
 that he indignantly take she away , as if from reproach and 
 disgrace . he have no sense of the honour do he and his daughter 
 by the lady 's condescension ; not the least . he resent the girl 's 
 position , as if the lady have be the commonest of commoner . that 
 be the story . I hope Lady Dedlock will excuse its painful nature . " 
 there be various opinion on the merit , more or less conflicting 
 with Volumnia 's . that fair young creature can not believe there 
 ever be any such lady and reject the whole history on the 
 threshold . the majority incline to the debilitated cousin 's 
 sentiment , which be in few word - " no business - Rouncewell 's fernal 
 townsman . " Sir Leicester generally refer back in his mind to Wat 
 Tyler and arrange a sequence of event on a plan of his own . 
 there be not much conversation in all , for late hour have be 
 keep at Chesney Wold since the necessary expense elsewhere begin , 
 and this be the first night in many on which the family have be 
 alone . it be past ten when Sir Leicester beg Mr. Tulkinghorn to 
 ring for candle . then the stream of moonlight have swell into a 
 lake , and then Lady Dedlock for the first time move , and rise , 
 and come forward to a table for a glass of water . winking 
 cousin , bat - like in the candle glare , crowd round to give it ; 
 Volumnia   always ready for something well if procurable   take 
 another , a very mild sip of which content she ; Lady Dedlock , 
 graceful , self - possess , look after by admire eye , pass 
 away slowly down the long perspective by the side of that nymph , 
 not at all improve she as a question of contrast . 
 CHAPTER XLI 
 in Mr. Tulkinghorn 's Room 
 Mr. Tulkinghorn arrive in his turret - room a little breathe by the 
 journey up , though leisurely perform . there be an expression on 
 his face as if he have discharge his mind of some grave matter and 
 be , in his close way , satisfy . to say of a man so severely and 
 strictly self - repress that he be triumphant would be to do he as 
 great an injustice as to suppose he trouble with love or 
 sentiment or any romantic weakness . he be sedately satisfied . 
 perhaps there be a rather increase sense of power upon he as he 
 loosely grasp one of his veinous wrist with his other hand and 
 hold it behind his back walk noiselessly up and down . 
 there be a capacious writing - table in the room on which be a pretty 
 large accumulation of paper . the green lamp be light , his 
 reading - glass lie upon the desk , the easy - chair be wheel up to 
 it , and it would seem as though he have intend to bestow an hour 
 or so upon these claim on his attention before go to bed . but 
 he happen not to be in a business mind . after a glance at the 
 document await his notice - with his head bend low over the 
 table , the old man 's sight for print or writing be defective at 
 night - he open the french window and step out upon the lead . 
 there he again walk slowly up and down in the same attitude , 
 subsiding , if a man so cool may have any need to subside , from the 
 story he have relate downstair . 
 the time be once when man as know as Mr. Tulkinghorn would walk 
 on turret - top in the starlight and look up into the sky to read 
 their fortune there . host of star be visible to - night , though 
 their brilliancy be eclipse by the splendour of the moon . if he 
 be seek his own star as he methodically turn and turn upon the 
 lead , it should be but a pale one to be so rustily represent 
 below . if he be trace out his destiny , that may be write in 
 other character near to his hand . 
 as he pace the lead with his eye most probably as high above his 
 thought as they be high above the earth , he be suddenly stop 
 in pass the window by two eye that meet his own . the ceiling 
 of his room be rather low ; and the upper part of the door , which be 
 opposite the window , be of glass . there be an inner baize door , 
 too , but the night be warm he do not close it when he come 
 upstairs . these eye that meet his own be look in through the 
 glass from the corridor outside . he know they well . the blood 
 have not flush into his face so suddenly and redly for many a long 
 year as when he recognize Lady Dedlock . 
 he step into the room , and she come in too , close both the 
 door behind she . there be a wild disturbance - be it fear or 
 anger ? - in her eye . in her carriage and all else she look as she 
 look downstairs two hour ago . 
 be it fear or be it anger now ? he can not be sure . both might be 
 as pale , both as intent . 
 " Lady Dedlock ? " 
 she do not speak at first , nor even when she have slowly drop 
 into the easy - chair by the table . they look at each other , like 
 two picture . 
 " why have you tell my story to so many person ? " 
 " Lady Dedlock , it be necessary for I to inform you that I know 
 it . " 
 " how long have you know it ? " 
 " I have suspect it a long while - fully know it a little while . " 
 " month ? " 
 " day . " 
 he stand before she with one hand on a chair - back and the other in 
 his old - fashioned waistcoat and shirt - frill , exactly as he have 
 stand before she at any time since her marriage . the same formal 
 politeness , the same compose deference that might as well be 
 defiance ; the whole man the same dark , cold object , at the same 
 distance , which nothing have ever diminish . 
 " be this true concern the poor girl ? " 
 he slightly incline and advance his head as not quite 
 understand the question . 
 " you know what you relate . be it true ? do her friend know my 
 story also ? be it the town - talk yet ? be it chalk upon the wall 
 and cry in the street ? " 
 so ! anger , and fear , and shame . all three contending . what power 
 this woman have to keep these rag passion down ! Mr. 
 Tulkinghorn 's thought take such form as he look at she , with his 
 ragged grey eyebrow a hair 's breadth more contract than usual 
 under her gaze . 
 " no , Lady Dedlock . that be a hypothetical case , arise out of 
 Sir Leicester 's unconsciously carry the matter with so high a 
 hand . but it would be a real case if they know - what we know . " 
 " then they do not know it yet ? " 
 " no . " 
 " can I save the poor girl from injury before they know it ? " 
 " really , Lady Dedlock , " Mr. Tulkinghorn reply , " I can not give a 
 satisfactory opinion on that point . " 
 and he think , with the interest of attentive curiosity , as he 
 watch the struggle in her breast , " the power and force of this 
 woman be astonishing ! " 
 " Sir , " she say , for the moment oblige to set her lip with all 
 the energy she have , that she may speak distinctly , " I will make it 
 plainer . I do not dispute your hypothetical case . I anticipate 
 it , and feel its truth as strongly as you can do , when I see Mr. 
 Rouncewell here . I know very well that if he could have have the 
 power of see I as I be , he would consider the poor girl 
 tarnish by have for a moment be , although most innocently , 
 the subject of my great and distinguished patronage . but I have an 
 interest in she , or I should rather say - no long belong to 
 this place - I have , and if you can find so much consideration for 
 the woman under your foot as to remember that , she will be very 
 sensible of your mercy . " 
 Mr. Tulkinghorn , profoundly attentive , throw this off with a shrug 
 of self - depreciation and contract his eyebrow a little more . 
 " you have prepare I for my exposure , and I thank you for that 
 too . be there anything that you require of I ? be there any claim 
 that I can release or any charge or trouble that I can spare my 
 husband in obtain his release by certify to the exactness of 
 your discovery ? I will write anything , here and now , that you will 
 dictate . I be ready to do it . " 
 and she would do it , think the lawyer , watchful of the firm hand 
 with which she take the pen ! 
 " I will not trouble you , Lady Dedlock . pray spare yourself . " 
 " I have long expect this , as you know . I neither wish to spare 
 myself nor to be spar . you can do nothing bad to I than you 
 have do . do what remain now . " 
 " Lady Dedlock , there be nothing to be do . I will take leave to 
 say a few word when you have finish . " 
 their need for watch one another should be over now , but they do 
 it all this time , and the star watch they both through the open 
 window . away in the moonlight lie the woodland field at rest , and 
 the wide house be as quiet as the narrow one . the narrow one ! 
 where be the digger and the spade , this peaceful night , destine 
 to add the last great secret to the many secret of the Tulkinghorn 
 existence ? be the man bear yet , be the spade wrought yet ? curious 
 question to consider , more curious perhaps not to consider , under 
 the watch star upon a summer night . 
 " of repentance or remorse or any feeling of mine , " Lady Dedlock 
 presently proceed , " I say not a word . if I be not dumb , you 
 would be deaf . let that go by . it be not for your ear . " 
 he make a feint of offer a protest , but she sweep it away with 
 her disdainful hand . 
 " of other and very different thing I come to speak to you . my 
 jewel be all in their proper place of keep . they will be 
 find there . so , my dress . so , all the valuable I have . some 
 ready money I have with I , please to say , but no large amount . I 
 do not wear my own dress , in order that I might avoid observation . 
 I go to be henceforward lose . make this know . I leave no other 
 charge with you . " 
 " excuse I , Lady Dedlock , " say Mr. Tulkinghorn , quite unmoved . " I 
 be not sure that I understand you . you want - " 
 " to be lose to all here . I leave Chesney Wold to - night . I go this 
 hour . " 
 Mr. Tulkinghorn shake his head . she rise , but he , without move 
 hand from chair - back or from old - fashioned waistcoat and shirt- 
 frill , shake his head . 
 " what ? not go as I have say ? " 
 " no , Lady Dedlock , " he very calmly reply . 
 " do you know the relief that my disappearance will be ? have you 
 forget the stain and blot upon this place , and where it be , and 
 who it be ? " 
 " no , Lady Dedlock , not by any mean . " 
 without deign to rejoin , she move to the inner door and have it 
 in her hand when he say to she , without himself stir hand or 
 foot or raise his voice , " Lady Dedlock , have the goodness to stop 
 and hear I , or before you reach the staircase I shall ring the 
 alarm - bell and rouse the house . and then I must speak out before 
 every guest and servant , every man and woman , in it . " 
 he have conquer she . she falter , tremble , and put her hand 
 confusedly to her head . slight token these in any one else , but 
 when so practise an eye as Mr. Tulkinghorn 's see indecision for a 
 moment in such a subject , he thoroughly know its value . 
 he promptly say again , " have the goodness to hear I , Lady 
 Dedlock , " and motion to the chair from which she have rise . she 
 hesitate , but he motion again , and she sit down . 
 " the relation between we be of an unfortunate description , Lady 
 Dedlock ; but as they be not of my making , I will not apologize for 
 they . the position I hold in reference to Sir Leicester be so well 
 know to you that I can hardly imagine but that I must long have 
 appear in your eye the natural person to make this discovery . " 
 " Sir , " she return without look up from the ground on which her 
 eye be now fix , " I have well have go . it would have be 
 far well not to have detain I . I have no more to say . " 
 " excuse I , Lady Dedlock , if I add a little more to hear . " 
 " I wish to hear it at the window , then . I can not   breathe where I 
 be . " 
 his jealous glance as she walk that way betray an instant 's 
 misgive that she may have it in her thought to leap over , and 
 dash against ledge and cornice , strike her life out upon the 
 terrace below . but a moment 's observation of her figure as she 
 stand in the window without any support , look out at the star 
  - not up - gloomily out at those star which be low in the heaven , 
 reassure he . by face round as she have move , he stand a 
 little behind she . 
 " Lady Dedlock , I have not yet be able to come to a decision 
 satisfactory to myself on the course before I . I be not clear 
 what to do or how to act next . I must request you , in the 
 meantime , to keep your secret as you have keep it so long and not 
 to wonder that I keep it too . " 
 he pause , but she make no reply . 
 " pardon I , Lady Dedlock . this be an important subject . you be 
 honour I with your attention ? " 
 " I be . " 
 " thank you . I might have know it from what I have see of your 
 strength of character . I ought not to have ask the question , but 
 I have the habit of make sure of my ground , step by step , as I go 
 on . the sole consideration in this unhappy case be Sir Leicester . " 
 " then why , " she ask in a low voice and without remove she 
 gloomy look from those distant star , " do you detain I in his 
 house ? " 
 " because he be the consideration . Lady Dedlock , I have no occasion 
 to tell you that Sir Leicester be a very proud man , that his 
 reliance upon you be implicit , that the fall of that moon out of 
 the sky would not amaze he more than your fall from your high 
 position as his wife . " 
 she breathe quickly and heavily , but she stand as unflinchingly 
 as ever he have see she in the midst of her grand company . 
 " I declare to you , Lady Dedlock , that with anything short of this 
 case that I have , I would as soon have hop to root up by mean of 
 my own strength and my own hand the old tree on this estate as 
 to shake your hold upon Sir Leicester and Sir Leicester 's trust and 
 confidence in you . and even now , with this case , I hesitate . not 
 that he could doubt   that , even with he , be impossible , but that 
 nothing can prepare he for the blow . " 
 " not my flight ? " she return . " think of it again . " 
 " your flight , Lady Dedlock , would spread the whole truth , and a 
 hundred time the whole truth , far and wide . it would be 
 impossible to save the family credit for a day . it be not to be 
 think of . " 
 there be a quiet decision in his reply which admit of no 
 remonstrance . 
 " when I speak of Sir Leicester be the sole consideration , he and 
 the family credit be one . Sir Leicester and the baronetcy , Sir 
 Leicester and Chesney Wold , Sir Leicester and his ancestor and his 
 patrimony " - Mr. Tulkinghorn very dry here - " be , I need not say to 
 you , Lady Dedlock , inseparable . " 
 " go on ! " 
 " therefore , " say Mr. Tulkinghorn , pursue his case in his jog- 
 trot style , " I have much to consider . this be to be hush up if 
 it can be . how can it be , if Sir Leicester be drive out of his 
 wit or lay upon a death - bed ? if I inflict this shock upon he 
 to - morrow morning , how could the immediate change in he be 
 account for ? what could have cause it ? what could have divide 
 you ? Lady Dedlock , the wall - chalking and the street - crying would 
 come on directly , and you be to remember that it would not affect 
 you merely   whom I can not at all consider in this business   but 
 your husband , Lady Dedlock , your husband . " 
 he get plain as he get on , but not an atom more emphatic or 
 animate . 
 " there be another point of view , " he continue , " in which the case 
 present itself . Sir Leicester be devoted to you almost to 
 infatuation . he might not be able to overcome that infatuation , 
 even know what we know . I be put an extreme case , but it 
 might be so . if so , it be well that he know nothing . well 
 for common sense , well for he , well for I . I must take all 
 this into account , and it combine to render a decision very 
 difficult . " 
 she stand look out at the same star without a word . they be 
 begin to pale , and she look as if their coldness freeze she . 
 " my experience teach I , " say Mr. Tulkinghorn , who have by this 
 time get his hand in his pocket and be go on in his business 
 consideration of the matter like a machine . " my experience teach 
 I , Lady Dedlock , that most of the people I know would do far 
 well to leave marriage alone . it be at the bottom of three 
 fourth of their trouble . so I think when Sir Leicester 
 marry , and so I always have think since . no more about that . 
 I must now be guide by circumstance . in the meanwhile I must beg 
 you to keep your own counsel , and I will keep mine . " 
 " I be to drag my present life on , hold its pain at your 
 pleasure , day by day ? " she ask , still look at the distant sky . 
 " yes , I be afraid so , Lady Dedlock . " 
 " it be necessary , you think , that I should be so tie to the 
 stake ? " 
 " I be sure that what I recommend be necessary . " 
 " I be to remain on this gaudy platform on which my miserable 
 deception have be so long act , and it be to fall beneath I when 
 you give the signal ? " she say slowly . 
 " not without notice , Lady Dedlock . I shall take no step without 
 forewarn you . " 
 she ask all her question as if she be repeat they from 
 memory or call they over in her sleep . 
 " we be to meet as usual ? " 
 " precisely as usual , if you please . " 
 " and I be to hide my guilt , as I have do so many year ? " 
 " as you have do so many year . I should not have make that 
 reference myself , Lady Dedlock , but I may now remind you that your 
 secret can be no heavy to you than it be , and be no bad and no 
 well than it be . I know it certainly , but I believe we have 
 never wholly trust each other . " 
 she stand absorb in the same frozen way for some little time 
 before ask , " be there anything more to be sald to - night ? " 
 " why , " Mr. Tulkinghorn return methodically as he softly rub his 
 hand , " I should like to be assure of your acquiescence in my 
 arrangement , Lady Dedlock . " 
 " you may be assure of it . " 
 " good . and I would wish in conclusion to remind you , as a business 
 precaution , in case it should be necessary to recall the fact in 
 any communication with Sir Leicester , that throughout our interview 
 I have expressly state my sole consideration to be Sir Leicester 's 
 feeling and honour and the family reputation . I should have be 
 happy to have make Lady Dedlock a prominent consideration , too , if 
 the case have admit of it ; but unfortunately it do not . " 
 " I can attest your fidelity , sir . " 
 both before and after say it she remain absorb , but at length 
 move , and turn , unshaken in her natural and acquire presence , 
 towards the door . Mr. Tulkinghorn open both the door exactly as 
 he would have do yesterday , or as he would have do ten year 
 ago , and make his old - fashioned bow as she pass out . it be not 
 an ordinary look that he receive from the handsome face as it go 
 into the darkness , and it be not an ordinary movement , though a 
 very slight one , that acknowledge his courtesy . but as he 
 reflect when he be leave alone , the woman have be put no 
 common constraint upon herself . 
 he would know it all the well if he see the woman pace her own 
 room with her hair wildly throw from her flung - back face , her 
 hand clasp behind her head , her figure twist as if by pain . 
 he would think so all the more if he see the woman thus hurry up 
 and down for hour , without fatigue , without intermission , follow 
 by the faithful step upon the Ghost 's Walk . but he shut out the 
 now chill air , draw the window - curtain , go to bed , and fall 
 asleep . and truly when the star go out and the wan day peep into 
 the turret - chamber , find he at his old , he look as if the 
 digger and the spade be both commission and would soon be 
 dig . 
 the same wan day peep in at Sir Leicester pardon the repentant 
 country in a majestically condescend dream ; and at the cousin 
 enter on various public employment , principally receipt of 
 salary ; and at the chaste Volumnia , bestow a dower of fifty 
 thousand pound upon a hideous old general with a mouth of false 
 tooth like a pianoforte too full of key , long the admiration of 
 Bath and the terror of every other community . also into room high 
 in the roof , and into office in court - yard , and over stable , 
 where humbler ambition dream of bliss , in keeper ' lodge , and in 
 holy matrimony with Will or Sally . up come the bright sun , 
 draw everything up with it - the Wills and Sallys , the latent 
 vapour in the earth , the droop leaf and flower , the bird and 
 beast and creep thing , the gardener to sweep the dewy turf 
 and unfold emerald velvet where the roller pass , the smoke of the 
 great kitchen fire wreathe itself straight and high into the 
 lightsome air . lastly , up come the flag over Mr. Tulkinghorn 's 
 unconscious head cheerfully proclaim that Sir Leicester and Lady 
 Dedlock be in their happy home and that there be hospitality at 
 the place in Lincolnshire . 
 CHAPTER XLII 
 in Mr. Tulkinghorn 's Chambers 
 from the verdant undulation and the spread oak of the Dedlock 
 property , Mr. Tulkinghorn transfer himself to the stale heat and 
 dust of London . his manner of come and go between the two 
 place be one of his impenetrability . he walk into Chesney Wold 
 as if it be next door to his chamber and return to his chamber 
 as if he have never be out of Lincoln 's Inn Fields . he neither 
 change his dress before the journey nor talk of it afterwards . 
 he melt out of his turret - room this morning , just as now , in the 
 late twilight , he melt into his own square . 
 like a dingy London bird among the bird at roost in these pleasant 
 field , where the sheep be all make into parchment , the goat into 
 wig , and the pasture into chaff , the lawyer , smoke - dry and 
 fade , dwell among mankind but not consort with they , age 
 without experience of genial youth , and so long use to make his 
 cramp nest in hole and corner of human nature that he have 
 forget its broad and well range , come saunter home . in 
 the oven make by the hot pavement and hot building , he have bake 
 himself dryer than usual ; and he have in his thirsty mind his 
 mellow port - wine half a century old . 
 the lamplighter be skip up and down his ladder on Mr. 
 Tulkinghorn 's side of the Fields when that high - priest of noble 
 mystery arrive at his own dull court - yard . he ascend the door- 
 step and be glide into the dusky hall when he encounter , on the 
 top step , a bow and propitiatory little man . 
 " be that Snagsby ? " 
 " yes , sir . I hope you be well , sir . I be just give you up , 
 sir , and go home . " 
 " Aye ? what be it ? what do you want with I ? " 
 " well , sir , " say Mr. Snagsby , hold his hat at the side of his 
 head in his deference towards his good customer , " I be wishful to 
 say a word to you , sir . " 
 " can you say it here ? " 
 " perfectly , sir . " 
 " say it then . " the lawyer turn , lean his arm on the iron 
 railing at the top of the step , and look at the lamplighter 
 light the court - yard . 
 " it be relate , " say Mr. Snagsby in a mysterious low voice , " it 
 be relate - not to put too fine a point upon it - to the foreigner , 
 sir ! " 
 Mr. Tulkinghorn eye he with some surprise . " what foreigner ? " 
 " the foreign female , sir . french , if I do not   mistake ? I be not 
 acquaint with that language myself , but I should judge from her 
 manner and appearance that she be french ; anyways , certainly 
 foreign . she that be upstairs , sir , when Mr. Bucket and I have 
 the honour of wait upon you with the sweep - boy that night . " 
 " oh ! yes , yes . Mademoiselle Hortense . " 
 " indeed , sir ? " Mr. Snagsby cough his cough of submission behind 
 his hat . " I be not acquaint myself with the name of foreigner 
 in general , but I have no doubt it would be that . " Mr. Snagsby 
 appear to have set out in this reply with some desperate design of 
 repeat the name , but on reflection cough again to excuse 
 himself . 
 " and what can you have to say , Snagsby , " demand Mr. Tulkinghorn , 
 " about she ? " 
 " well , sir , " return the stationer , shade his communication with 
 his hat , " it fall a little hard upon I . my domestic happiness be 
 very great - at least , it be as great as can be expect , I be sure - 
 but my little woman be rather give to jealousy . not to put too 
 fine a point upon it , she be very much give to jealousy . and you 
 see , a foreign female of that genteel appearance come into the 
 shop , and hover - I should be the last to make use of a strong 
 expression if I could avoid it , but hover , sir - in the court - 
 you know it be - now be not   it ? I only put it to yourself , sir . " 
 Mr. Snagsby , have say this in a very plaintive manner , throw in 
 a cough of general application to fill up all the blank . 
 " why , what do you mean ? " ask Mr. Tulkinghorn . 
 " just so , sir , " return Mr. Snagsby ; " I be sure you would feel it 
 yourself and would excuse the reasonableness of MY feeling when 
 couple with the known excitableness of my little woman . you see , 
 the foreign female - which you mention her name just now , with 
 quite a native sound I be sure - catch up the word Snagsby that 
 night , be uncommon quick , and make inquiry , and get the 
 direction and come at dinner - time . now Guster , our young woman , be 
 timid and have fit , and she , take fright at the foreigner 's 
 look - which be fierce - and at a grind manner that she have of 
 speak - which be calculate to alarm a weak mind - give way to it , 
 instead of bear up against it , and tumble down the kitchen 
 stair out of one into another , such fit as I do sometimes think 
 be never go into , or come out of , in any house but our . 
 consequently there be by good fortune ample occupation for my 
 little woman , and only I to answer the shop . when she do say 
 that Mr. Tulkinghorn , be always deny to she by his employer 
  which I have no doubt at the time be a foreign mode of view a 
 clerk , she would do herself the pleasure of continually call at 
 my place until she be let in here . since then she have be , as I 
 begin by say , hover , hover , sir " - Mr. Snagsby repeat the 
 word with pathetic emphasis - " in the court . the effect of which 
 movement it be impossible to calculate . I should not   wonder if it 
 might have already give rise to the painfull mistake even in 
 the neighbour ' mind , not mention   if such a thing be 
 possible   my little woman . whereas , goodness know , " say Mr. 
 Snagsby , shake his head , " I never have an idea of a foreign 
 female , except as be formerly connect with a bunch of broom 
 and a baby , or at the present time with a tambourine and earring . 
 I never have , I do assure you , sir ! " 
 Mr. Tulkinghorn have listen gravely to this complaint and inquire 
 when the stationer have finish , " and that be all , be it , Snagsby ? " 
 " why yes , sir , that be all , " say Mr. Snagsby , end with a cough 
 that plainly add , " and it be enough too - for I . " 
 " I do not   know what Mademoiselle Hortense may want or mean , unless 
 she be mad , " say the lawyer . 
 " even if she be , you know , sir , " Mr. Snagsby plead , " it would not 
 be a consolation to have some weapon or another in the form of a 
 foreign dagger plant in the family . " 
 " no , " say the other . " well , well ! this shall be stop . I be 
 sorry you have be inconvenience . if she come again , send she 
 here . " 
 Mr. Snagsby , with much bowing and short apologetic coughing , take 
 his leave , lighten in heart . Mr. Tulkinghorn go upstairs , 
 say to himself , " these woman be create to give trouble the 
 whole earth over . the mistress not be enough to deal with , 
 here be the maid now ! but I will be short with this jade at least ! " 
 so say , he unlock his door , grope his way into his murky 
 room , light his candle , and look about he . it be too dark to 
 see much of the Allegory overhead there , but that importunate 
 Roman , who be for ever topple out of the cloud and pointing , be 
 at his old work pretty distinctly . not honour he with much 
 attention , Mr. Tulkinghorn take a small key from his pocket , 
 unlock a drawer in which there be another key , which unlock a 
 chest in which there be another , and so come to the cellar - key , 
 with which he prepare to descend to the region of old wine . he 
 be go towards the door with a candle in his hand when a knock 
 come . 
 " who be this ? aye , aye , mistress , it be you , be it ? you appear at a 
 good time . I have just be hear of you . now ! what do you 
 want ? " 
 he stand the candle on the chimney - piece in the clerk 's hall and 
 tap his dry cheek with the key as he address these word of 
 welcome to Mademoiselle Hortense . that feline personage , with her 
 lip tightly shut and her eye look out at he sideways , softly 
 close the door before reply . 
 " I have have great deal of trouble to find you , sir . " 
 " have you ! " 
 " I have be here very often , sir . it have always be say to I , 
 he be not at home , he be engage , he be this and that , he be not for 
 you . " 
 " quite right , and quite true . " 
 " not true . lie ! " 
 at time there be a suddenness in the manner of Mademoiselle 
 Hortense so like a bodily spring upon the subject of it that such 
 subject involuntarily start and fail back . it be Mr. 
 Tulkinghorn 's case at present , though Mademoiselle Hortense , with 
 her eye almost shut up   but still look out sideways , be only 
 smile contemptuously and shake her head . 
 " now , mistress , " say the lawyer , tap the key hastily upon the 
 chimney - piece . " if you have anything to say , say it , say it . " 
 " Sir , you have not use I well . you have be mean and shabby . " 
 " mean and shabby , eh ? " return the lawyer , rub his nose with 
 the key . 
 " yes . what be it that I tell you ? you know you have . you have 
 attrappe I - catch I - to give you information ; you have ask 
 I to show you the dress of mine my Lady must have wear that night , 
 you have pray I to come in it here to meet that boy . say ! be it 
 not ? " Mademoiselle Hortense make another spring . 
 " you be a vixen , a vixen ! " Mr. Tulkinghorn seem to meditate as 
 he look distrustfully at she , then he reply , " well , wench , well . 
 I pay you . " 
 " you pay I ! " she repeat with fierce disdain . " two sovereign ! I 
 have not change they , I re - fuse they , I des - pise they , I throw they 
 from I ! " which she literally do , take they out of her bosom 
 as she speak and fling they with such violence on the floor 
 that they jerk up again into the light before they roll away into 
 corner and slowly settle down there after spin vehemently . 
 " now ! " say Mademoiselle Hortense , darken her large eye again . 
 " you have pay I ? eh , my God , oh yes ! " 
 Mr. Tulkinghorn rub his head with the key while she entertain 
 herself with a sarcastic laugh . 
 " you must be rich , my fair friend , " he composedly observe , " to 
 throw money about in that way ! " 
 " I be rich , " she return . " I be very rich in hate . I hate my 
 Lady , of all my heart . you know that . " 
 " know it ? how should I know it ? " 
 " because you have know it perfectly before you pray I to give 
 you that information . because you have know perfectly that I be 
 en - r - r - r - rag ! " it appear impossible for mademoiselle to roll 
 the letter " r " sufficiently in this word , notwithstanding that she 
 assist her energetic delivery by clench both her hand and 
 set all her tooth . 
 " oh ! I know that , do I ? " say Mr. Tulkinghorn , examine the ward 
 of the key . 
 " yes , without doubt . I be not blind . you have make sure of I 
 because you know that . you have reason ! I det - est she . " 
 Mademoiselle fold her arm and throw this last remark at he over 
 one of her shoulder . 
 " have say this , have you anything else to say , mademoiselle ? " 
 " I be not yet place . place I well . find I a good condition ! 
 if you can not , or do not choose to do that , employ I to pursue 
 she , to chase she , to disgrace and to dishonour she . I will help 
 you well , and with a good will . it be what you do . do I not know 
 that ? " 
 " you appear to know a good deal , " Mr. Tulkinghorn retort . 
 " do I not ? be it that I be so weak as to believe , like a child , 
 that I come here in that dress to rec - eive that boy only to decide 
 a little bet , a wager ? eh , my God , oh yes ! " in this reply , down 
 to the word " wager " inclusive , mademoiselle have be ironically 
 polite and tender , then as suddenly dash into the bitter and 
 most defiant scorn , with her black eye in one and the same moment 
 very nearly shut and staringly wide open . 
 " now , let we see , " say Mr. Tulkinghorn , tap his chin with the 
 key and look imperturbably at she , " how this matter stand . " 
 " ah ! let we see , " mademoiselle assent , with many angry and tight 
 nod of her head . 
 " you come here to make a remarkably modest demand , which you have 
 just state , and it not be concede , you will come again . " 
 " and again , " say mademoiselle with more tight and angry nod . 
 " and yet again . and yet again . and many time again . in effect , 
 for ever ! " 
 " and not only here , but you will go to Mr. Snagsby 's too , perhaps ? 
 that visit not succeed either , you will go again perhaps ? " 
 " and again , " repeat mademoiselle , cataleptic with determination . 
 " and yet again . and yet again . and many time again . in effect , 
 for ever ! " 
 " very well . now , Mademoiselle Hortense , let I recommend you to 
 take the candle and pick up that money of your . I think you will 
 find it behind the clerk 's partition in the corner yonder . " 
 she merely throw a laugh over her shoulder and stand her ground 
 with fold arm . 
 " you will not , eh ? " 
 " no , I will not ! " 
 " so much the poor you ; so much the rich I ! look , mistress , 
 this be the key of my wine - cellar . it be a large key , but the key 
 of prison be large . in this city there be house of correction 
  where the treadmill be , for woman , the gate of which be very 
 strong and heavy , and no doubt the key too . I be afraid a lady of 
 your spirit and activity would find it an inconvenience to have one 
 of those key turn upon she for any length of time . what do you 
 think ? " 
 " I think , " mademoiselle reply without any action and in a clear , 
 oblige voice , " that you be a miserable wretch . " 
 " probably , " return Mr. Tulkinghorn , quietly blow his nose . 
 " but I do not   ask what you think of myself ; I ask what you think of 
 the prison . " 
 " nothing . what do it matter to I ? " 
 " why , it matter this much , mistress , " say the lawyer , 
 deliberately put away his handkerchief and adjust his frill ; 
 " the law be so despotic here that it interfere to prevent any of 
 our good english citizen from be trouble , even by a lady 's 
 visit against his desire . and on his complaining that he be so 
 troubled , it take hold of the troublesome lady and shut she up in 
 prison under hard discipline . turn the key upon she , mistress . " 
 illustrate with the cellar - key . 
 " truly ? " return mademoiselle in the same pleasant voice . " that be 
 droll ! but - my faith ! - still what do it matter to I ? " 
 " my fair friend , " say Mr. Tulkinghorn , " make another visit here , 
 or at Mr. Snagsby 's , and you shall learn . " 
 " in that case you will send I to the prison , perhaps ? " 
 " perhaps . " 
 it would be contradictory for one in mademoiselle 's state of 
 agreeable jocularity to foam at the mouth , otherwise a tigerish 
 expansion thereabout might look as if a very little more would 
 make she do it . 
 " in a word , mistress , " say Mr. Tulkinghorn , " I be sorry to be 
 unpolite , but if you ever present yourself uninvited here - or 
 there - again , I will give you over to the police . their gallantry 
 be great , but they carry troublesome people through the street in 
 an ignominious manner , strap down on a board , my good wench . " 
 " I will prove you , " whisper mademoiselle , stretch out her hand , 
 " I will try if you dare to do it ! " 
 " and if , " pursue the lawyer without mind she , " I place you in 
 that good condition of be lock up in jail , it will be some 
 time before you find yourself at liberty again . " 
 " I will prove you , " repeat mademoiselle in her former whisper . 
 " and now , " proceed the lawyer , still without mind she , " you have 
 well go . think twice before you come here again . " 
 " think you , " she answer , " twice two hundred time ! " 
 " you be dismiss by your lady , you know , " Mr. Tulkinghorn 
 observe , follow she out upon the staircase , " as the most 
 implacable and unmanageable of woman . now turn over a new leaf and 
 take warning by what I say to you . for what I say , I mean ; and 
 what I threaten , I will do , mistress . " 
 she go down without answer or look behind she . when she be 
 go , he go down too , and return with his cobweb - cover 
 bottle , devote himself to a leisurely enjoyment of its content , 
 now and then , as he throw his head back in his chair , catch 
 sight of the pertinacious roman pointing from the ceiling . 
 CHAPTER XLIII 
 Esther 's Narrative 
 it matter little now how much I think of my living mother who 
 have tell I evermore to consider she dead . I could not venture to 
 approach she or to communicate with she in writing , for my sense of 
 the peril in which her life be pass be only to be equal by 
 my fear of increase it . know that my mere existence as a 
 living creature be an unforeseen danger in her way , I could not 
 always conquer that terror of myself which have seize I when I 
 first know the secret . at no time do I dare to utter her name . I 
 feel as if I do not even dare to hear it . if the conversation 
 anywhere , when I be present , take that direction , as it sometimes 
 naturally do , I try not to hear : I mentally count , repeat 
 something that I know , or go out of the room . I be conscious now 
 that I often do these thing when there can have be no danger of 
 her be speak of , but I do they in the dread I have of hear 
 anything that might lead to her betrayal , and to her betrayal 
 through I . 
 it matter little now how often I recall the tone of my mother 's 
 voice , wonder whether I should ever hear it again as I so long 
 to do , and think how strange and desolate it be that it should 
 be so new to I . it matter little that I watch for every public 
 mention of my mother 's name ; that I pass and repasse the door of 
 her house in town , love it , but afraid to look at it ; that I once 
 sit in the theatre when my mother be there and see I , and when we 
 be so wide asunder before the great company of all degree that 
 any link or confidence between we seem a dream . it be all , all 
 over . my lot have be so blest that I can relate little of myself 
 which be not a story of goodness and generosity in other . I may 
 well pass that little and go on . 
 when we be settle at home again , Ada and I have many 
 conversation with my guardian of which Richard be the theme . my 
 dear girl be deeply grieve that he should do their kind cousin so 
 much wrong , but she be so faithful to Richard that she could not 
 bear to blame he even for that . my guardian be assure of it , 
 and never couple his name with a word of reproof . " Rick be 
 mistaken , my dear , " he would say to she . " well , well ! we have all 
 be mistake over and over again . we must trust to you and time 
 to set he right . " 
 we know afterwards what we suspect then , that he do not trust to 
 time until he have often try to open Richard 's eye . that he have 
 write to he , go to he , talk with he , try every gentle 
 and persuasive art his kindness could devise . our poor devote 
 Richard be deaf and blind to all . if he be wrong , he would make 
 amend when the Chancery suit be over . if he be grope in the 
 dark , he could not do well than do his utmost to clear away those 
 cloud in which so much be confused and obscure . suspicion and 
 misunderstanding be the fault of the suit ? then let he work the 
 suit out and come through it to his right mind . this be his 
 unvarying reply . Jarndyce and Jarndyce have obtain such 
 possession of his whole nature that it be impossible to place any 
 consideration before he which he do not , with a distorted kind of 
 reason , make a new argument in favour of his do what he do . 
 " so that it be even more mischievous , " say my guardian once to I , 
 " to remonstrate with the poor dear fellow than to leave he alone . " 
 I take one of these opportunity of mention my doubt of Mr. 
 Skimpole as a good adviser for Richard . 
 " Adviser ! " return my guardian , laugh , " my dear , who would 
 advise with Skimpole ? " 
 " Encourager would perhaps have be a well word , " say I. 
 " Encourager ! " return my guardian again . " who could be encourage 
 by Skimpole ? " 
 " not Richard ? " I ask . 
 " no , " he reply . " such an unworldly , uncalculating , gossamer 
 creature be a relief to he and an amusement . but as to advise 
 or encouraging or occupy a serious station towards anybody or 
 anything , it be simply not to be think of in such a child as 
 Skimpole . " 
 " pray , cousin John , " say Ada , who have just join we and now 
 look over my shoulder , " what make he such a child ? " 
 " what make he such a child ? " inquire my guardian , rub his 
 head , a little at a loss . 
 " yes , cousin John . " 
 " why , " he slowly reply , roughen his head more and more , " he be 
 all sentiment , and - and susceptibility , and - and sensibility , and - 
 and imagination . and these quality be not regulate in he , 
 somehow . I suppose the people who admire he for they in his 
 youth attach too much importance to they and too little to any 
 training that would have balance and adjust they , and so he 
 become what he be . hey ? " say my guardian , stop short and 
 look at we hopefully . " what do you think , you two ? " 
 Ada , glance at I , say she think it be a pity he should be an 
 expense to Richard . 
 " so it be , so it be , " return my guardian hurriedly . " that must 
 not be . we must arrange that . I must prevent it . that will never 
 do . " 
 and I say I think it be to be regret that he have ever 
 introduce Richard to Mr. Vholes for a present of five pound . 
 " do he ? " say my guardian with a pass shade of vexation on his 
 face . " but there you have the man . there you have the man ! there 
 be nothing mercenary in that with he . he have no idea of the value 
 of money . he introduce Rick , and then he be good friend with Mr. 
 Vholes and borrow five pound of he . he mean nothing by it and 
 think nothing of it . he tell you himself , I will be bind , my 
 dear ? " 
 " oh , yes ! " say I. 
 " exactly ! " cry my guardian , quite triumphant . " there you have 
 the man ! if he have mean any harm by it or be conscious of any 
 harm in it , he would not   tell it . he tell it as he do it in mere 
 simplicity . but you shall see he in his own home , and then you will 
 understand he well . we must pay a visit to Harold Skimpole and 
 caution he on these point . Lord bless you , my dear , an infant , 
 an infant ! " 
 in pursuance of this plan , we go into London on an early day and 
 present ourselves at Mr. Skimpole 's door . 
 he live in a place call the Polygon , in Somers Town , where there 
 be at that time a number of poor spanish refugee walk about 
 in cloak , smoke little paper cigar . whether he be a well 
 tenant than one might have suppose , in consequence of his friend 
 somebody always pay his rent at last , or whether his inaptitude 
 for business render it particularly difficult to turn he out , I 
 do not   know ; but he have occupy the same house some year . it be 
 in a state of dilapidation quite equal to our expectation . two or 
 three of the area railing be go , the water - butt be break , 
 the knocker be loose , the bell - handle have be pull off a long 
 time to judge from the rusty state of the wire , and dirty 
 footprint on the step be the only sign of its be inhabit . 
 a slatternly full - blow girl who seem to be burst out at the 
 rent in her gown and the crack in her shoe like an over - ripe 
 berry answer our knock by open the door a very little way and 
 stop up the gap with her figure . as she know Mr. Jarndyce 
  indeed Ada and I both think that she evidently associate he 
 with the receipt of her wage , she immediately relent and 
 allow we to pass in . the lock of the door be in a disabled 
 condition , she then apply herself to secure it with the chain , 
 which be not in good action either , and say would we go upstairs ? 
 we go upstairs to the first floor , still see no other 
 furniture than the dirty footprint . Mr. Jarndyce without further 
 ceremony enter a room there , and we follow . it be dingy 
 enough and not at all clean , but furnish with an odd kind of 
 shabby luxury , with a large footstool , a sofa , and plenty of 
 cushion , an easy - chair , and plenty of pillow , a piano , book , 
 draw material , music , newspaper , and a few sketch and 
 picture . a broken pane of glass in one of the dirty window be 
 paper and wafere over , but there be a little plate of hothouse 
 nectarine on the table , and there be another of grape , and 
 another of sponge - cake , and there be a bottle of light wine . Mr. 
 Skimpole himself recline upon the sofa in a dressing - gown , 
 drink some fragrant coffee from an old china cup - it be then 
 about mid - day - and look at a collection of wallflower in the 
 balcony . 
 he be not in the least disconcert by our appearance , but rise 
 and receive we in his usual airy manner . 
 " here I be , you see ! " he say when we be seat , not without some 
 little difficulty , the great part of the chair be break . 
 " here I be ! this be my frugal breakfast . some man want leg of 
 beef and mutton for breakfast ; I do not . give I my peach , my cup 
 of coffee , and my claret ; I be content . I do not   want they for 
 themselves , but they remind I of the sun . there be nothing solar 
 about leg of beef and mutton . mere animal satisfaction ! " 
 " this be our friend 's consulting - room   or would be , if he ever 
 prescribe , his sanctum , his studio , " say my guardian to we . 
 " yes , " say Mr. Skimpole , turn his bright face about , " this be 
 the bird 's cage . this be where the bird live and sing . they 
 pluck his feather now and then and clip his wing , but he sing , 
 he sing ! " 
 he hand we the grape , repeat in his radiant way , " he sing ! 
 not an ambitious note , but still he sing . " 
 " these be very fine , " say my guardian . " a present ? " 
 " no , " he answer . " no ! some amiable gardener sell they . his man 
 want to know , when he bring they last evening , whether he 
 should wait for the money . ' really , my friend , ' I say , ' I think 
 not - if your time be of any value to you . ' I suppose it be , for 
 he go away . " 
 my guardian look at we with a smile , as though he ask we , " be 
 it possible to be worldly with this baby ? " 
 " this be a day , " say Mr. Skimpole , gaily take a little claret in 
 a tumbler , " that will ever be remember here . we shall call it 
 Saint Clare and Saint Summerson day . you must see my daughter . I 
 have a blue - eyed daughter who be my Beauty daughter , I have a 
 Sentiment daughter , and I have a Comedy daughter . you must see 
 they all . they will be enchant . " 
 he be go to summon they when my guardian interpose and ask 
 he to pause a moment , as he wish to say a word to he first . 
 " my dear Jarndyce , " he cheerfully reply , go back to his sofa , 
 " as many moment as you please . time be no object here . we never 
 know what o'clock it be , and we never care . not the way to get on 
 in life , you will tell I ? certainly . but we don't get on in life . 
 we do not   pretend to do it . " 
 my guardian look at we again , plainly say , " you hear he ? " 
 " now , Harold , " he begin , " the word I have to say relate to Rick . " 
 " the dear friend I have ! " return Mr. Skimpole cordially . " I 
 suppose he ought not to be my dear friend , as he be not on term 
 with you . but he be , I can not   help it ; he be full of youthful 
 poetry , and I love he . if you do not   like it , I can not   help it . I 
 love he . " 
 the engaging frankness with which he make this declaration really 
 have a disinterested appearance and captivate my guardian , if not , 
 for the moment , Ada too . 
 " you be welcome to love he as much as you like , " return Mr. 
 Jarndyce , " but we must save his pocket , Harold . " 
 " oh ! " say Mr. Skimpole . " his pocket ? now you be come to what 
 I do not   understand . " take a little more claret and dip one 
 of the cake in it , he shake his head and smile at Ada and I with 
 an ingenuous foreboding that he never could be make to understand . 
 " if you go with he here or there , " say my guardian plainly , " you 
 must not let he pay for both . " 
 " my dear Jarndyce , " return Mr. Skimpole , his genial face 
 irradiate by the comicality of this idea , " what be I to do ? if he 
 take I anywhere , I must go . and how can I pay ? I never have any 
 money . if I have any money , I do not   know anything about it . 
 suppose I say to a man , how much ? suppose the man say to I seven 
 and sixpence ? I know nothing about seven and sixpence . it be 
 impossible for I to pursue the subject with any consideration for 
 the man . I do not   go about ask busy people what seven and 
 sixpence be in Moorish - which I do not   understand . why should I go 
 about ask they what seven and sixpence be in Money - which I 
 do not   understand ? " 
 " well , " say my guardian , by no mean displease with this artless 
 reply , " if you come to any kind of journeying with Rick , you must 
 borrow the money of I   never breathe the least allusion to that 
 circumstance , and leave the calculation to he . " 
 " my dear Jarndyce , " return Mr. Skimpole , " I will do anything to 
 give you pleasure , but it seem an idle form - a superstition . 
 besides , I give you my word , Miss Clare and my dear Miss Summerson , 
 I think Mr. Carstone be immensely rich . I think he have only 
 to make over something , or to sign a bond , or a draft , or a cheque , 
 or a bill , or to put something on a file somewhere , to bring down a 
 shower of money . " 
 " indeed it be not so , sir , " say Ada . " he be poor . " 
 " no , really ? " return Mr. Skimpole with his bright smile . " you 
 surprise I . 
 " and not be the rich for trust in a rotten reed , " say my 
 guardian , lay his hand emphatically on the sleeve of Mr. 
 Skimpole 's dressing - gown , " be you very careful not to encourage he 
 in that reliance , Harold . " 
 " my dear good friend , " return Mr. Skimpole , " and my dear Miss 
 Simmerson , and my dear Miss Clare , how can I do that ? it be 
 business , and I do not   know business . it be he who encourage I . 
 he emerge from great feat of business , present the bright 
 prospect before I as their result , and call upon I to admire 
 they . I do admire they - as bright prospect . but I know no more 
 about they , and I tell he so . " 
 the helpless kind of candour with which he present this before 
 we , the light - hearted manner in which he be amuse by his 
 innocence , the fantastic way in which he take himself under his own 
 protection and argue about that curious person , combine with the 
 delightful ease of everything he say exactly to make out my 
 guardian 's case . the more I see of he , the more unlikely it 
 seem to I , when he be present , that he could design , conceal , 
 or influence anything ; and yet the less likely that appear when 
 he be not present , and the less agreeable it be to think of his 
 have anything to do with any one for whom I care . 
 hear that his examination   as he call it   be now over , Mr. 
 Skimpole leave the room with a radiant face to fetch his daughter 
  his son have run away at various time , leave my guardian quite 
 delighted by the manner in which he have vindicate his childish 
 character . he soon come back , bring with he the three young 
 lady and Mrs. Skimpole , who have once be a beauty but be now a 
 delicate high - nosed invalid suffering under a complication of 
 disorder . 
 " this , " say Mr. Skimpole , " be my Beauty daughter , Arethusa - play 
 and sing odd and end like her father . this be my Sentiment 
 daughter , Laura - play a little but do not   sing . this be my Comedy 
 daughter , Kitty - sing a little but do not   play . we all draw a 
 little and compose a little , and none of we have any idea of time 
 or money . " 
 Mrs. Skimpole sigh , I think , as if she would have be glad to 
 strike out this item in the family attainment . I also think 
 that she rather impress her sigh upon my guardian and that she 
 take every opportunity of throw in another . 
 " it be pleasant , " say Mr. Skimpole , turn his sprightly eye 
 from one to the other of we , " and it be whimsically interesting to 
 trace peculiarity in family . in this family we be all 
 child , and I be the young . " 
 the daughter , who appear to be very fond of he , be amuse by 
 this droll fact , particularly the Comedy daughter . 
 " my dear , it be true , " say Mr. Skimpole , " be it not ? so it be , 
 and so it must be , because like the dog in the hymn , ' it be our 
 nature to . ' now , here be Miss Summerson with a fine administrative 
 capacity and a knowledge of detail perfectly surprising . it will 
 sound very strange in Miss Summerson 's ear , I dare say , that we 
 know nothing about chop in this house . but we do not , not the 
 least . we can not   cook anything whatever . a needle and thread we 
 do not   know how to use . we admire the people who possess the 
 practical wisdom we want , but we do not   quarrel with they . then why 
 should they quarrel with we ? live and let live , we say to they . 
 live upon your practical wisdom , and let we live upon you ! " 
 he laugh , but as usual seem quite candid and really to mean 
 what he say . 
 " we have sympathy , my rose , " say Mr. Skimpole , ' sympathy for 
 everything . have we not ? " 
 " oh , yes , papa ! " cry the three daughter . 
 " in fact , that be our family department , " say Mr. Skimpole , " in 
 this hurly - burly of life . we be capable of look on and of 
 be interested , and we do look on , and we be interested . what 
 more can we do ? here be my Beauty daughter , marry these three 
 year . now I dare say she marry another child , and have two 
 more , be all wrong in point of political economy , but it be very 
 agreeable . we have our little festivity on those occasion and 
 exchange social idea . she bring her young husband home one 
 day , and they and their young fledgling have their nest upstairs . 
 I dare say at some time or other Sentiment and Comedy will bring 
 their husband home and have their nest upstairs too . so we get 
 on , we do not   know how , but somehow . " 
 she look very young indeed to be the mother of two child , and 
 I could not help pity both she and they . it be evident that 
 the three daughter have grow up as they could and have have just as 
 little haphazard instruction as qualified they to be their father 's 
 plaything in his idlest hour . his pictorial taste be 
 consult , I observe , in their respective style of wear their 
 hair , the Beauty daughter be in the classic manner , the 
 Sentiment daughter luxuriant and flow , and the Comedy daughter 
 in the arch style , with a good deal of sprightly forehead , and 
 vivacious little curl dot about the corner of her eye . they 
 be dress to correspond , though in a most untidy and negligent 
 way . 
 Ada and I converse with these young lady and find they 
 wonderfully like their father . in the meanwhile Mr. Jarndyce   who 
 have be rub his head to a great extent , and hint at a change 
 in the wind   talk with Mrs. Skimpole in a corner , where we could 
 not help hear the chink of money . Mr. Skimpole have previously 
 volunteer to go home with we and have withdraw to dress himself 
 for the purpose . 
 " my rose , " he say when he come back , " take care of mama . she be 
 poorly to - day . by go home with Mr. Jarndyce for a day or two , I 
 shall hear the lark sing and preserve my amiability . it have be 
 try , you know , and would be try again if I remain at home . " 
 " that bad man ! " say the Comedy daughter . 
 " at the very time when he know papa be lie ill by his 
 wallflower , look at the blue sky , " Laura complain . 
 " and when the smell of hay be in the air ! " say Arethusa . 
 " it show a want of poetry in the man , " Mr. Skimpole assent , but 
 with perfect good humour . " it be coarse . there be an absence of 
 the fine touch of humanity in it ! my daughter have take great 
 offence , " he explain to we , " at an honest man - " 
 " not honest , papa . impossible ! " they all three protest . 
 " at a rough kind of fellow - a sort of human hedgehog roll up , " 
 say Mr. Skimpole , " who be a baker in this neighbourhood and from 
 whom we borrow a couple of arm - chair . we want a couple of arm- 
 chair , and we have not   get they , and therefore of course we look 
 to a man who had get they , to lend they . well ! this morose person 
 lend they , and we wear they out . when they be wear out , he 
 want they back . he have they back . he be content , you will 
 say . not at all . he object to their be wear . I reason 
 with he , and point out his mistake . I say , ' can you , at your 
 time of life , be so headstrong , my friend , as to persist that an 
 arm - chair be a thing to put upon a shelf and look at ? that it be 
 an object to contemplate , to survey from a distance , to consider 
 from a point of sight ? do not   you know that these arm - chair be 
 borrow to be sit upon ? ' he be unreasonable and unpersuadable 
 and use intemperate language . be as patient as I be at this 
 minute , I address another appeal to he . I say , ' now , my good 
 man , however our business capacity may vary , we be all child 
 of one great mother , Nature . on this blooming summer morning here 
 you see I '   I be on the sofa   ' with flower before I , fruit upon 
 the table , the cloudless sky above I , the air full of fragrance , 
 contemplate Nature . I entreat you , by our common brotherhood , 
 not to interpose between I and a subject so sublime , the absurd 
 figure of an angry baker ! ' but he do , " say Mr. Skimpole , raise 
 his laugh eye in playful astonishment ; " he do interpose that 
 ridiculous figure , and he do , and he will again . and therefore I 
 be very glad to get out of his way and to go home with my friend 
 Jarndyce . " 
 it seem to escape his consideration that Mrs. Skimpole and the 
 daughter remain behind to encounter the baker , but this be so 
 old a story to all of they that it have become a matter of course . 
 he take leave of his family with a tenderness as airy and graceful 
 as any other aspect in which he show himself and ride away with 
 we in perfect harmony of mind . we have an opportunity of see 
 through some open door , as we go downstairs , that his own 
 apartment be a palace to the rest of the house . 
 I could have no anticipation , and I have none , that something very 
 startling to I at the moment , and ever memorable to I in what 
 ensue from it , be to happen before this day be out . our guest 
 be in such spirit on the way home that I could do nothing but 
 listen to he and wonder at he ; nor be I alone in this , for Ada 
 yield to the same fascination . as to my guardian , the wind , 
 which have threaten to become fix in the east when we leave 
 Somers Town , veer completely round before we be a couple of 
 mile from it . 
 whether of questionable childishness or not in any other matter , 
 Mr. Skimpole have a child 's enjoyment of change and bright weather . 
 in no way weary by his sally on the road , he be in the 
 drawing - room before any of we ; and I hear he at the piano while I 
 be yet look after my housekeeping , singing refrain of 
 barcarole and drink song , italian and german , by the score . 
 we be all assemble shortly before dinner , and he be still at 
 the piano idly pick out in his luxurious way little strain of 
 music , and talk between while of finish some sketch of the 
 ruin old Verulam wall to - morrow , which he have begin a year or two 
 ago and have get tired of , when a card be bring in and my 
 guardian read aloud in a surprised voice , " Sir Leicester Dedlock ! " 
 the visitor be in the room while it be yet turn round with I 
 and before I have the power to stir . if I have have it , I should have 
 hurry away . I have not even the presence of mind , in my 
 giddiness , to retire to Ada in the window , or to see the window , or 
 to know where it be . I hear my name and find that my guardian 
 be present I before I could move to a chair . 
 " pray be seat , Sir Leicester . " 
 " Mr. Jarndyce , " say Sir Leicester in reply as he bow and seat 
 himself , " I do myself the honour of call here - " 
 " you do I the honour , Sir Leicester . " 
 " thank you - of call here on my road from Lincolnshire to express 
 my regret that any cause of complaint , however strong , that I may 
 have against a gentleman who - who be know to you and have be your 
 host , and to whom therefore I will make no farth reference , 
 should have prevent you , still more lady under your escort and 
 charge , from see whatever little there may be to gratify a 
 polite and refined taste at my house , Chesney Wold . " 
 " you be exceedingly obliging , Sir Leicester , and on behalf of 
 those lady   who be present   and for myself , I thank you very 
 much . " 
 " it be possible , Mr. Jarndyce , that the gentleman to whom , for the 
 reason I have mention , I refrain from make further allusion - 
 it be possible , Mr. Jarndyce , that that gentleman may have do I 
 the honour so far to misapprehend my character as to induce you to 
 believe that you would not have be receive by my local 
 establishment in Lincolnshire with that urbanity , that courtesy , 
 which its member be instruct to show to all lady and 
 gentleman who present themselves at that house . I merely beg to 
 observe , sir , that the fact be the reverse . " 
 my guardian delicately dismiss this remark without make any 
 verbal answer . 
 " it have give I pain , Mr. Jarndyce , " Sir Leicester weightily 
 proceed . " I assure you , sir , it have give - I - pain - to learn 
 from the housekeeper at Chesney Wold that a gentleman who be in 
 your company in that part of the county , and who would appear to 
 possess a cultivate taste for the fine art , be likewise deter 
 by some such cause from examine the family picture with that 
 leisure , that attention , that care , which he might have desire to 
 bestow upon they and which some of they might possibly have 
 repay . " here he produce a card and read , with much gravity and a 
 little trouble , through his eye - glass , " Mr. Hirrold - Herald - 
 Harold - skampling - skumple - I beg your pardon - Skimpole . " 
 " this be Mr. Harold Skimpole , " say my guardian , evidently 
 surprised . 
 " oh ! " exclaim Sir Leicester , " I be happy to meet Mr. Skimpole and 
 to have the opportunity of tender my personal regret . I hope , 
 sir , that when you again find yourself in my part of the county , 
 you will be under no similar sense of restraint . " 
 " you be very obliging , Sir Leicester Dedlock . so encouraged , I 
 shall certainly give myself the pleasure and advantage of another 
 visit to your beautiful house . the owner of such place as 
 Chesney Wold , " say Mr. Skimpole with his usual happy and easy air , 
 " be public benefactor . they be good enough to maintain a number 
 of delightful object for the admiration and pleasure of we poor 
 man ; and not to reap all the admiration and pleasure that they 
 yield be to be ungrateful to our benefactor . " 
 Sir Leicester seem to approve of this sentiment highly . " an 
 artist , sir ? " 
 " no , " return Mr. Skimpole . " a perfectly idle man . a mere 
 amateur . " 
 Sir Leicester seem to approve of this even more . he hop he 
 might have the good fortune to be at Chesney Wold when Mr. Skimpole 
 next come down into Lincolnshire . Mr. Skimpole profess himself 
 much flattered and honour . 
 " Mr. Skimpole mention , " pursue Sir Leicester , address himself 
 again to my guardian , " mention to the housekeeper , who , as he 
 may have observe , be an old and attach retainer of the family - " 
  " that be , when I walk through the house the other day , on the 
 occasion of my go down to visit Miss Summerson and Miss Clare , " 
 Mr. Skimpole airily explain to we . 
 " - that the friend with whom he have formerly be stay there be 
 Mr. Jarndyce . " Sir Leicester bow to the bearer of that name . 
 " and hence I become aware of the circumstance for which I have 
 profess my regret . that this should have occur to any 
 gentleman , Mr. Jarndyce , but especially a gentleman formerly know 
 to Lady Dedlock , and indeed claim some distant connexion with 
 she , and for whom   as I learn from my Lady herself   she entertain 
 a high respect , do , I assure you , give - I - pain . " 
 " pray say no more about it , Sir Leicester , " return my guardian . 
 " I be very sensible , as I be sure we all be , of your consideration . 
 indeed the mistake be mine , and I ought to apologize for it . " 
 I have not once look up . I have not see the visitor and have not 
 even appear to myself to hear the conversation . it surprise I 
 to find that I can recall it , for it seem to make no impression 
 on I as it pass . I hear they speak , but my mind be so 
 confused and my instinctive avoidance of this gentleman make his 
 presence so distress to I that I think I understand nothing , 
 through the rushing in my head and the beating of my heart . 
 " I mention the subject to Lady Dedlock , " say Sir Leicester , 
 rise , " and my Lady inform I that she have have the pleasure of 
 exchange a few word with Mr. Jarndyce and his ward on the 
 occasion of an accidental meeting during their sojourn in the 
 vicinity . permit I , Mr. Jarndyce , to repeat to yourself , and to 
 these lady , the assurance I have already tender to Mr. 
 Skimpole . circumstance undoubtedly prevent my saying that it 
 would afford I any gratification to hear that Mr. Boythorn have 
 favour my house with his presence , but those circumstance be 
 confine to that gentleman himself and do not extend beyond he . " 
 " you know my old opinion of he , " say Mr. Skimpole , lightly 
 appeal to we . " an amiable bull who be determined to make every 
 colour scarlet ! " 
 Sir Leicester Dedlock cough as if he could not possibly hear 
 another word in reference to such an individual and take his leave 
 with great ceremony and politeness . I get to my own room with all 
 possible speed and remain there until I have recover my self- 
 command . it have be very much disturbed , but I be thankful to 
 find when I go downstairs again that they only rally I for 
 have be shy and mute before the great Lincolnshire baronet . 
 by that time I have make up my mind that the period be come when I 
 must tell my guardian what I know . the possibility of my being 
 bring into contact with my mother , of my be take to her 
 house , even of Mr. Skimpole 's , however distantly associate with 
 I , receive kindness and obligation from her husband , be so 
 painful that I feel I could no long guide myself without his 
 assistance . 
 when we have retire for the night , and Ada and I have have our usual 
 talk in our pretty room , I go out at my door again and seek my 
 guardian among his book . I know he always read at that hour , and 
 as I draw near I see the light shin out into the passage from 
 his reading - lamp . 
 " may I come in , guardian ? " 
 " surely , little woman . what be the matter ? " 
 " nothing be the matter . I think I would like to take this quiet 
 time of say a word to you about myself . " 
 he put a chair for I , shut his book , and put it by , and turn his 
 kind attentive face towards I . I could not help observe that it 
 wear that curious expression I have observe in it once before - on 
 that night when he have say that he be in no trouble which I could 
 readily understand . 
 " what concern you , my dear Esther , " say he , " concern we all . 
 you can not be more ready to speak than I be to hear . " 
 " I know that , guardian . but I have such need of your advice and 
 support . oh ! you do not   know how much need I have to - night . " 
 he look unprepared for my be so earnest , and even a little 
 alarmed . 
 " or how anxious I have be to speak to you , " say I , " ever since 
 the visitor be here to - day . " 
 " the visitor , my dear ! Sir Leicester Dedlock ? " 
 " yes . " 
 he fold his arm and sit look at I with an air of the 
 profound astonishment , await what I should say next . I do 
 not know how to prepare he . 
 " why , Esther , " say he , break into a smile , " our visitor and you 
 be the two last person on earth I should have think of 
 connect together ! " 
 " oh , yes , guardian , I know it . and I too , but a little while ago . " 
 the smile pass from his face , and he become graver than before . 
 he cross to the door to see that it be shut   but I have see to 
 that   and resume his seat before I . 
 " Guardian , " say I , " do you remensher , when we be overtake by 
 the thunder - storm , Lady Dedlock 's speak to you of her sister ? " 
 " of course . of course I do . " 
 " and remind you that she and her sister have differ , have go 
 their several way ? " 
 " of course . " 
 " why do they separate , guardian ? " 
 his face quite alter as he look at I . " my child , what 
 question be these ! I never know . no one but themselves ever do 
 know , I believe . who could tell what the secret of those two 
 handsome and proud woman be ! you have see Lady Dedlock . if you 
 have ever see her sister , you would know she to have be as 
 resolute and haughty as she . " 
 " oh , guardian , I have see she many and many a time ! " 
 " seen she ? " 
 he pause a little , bite his lip . " then , Esther , when you speak 
 to I long ago of Boythorn , and when I tell you that he be all but 
 marry once , and that the lady do not die , but die to he , and 
 that that time have have its influence on his later life - do you 
 know it all , and know who the lady be ? " 
 " no , guardian , " I return , fearful of the light that dimly break 
 upon I . " nor do I know yet . " 
 " Lady Dedlock 's sister . " 
 " and why , " I could scarcely ask he , " why , guardian , pray tell I 
 why be they part ? " 
 " it be her act , and she keep its motif in her inflexible heart . 
 he afterwards do conjecture   but it be mere conjecture   that some 
 injury which her haughty spirit have receive in her cause of 
 quarrel with her sister have wound she beyond all reason , but she 
 write he that from the date of that letter she die to he - as in 
 literal truth she do - and that the resolution be exact from she 
 by her knowledge of his proud temper and his strained sense of 
 honour , which be both her nature too . in consideration for those 
 master point in he , and even in consideration for they in 
 herself , she make the sacrifice , she say , and would live in it and 
 die in it . she do both , I fear ; certainly he never see she , never 
 hear of she from that hour . nor do any one . " 
 " oh , guardian , what have I do ! " I cry , give way to my grief ; 
 " what sorrow have I innocently cause ! " 
 " you cause , Esther ? " 
 " yes , guardian . innocently , but most surely . that seclude sister 
 be my first remembrance . " 
 " no , no ! " he cry , start . 
 " yes , guardian , yes ! and her sister be my mother ! " 
 I would have tell he all my mother 's letter , but he would not hear 
 it then . he speak so tenderly and wisely to I , and he put so 
 plainly before I all I have myself imperfectly think and hop in 
 my well state of mind , that , penetrate as I have be with 
 fervent gratitude towards he through so many year , I believe I 
 have never love he so dearly , never thank he in my heart so 
 fully , as I do that night . and when he have take I to my room 
 and kiss I at the door , and when at last I lie down to sleep , my 
 thought be how could I ever be busy enough , how could I ever be 
 good enough , how in my little way could I ever hope to be forgetful 
 enough of myself , devote enough to he , and useful enough to 
 other , to show he how I bless and honour he . 
 CHAPTER XLIV 
 the Letter and the Answer 
 my guardian call I into his room next morning , and then I tell 
 he what have be leave untold on the previous night . there be 
 nothing to be do , he say , but to keep the secret and to avoid 
 another such encounter as that of yesterday . he understand my 
 feeling and entirely share it . he charge himself even with 
 restrain Mr. Skimpole from improve his opportunity . one 
 person whom he need not name to I , it be not now possible for he 
 to advise or help . he wish it be , but no such thing could be . 
 if her mistrust of the lawyer whom she have mention be well- 
 found , which he scarcely doubt , he dread discovery . he know 
 something of he , both by sight and by reputation , and it be 
 certain that he be a dangerous man . whatever happen , he 
 repeatedly impress upon I with anxious affection and kindness , I 
 be as innocent of as himself and as unable to influence . 
 " nor do I understand , " say he , " that any doubt tend towards you , 
 my dear . much suspicion may exist without that connexion . " 
 " with the lawyer , " I return . " but two other person have come 
 into my mind since I have be anxious . then I tell he all about 
 Mr. Guppy , who I fear might have have his vague surmise when I 
 little understand his meaning , but in whose silence after our last 
 interview I express perfect confidence . 
 " well , " say my guardian . " then we may dismiss he for the 
 present . who be the other ? " 
 I call to his recollection the french maid and the eager offer of 
 herself she have make to I . 
 " ha ! " he return thoughtfully . " that be a more alarming person 
 than the clerk . but after all , my dear , it be but seek for a 
 new service . she have see you and Ada a little while before , and 
 it be natural that you should come into her head . she merely 
 propose herself for your maid , you know . she do nothing more . " 
 " her manner be strange , " say I. 
 " yes , and her manner be strange when she take her shoe off and 
 show that cool relish for a walk that might have end in her 
 death - bed , " say my guardian . " it would be useless self - distress 
 and torment to reckon up such chance and possibility . there be 
 very few harmless circumstance that would not seem full of 
 perilous meaning , so consider . be hopeful , little woman . you 
 can be nothing well than yourself ; be that , through this 
 knowledge , as you be before you have it . it be the good you can 
 do for everybody 's sake . I , share the secret with you - " 
 " and lighten it , guardian , so much , " say I. 
 " - will be attentive to what pass in that family , so far as I can 
 observe it from my distance . and if the time should come when I 
 can stretch out a hand to render the least service to one whom it 
 be well not to name even here , I will not fail to do it for her 
 dear daughter 's sake . " 
 I thank he with my whole heart . what could I ever do but thank 
 he ! I be go out at the door when he ask I to stay a 
 moment . quickly turn round , I see that same expression on his 
 face again ; and all at once , I do not   know how , it flash upon I 
 as a new and far - off possibility that I understand it . 
 " my dear Esther , " say my guardian , " I have long have something in 
 my thought that I have wish to say to you . " 
 " indeed ? " 
 " I have have some difficulty in approach it , and I still have . I 
 should wish it to be so deliberately say , and so deliberately 
 consider . would you object to my write it ? " 
 " dear guardian , how could I object to your write anything for I 
 to read ? " 
 " then see , my love , " say he with his cheery smile , " be I at this 
 moment quite as plain and easy - do I seem as open , as honest and 
 old - fashioned - as I be at any time ? " 
 I answer in all earnestness , " quite . " with the strict truth , 
 for his momentary hesitation be go   it have not last a minute , 
 and his fine , sensible , cordial , sterling manner be restore . 
 " do I look as if I suppress anything , mean anything but what I 
 say , have any reservation at all , no matter what ? " say he with his 
 bright clear eye on mine . 
 I answer , most assuredly he do not . 
 " can you fully trust I , and thoroughly rely on what I profess , 
 Esther ? " 
 " most thoroughly , " say I with my whole heart . 
 " my dear girl , " return my guardian , " give I your hand . " 
 he take it in his , hold I lightly with his arm , and look 
 down into my face with the same genuine freshness and faithfulness 
 of manner - the old protect manner which have make that house my 
 home in a moment - say , " you have work change in I , little 
 woman , since the winter day in the stage - coach . first and last you 
 have do I a world of good since that time . " 
 " ah , guardian , what have you do for I since that time ! " 
 " but , " say he , " that be not to be remember now . " 
 " it never can be forget . " 
 " yes , Esther , " say he with a gentle seriousness , " it be to be 
 forget now , to be forget for a while . you be only to 
 remember now that nothing can change I as you know I . can you 
 feel quite assured of that , my dear ? " 
 " I can , and I do , " I say . 
 " that be much , " he answer . " that be everything . but I must not 
 take that at a word . I will not write this something in my 
 thought until you have quite resolve within yourself that nothing 
 can change I as you know I . if you doubt that in the least 
 degree , I will never write it . if you be sure of that , on good 
 consideration , send Charley to I this night week - ' for the 
 letter . ' but if you be not quite certain , never send . mind , I 
 trust to your truth , in this thing as in everything . if you be 
 not quite certain on that one point , never send ! " 
 " Guardian , " say I , " I be already certain , I can no more be change 
 in that conviction than you can be change towards I . I shall 
 send Charley for the letter . " 
 he shake my hand and say no more . nor be any more say in 
 reference to this conversation , either by he or I , through the 
 whole week . when the appoint night come , I say to Charley as 
 soon as I be alone , " go and knock at Mr. Jarndyce 's door , Charley , 
 and say you have come from I - ' for the letter . ' " Charley go up 
 the stair , and down the stair , and along the passage - the zig- 
 zag way about the old - fashioned house seem very long in my 
 listening ear that night - and so come back , along the passage , 
 and down the stair , and up the stair , and bring the letter . 
 " lay it on the table , Charley , " say I. so Charley lay it on the 
 table and go to bed , and I sit look at it without take it 
 up , think of many thing . 
 I begin with my overshadowed childhood , and pass through those 
 timid day to the heavy time when my aunt lie dead , with she 
 resolute face so cold and set , and when I be more solitary with 
 Mrs. Rachael than if I have have no one in the world to speak to or 
 to look at . I pass to the altered day when I be so bl as to 
 find friend in all around I , and to be belove . I come to the 
 time when I first see my dear girl and be receive into that 
 sisterly affection which be the grace and beauty of my life . I 
 recall the first bright gleam of welcome which have shine out of 
 those very window upon our expectant face on that cold bright 
 night , and which have never pal . I live my happy life there over 
 again , I go through my illness and recovery , I think of myself 
 so altered and of those around I so unchanged ; and all this 
 happiness shone like a light from one central figure , represent 
 before I by the letter on the table . 
 I open it and read it . it be so impressive in its love for I , 
 and in the unselfish caution it give I , and the consideration it 
 show for I in every word , that my eye be too often blind to 
 read much at a time . but I read it through three time before I 
 lay it down . I have think beforehand that I know its purport , 
 and I do . it ask I , would I be the mistress of Bleak House . 
 it be not a love letter , though it express so much love , but be 
 write just as he would at any time have speak to I . I see his 
 face , and hear his voice , and feel the influence of his kind 
 protect manner in every line . it address I as if our place 
 be reverse , as if all the good deed have be mine and all the 
 feeling they have awaken his . it dwelt on my being young , and he 
 past the prime of life ; on his have attain a ripe age , while I 
 be a child ; on his writing to I with a silvered head , and know 
 all this so well as to set it in full before I for mature 
 deliberation . it tell I that I would gain nothing by such a 
 marriage and lose nothing by reject it , for no new relation 
 could enhance the tenderness in which he hold I , and whatever my 
 decision be , he be certain it would be right . but he have 
 consider this step anew since our late confidence and have decide 
 on take it , if it only serve to show I through one poor 
 instance that the whole world would readily unite to falsify the 
 stern prediction of my childhood . I be the last to know what 
 happiness I could bestow upon he , but of that he say no more , for 
 I be always to remember that I owe he nothing and that he be my 
 debtor , and for very much . he have often think of our future , and 
 foresee that the time must come , and fear that it might come 
 soon , when Ada   now very nearly of age   would leave we , and when 
 our present mode of life must be break up , have become accustom 
 to reflect on this proposal . thus he make it . if I feel that I 
 could ever give he the good right he could have to be my 
 protector , and if I feel that I could happily and justly become the 
 dear companion of his remain life , superior to all light 
 chance and change than death , even then he could not have I bind 
 myself irrevocably while this letter be yet so new to I , but even 
 then I must have ample time for reconsideration . in that case , or 
 in the opposite case , let he be unchanged in his old relation , in 
 his old manner , in the old name by which I call he . and as to 
 his bright Dame Durden and little housekeeper , she would ever be 
 the same , he know . 
 this be the substance of the letter , write throughout with a 
 justice and a dignity as if he be indeed my responsible guardian 
 impartially represent the proposal of a friend against whom in 
 his integrity he state the full case . 
 but he do not hint to I that when I have be well look he 
 have have this same proceeding in his thought and have refrain from 
 it . that when my old face be go from I , and I have no 
 attraction , he could love I just as well as in my fairer day . 
 that the discovery of my birth give he no shock . that his 
 generosity rise above my disfigurement and my inheritance of shame . 
 that the more I stand in need of such fidelity , the more firmly I 
 might trust in he to the last . 
 but I know it , I know it well now . it come upon I as the close of 
 the benignant history I have be pursue , and I feel that I have 
 but one thing to do . to devote my life to his happiness be to 
 thank he poorly , and what have I wish for the other night but 
 some new mean of thank he ? 
 still I cry very much , not only in the fullness of my heart after 
 read the letter , not only in the strangeness of the prospect - 
 for it be strange though I have expect the content - but as if 
 something for which there be no name or distinct idea be 
 indefinitely lose to I . I be very happy , very thankful , very 
 hopeful ; but I cry very much . 
 by and by I go to my old glass . my eye be red and swollen , 
 and I say , " oh , Esther , Esther , can that be you ! " I be afraid the 
 face in the glass be go to cry again at this reproach , but I 
 hold up my finger at it , and it stop . 
 " that be more like the composed look you comfort I with , my 
 dear , when you show I such a change ! " say I , begin to let 
 down my hair . " when you be mistress of Bleak House , you be to be 
 as cheerful as a bird . in fact , you be always to be cheerful ; so 
 let we begin for once and for all . " 
 I go on with my hair now , quite comfortably . I sob a little 
 still , but that be because I have be cry , not because I be 
 cry then . 
 " and so Esther , my dear , you be happy for life . happy with your 
 good friend , happy in your old home , happy in the power of do a 
 great deal of good , and happy in the undeserved love of the good of 
 man . " 
 I think , all at once , if my guardian have marry some one else , 
 how should I have feel , and what should I have do ! that would 
 have be a change indeed . it present my life in such a new and 
 blank form that I ring my housekeeping key and give they a kiss 
 before I lay they down in their basket again . 
 then I go on to think , as I dress my hair before the glass , how 
 often have I consider within myself that the deep trace of my 
 illness and the circumstance of my birth be only new reason why 
 I should be busy , busy , busy - useful , amiable , serviceable , in all 
 honest , unpretending way . this be a good time , to be sure , to 
 sit down morbidly and cry ! as to its seeming at all strange to I 
 at first   if that be any excuse for crying , which it be not 
 that I be one day to be the mistress of Bleak House , why should it 
 seem strange ? other people have think of such thing , if I have 
 not . " do not   you remember , my plain dear , " I ask myself , look 
 at the glass , " what Mrs. Woodcourt say before those scar be 
 there about your marrying - " 
 perhaps the name bring they to my remembrance . the dried remain 
 of the flower . it would be well not to keep they now . they have 
 only be preserve in memory of something wholly past and go , 
 but it would be well not to keep they now . 
 they be in a book , and it happen to be in the next room - our 
 sitting - room , divide Ada 's chamber from mine . I take a candle 
 and go softly in to fetch it from its shelf . after I have it in 
 my hand , I see my beautiful darling , through the open door , lie 
 asleep , and I steal in to kiss she . 
 it be weak in I , I know , and I could have no reason for cry ; 
 but I drop a tear upon her dear face , and another , and another . 
 weak than that , I take the wither flower out and put they for 
 a moment to her lip . I think about her love for Richard , 
 though , indeed , the flower have nothing to do with that . then I 
 take they into my own room and burn they at the candle , and they 
 be dust in an instant . 
 on enter the breakfast - room next morning , I find my guardian 
 just as usual , quite as frank , as open , and free . there be not 
 the least constraint in his manner , there be none   or I think 
 there be none   in mine . I be with he several time in the 
 course of the morning , in and out , when there be no one there , and 
 I think it not unlikely that he might speak to I about the 
 letter , but he do not say a word . 
 so , on the next morning , and the next , and for at least a week , 
 over which time Mr. Skimpole prolong his stay . I expect , every 
 day , that my guardian might speak to I about the letter , but he 
 never do . 
 I think then , grow uneasy , that I ought to write an answer . I 
 try over and over again in my own room at night , but I could not 
 write an answer that at all begin like a good answer , so I think 
 each night I would wait one more day . and I wait seven more 
 day , and he never say a word . 
 at last , Mr. Skimpole have depart , we three be one afternoon 
 go out for a ride ; and I , be dress before Ada and go 
 down , come upon my guardian , with his back towards I , stand at 
 the drawing - room window look out . 
 he turn on my come in and say , smile , " Aye , it be you , little 
 woman , be it ? " and look out again . 
 I have make up my mind to speak to he now . in short , I have come 
 down on purpose . " Guardian , " I say , rather hesitate and 
 trembling , " when would you like to have the answer to the letter 
 Charley come for ? " 
 " when it be ready , my dear , " he reply . 
 " I think it be ready , " say I. 
 " be Charley to bring it ? " he ask pleasantly . 
 " no . I have bring it myself , guardian , " I return . 
 I put my two arm round his neck and kiss he , and he say be 
 this the mistress of Bleak House , and I say yes ; and it make no 
 difference presently , and we all go out together , and I say 
 nothing to my precious pet about it . 
 CHAPTER XLV 
 in Trust 
 one morning when I have do jingle about with my basket of key , 
 as my beauty and I be walk round and round the garden I 
 happen to turn my eye towards the house and see a long thin 
 shadow go in which look like Mr. Vholes . Ada have be tell 
 I only that morning of her hope that Richard might exhaust his 
 ardour in the Chancery suit by be so very earnest in it ; and 
 therefore , not to damp my dear girl 's spirit , I say nothing about 
 Mr. Vholes 's shadow . 
 presently come Charley , lightly wind among the bush and 
 tripping along the path , as rosy and pretty as one of Flora 's 
 attendant instead of my maid , say , " oh , if you please , miss , 
 would you step and speak to Mr. Jarndyce ! " 
 it be one of Charley 's peculiarity that whenever she be charge 
 with a message she always begin to deliver it as soon as she 
 beheld , at any distance , the person for whom it be intend . 
 therefore I see Charley ask I in her usual form of word to 
 ' step and speak " to Mr. Jarndyce long before I hear she . and when 
 I do hear she , she have say it so often that she be out of 
 breath . 
 I tell Ada I would make haste back and inquire of Charley as we 
 go in whether there be not a gentleman with Mr. Jarndyce . to 
 which Charley , whose grammar , I confess to my shame , never do any 
 credit to my educational power , reply , " yes , miss . he as come 
 down in the country with Mr. Richard . " 
 a more complete contrast than my guardian and Mr. Vholes I suppose 
 there could not be . I find they look at one another across a 
 table , the one so open and the other so close , the one so broad and 
 upright and the other so narrow and stooping , the one give out 
 what he have to say in such a rich ringing voice and the other 
 keep it in in such a cold - blooded , gasping , fish - like manner 
 that I think I never have see two people so unmatched . 
 " you know Mr. Vholes , my dear , " say my guardian . not with the 
 great urbanity , I must say . 
 Mr. Vholes rise , glove and button up as usual , and seat 
 himself again , just as he have seat himself beside Richard in the 
 gig . not have Richard to look at , he look straight before he . 
 " Mr. Vholes , " say my guardian , eye his black figure as if he 
 be a bird of ill oman , " have bring an ugly report of our most 
 unfortunate Rick . " lay a marked emphasis on " most unfortunate " 
 as if the word be rather descriptive of his connexion with Mr. 
 Vholes . 
 I sit down between they ; Mr. Vholes remain immovable , except that 
 he secretly pick at one of the red pimple on his yellow face 
 with his black glove . 
 " and as Rick and you be happily good friend , I should like to 
 know , " say my guardian , " what you think , my dear . would you be so 
 good as to - as to speak up , Mr. Vholes ? " 
 do anything but that , Mr. Vholes observe , " I have be say 
 that I have reason to know , Miss Summerson , as Mr. C. 's professional 
 adviser , that Mr. C. 's circumstance be at the present moment in an 
 embarrassed state . not so much in point of amount as owe to the 
 peculiar and press nature of liability Mr. C. have incur and 
 the mean he have of liquidating or meet the same . I have stave 
 off many little matter for Mr. C. , but there be a limit to stave 
 off , and we have reach it . I have make some advance out of 
 pocket to accommodate these unpleasantness , but I necessarily look 
 to be repay , for I do not pretend to be a man of capital , and I 
 have a father to support in the Vale of Taunton , besides strive to 
 realize some little independence for three dear girl at home . my 
 apprehension be , Mr. C. 's circumstance be such , lest it should 
 end in his obtaining leave to part with his commission , which at all 
 event be desirable to be make known to his connexion . " 
 Mr. Vholes , who have look at I while speak , here emerge into 
 the silence he could hardly be say to have break , so stifle be 
 his tone , and look before he again . 
 " imagine the poor fellow without even his present resource , " say 
 my guardian to I . " yet what can I do ? you know he , Esther . he 
 would never accept of help from I now . to offer it or hint at it 
 would be to drive he to an extremity , if nothing else do . " 
 Mr. Vholes hereupon address I again . 
 " what Mr. Jarndyce remark , miss , be no doubt the case , and be the 
 difficulty . I do not see that anything be to be do , I do not say 
 that anything be to be do . far from it . I merely come down here 
 under the seal of confidence and mention it in order that 
 everything may be openly carry on and that it may not be say 
 afterwards that everything be not openly carry on . my wish be 
 that everything should be openly carry on . I desire to leave a 
 good name behind I . if I consult merely my own interest with 
 Mr. C. , I should not be here . so insurmountable , as you must well 
 know , would be his objection . this be not a professional 
 attendance . this can he charge to nobody . I have no interest in 
 it except as a member of society and a father - and a son , " say Mr. 
 Vholes , who have nearly forget that point . 
 it appear to we that Mr. Vholes say neither more nor less than 
 the truth in intimate that he seek to divide the responsibility , 
 such as it be , of know Richard 's situation . I could only 
 suggest that I should go down to Deal , where Richard be then 
 station , and see he , and try if it be possible to avert the 
 bad . without consult Mr. Vholes on this point , I take my 
 guardian aside to propose it , while Mr. Vholes gauntly stalk to 
 the fire and warm his funeral glove . 
 the fatigue of the journey form an immediate objection on my 
 guardian 's part , but as I see he have no other , and as I be only 
 too happy to go , I get his consent . we have then merely to dispose 
 of Mr. Vholes . 
 " well , sir , " say Mr. Jarndyce , " Miss Summerson will communicate 
 with Mr. Carstone , and you can only hope that his position may be 
 yet retrievable . you will allow I to order you lunch after your 
 journey , sir . " 
 " I thank you , Mr. Jarndyce , " say Mr. Vholes , put out his long 
 black sleeve to check the ringing of the bell , " not any . I thank 
 you , no , not a morsel . my digestion be much impaired , and I be but 
 a poor knife and fork at any time . if I be to partake of solid 
 food at this period of the day , I do not   know what the consequence 
 might be . everything have be openly carry on , sir , I will 
 now with your permission take my leave . " 
 " and I would that you could take your leave , and we could all take 
 our leave , Mr. Vholes , " return my guardian bitterly , " of a cause 
 you know of . " 
 Mr. Vholes , whose black dye be so deep from head to foot that it 
 have quite steam before the fire , diffuse a very unpleasant 
 perfume , make a short one - sided inclination of his head from the 
 neck and slowly shake it . 
 " we whose ambition it be to be look upon in the light of 
 respectable practitioner , sir , can but put our shoulder to the 
 wheel . we do it , sir . at least , I do it myself ; and I wish to 
 think well of my professional brother , one and all . you be 
 sensible of an obligation not to refer to I , miss , in communicating 
 with Mr. C. ? " 
 I say I would be careful not to do it . 
 " just so , miss . good morning . Mr. Jarndyce , good morning , sir . " 
 Mr. Vholes put his dead glove , which scarcely seem to have any 
 hand in it , on my finger , and then on my guardian 's finger , and 
 take his long thin shadow away . I think of it on the outside of 
 the coach , pass over all the sunny landscape between we and 
 London , chill the seed in the ground as it glide along . 
 of course it become necessary to tell Ada where I be go and why 
 I be go , and of course she be anxious and distressed . but she 
 be too true to Richard to say anything but word of pity and word 
 of excuse , and in a more loving spirit still - my dear devoted 
 girl ! - she write he a long letter , of which I take charge . 
 Charley be to be my travel companion , though I be sure I 
 want none and would willingly have leave she at home . we all go 
 to London that afternoon , and find two place in the mail , 
 secure they . at our usual bed - time , Charley and I be roll 
 away seaward with the kentish letter . 
 it be a night 's journey in those coach time , but we have the mail 
 to ourselves and do not find the night very tedious . it pass 
 with I as I suppose it would with most people under such 
 circumstance . at one while my journey look hopeful , and at 
 another hopeless . now I think I should do some good , and now I 
 wonder how I could ever have suppose so . now it seem one of 
 the most reasonable thing in the world that I should have come , 
 and now one of the most unreasonable . in what state I should find 
 Richard , what I should say to he , and what he would say to I 
 occupy my mind by turn with these two state of feeling ; and the 
 wheel seem to play one tune   to which the burden of my 
 guardian 's letter set itself   over and over again all night . 
 at last we come into the narrow street of Deal , and very gloomy 
 they be upon a raw misty morning . the long flat beach , with its 
 little irregular house , wooden and brick , and its litter of 
 capstan , and great boat , and shed , and bare upright pole with 
 tackle and block , and loose gravelly waste place overgrow with 
 grass and weed , wear as dull an appearance as any place I ever 
 see . the sea be heave under a thick white fog ; and nothing else 
 be move but a few early ropemaker , who , with the yarn twist 
 round their body , look as if , tired of their present state of 
 existence , they be spin themselves into cordage . 
 but when we get into a warm room in an excellent hotel and sit 
 down , comfortably wash and dress , to an early breakfast   for it 
 be too late to think of go to bed , Deal begin to look more 
 cheerful . our little room be like a ship 's cabin , and that 
 delight Charley very much . then the fog begin to rise like a 
 curtain , and number of ship that we have have no idea be near 
 appear . I do not   know how many sail the waiter tell we be then 
 lie in the down . some of these vessel be of grand size - one 
 be a large Indiaman just come home ; and when the sun shine through 
 the cloud , make silvery pool in the dark sea , the way in which 
 these ship brighten , and shadow , and change , amid a bustle of 
 boat pull off from the shore to they and from they to the 
 shore , and a general life and motion in themselves and everything 
 around they , be most beautiful . 
 the large Indiaman be our great attraction because she have come 
 into the down in the night . she be surround by boat , and we 
 say how glad the people on board of she must be to come ashore . 
 Charley be curious , too , about the voyage , and about the heat in 
 India , and the serpent and the tiger ; and as she pick up such 
 information much fast than grammar , I tell she what I know on 
 those point . I tell she , too , how people in such voyage be 
 sometimes wreck and cast on rock , where they be save by the 
 intrepidity and humanity of one man . and Charley ask how that 
 could be , I tell she how we know at home of such a case . 
 I have think of send Richard a note say I be there , but it 
 seem so much well to go to he without preparation . as he 
 live in barrack I be a little doubtful whether this be 
 feasible , but we go out to reconnoitre . peep in at the gate 
 of the barrack - yard , we find everything very quiet at that time in 
 the morning , and I ask a sergeant stand on the guardhouse- 
 step where he live . he send a man before to show I , who go up 
 some bare stair , and knock with his knuckle at a door , and leave 
 we . 
 " now then ! " cry Richard from within . so I leave Charley in the 
 little passage , and go on to the half - open door , say , " can I 
 come in , Richard ? it be only Dame Durden . " 
 he be write at a table , with a great confusion of clothe , tin 
 case , book , boot , brush , and portmanteau strew all about the 
 floor . he be only half dress - in plain clothe , I observe , not 
 in uniform - and his hair be unbrushe , and he look as wild as 
 his room . all this I see after he have heartily welcome I and I 
 be seat near he , for he start upon hear my voice and 
 catch I in his arm in a moment . dear Richard ! he be ever the 
 same to I . down to - ah , poor poor fellow ! - to the end , he never 
 receive I but with something of his old merry boyish manner . 
 " Good heaven , my dear little woman , " say he , " how do you come 
 here ? who could have think of see you ! nothing the matter ? 
 Ada be well ? " 
 " quite well . lovelier than ever , Richard ! " 
 " ah ! " he say , lean back in his chair . " my poor cousin ! I be 
 write to you , Esther . " 
 so worn and haggard as he look , even in the fullness of his 
 handsome youth , lean back in his chair and crush the closely 
 write sheet of paper in his hand ! 
 " have you be at the trouble of write all that , and be I not to 
 read it after all ? " I ask . 
 " oh , my dear , " he return with a hopeless gesture . " you may read 
 it in the whole room . it be all over here . " 
 I mildly entreat he not to be despondent . I tell he that I have 
 hear by chance of his be in difficulty and have come to consult 
 with he what could well be do . 
 " like you , Esther , but useless , and so not like you ! " say he with 
 a melancholy smile . " I be away on leave this day - should have be 
 go in another hour - and that be to smooth it over , for my selling 
 out . well ! let bygone be bygone . so this calling follow the 
 rest . I only want to have be in the church to have make the 
 round of all the profession . " 
 " Richard , " I urge , " it be not so hopeless as that ? " 
 " Esther , " he return , " it be indeed . I be just so near disgrace 
 as that those who be put in authority over I   as the catechism 
 go   would far rather be without I than with I . and they be 
 right . apart from debt and dun and all such drawback , I be not 
 fit even for this employment . I have no care , no mind , no heart , 
 no soul , but for one thing . why , if this bubble have not   break 
 now , " he say , tear the letter he have write into fragment and 
 moodily cast they away , by driblet , " how could I have go 
 abroad ? I must have be order abroad , but how could I have 
 go ? how could I , with my experience of that thing , trust even 
 vhole unless I be at his back ! " 
 I suppose he know by my face what I be about to say , but he catch 
 the hand I have lay upon his arm and touch my own lip with it to 
 prevent I from go on . 
 " no , Dame Durden ! two subject I forbid - must forbid . the first 
 be John Jarndyce . the second , you know what . call it madness , and 
 I tell you I can not   help it now , and can not   be sane . but it be no 
 such thing ; it be the one object I have to pursue . it be a pity I 
 ever be prevail upon to turn out of my road for any other . it 
 would be wisdom to abandon it now , after all the time , anxiety , and 
 pain I have bestow upon it ! oh , yes , true wisdom . it would be 
 very agreeable , too , to some people ; but I never will . " 
 he be in that mood in which I think it well not to increase his 
 determination   if anything could increase it   by oppose he . I 
 take out Ada 's letter and put it in his hand . 
 " be I to read it now ? " he ask . 
 as I tell he yes , he lay it on the table , and rest his head 
 upon his hand , begin . he have not read far when he rest his head 
 upon his two hand - to hide his face from I . in a little while he 
 rise as if the light be bad and go to the window . he finish 
 read it there , with his back towards I , and after he have 
 finish and have fold it up , stand there for some minute with 
 the letter in his hand . when he come back to his chair , I see 
 tear in his eye . 
 " of course , Esther , you know what she say here ? " he speak in a 
 soften voice and kiss the letter as he ask I . 
 " yes , Richard . " 
 " offer I , " he go on , tap his foot upon the floor , " the 
 little inheritance she be certain of so soon - just as little and as 
 much as I have waste - and beg and pray I to take it , set myself 
 right with it , and remain in the service . " 
 " I know your welfare to be the dear wish of her heart , " say I. 
 " and , oh , my dear Richard , Ada 's be a noble heart . " 
 " I be sure it be . I - I wish I be dead ! " 
 he go back to the window , and lay his arm across it , lean 
 his head down on his arm . it greatly affect I to see he so , 
 but I hop he might become more yielding , and I remain silent . 
 my experience be very limited ; I be not at all prepare for his 
 rouse himself out of this emotion to a new sense of injury . 
 " and this be the heart that the same John Jarndyce , who be not 
 otherwise to be mention between we , step in to estrange from 
 I , " say he indignantly . " and the dear girl make I this 
 generous offer from under the same John Jarndyce 's roof , and with 
 the same John Jarndyce 's gracious consent and connivance , I dare 
 say , as a new mean of buy I off . " 
 " Richard ! " I cry out , rise hastily . " I will not hear you say 
 such shameful word ! " I be very angry with he indeed , for the 
 first time in my life , but it only last a moment . when I see his 
 worn young face look at I as if he be sorry , I put my hand on 
 his shoulder and say , " if you please , my dear Richard , do not 
 speak in such a tone to I . consider ! " 
 he blame himself exceedingly and tell I in the most generous 
 manner that he have be very wrong and that he beg my pardon a 
 thousand time . at that I laugh , but tremble a little too , for 
 I be rather flutter after be so fiery . 
 " to accept this offer , my dear Esther , " say he , sit down 
 beside I and resume our conversation , " - once more , pray , pray 
 forgive I ; I be deeply grieve - to accept my dear cousin 's 
 offer be , I need not say , impossible . besides , I have letter and 
 paper that I could show you which would convince you it be all 
 over here . I have do with the red coat , believe I . but it be 
 some satisfaction , in the midst of my trouble and perplexity , to 
 know that I be press Ada 's interest in press my own . vhole 
 have his shoulder to the wheel , and he can not help urge it on as 
 much for she as for I , thank God ! " 
 his sanguine hope be rise within he and light up his 
 feature , but they make his face more sad to I than it have be 
 before . 
 " no , no ! " cry Richard exultingly . " if every farthing of Ada 's 
 little fortune be mine , no part of it should be spend in 
 retain I in what I be not fit for , can take no interest in , and 
 be weary of . it should be devoted to what promise a well 
 return , and should be use where she have a large stake . do not   be 
 uneasy for I ! I shall now have only one thing on my mind , and 
 Vholes and I will work it . I shall not be without mean . free of 
 my commission , I shall be able to compound with some small usurer 
 who will hear of nothing but their bond now - Vholes say so . I 
 should have a balance in my favour anyway , but that would swell it . 
 come , come ! you shall carry a letter to Ada from I , Esther , and 
 you must both of you be more hopeful of I and not believe that I 
 be quite cast away just yet , my dear . " 
 I will not repeat what I say to Richard . I know it be tiresome , 
 and nobody be to suppose for a moment that it be at all wise . it 
 only come from my heart . he hear it patiently and feelingly , but 
 I see that on the two subject he have reserve it be at present 
 hopeless to make any representation to he . I see too , and have 
 experience in this very interview , the sense of my guardian 's 
 remark that it be even more mischievous to use persuasion with he 
 than to leave he as he be . 
 therefore I be drive at last to ask Richard if he would mind 
 convince I that it really be all over there , as he have say , 
 and that it be not his mere impression . he show I without 
 hesitation a correspondence make it quite plain that his 
 retirement be arrange . I find , from what he tell I , that Mr. 
 Vholes have copy of these paper and have be in consultation with 
 he throughout . beyond ascertain this , and have be the 
 bearer of Ada 's letter , and be   as I be go to be   Richard 's 
 companion back to London , I have do no good by come down . 
 admit this to myself with a reluctant heart , I say I would 
 return to the hotel and wait until he join I there , so he throw 
 a cloak over his shoulder and see I to the gate , and Charley and 
 I go back along the beach . 
 there be a concourse of people in one spot , surround some naval 
 officer who be land from a boat , and press about they with 
 unusual interest . I say to Charley this would be one of the great 
 Indiaman 's boat now , and we stop to look . 
 the gentleman come slowly up from the waterside , speak good- 
 humouredly to each other and to the people around and glance 
 about they as if they be glad to be in England again . " Charley , 
 Charley , " say I , " come away ! " and I hurry on so swiftly that my 
 little maid be surprised . 
 it be not until we be shut up in our cabin - room and I have have 
 time to take breath that I begin to think why I have make such 
 haste . in one of the sunburnt face I have recognize Mr. Allan 
 Woodcourt , and I have be afraid of his recognize I . I have be 
 unwilling that he should see my altered look . I have be take by 
 surprise , and my courage have quite fail I . 
 but I know this would not do , and I now say to myself , " my dear , 
 there be no reason - there be and there can be no reason at all - why 
 it should be bad for you now than it ever have be . what you 
 be last month , you be to - day ; you be no bad , you be no 
 well . this be not your resolution ; call it up , Esther , call it 
 up ! " I be in a great tremble - with running - and at first be 
 quite unable to calm myself ; but I get well , and I be very glad 
 to know it . 
 the party come to the hotel . I hear they speak on the 
 staircase . I be sure it be the same gentleman because I know 
 their voice again - I mean I know Mr. Woodcourt 's . it would still 
 have be a great relief to I to have go away without make 
 myself know , but I be determined not to do so . " no , my dear , no . 
 no , no , no ! " 
 I untie my bonnet and put my veil half up - I think I mean half 
 down , but it matter very little - and write on one of my card that 
 I happen to be there with Mr. Richard Carstone , and I send it in 
 to Mr. Woodcourt . he come immediately . I tell he I be rejoice 
 to be by chance among the first to welcome he home to England . 
 and I see that he be very sorry for I . 
 " you have be in shipwreck and peril since you leave we , Mr. 
 Woodcourt , " say I , " but we can hardly call that a misfortune which 
 enable you to be so useful and so brave . we read of it with the 
 true interest . it first come to my knowledge through your old 
 patient , poor Miss Flite , when I be recover from my severe 
 illness . " 
 " ah ! Little Miss Flite ! " he say . " she live the same life yet ? " 
 " just the same . " 
 I be so comfortable with myself now as not to mind the veil and to 
 be able to put it aside . 
 " her gratitude to you , Mr. Woodcourt , be delightful . she be a most 
 affectionate creature , as I have reason to say . " 
 " you - you have find she so ? " he return . " I - I be glad of that . " 
 he be so very sorry for I that he could scarcely speak . 
 " I assure you , " say I , " that I be deeply touch by her sympathy 
 and pleasure at the time I have refer to . " 
 " I be grieve to hear that you have be very ill . " 
 " I be very ill . " 
 " but you have quite recover ? " 
 " I have quite recover my health and my cheerfulness , " say I. 
 " you know how good my guardian be and what a happy life we lead , 
 and I have everything to be thankful for and nothing in the world 
 to desire . " 
 I feel as if he have great commiseration for I than I have ever 
 have for myself . it inspire I with new fortitude and new calmness 
 to find that it be I who be under the necessity of reassure 
 he . I speak to he of his voyage out and home , and of his future 
 plan , and of his probable return to India . he say that be very 
 doubtful . he have not find himself more favour by fortune there 
 than here . he have go out a poor ship 's surgeon and have come home 
 nothing well . while we be talk , and when I be glad to 
 believe that I have alleviate   if I may use such a term   the shock 
 he have have in see I , Richard come in . he have hear downstair 
 who be with I , and they meet with cordial pleasure . 
 I see that after their first greeting be over , and when they 
 speak of Richard 's career , Mr. Woodcourt have a perception that all 
 be not go well with he . he frequently glance at his face as 
 if there be something in it that give he pain , and more than 
 once he look towards I as though he seek to ascertain whether 
 I know what the truth be . yet Richard be in one of his sanguine 
 state and in good spirit and be thoroughly pleased to see Mr. 
 Woodcourt again , whom he have always like . 
 Richard propose that we all should go to London together ; but Mr. 
 Woodcourt , have to remain by his ship a little long , could not 
 join we . he din with we , however , at an early hour , and become 
 so much more like what he use to be that I be still more at peace 
 to think I have be able to soften his regret . yet his mind be 
 not relieve of Richard . when the coach be almost ready and 
 Richard run down to look after his luggage , he speak to I about 
 he . 
 I be not sure that I have a right to lay his whole story open , but 
 I refer in a few word to his estrangement from Mr Jarndyce and 
 to his be entangle in the ill - fat Chancery suit . Mr. 
 Woodcourt listen with interest and express his regret . 
 " I see you observe he rather closely , " say I , " do you think he 
 so change ? " 
 " he be change , " he return , shake his head . 
 I feel the blood rush into my face for the first time , but it be 
 only an instantaneous emotion . I turn my head aside , and it be 
 go . 
 " it be not , " say Mr. Woodcourt , " his be so much young or 
 old , or thin or fat , or paler or ruddier , as there be 
 upon his face such a singular expression . I never see so 
 remarkable a look in a young person . one can not say that it be all 
 anxiety or all weariness ; yet it be both , and like ungrown 
 despair . " 
 " you do not think he be ill ? " say I. 
 No . he look robust in body . 
 " that he can not be at peace in mind , we have too much reason to 
 know , " I proceed . " Mr. Woodcourt , you be go to London ? " 
 " to - morrow or the next day . " 
 " there be nothing Richard want so much as a friend . he always 
 like you . pray see he when you get there . pray help he 
 sometimes with your companionship if you can . you do not know of 
 what service it might be . you can not think how Ada , and Mr. 
 Jarndyce , and even i - how we should all thank you , Mr. Woodcourt ! " 
 " Miss Summerson , " he say , more moved than he have be from the 
 first , " before heaven , I will be a true friend to he ! I will 
 accept he as a trust , and it shall be a sacred one ! " 
 " God bless you ! " say I , with my eye fill fast ; but I think 
 they might , when it be not for myself . " Ada love he - we all 
 love he , but Ada love he as we can not . I will tell she what you 
 say . thank you , and God bless you , in her name ! " 
 Richard come back as we finish exchange these hurried word and 
 give I his arm to take I to the coach . 
 " Woodcourt , " he say , unconscious with what application , " pray let 
 we meet in London ! " 
 " Meet ? " return the other . " I have scarcely a friend there now 
 but you . where shall I find you ? " 
 " why , I must get a lodging of some sort , " say Richard , ponder . 
 " say at Vholes 's , Symond 's Inn . " 
 " good ! without loss of time . " 
 they shake hand heartily . when I be seat in the coach and 
 Richard be yet stand in the street , Mr. Woodcourt lay his 
 friendly hand on Richard 's shoulder and look at I . I understand 
 he and wave mine in thank . 
 and in his last look as we drive away , I see that he be very sorry 
 for I . I be glad to see it . I feel for my old self as the dead 
 may feel if they ever revisit these scene . I be glad to be 
 tenderly remember , to be gently pity , not to be quite 
 forget . 
 CHAPTER XLVI 
 stop he ! 
 darkness rest upon Tom - All - Alone 's . dilate and dilate since 
 the sun go down last night , it have gradually swell until it 
 fill every void in the place . for a time there be some dungeon 
 light burn , as the lamp of life hum in Tom - all - Alone 's , 
 heavily , heavily , in the nauseous air , and wink - as that lamp , 
 too , wink in Tom - all - Alone 's - at many horrible thing . but they 
 be blot out . the moon have eye Tom with a dull cold stare , as 
 admit some puny emulation of herself in his desert region unfit 
 for life and blast by volcanic fire ; but she have pass on and 
 be go . the black nightmare in the infernal stable graze on 
 Tom - all - Alone 's , and Tom be fast asleep . 
 much mighty speech - making there have be , both in and out of 
 Parliament , concern Tom , and much wrathful disputation how Tom 
 shall be get right . whether he shall be put into the main road by 
 constable , or by beadle , or by bell - ringing , or by force of 
 figure , or by correct principle of taste , or by high church , or 
 by low church , or by no church ; whether he shall be set to 
 split truss of polemical straw with the crooked knife of his 
 mind or whether he shall be put to stone - breaking instead . in the 
 midst of which dust and noise there be but one thing perfectly 
 clear , to wit , that Tom only may and can , or shall and will , be 
 reclaim accord to somebody 's theory but nobody 's practice . 
 and in the hopeful meantime , Tom go to perdition head foremost in 
 his old determined spirit . 
 but he have his revenge . even the wind be his messenger , and 
 they serve he in these hour of darkness . there be not a drop of 
 Tom 's corrupted blood but propagate infection and contagion 
 somewhere . it shall pollute , this very night , the choice stream 
  in which chemist on analysis would find the genuine nobility   of 
 a Norman house , and his grace shall not be able to say nay to the 
 infamous alliance . there be not an atom of Tom 's slime , not a 
 cubic inch of any pestilential gas in which he live , not one 
 obscenity or degradation about he , not an ignorance , not a 
 wickedness , not a brutality of his committing , but shall work its 
 retribution through every order of society up to the proud of 
 the proud and to the high of the high . verily , what with 
 taint , plundering , and spoil , Tom have his revenge . 
 it be a moot point whether Tom - all - Alone 's be uglier by day or by 
 night , but on the argument that the more that be see of it the 
 more shocking it must be , and that no part of it leave to the 
 imagination be at all likely to be make so bad as the reality , day 
 carry it . the day begin to break now ; and in truth it might be 
 well for the national glory even that the sun should sometimes 
 set upon the british dominion than that it should ever rise upon 
 so vile a wonder as Tom . 
 a brown sunburnt gentleman , who appear in some inaptitude for 
 sleep to be wander abroad rather than count the hour on a 
 restless pillow , stroll hitherward at this quiet time . attract 
 by curiosity , he often pause and look about he , up and down the 
 miserable by - way . nor be he merely curious , for in his bright 
 dark eye there be compassionate interest ; and as he look here and 
 there , he seem to understand such wretchedness and to have study 
 it before . 
 on the bank of the stagnant channel of mud which be the main street 
 of Tom - all - Alone 's , nothing be to be see but the crazy house , shut 
 up and silent . no wake creature save himself appear except in 
 one direction , where he see the solitary figure of a woman sit 
 on a door - step . he walk that way . Approaching , he observe that 
 she have journey a long distance and be footsore and travel- 
 stain . she sit on the door - step in the manner of one who be 
 wait , with her elbow on her knee and her head upon her hand . 
 beside she be a canvas bag , or bundle , she have carry . she be 
 doze probably , for she give no heed to his step as he come 
 toward she . 
 the broken footway be so narrow that when Allan Woodcourt come to 
 where the woman sit , he have to turn into the road to pass she . 
 look down at her face , his eye meet her , and he stop . 
 " what be the matter ? " 
 " nothing , sir . " 
 " can not   you make they hear ? do you want to be let in ? " 
 " I be walte till they get up at another house - a lodging - house - 
 not here , " the woman patiently return . " I be wait here because 
 there will be sun here presently to warm I . " 
 " I be afraid you be tired . I be sorry to see you sit in the 
 street . " 
 " thank you , sir . it do not   matter . " 
 a habit in he of speak to the poor and of avoid patronage or 
 condescension or childishness   which be the favourite device , many 
 people deem it quite a subtlety to talk to they like little 
 spelling book   have put he on good term with the woman easily . 
 " let I look at your forehead , " he say , bend down . " I be a 
 doctor . do not   be afraid . I would not   hurt you for the world . " 
 he know that by touch she with his skilful and accustomed hand 
 he can soothe she yet more readily . she make a slight objection , 
 say , " it be nothing " ; but he have scarcely lay his finger on the 
 wound place when she lift it up to the light . 
 " aye ! a bad bruise , and the skin sadly break . this must be very 
 sore . " 
 " it do ache a little , sir , " return the woman with a start tear 
 upon her cheek . 
 " let I try to make it more comfortable . my handkerchief will not 
 hurt you . " 
 " oh , dear no , sir , I be sure of that ! " 
 he cleanse the injure place and dry it , and have carefully 
 examine it and gently press it with the palm of his hand , take 
 a small case from his pocket , dress it , and bind it up . while 
 he be thus employ , he say , after laugh at his establish a 
 surgery in the street , " and so your husband be a brickmaker ? " 
 " how do you know that , sir ? " ask the woman , astonish . 
 " why , I suppose so from the colour of the clay upon your bag and on 
 your dress . and I know brickmaker go about work at piecework 
 in different place . and I be sorry to say I have know they cruel 
 to their wife too . " 
 the woman hastily lift up her eye as if she would deny that her 
 injury be referable to such a cause . but feel the hand upon her 
 forehead , and see his busy and composed face , she quietly drop 
 they again . 
 " where be he now ? " ask the surgeon . 
 " he get into trouble last night , sir ; but he will look for I at the 
 lodging - house . " 
 " he will get into bad trouble if he often misuse his large and 
 heavy hand as he have misuse it here . but you forgive he , brutal 
 as he be , and I say no more of he , except that I wish he deserve 
 it . you have no young child ? " 
 the woman shake her head . " one as I call mine , sir , but it be 
 Liz 's . " 
 " your own be dead . I see ! poor little thing ! " 
 by this time he have finish and be put up his case . " I 
 suppose you have some settle home . be it far from here ? " he ask , 
 good - humouredly make light of what he have do as she get up and 
 curtsys . 
 " it be a good two or three and twenty mile from here , sir . at Saint 
 Albans . you know Saint Albans , sir ? I think you give a start 
 like , as if you do . " 
 " yes , I know something of it . and now I will ask you a question in 
 return . have you money for your lodging ? " 
 " yes , sir , " she say , " really and truly . " and she show it . he 
 tell she , in acknowledgment of her many subdued thank , that she 
 be very welcome , give she good day , and walk away . Tom - all- 
 Alone 's be still asleep , and nothing be astir . 
 yes , something be ! as he retrace his way to the point from which 
 he descry the woman at a distance sit on the step , he see a 
 ragged figure come very cautiously along , crouch close to the 
 soil wall - which the wretched figure might as well avoid - and 
 furtively thrust a hand before it . it be the figure of a youth 
 whose face be hollow and whose eye have an emaciated glare . he be 
 so intent on get along unseen that even the apparition of a 
 stranger in whole garment do not tempt he to look back . he 
 shade his face with his ragged elbow as he pass on the other 
 side of the way , and go shrink and creep on with his 
 anxious hand before he and his shapeless clothe hang in 
 shred . clothe make for what purpose , or of what material , it 
 would be impossible to say . they look , in colour and in substance , 
 like a bundle of rank leaf of swampy growth that rot long ago . 
 Allan Woodcourt pause to look after he and note all this , with a 
 shadowy belief that he have see the boy before . he can not recall 
 how or where , but there be some association in his mind with such a 
 form . he imagine that he must have see it in some hospital or 
 refuge , still , can not make out why it come with any special force 
 on his remembrance . 
 he be gradually emerge from Tom - all - Alone be in the morning light , 
 think about it , when he hear run foot behind he , and 
 look round , see the boy scour towards he at great speed , 
 follow by the woman . 
 " stop he , stop he ! " cry the woman , almost breathless . " stop 
 he , sir ! " 
 he dart across the road into the boy 's path , but the boy be 
 quick than he , make a curve , duck , dive under his hand , come 
 up half - a - dozen yard beyond he , and scour away again . still the 
 woman follow , cry , " stop he , sir , pray stop he ! " Allan , not 
 know but that he have just rob she of her money , follow in 
 chase and run so hard that he run the boy down a dozen time , but 
 each time he repeat the curve , the duck , the dive , and scour away 
 again . to strike at he on any of these occasion would be to fall 
 and disable he , but the pursuer can not resolve to do that , and so 
 the grimly ridiculous pursuit continue . at last the fugitive , 
 hard - press , take to a narrow passage and a court which have no 
 thoroughfare . here , against a hoarding of decay timber , he be 
 bring to bay and tumble down , lie gasp at his pursuer , who 
 stand and gasp at he until the woman come up . 
 " oh , you , Jo ! " cry the woman . " what ? I have find you at last ! " 
 " Jo , " repeat Allan , look at he with attention , " Jo ! Stay . to 
 be sure ! I recollect this lad some time ago be bring before 
 the coroner . " 
 " yes , I see you once afore at the inkwhich , " whimper Jo . " what of 
 that ? can not   you never let such an unfortnet as I alone ? An't   I 
 unfortnet enough for you yet ? how unfortnet do you want I fur to 
 be ? I have   be a - chivy and a - chivy , fust by one on you and nixt 
 by another on you , till I be worritte to skin and bone . the 
 inkwhich warn't   MY fault . I do nothink . he wo wery good to I , 
 he wo ; he wo the only one I know to speak to , as ever come 
 across my crossing . it be not   wery likely I should want he to be 
 inkwhiched . I only wish I wo , myself . I do not   know why I do not 
 go and make a hole in the water , I be sure I do not . " 
 he say it with such a pitiable air , and his grimy tear appear so 
 real , and he lie in the corner up against the hoarding so like a 
 growth of fungus or any unwholesome excrescence produce there in 
 neglect and impurity , that Allan Woodcourt be soften towards he . 
 he say to the woman , " miserable creature , what have he do ? " 
 to which she only reply , shake her head at the prostrate figure 
 more amazedly than angrily , " oh , you Jo , you Jo . I have find you 
 at last ! " 
 " what have he do ? " say Allan . " have he rob you ? " 
 " no , sir , no . robbed I ? he do nothing but what be kind - hearte 
 by I , and that be the wonder of it . " 
 Allan look from Jo to the woman , and from the woman to Jo , wait 
 for one of they to unravel the riddle . 
 " but he be along with I , sir , " say the woman . " oh , you Jo ! he 
 be along with I , sir , down at Saint Albans , ill , and a young 
 lady , Lord bles she for a good friend to I , take pity on he when 
 I durstn't , and take he home - " 
 Allan shrink back from he with a sudden horror . 
 " yes , sir , yes . take he home , and make he comfortable , and like 
 a thankless monster he run away in the night and never have be 
 see or hear of since till I set eye on he just now . and that 
 young lady that be such a pretty dear catch his illness , lose she 
 beautiful look , and would not   hardly be know for the same young 
 lady now if it be not   for her angel temper , and her pretty shape , 
 and her sweet voice . do you know it ? you ungrateful wretch , do 
 you know that this be all along of you and of her goodness to you ? " 
 demand the woman , begin to rage at he as she recall it and 
 break into passionate tear . 
 the boy , in rough sort stun by what he hear , fall to smear 
 his dirty forehead with his dirty palm , and to star at the 
 ground , and to shake from head to foot until the crazy hoarding 
 against which he lean rattle . 
 Allan restrain the woman , merely by a quiet gesture , but 
 effectually . 
 " Richard tell I - " he falter . " I mean , I have hear of this - 
 do not   mind I for a moment , I will speak presently . " 
 he turn away and stand for a while look out at the cover 
 passage . when he come back , he have recover his composure , 
 except that he contend against an avoidance of the boy , which be 
 so very remarkable that it absorb the woman 's attention . 
 " you hear what she say . but get up , get up ! " 
 Jo , shaking and chatter , slowly rise and stand , after the 
 manner of his tribe in a difficulty , sideways against the hoarding , 
 rest one of his high shoulder against it and covertly rub 
 his right hand over his left and his left foot over his right . 
 " you hear what she say , and I know it be true . have you be here 
 ever since ? " 
 " Wishermaydie if I see Tom - all - Alone be till this blessed morning , " 
 reply Jo hoarsely . 
 " why have you come here now ? " 
 Jo look all round the confine court , look at his questioner no 
 high than the knee , and finally answer , " I do not   know how to do 
 nothink , and I can not   get nothink to do . I be wery poor and ill , and 
 I think I would come back here when there warn't   nobody about , and 
 lie down and hide somewhere as I know on till arter dark , and 
 then go and beg a trifle of Mr. Snagsby . he wos allus willin fur 
 to give I somethink he wo , though Mrs. Snagsby she be allus a- 
 chivy on I - like everybody everywhere . " 
 " where have you come from ? " 
 Jo look all round the court again , look at his questioner 's knee 
 again , and conclude by lay his profile against the hoarding in 
 a sort of resignation . 
 " do you hear I ask you where you have come from ? " 
 " tramp then , " say Jo . 
 " now tell I , " proceed Allan , make a strong effort to overcome 
 his repugnance , go very near to he , and lean over he with 
 an expression of confidence , " tell I how it come about that you 
 leave that house when the good young lady have be so unfortunate as 
 to pity you and take you home . " 
 Jo suddenly come out of his resignation and excitedly declare , 
 address the woman , that he never know about the young lady , 
 that he never heern about it , that he never go fur to hurt she , 
 that he would soon have hurt his own self , that he would soon have 
 have his unfortnet ed chop off than ever go a - nigh she , and 
 that she wo wery good to he , she wo . conduct himself 
 throughout as if in his poor fashion he really mean it , and 
 wind up with some very miserable sob . 
 Allan Woodcourt see that this be not a sham . he constrain 
 himself to touch he . " come , Jo . tell I . " 
 " no . I dustn't , " say Jo , relapse into the profile state . " I 
 dustn't , or I would . " 
 " but I must know , " return the other , " all the same . come , Jo . " 
 after two or three such adjuration , Jo lift up his head again , 
 look round the court again , and say in a low voice , " well , I will 
 tell you something . I be take away . there ! " 
 " took away ? in the night ? " 
 " ah ! " very apprehensive of be overhear , Jo look about he and 
 even glance up some ten foot at the top of the hoarding and 
 through the crack in it lest the object of his distrust should be 
 look over or hide on the other side . 
 " who take you away ? " 
 " I dustn't   name he , " say Jo . " I dustn't   do it , sir . 
 " but I want , in the young lady 's name , to know . you may trust I . 
 no one else shall hear . " 
 " ah , but I do not   know , " reply Jo , shake his head fearfully , " as 
 he don't hear . " 
 " why , he be not in this place . " 
 " oh , be not   he though ? " say Jo . " he be in all manner of place , all 
 at wanst . " 
 Allan look at he in perplexity , but discover some real meaning 
 and good faith at the bottom of this bewildering reply . he 
 patiently await an explicit answer ; and Jo , more baffled by his 
 patience than by anything else , at last desperately whisper a name 
 in his ear . 
 " Aye ! " say Allan . " why , what have you be do ? " 
 " Nothink , sir . never do nothink to get myself into no trouble , 
 ' sept in not move on and the inkwhich . but I be a - move on now . 
 I be a - move on to the berryin ground - that be the move as I be up 
 to . " 
 " no , no , we will try to prevent that . but what do he do with 
 you ? " 
 " put I in a horsepittle , " reply Jo , whispering , " till I be 
 discharge , then giv I a little money - four half - bull , wot you 
 may call half - crown - and s ' hook it ! nobody want you here , ' he 
 se . ' you hook it . you go and tramp , ' he se . ' you move on , ' he 
 se . ' do not   let I ever see you nowhere within forty mile of 
 London , or you will repent it . ' so I shall , if ever he doo see I , 
 and he will see I if I be above ground , " conclude Jo , nervously 
 repeat all his former precaution and investigation . 
 Allan consider a little , then remark , turn to the woman but 
 keep an encouraging eye on Jo , " he be not so ungrateful as you 
 suppose . he have a reason for go away , though it be an 
 insufficient one . " 
 " Thankee , sir , thankee ! " exclaim Jo . " there now ! see how hard 
 you wo upon I . but ony you tell the young lady wot the genlmn 
 s , and it be all right . for you wo wery good to I too , and I 
 know it . " 
 " now , Jo , " say Allan , keep his eye upon he , " come with I and 
 I will find you a well place than this to lie down and hide in . 
 if I take one side of the way and you the other to avoid 
 observation , you will not run away , I know very well , if you make 
 I a promise . " 
 " I will not , not unless I wos to see HIM a - come , sir . " 
 " very well . I take your word . half the town be get up by this 
 time , and the whole town will be broad awake in another hour . come 
 along . good day again , my good woman . " 
 " good day again , sir , and I thank you kindly many time again . " 
 she have be sit on her bag , deeply attentive , and now rise 
 and take it up . Jo , repeating , " ony you tell the young lady as I 
 never go fur to hurt she and wot the genlmn s ! " nod and 
 shamble and shiver , and smear and blink , and half laugh and 
 half cry , a farewell to she , and take his creep way along 
 after Allan Woodcourt , close to the house on the opposite side of 
 the street . in this order , the two come up out of Tom - all - Alone 's 
 into the broad ray of the sunlight and the purer air . 
 CHAPTER XLVII 
 Jo 's will 
 as Allan Woodcourt and Jo procee along the street where the high 
 church spire and the distance be so near and clear in the 
 morning light that the city itself seem renew by rest , Allan 
 revolve in his mind how and where he shall bestow his companion . 
 " it surely be a strange fact , " he consider , " that in the heart of 
 a civilized world this creature in human form should be more 
 difficult to dispose of than an unowned dog . " but it be none the 
 less a fact because of its strangeness , and the difficulty remain . 
 at first he look behind he often to assure himself that Jo be 
 still really follow . but look where he will , he still behold 
 he close to the opposite house , make his way with his wary hand 
 from brick to brick and from door to door , and often , as he creep 
 along , glance over at he watchfully . soon satisfied that the 
 last thing in his thought be to give he the slip , Allan go on , 
 consider with a less divided attention what he shall do . 
 a breakfast - stall at a street - corner suggest the first thing to be 
 do . he stop there , look round , and beckon Jo . Jo cross and 
 come halt and shuffle up , slowly scoop the knuckle of his 
 right hand round and round in the hollowed palm of his left , 
 knead dirt with a natural pestle and mortar . what be a dainty 
 repast to Jo be then set before he , and he begin to gulp the 
 coffee and to gnaw the bread and butter , look anxiously about 
 he in all direction as he eat and drink , like a scared animal . 
 but he be so sick and miserable that even hunger have abandon he . 
 " I think I be amost a - starvin , sir , " say Jo , soon put down 
 his food , " but I do not   know nothink - not even that . I do not   care 
 for eat wittle nor yet for drink on them . " and Jo stand 
 shivering and look at the breakfast wonderingly . 
 Allan Woodcourt lay his hand upon his pulse and on his chest . 
 " draw breath , Jo ! " " it draw , " say Jo , " as heavy as a cart . " he 
 might add , " and rattle like it , " but he only mutter , " I be a- 
 move on , sir . " 
 Allan look about for an apothecary 's shop . there be none at hand , 
 but a tavern do as well or well . he obtain a little measure 
 of wine and give the lad a portion of it very carefully . he 
 begin to revive almost as soon as it pass his lip . " we may 
 repeat that dose , Jo , " observe Allan after watch he with his 
 attentive face . " so ! now we will take five minute ' rest , and 
 then go on again . " 
 leave the boy sit on the bench of the breakfast - stall , with 
 his back against an iron railing , Allan Woodcourt pace up and down 
 in the early sunshine , cast an occasional look towards he 
 without appear to watch he . it require no discernment to 
 perceive that he be warm and refresh . if a face so shaded can 
 brighten , his face brighten somewhat ; and by little and little he 
 eat the slice of bread he have so hopelessly lay down . observant 
 of these sign of improvement , Allan engage he in conversation 
 and elicit to his no small wonder the adventure of the lady in the 
 veil , with all its consequence . Jo slowly munch as he slowly 
 tell it . when he have finish his story and his bread , they go on 
 again . 
 intend to refer his difficulty in find a temporary place of 
 refuge for the boy to his old patient , zealous little Miss Flite , 
 Allan lead the way to the court where he and Jo first foregather . 
 but all be change at the rag and bottle shop ; Miss Flite no long 
 lodge there ; it be shut up ; and a hard - feature female , much 
 obscure by dust , whose age be a problem , but who be indeed no other 
 than the interesting Judy , be tart and spare in her reply . these 
 sufficing , however , to inform the visitor that Miss Flite and her 
 bird be domicile with a Mrs. Blinder , in Bell Yard , he repair to 
 that neighbouring place , where Miss Flite   who rise early that she 
 may be punctual at the divan of justice hold by her excellent friend 
 the Chancellor   come run downstairs with tear of welcome and 
 with open arm . 
 " my dear physician ! " cry Miss Flite . " my meritorious , 
 distinguish , honourable officer ! " she use some odd expression , 
 but be as cordial and full of heart as sanity itself can be - more so 
 than it often be . Allan , very patient with she , wait until she have 
 no more rapture to express , then point out Jo , tremble in a 
 doorway , and tell she how he come there . 
 " where can I lodge he hereabout for the present ? now , you have a 
 fund of knowledge and good sense and can advise I . " 
 Miss Flite , mighty proud of the compliment , set herself to 
 consider ; but it be long before a bright thought occur to she . 
 Mrs. Blinder be entirely let , and she herself occupy poor 
 Gridley 's room . " Gridley ! " exclaim Miss Flite , clap her hand 
 after a twentieth repetition of this remark . " Gridley ! to be 
 sure ! of course ! my dear physician ! General George will help we 
 out . " 
 it be hopeless to ask for any information about General George , and 
 would be , though Miss Flite have not akeady run upstairs to put on 
 her pinched bonnet and her poor little shawl and to arm herself 
 with her reticule of document . but as she inform her physician 
 in her disjoint manner on come down in full array that General 
 George , whom she often call upon , know her dear Fitz Jarndyce and 
 take a great interest in all connect with she , Allan be induce 
 to think that they may be in the right way . so he tell Jo , for 
 his encouragement , that this walk about will soon be over now ; 
 and they repair to the general 's . fortunately it be not far . 
 from the exterior of George 's Shooting Gallery , and the long entry , 
 and the bare perspective beyond it , Allan Woodcourt augur well . 
 he also descry promise in the figure of Mr. George himself , 
 stride towards they in his morning exercise with his pipe in his 
 mouth , no stock on , and his muscular arm , develop by broadsword 
 and dumbbell , weightily assert themselves through his light 
 shirt - sleeve . 
 " your servant , sir , " say Mr. George with a military salute . Good- 
 humouredly smile all over his broad forehead up into his crisp 
 hair , he then defer to Miss Flite , as , with great stateliness , and 
 at some length , she perform the courtly ceremony of presentation . 
 he wind it up with another " your servant , sir ! " and another 
 salute . 
 " excuse I , sir . a sailor , I believe ? " say Mr. George . 
 " I be proud to find I have the air of one , " return Allan ; " but I 
 be only a sea - go doctor . " 
 " indeed , sir ! I should have think you be a regular blue - jacket 
 myself . " 
 Allan hop Mr. George will forgive his intrusion the more readily 
 on that account , and particularly that he will not lay aside his 
 pipe , which , in his politeness , he have testify some intention of 
 do . " you be very good , sir , " return the trooper . " as I know 
 by experience that it be not disagreeable to Miss Flite , and since 
 it be equally agreeable to yourself - " and finish the sentence by 
 put it between his lip again . Allan proceed to tell he all 
 he know about Jo , unto which the trooper listen with a grave 
 face . 
 " and that be the lad , sir , be it ? " he inquire , look along the 
 entry to where Jo stand star up at the great letter on the 
 whitewash front , which have no meaning in his eye . 
 " that be he , " say Allan . " and , Mr. George , I be in this difficulty 
 about he . I be unwilling to place he in a hospital , even if I 
 could procure he immediate admission , because I foresee that he 
 would not stay there many hour if he could be so much as get 
 there . the same objection apply to a workhouse , suppose I have 
 the patience to be evade and shirk , and hand about from post 
 to pillar in try to get he into one , which be a system that I 
 do not   take kindly to . " 
 " no man do , sir , " return Mr. George . 
 " I be convinced that he would not remain in either place , because 
 he be possess by an extraordinary terror of this person who 
 order he to keep out of the way ; in his ignorance , he believe 
 this person to be everywhere , and cognizant of everything . " 
 " I ask your pardon , sir , " say Mr. George . " but you have not 
 mention that party 's name . be it a secret , sir ? " 
 " the boy make it one . but his name be Bucket . " 
 " Bucket the detective , sir ? " 
 " the same man . " 
 " the man be know to I , sir , " return the trooper after blow 
 out a cloud of smoke and square his chest , " and the boy be so far 
 correct that he undoubtedly be a - rum customer . " Mr. George smoke 
 with a profound meaning after this and survey Miss Flite in 
 silence . 
 " now , I wish Mr. Jarndyce and Miss Summerson at least to know that 
 this Jo , who tell so strange a story , have reappear , and to have 
 it in their power to speak with he if they should desire to do so . 
 therefore I want to get he , for the present moment , into any poor 
 lodging keep by decent people where he would be admit . decent 
 people and Jo , Mr. George , " say Allan , follow the direction of 
 the trooper 's eye along the entry , " have not be much acquainted , 
 as you see . hence the difficulty . do you happen to know any one 
 in this neighbourhood who would receive he for a while on my 
 pay for he beforehand ? " 
 as he put the question , he become aware of a dirty - face little 
 man stand at the trooper 's elbow and look up , with an oddly 
 twisted figure and countenance , into the trooper 's face . after a 
 few more puff at his pipe , the trooper look down askant at the 
 little man , and the little man wink up at the trooper . 
 " well , sir , " say Mr. George , " I can assure you that I would 
 willingly be knock on the head at any time if it would be at all 
 agreeable to Miss Summerson , and consequently I esteem it a 
 privilege to do that young lady any service , however small . we be 
 naturally in the vagabond way here , sir , both myself and Phil . you 
 see what the place be . you be welcome to a quiet corner of it for 
 the boy if the same would meet your view . no charge make , except 
 for ration . we be not in a flourishing state of circumstance 
 here , sir . we be liable to be tumble out neck and crop at a 
 moment 's notice . however , sir , such as the place be , and so long 
 as it last , here it be at your service . " 
 with a comprehensive wave of his pipe , Mr. George place the whole 
 building at his visitor 's disposal . 
 " I take it for grant , sir , " he add , " you be one of the 
 medical staff , that there be no present infection about this 
 unfortunate subject ? " 
 Allan be quite sure of it . 
 " because , sir , " say Mr. George , shake his head sorrowfully , " we 
 have have enough of that . " 
 his tone be no less sorrowfully echo by his new acquaintance . 
 " still I be bind to tell you , " observe Allan after repeat his 
 former assurance , " that the boy be deplorably low and reduce and 
 that he may be - I do not say that he be - too far go to recover . " 
 " do you consider he in present danger , sir ? " inquire the trooper . 
 " yes , I fear so . " 
 " then , sir , " return the trooper in a decisive manner , " it appear 
 to I - be naturally in the vagabond way myself - that the soon 
 he come out of the street , the well . you , Phil ! bring he in ! " 
 Mr. Squod tack out , all on one side , to execute the word of 
 command ; and the trooper , have smoke his pipe , lay it by . Jo 
 be bring in . he be not one of Mrs. Pardiggle 's Tockahoopo 
 Indians ; he be not one of Mrs. Jellyby 's lamb , be wholly 
 unconnected with Borrioboola - Gha ; he be not soften by distance 
 and unfamiliarity ; he be not a genuine foreign - grow savage ; he be 
 the ordinary home - make article . dirty , ugly , disagreeable to all 
 the sens , in body a common creature of the common street , only 
 in soul a heathen . homely filth begrime he , homely parasite 
 devour he , homely sore be in he , homely rag be on he ; native 
 ignorance , the growth of english soil and climate , sink his 
 immortal nature low than the beast that perish . stand forth , 
 Jo , in uncompromise colour ! from the sole of thy foot to the 
 crown of thy head , there be nothing interesting about thee . 
 he shuffle slowly into Mr. George 's gallery and stand huddle 
 together in a bundle , look all about the floor . he seem to 
 know that they have an inclination to shrink from he , partly for 
 what he be and partly for what he have cause . he , too , shrink 
 from they . he be not of the same order of thing , not of the same 
 place in creation . he be of no order and no place , neither of the 
 beast nor of humanity . 
 " look here , Jo ! " say Allan . " this be Mr. George . " 
 Jo search the floor for some time long , then look up for a 
 moment , and then down again . 
 " he be a kind friend to you , for he be go to give you lodge 
 room here . " 
 Jo make a scoop with one hand , which be suppose to be a bow . 
 after a little more consideration and some backing and change of 
 the foot on which he rest , he mutter that he be " wery thankful . " 
 " you be quite safe here . all you have to do at present be to be 
 obedient and to get strong . and mind you tell we the truth here , 
 whatever you do , Jo . " 
 " Wishermaydie if I do not , sir , " say Jo , revert to his favourite 
 declaration . " I never do nothink yit , but wot you know on , to 
 get myself into no trouble . I never be in no other trouble at 
 all , sir , ' sept not knowin ' nothink and starwation . " 
 " I believe it , now attend to Mr. George . I see he be go to 
 speak to you . " 
 " my intention merely be , sir , " observe Mr. George , amazingly 
 broad and upright , " to point out to he where he can lie down and 
 get a thorough good dose of sleep . now , look here . " as the 
 trooper speak , he conduct they to the other end of the gallery 
 and open one of the little cabin . " there you be , you see ! here 
 be a mattress , and here you may rest , on good behaviour , as long as 
 Mr. , I ask your pardon , sir " - he refer apologetically to the card 
 Allan have give he - " Mr. Woodcourt please . do not   you be alarm 
 if you hear shot ; they will be aim at the target , and not you . 
 now , there be another thing I would recommend , sir , " say the 
 trooper , turn to his visitor . " Phil , come here ! " 
 Phil bear down upon they accord to his usual tactic . " here be 
 a man , sir , who be find , when a baby , in the gutter . consequently , 
 it be to be expect that he take a natural interest in this poor 
 creature . you do , do not   you , Phil ? " 
 " certainly and surely I do , guv'ner , " be Phil 's reply . 
 " now I be think , sir , " say Mr. George in a martial sort of 
 confidence , as if he be give his opinion in a council of war at 
 a drum - head , " that if this man be to take he to a bath and be to 
 lay out a few shilling in get he one or two coarse article - " 
 " Mr. George , my considerate friend , " return Allan , take out his 
 purse , " it be the very favour I would have ask . " 
 Phil Squod and Jo be send out immediately on this work of 
 improvement . Miss Flite , quite enrapture by her success , make 
 the good of her way to court , have great fear that otherwise her 
 friend the Chancellor may be uneasy about she or may give the 
 judgment she have so long expect in her absence , and observe 
 " which you know , my dear physician , and general , after so many 
 year , would be too absurdly unfortunate ! " Allan take the 
 opportunity of go out to procure some restorative medicine , and 
 obtain they near at hand , soon return to find the trooper 
 walk up and down the gallery , and to fall into step and walk 
 with he . 
 " I take it , sir , " say Mr. George , " that you know Miss Summerson 
 pretty well ? " 
 yes , it appear . 
 " not relate to she , sir ? " 
 no , it appear . 
 " excuse the apparent curiosity , " say Mr. George . " it seem to I 
 probable that you might take more than a common interest in this 
 poor creature because Miss Summerson have take that unfortunate 
 interest in he . ' tis my case , sir , I assure you . " 
 " and mine , Mr. George . " 
 the trooper look sideways at Allan 's sunburnt cheek and bright 
 dark eye , rapidly measure his height and build , and seem to 
 approve of he . 
 " since you have be out , sir , I have be think that I 
 unquestionably know the room in Lincoln 's Inn Fields , where Bucket 
 take the lad , accord to his account . though he be not 
 acquaint with the name , I can help you to it . it be Tulkinghorn . 
 that be what it be . " 
 Allan look at he inquiringly , repeat the name . 
 " Tulkinghorn . that be the name , sir . I know the man , and know he 
 to have be in communication with Bucket before , respect a 
 deceased person who have give he offence . I know the man , sir . 
 to my sorrow . " 
 Allan naturally ask what kind of man he be . 
 " what kind of man ! do you mean to look at ? " 
 " I think I know that much of he . I mean to deal with . generally , 
 what kind of man ? " 
 " why , then I will tell you , sir , " return the trooper , stop short 
 and fold his arm on his square chest so angrily that his face 
 fire and flush all over ; " he be a confoundedly bad kind of man . 
 he be a slow - torture kind of man . he be no more like flesh and 
 blood than a rusty old carbine be . he be a kind of man - by 
 George ! - that have cause I more restlessness , and more uneasiness , 
 and more dissatisfaction with myself than all other man put 
 together . that be the kind of man Mr. Tulkinghorn be ! " 
 " I be sorry , " say Allan , " to have touch so sore a place . " 
 " Sore ? " the trooper plant his leg wider apart , wet the palm of 
 his broad right hand , and lay it on the imaginary moustache . 
 " it be no fault of your , sir ; but you shall judge . he have get a 
 power over I . he be the man I speak of just now as be able to 
 tumble I out of this place neck and crop . he keep I on a 
 constant see - saw . he will not   hold off , and he will not   come on . if I 
 have a payment to make he , or time to ask he for , or anything to 
 go to he about , he do not   see I , do not   hear I - pass I on to 
 Melchisedech 's in Clifford 's Inn , Melchisedech 's in Clifford 's Inn 
 pass I back again to he - he keep I prowl and dangle 
 about he as if I be make of the same stone as himself . why , I 
 spend half my life now , pretty well , loitering and dodge about 
 his door . what do he care ? nothing . just as much as the rusty 
 old carbine I have compare he to . he chafe and goad I till - 
 Bah ! nonsense ! I be forget myself . Mr. Woodcourt , " the 
 trooper resume his march , " all I say be , he be an old man ; but I 
 be glad I shall never have the chance of set spur to my horse 
 and rid at he in a fair field . for if I have that chance , in 
 one of the humour he drive I into - he would go down , sir ! " 
 Mr. George have be so excited that he find it necessary to wipe 
 his forehead on his shirt - sleeve . even while he whistle his 
 impetuosity away with the national anthem , some involuntary 
 shaking of his head and heaving of his chest still linger behind , 
 not to mention an occasional hasty adjustment with both hand of 
 his open shirt - collar , as if it be scarcely open enough to 
 prevent his be trouble by a choke sensation . in short , Allan 
 Woodcourt have not much doubt about the go down of Mr. 
 Tulkinghorn on the field refer to . 
 Jo and his conductor presently return , and Jo be assist to his 
 mattress by the careful Phil , to whom , after due administration of 
 medicine by his own hand , Allan confide all needful mean and 
 instruction . the morning be by this time get on apace . he 
 repair to his lodging to dress and breakfast , and then , without 
 seek rest , go away to Mr. Jarndyce to communicate his 
 discovery . 
 with he Mr. Jarndyce return alone , confidentially tell he 
 that there be reason for keep this matter very quiet indeed 
 and show a serious interest in it . to Mr. Jarndyce , Jo repeat 
 in substance what he say in the morning , without any material 
 variation . only that cart of his be heavy to draw , and draw 
 with a hollower sound . 
 " let I lay here quiet and not be chivy no more , " falter Jo , 
 " and be so kind any person as be a - passin nigh where I use fur to 
 sleep , as jist to say to Mr. Sangsby that Jo , wot he know once , be 
 a - move on right forard with his duty , and I will be wery thankful . 
 I would be more thankful than I be aready if it wo any way possible 
 for an unfortnet to be it . " 
 he make so many of these reference to the law - stationer in the 
 course of a day or two that Allan , after confer with Mr. 
 Jarndyce , good - naturedly resolve to call in Cook 's Court , the 
 rather , as the cart seem to be break down . 
 to Cook 's court , therefore , he repair . Mr. Snagsby be behind his 
 counter in his grey coat and sleeve , inspect an indenture of 
 several skin which have just come in from the engrosser 's , an 
 immense desert of law - hand and parchment , with here and there a 
 resting - place of a few large letter to break the awful monotony 
 and save the traveller from despair . Mr Snagsby put up at one of 
 these inky well and greet the stranger with his cough of general 
 preparation for business . 
 " you do not   remember I , Mr. Snagsby ? " 
 the stationer 's heart begin to thump heavily , for his old 
 apprehension have never abate . it be as much as he can do to 
 answer , " no , sir , I can not   say I do . I should have consider - not 
 to put too fine a point upon it - that I never see you before , sir . " 
 " twice before , " say Allan Woodcourt . " once at a poor bedside , and 
 once - " 
 " it be come at last ! " think the afflict stationer , as 
 recollection break upon he . " it be get to a head now and be go 
 to burst ! " but he have sufficient presence of mind to conduct his 
 visitor into the little counting - house and to shut the door . 
 " be you a married man , sir ? " 
 " no , I be not . " 
 " would you make the attempt , though single , " say Mr. Snagsby in a 
 melancholy whisper , " to speak as low as you can ? for my little 
 woman be a - listen somewhere , or I will forfeit the business and 
 five hundred pound ! " 
 in deep dejection Mr. Snagsby sit down on his stool , with his back 
 against his desk , protest , " I never have a secret of my own , sir . 
 I can not   charge my memory with ever have once attempt to deceive 
 my little woman on my own account since she name the day . I 
 would not   have do it , sir . not to put too fine a point upon it , I 
 could not   have do it , I dursn't   have do it . whereas , and 
 nevertheless , I find myself wrap round with secrecy and mystery , 
 till my life be a burden to I . " 
 his visitor profess his regret to hear it and ask he do he 
 remember Jo . Mr. Snagsby answer with a suppress groan , oh , 
 do not   he ! 
 " you could not   name an individual human being - except myself - that 
 my little woman be more set and determine against than Jo , " say 
 Mr. Snagsby . 
 Allan ask why . 
 " why ? " repeat Mr. Snagsby , in his desperation clutching at the 
 clump of hair at the back of his bald head . " how should I know 
 why ? but you be a single person , sir , and may you long be spar 
 to ask a married person such a question ! " 
 with this beneficent wish , Mr. Snagsby cough a cough of dismal 
 resignation and submit himself to hear what the visitor have to 
 communicate . 
 " there again ! " say Mr. Snagsby , who , between the earnestness of 
 his feeling and the suppress tone of his voice be discolour 
 in the face . " at it again , in a new direction ! a certain person 
 charge I , in the solemn way , not to talk of Jo to any one , 
 even my little woman . then come another certain person , in the 
 person of yourself , and charge I , in an equally solemn way , not 
 to mention Jo to that other certain person above all other person . 
 why , this be a private asylum ! why , not to put too fine a point 
 upon it , this be Bedlam , sir ! " say Mr. Snagsby . 
 but it be well than he expect after all , be no explosion of 
 the mine below he or deepen of the pit into which he have 
 fall . and be tender - hearted and affect by the account he 
 hear of Jo 's condition , he readily engage to " look round " as 
 early in the evening as he can manage it quietly . he look round 
 very quietly when the evening come , but it may turn out that Mrs. 
 Snagsby be as quiet a manager as he . 
 Jo be very glad to see his old friend and say , when they be leave 
 alone , that he take it uncommon kind as Mr. Sangsby should come so 
 far out of his way on account of sich as he . Mr. Snagsby , 
 touch by the spectacle before he , immediately lay upon the 
 table half a crown , that magic balsam of his for all kind of 
 wound . 
 " and how do you find yourself , my poor lad ? " inquire the stationer 
 with his cough of sympathy . 
 " I be in luck , Mr. Sangsby , I be , " return Jo , " and do not   want for 
 nothink . I be more cumfbler nor you can not   think . Mr. Sangsby ! I be 
 wery sorry that I do it , but I do not   go fur to do it , sir . " 
 the stationer softly lay down another half - crown and ask he what 
 it be that he be sorry for have do . 
 " Mr. Sangsby , " say Jo , " I go and giv a illness to the lady as 
 wos and yit as warn't   the t'other lady , and none of them never say 
 nothink to I for have do it , on account of their being s 
 good and my have be s'unfortnet . the lady come herself and see 
 I yesday , and she se , ' ah , Jo ! ' she se . ' we think we would lose 
 you , Jo ! ' she se . and she sit down a - smilin so quiet , and do not 
 pass a word nor yit a look upon I for have do it , she do not , 
 and I turn agin the wall , I doos , Mr. Sangsby . and Mr. Jarnders , 
 I see he a - force to turn away his own self . and Mr. Woodcot , he 
 come fur to giv I somethink fur to ease I , wot he be allus a - do 
 on day and night , and wen he come a - bending over I and a - speakin 
 up so bold , I see his tear a - fallin , Mr. Sangsby . " 
 the softened stationer deposit another half - crown on the table . 
 nothing less than a repetition of that infallible remedy will 
 relieve his feeling . 
 " wot I be a - thinkin on , Mr. Sangsby , " proceed Jo , " wos , as you 
 wo able to write wery large , p'raps ? " 
 " yes , Jo , please God , " return the stationer . 
 " uncommon precious large , p'raps ? " say Jo with eagerness . 
 " yes , my poor boy . " 
 Jo laugh with pleasure . " wot I wo a - thinking on then , Mr. 
 Sangsby , wos , that when I wo move on as fur as ever I could go 
 and could not   he move no furder , whether you might be so good 
 p'raps as to write out , wery large so that any one could see it 
 anywhere , as that I wos wery truly hearty sorry that I do it and 
 that I never go fur to do it , and that though I do not   know 
 nothink at all , I knowd as Mr. Woodcot once cry over it and wos 
 allus grieve over it , and that I hop as he would be able to forgive 
 I in his mind . if the writin could be make to say it wery large , 
 he might . " 
 " it shall say it , Jo . very large . " 
 Jo laugh again . " Thankee , Mr. Sangsby . it be wery kind of you , 
 sir , and it make I more cumfbler nor I be afore . " 
 the meek little stationer , with a broken and unfinished cough , 
 slip down his fourth half - crown - he have never be so close to a 
 case require so many - and be fain to depart . and Jo and he , upon 
 this little earth , shall meet no more . no more . 
 for the cart so hard to draw be near its journey 's end and drag 
 over stony ground . all round the clock it labour up the broken 
 step , shatter and worn . not many time can the sun rise and 
 behold it still upon its weary road . 
 Phil Squod , with his smoky gunpowder visage , at once act as nurse 
 and work as armourer at his little table in a corner , often 
 look round and say with a nod of his green - baize cap and an 
 encourage elevation of his one eyebrow , " hold up , my boy ! hold 
 up ! " there , too , be Mr. Jarndyce many a time , and Allan Woodcourt 
 almost always , both think , much , how strangely fate have 
 entangle this rough outcast in the web of very different life . 
 there , too , the trooper be a frequent visitor , fill the doorway 
 with his athletic figure and , from his superfluity of life and 
 strength , seem to shed down temporary vigour upon Jo , who never 
 fail to speak more robustly in answer to his cheerful word . 
 Jo be in a sleep or in a stupor to - day , and Allan Woodcourt , newly 
 arrive , stand by he , look down upon his waste form . after a 
 while he softly seat himself upon the bedside with his face 
 towards he - just as he sit in the law - writer 's room - and touch 
 his chest and heart . the cart have very nearly give up , but 
 labour on a little more . 
 the trooper stand in the doorway , still and silent . Phil have 
 stop in a low clink noise , with his little hammer in his 
 hand . Mr. Woodcourt look round with that grave professional 
 interest and attention on his face , and glance significantly at 
 the trooper , sign to Phil to carry his table out . when the little 
 hammer be next use , there will be a speck of rust upon it . 
 " well , Jo ! what be the matter ? do not   be frighten . " 
 " I think , " say Jo , who have start and be look round , " I 
 think I be in Tom - all - Alone 's agin . ai not   there nobody here but 
 you , Mr. Woodcot ? " 
 " nobody . " 
 " and I be not   take back to Tom - all - Alone 's . be I , sir ? " 
 " no . " Jo close his eye , mutter , " I be wery thankful . " 
 after watch he closely a little while , Allan put his mouth 
 very near his ear and say to he in a low , distinct voice , " Jo ! 
 do you ever know a prayer ? " 
 " never knowd nothink , sir . " 
 " not so much as one short prayer ? " 
 " no , sir . nothink at all . Mr. Chadbands he wo a - prayin wunst at 
 Mr. Sangsby 's and I heerd he , but he sound as if he wos a- 
 speakin to hisself , and not to I . he pray a lot , but I could not 
 make out nothink on it . different time there be other genlman 
 come down Tom - all - Alone be a - prayin , but they all mostly se as the 
 t'other ' wun pray wrong , and all mostly sound to be a - talk 
 to theirselve , or a - pass blame on the t'other , and not a- 
 talkin to we . we never knowd nothink . I never knowd what it wo 
 all about . " 
 it take he a long time to say this , and few but an experienced 
 and attentive listener could hear , or , hearing , understand he . 
 after a short relapse into sleep or stupor , he make , of a sudden , 
 a strong effort to get out of bed . 
 " stay , Jo ! what now ? " 
 " it be time for I to go to that there berryin ground , sir , " he 
 return with a wild look . 
 " lie down , and tell I . what bury ground , Jo ? " 
 " where they lay he as wos wery good to I , wery good to I 
 indeed , he wo . it be time fur I to go down to that there berryin 
 ground , sir , and ask to be put along with he . I want to go there 
 and be berry . he use fur to say to I , ' I be as poor as you to- 
 day , Jo , ' he se . I want to tell he that I be as poor as he now 
 and have come there to be lay along with he . " 
 " by and by , Jo . by and by . " 
 " ah ! p'rap they would not   do it if I wo to go myself . but will 
 you promise to have I take there , sir , and lay along with he ? " 
 " I will , indeed . " 
 " Thankee , sir . Thankee , sir . they will have to get the key of the 
 gate afore they can take I in , for it be allus locked . and there be 
 a step there , as I use for to clean with my broom . it be turn 
 wery dark , sir . be there any light a - comin ? " 
 " it be come fast , Jo . " 
 fast . the cart be shake all to piece , and the rugged road be 
 very near its end . 
 " Jo , my poor fellow ! " 
 " I hear you , sir , in the dark , but I be a - gropin - a - gropin - let I 
 catch hold of your hand . " 
 " Jo , can you say what I say ? " 
 " I will say anythink as you say , sir , for I know it be good . " 
 " our Father . " 
 " our Father ! yes , that be wery good , sir . " 
 " which art in heaven . " 
 " art in heaven - be the light a - comin , sir ? " 
 " it be close at hand . hallow by thy name ! " 
 " Hallowed be - thy - " 
 the light be come upon the dark benight way . dead ! 
 Dead , your Majesty . dead , my lord and gentleman . dead , right 
 reverend and wrong reverend of every order . dead , man and woman , 
 bear with heavenly compassion in your heart . and die thus 
 around we every day . 
 CHAPTER XLVIII 
 closing in 
 the place in Lincolnshire have shut its many eye again , and the 
 house in town be awake . in Lincolnshire the dedlock of the past 
 doze in their picture - frame , and the low wind murmur through the 
 long drawing - room as if they be breathe pretty regularly . in 
 town the dedlock of the present rattle in their fire - eye 
 carriage through the darkness of the night , and the Dedlock 
 Mercuries , with ash   or hair - powder   on their head , symptomatic 
 of their great humility , loll away the drowsy morning in the 
 little window of the hall . the fashionable world - tremendous orb , 
 nearly five mile round - be in full swing , and the solar system 
 work respectfully at its appoint distance . 
 where the throng be thick , where the light be bright , where 
 all the sens be minister to with the great delicacy and 
 refinement , Lady Dedlock be . from the shin height she have 
 scale and take , she be never absent . though the belief she of 
 old repose in herself as one able to reserve whatsoever she would 
 under her mantle of pride be beat down , though she have no 
 assurance that what she be to those around she she will remain 
 another day , it be not in her nature when envious eye be look 
 on to yield or to droop . they say of she that she have lately grow 
 more handsome and more haughty . the debilitated cousin say of 
 she that she be beauty nough - tsetup shopofwoman - but rather 
 larme kind - remindingmanfact - inconvenient woman - who will 
 getoutofbedandbawthstahlishment - Shakespeare . 
 Mr. Tulkinghorn say nothing , look nothing . now , as heretofore , 
 he be to be find in doorway of room , with his limp white cravat 
 loosely twist into its old - fashioned tie , receive patronage 
 from the peerage and make no sign . of all man he be still the 
 last who might be suppose to have any influence upon my Lady . of 
 all woman she be still the last who might be suppose to have any 
 dread of he . 
 one thing have be much on her mind since their late interview in 
 his turret - room at Chesney Wold . she be now decide , and prepare 
 to throw it off . 
 it be morning in the great world , afternoon accord to the little 
 sun . the mercury , exhaust by look out of window , be 
 repose in the hall and hang their heavy head , the gorgeous 
 creature , like overblown sunflower . like they , too , they seem to 
 run to a deal of seed in their tag and trimming . Sir Leicester , 
 in the library , have fall asleep for the good of the country over 
 the report of a parliamentary committee . my Lady sit in the room 
 in which she give audience to the young man of the name of Guppy . 
 Rosa be with she and have be write for she and read to she . 
 Rosa be now at work upon embroidery or some such pretty thing , and 
 as she bend her head over it , my Lady watch she in silence . not 
 for the first time to - day . 
 " Rosa . " 
 the pretty village face look brightly up . then , see how 
 serious my Lady be , look puzzled and surprised . 
 " see to the door . be it shut ? " 
 yes . she go to it and return , and look yet more surprised . 
 " I be about to place confidence in you , child , for I know I may 
 trust your attachment , if not your judgment . in what I be go to 
 do , I will not disguise myself to you at least . but I confide in 
 you . say nothing to any one of what pass between we . " 
 the timid little beauty promise in all earnestness to be 
 trustworthy . 
 " do you know , " Lady Dedlock ask she , sign to she to bring she 
 chair nearer , " do you know , Rosa , that I be different to you from 
 what I be to any one ? " 
 " yes , my Lady . much kind . but then I often think I know you as 
 you really be . " 
 " you often think you know I as I really be ? poor child , poor 
 child ! " 
 she say it with a kind of scorn - though not of Rosa - and sit 
 brood , look dreamily at she . 
 " do you think , Rosa , you be any relief or comfort to I ? do you 
 suppose your be young and natural , and fond of I and grateful 
 to I , make it any pleasure to I to have you near I ? " 
 " I do not   know , my Lady ; I can scarcely hope so . but with all my 
 heart , I wish it be so . " 
 " it be so , little one . " 
 the pretty face be check in its flush of pleasure by the dark 
 expression on the handsome face before it . it look timidly for an 
 explanation . 
 " and if I be to say to - day , ' go ! leave I ! ' I should say what 
 would give I great pain and disquiet , child , and what would leave 
 I very solitary . " 
 " my Lady ! have I offend you ? " 
 " in nothing . come here . " 
 Rosa bend down on the footstool at my Lady 's foot . my Lady , with 
 that motherly touch of the famous ironmaster night , lay her hand 
 upon her dark hair and gently keep it there . 
 " I tell you , Rosa , that I wish you to be happy and that I would 
 make you so if I could make anybody happy on this earth . I can not . 
 there be reason now know to I , reason in which you have no 
 part , render it far well for you that you should not remain 
 here . you must not remain here . I have determine that you shall 
 not . I have write to the father of your lover , and he will be 
 here to - day . all this I have do for your sake . " 
 the weep girl cover her hand with kiss and say what shall 
 she do , what shall she do , when they be separate ! her mistress 
 kiss she on the cheek and make no other answer . 
 " now , be happy , child , under well circumstance . be beloved and 
 happy ! " 
 " ah , my Lady , I have sometimes think - forgive my be so free - 
 that you be not happy . " 
 " I ! " 
 " will you be more so when you have send I away ? pray , pray , think 
 again . let I stay a little while ! " 
 " I have say , my child , that what I do , I do for your sake , not my 
 own . it be do . what I be towards you , Rosa , be what I be now - 
 not what I shall be a little while hence . remember this , and keep 
 my confidence . do so much for my sake , and thus all end between 
 we ! " 
 she detach herself from her simple - hearted companion and leave 
 the room . late in the afternoon , when she next appear upon the 
 staircase , she be in her haughty and cold state . as 
 indifferent as if all passion , feeling , and interest have be wear 
 out in the early age of the world and have perish from its 
 surface with its other depart monster . 
 Mercury have announce Mr. Rouncewell , which be the cause of her 
 appearance . Mr. Rouncewell be not in the library , but she repair 
 to the library . Sir Leicester be there , and she wish to speak to 
 he first . 
 " Sir Leicester , I be desirous - but you be engage . " 
 oh , dear no ! not at all . only Mr. Tulkinghorn . 
 always at hand . haunt every place . no relief or security from 
 he for a moment . 
 " I beg your pardon , Lady Dedlock . will you allow I to retire ? " 
 with a look that plainly say , " you know you have the power to 
 remain if you will , " she tell he it be not necessary and move 
 towards a chair . Mr. Tulkinghorn bring it a little forward for 
 she with his clumsy bow and retire into a window opposite . 
 interpose between she and the fade light of day in the now quiet 
 street , his shadow fall upon she , and he darken all before she . 
 even so do he darken her life . 
 it be a dull street under the good condition , where the two long 
 row of house stare at each other with that severity that half - a- 
 dozen of its great mansion seem to have be slowly star into 
 stone rather than originally build in that material . it be a 
 street of such dismal grandeur , so determined not to condescend to 
 liveliness , that the door and window hold a gloomy state of their 
 own in black paint and dust , and the echo mew behind have a dry 
 and massive appearance , as if they be reserve to stable the 
 stone charger of noble statue . complicated garnish of iron - work 
 entwine itself over the flight of step in this awful street , and 
 from these petrified bower , extinguisher for obsolete flambeaux 
 gasp at the upstart gas . here and there a weak little iron hoop , 
 through which bold boy aspire to throw their friend ' cap   its 
 only present use , retain its place among the rusty foliage , 
 sacred to the memory of depart oil . Nay , even oil itself , yet 
 linger at long interval in a little absurd glass pot , with a 
 knob in the bottom like an oyster , blink and sulk at new light 
 every night , like its high and dry master in the House of Lords . 
 therefore there be not much that Lady Dedlock , seat in her chair , 
 could wish to see through the window in which Mr. Tulkinghorn 
 stand . and yet - and yet - she send a look in that direction as if 
 it be her heart 's desire to have that figure move out of the 
 way . 
 Sir Leicester beg his Lady 's pardon . she be about to say ? 
 " only that Mr. Rouncewell be here   he have call by my appointment 
 and that we have well make an end of the question of that girl . I 
 be tired to death of the matter . " 
 " what can I do - to - assist ? " demand Sir Leicester in some 
 considerable doubt . 
 " let we see he here and have do with it . will you tell they to 
 send he up ? " 
 " Mr. Tulkinghorn , be so good as to ring . thank you . request , " 
 say Sir Leicester to Mercury , not immediately remember the 
 business term , " request the iron gentleman to walk this way . " 
 Mercury depart in search of the iron gentleman , find , and 
 produce he . Sir Leicester receive that ferruginous person 
 graciously . 
 " I hope you be well , Mr. Rouncewell . be seat .   my solicitor , 
 Mr. Tulkinghorn .   my Lady be desirous , Mr. Rouncewell , " Sir 
 Leicester skilfully transfer he with a solemn wave of his hand , 
 " be desirous to speak with you . Hem ! " 
 " I shall be very happy , " return the iron gentleman , " to give my 
 good attention to anything Lady Dedlock do I the honour to say . " 
 as he turn towards she , he find that the impression she make 
 upon he be less agreeable than on the former occasion . a distant 
 supercilious air make a cold atmosphere about she , and there be 
 nothing in her bearing , as there be before , to encourage openness . 
 " pray , sir , " say Lady Dedlock listlessly , " may I be allow to 
 inquire whether anything have pass between you and your son 
 respect your son 's fancy ? " 
 it be almost too troublesome to her languid eye to bestow a look 
 upon he as she ask this question . 
 " if my memory serve I , Lady Dedlock , I say , when I have the 
 pleasure of see you before , that I should seriously advise my 
 son to conquer that - fancy . " the ironmaster repeat her expression 
 with a little emphasis . 
 " and do you ? " 
 " oh ! of course I do . " 
 Sir Leicester give a nod , approve and confirmatory . very 
 proper . the iron gentleman , have say that he would do it , be 
 bind to do it . no difference in this respect between the base 
 metal and the precious . highly proper . 
 " and pray have he do so ? " 
 " really , Lady Dedlock , I can not make you a definite reply . I fear 
 not . probably not yet . in our condition of life , we sometimes 
 couple an intention with our - our fancy which render they not 
 altogether easy to throw off . I think it be rather our way to be 
 in earnest . " 
 Sir Leicester have a misgiving that there may be a hidden Wat 
 tylerish meaning in this expression , and fume a little . Mr. 
 Rouncewell be perfectly good - humour and polite , but within such 
 limit , evidently adapt his tone to his reception . 
 " because , " proceed my Lady , " I have be think of the subject , 
 which be tiresome to I . " 
 " I be very sorry , I be sure . " 
 " and also of what Sir Leicester say upon it , in which I quite 
 concur " - Sir Leicester flatter - " and if you can not give we the 
 assurance that this fancy be at an end , I have come to the 
 conclusion that the girl have well leave I . " 
 " I can give no such assurance , Lady Dedlock . nothing of the kind . " 
 " then she have well go . " 
 " excuse I , my Lady , " Sir Leicester considerately interpose , " but 
 perhaps this may be do an injury to the young woman which she 
 have not merit . here be a young woman , " say Sir Leicester , 
 magnificently lay out the matter with his right hand like a 
 service of plate , " whose good fortune it be to have attract the 
 notice and favour of an eminent lady and to live , under the 
 protection of that eminent lady , surround by the various 
 advantage which such a position confer , and which be 
 unquestionably very great - I believe unquestionably very great , 
 sir - for a young woman in that station of life . the question then 
 arise , should that young woman be deprive of these many 
 advantage and that good fortune simply because she have " - Sir 
 Leicester , with an apologetic but dignified inclination of his head 
 towards the ironmaster , wind up his sentence - " have attract the 
 notice of Mr Rouncewell 's son ? now , have she deserve this 
 punishment ? be this just towards she ? be this our previous 
 understanding ? " 
 " I beg your pardon , " interpose Mr. Rouncewell 's son 's father . 
 " Sir Leicester , will you allow I ? I think I may shorten the 
 subject . pray dismiss that from your consideration . if you 
 remember anything so unimportant - which be not to be expect - you 
 would recollect that my first thought in the affair be directly 
 oppose to she remain here . " 
 dismiss the Dedlock patronage from consideration ? oh ! Sir 
 Leicester be bind to believe a pair of ear that have be hand 
 down to he through such a family , or he really might have 
 mistrust their report of the iron gentleman 's observation . 
 " it be not necessary , " observe my Lady in her cold manner 
 before he can do anything but breathe amazedly , " to enter into 
 these matter on either side . the girl be a very good girl ; I have 
 nothing whatever to say against she , but she be so far insensible 
 to her many advantage and her good fortune that she be in love - or 
 suppose she be , poor little fool - and unable to appreciate they . " 
 Sir Leicester beg to observe that wholly alter the case . he 
 might have be sure that my Lady have the good ground and reason 
 in support of her view . he entirely agree with my Lady . the 
 young woman have well go . 
 " as Sir Leicester observe , Mr. Rouncewell , on the last occasion 
 when we be fatigue by this business , " Lady Dedlock languidly 
 proceed , " we can not make condition with you . without condition , 
 and under present circumstance , the girl be quite misplaced here 
 and have well go . I have tell she so . would you wish to have she 
 send back to the village , or would you like to take she with you , 
 or what would you prefer ? " 
 " Lady Dedlock , if I may speak plainly - " 
 " by all mean . " 
 " - I should prefer the course which will the soon relieve you of 
 the incumbrance and remove she from her present position . " 
 " and to speak as plainly , " she return with the same study 
 carelessness , ' so should i. do I understand that you will take she 
 with you ? " 
 the iron gentleman make an iron bow . 
 " Sir Leicester , will you ring ? " Mr. Tulkinghorn step forward from 
 his window and pull the bell . " I have forget you . thank you . " 
 he make his usual bow and go quietly back again . Mercury , 
 swift - responsive , appear , receive instruction whom to produce , 
 skim away , produce the aforesaid , and depart . 
 Rosa have be cry and be yet in distress . on she come in , the 
 ironmaster leave his chair , take her arm in his , and remain with 
 she near the door ready to depart . 
 " you be take charge of , you see , " say my Lady in her weary 
 manner , " and be go away well protect . I have mention that 
 you be a very good girl , and you have nothing to cry for . " 
 " she seem after all , " observe Mr. Tulkinghorn , loiter a little 
 forward with his hand behind he , " as if she be cry at go 
 away . " 
 " why , she be not well - breed , you see , " return Mr. Rouncewell with 
 some quickness in his manner , as if he be glad to have the lawyer 
 to retort upon , " and she be an inexperienced little thing and know 
 no well . if she have remain here , sir , she would have improve , 
 no doubt . " 
 " no doubt , " be Mr. Tulkinghorn 's compose reply . 
 Rosa sob out that she be very sorry to leave my Lady , and that she 
 be happy at Chesney Wold , and have be happy with my Lady , and 
 that she thank my Lady over and over again . " out , you silly 
 little puss ! " say the ironmaster , check she in a low voice , 
 though not angrily . " have a spirit , if you be fond of Watt ! " my 
 Lady merely wave she off with indifference , say , " there , there , 
 child ! you be a good girl . go away ! " Sir Leicester have 
 magnificently disengage himself from the subject and retire into 
 the sanctuary of his blue coat . Mr. Tulkinghorn , an indistinct 
 form against the dark street now dot with lamp , loom in my 
 Lady 's view , big and blacker than before . 
 " Sir Leicester and Lady Dedlock , " say Mr. Rouncewell after a pause 
 of a few moment , " I beg to take my leave , with an apology for 
 have again trouble you , though not of my own act , on this 
 tiresome subject . I can very well understand , I assure you , how 
 tiresome so small a matter must have become to Lady Dedlock . if I 
 be doubtful of my deal with it , it be only because I do not at 
 first quietly exert my influence to take my young friend here away 
 without trouble you at all . but it appear to I - I dare say 
 magnify the importance of the thing - that it be respectful to 
 explain to you how the matter stand and candid to consult your 
 wish and convenience . I hope you will excuse my want of 
 acquaintance with the polite world . " 
 Sir Leicester consider himself evoke out of the sanctuary by 
 these remark . " Mr. Rouncewell , " he return , " do not mention it . 
 justification be unnecessary , I hope , on either side . " 
 " I be glad to hear it , Sir Leicester ; and if I may , by way of a 
 last word , revert to what I say before of my mother 's long 
 connexion with the family and the worth it bespeak on both side , 
 I would point out this little instance here on my arm who show 
 herself so affectionate and faithful in parting and in whom my 
 mother , I dare say , have do something to awaken such feeling - 
 though of course Lady Dedlock , by her heartfelt interest and her 
 genial condescension , have do much more . " 
 if he mean this ironically , it may be true than he think . he 
 point it , however , by no deviation from his straightforward manner 
 of speech , though in say it he turn towards that part of the 
 dim room where my Lady sit . Sir Leicester stand to return his 
 parting salutation , Mr. Tulkinghorn again ring , Mercury take 
 another flight , and Mr. Rouncewell and Rosa leave the house . 
 then light be bring in , discover Mr. Tulkinghorn still 
 stand in his window with his hand behind he and my Lady still 
 sit with his figure before she , close up her view of the 
 night as well as of the day . she be very pale . Mr. Tulkinghorn , 
 observe it as she rise to retire , think , " well she may be ! the 
 power of this woman be astonishing . she have be act a part the 
 whole time . " but he can act a part too - his one unchanging 
 character - and as he hold the door open for this woman , fifty 
 pair of eye , each fifty time sharp than Sir Leicester 's pair , 
 should find no flaw in he . 
 Lady Dedlock dine alone in her own room to - day . Sir Leicester be 
 whip in to the rescue of the Doodle Party and the discomfiture 
 of the Coodle Faction . Lady Dedlock ask on sit down to 
 dinner , still deadly pale   and quite an illustration of the 
 debilitate cousin 's text , whether he be go out ? yes . whether 
 Mr. Tulkinghorn be go yet ? no . presently she ask again , be he 
 go YET ? no . what be he do ? Mercury think he be write 
 letter in the library . would my Lady wish to see he ? anything 
 but that . 
 but he wish to see my Lady . within a few more minute he be 
 report as send his respect , and could my Lady please to 
 receive he for a word or two after her dinner ? my Lady will 
 receive he now . he come now , apologize for intruding , even by 
 her permission , while she be at table . when they be alone , my 
 Lady wave her hand to dispense with such mockery . 
 " what do you want , sir ? " 
 " why , Lady Dedlock , " say the lawyer , take a chair at a little 
 distance from she and slowly rub his rusty leg up and down , up 
 and down , up and down , " I be rather surprised by the course you 
 have take . " 
 " indeed ? " 
 " yes , decidedly . I be not prepared for it . I consider it a 
 departure from our agreement and your promise . it put we in a new 
 position , Lady Dedlock . I feel myself under the necessity of 
 say that I do not   approve of it . " 
 he stop in his rubbing and look at she , with his hand on his 
 knee . imperturbable and unchangeable as he be , there be still an 
 indefinable freedom in his manner which be new and which do not 
 escape this woman 's observation . 
 " I do not quite understand you . " 
 " oh , yes you do , I think . I think you do . come , come , Lady 
 Dedlock , we must not fence and parry now . you know you like this 
 girl . " 
 " well , sir ? " 
 " and you know - and I know - that you have not send she away for the 
 reason you have assign , but for the purpose of separate she as 
 much as possible from - excuse my mention it as a matter of 
 business - any reproach and exposure that impend over yourself . " 
 " well , sir ? " 
 " well , Lady Dedlock , " return the lawyer , cross his leg and 
 nursing the uppermost knee . " I object to that . I consider that a 
 dangerous proceeding . I know it to be unnecessary and calculate 
 to awaken speculation , doubt , rumour , I do not   know what , in the 
 house . besides , it be a violation of our agreement . you be to 
 be exactly what you be before . whereas , it must be evident to 
 yourself , as it be to I , that you have be this evening very 
 different from what you be before . why , bless my soul , Lady 
 Dedlock , transparently so ! " 
 " if , sir , " she begin , " in my knowledge of my secret - " but he 
 interrupt she . 
 " now , Lady Dedlock , this be a matter of business , and in a matter 
 of business the ground can not be keep too clear . it be no long 
 your secret . excuse I . that be just the mistake . it be my 
 secret , in trust for Sir Leicester and the family . if it be your 
 secret , Lady Dedlock , we should not be here hold this 
 conversation . " 
 " that be very true . if in my knowledge of the secret I do what I 
 can to spare an innocent girl   especially , remember your own 
 reference to she when you tell my story to the assemble guest at 
 Chesney Wold   from the taint of my impending shame , I act upon a 
 resolution I have take . nothing in the world , and no one in the 
 world , could shake it or could move I . " this she say with great 
 deliberation and distinctness and with no more outward passion than 
 himself . as for he , he methodically discuss his matter of 
 business as if she be any insensible instrument use in business . 
 " really ? then you see , Lady Dedlock , " he return , " you be not to 
 be trust . you have put the case in a perfectly plain way , and 
 accord to the literal fact ; and that be the case , you be not 
 to be trust . " 
 " perhaps you may remember that I express some anxiety on this 
 same point when we speak at night at Chesney Wold ? " 
 " yes , " say Mr. Tulkinghorn , coolly get up and stand on the 
 hearth . " yes . I recollect , Lady Dedlock , that you certainly 
 refer to the girl , but that be before we come to our 
 arrangement , and both the letter and the spirit of our arrangement 
 altogether preclude any action on your part found upon my 
 discovery . there can be no doubt about that . as to spar the 
 girl , of what importance or value be she ? Spare ! Lady Dedlock , 
 here be a family name compromise . one might have suppose that 
 the course be straight on - over everything , neither to the right 
 nor to the left , regardless of all consideration in the way , 
 spar nothing , tread everything under foot . " 
 she have be look at the table . she lift up her eye and look 
 at he . there be a stern expression on her face and a part of she 
 low lip be compress under her tooth . " this woman understand 
 I , " Mr. Tulkinghorn think as she let her glance fall again . 
 " she can not be spar . why should she spare other ? " 
 for a little while they be silent . Lady Dedlock have eat no 
 dinner , but have twice or thrice pour out water with a steady hand 
 and drunk it . she rise from table , take a lounging - chair , and 
 recline in it , shade her face . there be nothing in her manner 
 to express weakness or excite compassion . it be thoughtful , 
 gloomy , concentrated . " this woman , " think Mr. Tulkinghorn , 
 stand on the hearth , again a dark object close up her view , 
 " be a study . " 
 he study she at his leisure , not speak for a time . she too 
 study something at her leisure . she be not the first to speak , 
 appear indeed so unlikely to be so , though he stand there until 
 midnight , that even he be drive upon break silence . 
 " Lady Dedlock , the most disagreeable part of this business 
 interview remain , but it be business . our agreement be break . a 
 lady of your sense and strength of character will be prepare for 
 my now declare it void and take my own course . " 
 " I be quite prepared . " 
 Mr. Tulkinghorn incline his head . " that be all I have to trouble 
 you with , Lady Dedlock . " 
 she stop he as he be move out of the room by ask , " this be 
 the notice I be to receive ? I wish not to misapprehend you . " 
 " not exactly the notice you be to receive , Lady Dedlock , because 
 the contemplated notice suppose the agreement to have be 
 observe . but virtually the same , virtually the same . the 
 difference be merely in a lawyer 's mind . " 
 " you intend to give I no other notice ? " 
 " you be right . no . " 
 " do you contemplate undeceive Sir Leicester to - night ? " 
 " a home question ! " say Mr. Tulkinghorn with a slight smile and 
 cautiously shake his head at the shaded face . " no , not to- 
 night . " 
 " to - morrow ? " 
 " all thing consider , I have well decline answer that 
 question , Lady Dedlock . if I be to say I do not   know when , 
 exactly , you would not believe I , and it would answer no purpose . 
 it may be to - morrow . I would rather say no more . you be 
 prepared , and I hold out no expectation which circumstance might 
 fail to justify . I wish you good evening . " 
 she remove her hand , turn her pale face towards he as he walk 
 silently to the door , and stop he once again as he be about to 
 open it . 
 " do you intend to remain in the house any time ? I hear you be 
 write in the library . be you go to return there ? " 
 " only for my hat . I be go home . " 
 she bow her eye rather than her head , the movement be so slight 
 and curious , and he withdraw . clear of the room he look at his 
 watch but be inclined to doubt it by a minute or thereabout . 
 there be a splendid clock upon the staircase , famous , as splendid 
 clock not often be , for its accuracy . " and what do you say , " Mr. 
 Tulkinghorn inquire , refer to it . " what do you say ? " 
 if it say now , " do not   go home ! " what a famous clock , hereafter , 
 if it say to - night of all the night that it have count off , to 
 this old man of all the young and old man who have ever stand 
 before it , " do not   go home ! " with its sharp clear bell it strike 
 three quarter after seven and tick on again . " why , you be bad 
 than I think you , " say Mr. Tulkinghorn , mutter reproof to his 
 watch . " two minute wrong ? at this rate you will not   last my time . " 
 what a watch to return good for evil if it tick in answer , " do not 
 go home ! " 
 he pass out into the street and walk on , with his hand behind 
 he , under the shadow of the lofty house , many of whose mystery , 
 difficulty , mortgage , delicate affair of all kind , be 
 treasure up within his old black satin waistcoat . he be in the 
 confidence of the very brick and mortar . the high chimney - stack 
 telegraph family secret to he . yet there be not a voice in a 
 mile of they to whisper , " do not   go home ! " 
 through the stir and motion of the commoner street ; through the 
 roar and jar of many vehicle , many foot , many voice ; with the 
 blaze shop - light light he on , the west wind blow he on , 
 and the crowd press he on , he be pitilessly urge upon his way , 
 and nothing meet he murmur , " do not   go home ! " arrive at last 
 in his dull room to light his candle , and look round and up , and 
 see the roman pointing from the ceiling , there be no new 
 significance in the Roman 's hand to - night or in the flutter of the 
 attendant group to give he the late warning , " do not   come here ! " 
 it be a moonlight night , but the moon , be past the full , be only 
 now rise over the great wilderness of London . the star be 
 shin as they shine above the turret - lead at Chesney Wold . this 
 woman , as he have of late be so accustomed to call she , look out 
 upon they . her soul be turbulent within she ; she be sick at heart 
 and restless . the large room be too cramped and close . she 
 can not endure their restraint and will walk alone in a neighbouring 
 garden . 
 too capricious and imperious in all she do to be the cause of 
 much surprise in those about she as to anything she do , this 
 woman , loosely muffle , go out into the moonlight . Mercury 
 attend with the key . have open the garden - gate , he deliver 
 the key into his Lady 's hand at her request and be bid to go 
 back . she will walk there some time to ease her ache head . she 
 may be an hour , she may be more . she need no further escort . the 
 gate shut upon its spring with a clash , and he leave she pass 
 on into the dark shade of some tree . 
 a fine night , and a bright large moon , and multitude of star . 
 Mr. Tulkinghorn , in repair to his cellar and in opening and 
 shut those resounding door , have to cross a little prison - like 
 yard . he look up casually , think what a fine night , what a 
 bright large moon , what multitude of star ! a quiet night , too . 
 a very quiet night . when the moon shin very brilliantly , a 
 solitude and stillness seem to proceed from she that influence even 
 crowded place full of life . not only be it a still night on dusty 
 high road and on hill - summit , whence a wide expanse of country 
 may be see in repose , quieter and quieter as it spread away into 
 a fringe of tree against the sky with the grey ghost of a bloom 
 upon they ; not only be it a still night in garden and in wood , 
 and on the river where the water - meadow be fresh and green , and 
 the stream sparkle on among pleasant island , murmur weir , and 
 whispering rush ; not only do the stillness attend it as it 
 flow where house cluster thick , where many bridge be reflect 
 in it , where wharf and shipping make it black and awful , where it 
 wind from these disfigurement through marsh whose grim beacon 
 stand like skeleton wash ashore , where it expand through the 
 bold region of rise ground , rich in cornfield wind - mill and 
 steeple , and where it mingle with the ever - heave sea ; not only 
 be it a still night on the deep , and on the shore where the watcher 
 stand to see the ship with her spread wing cross the path of 
 light that appear to be present to only he ; but even on this 
 stranger 's wilderness of London there be some rest . its steeple 
 and tower and its one great dome grow more ethereal ; its smoky 
 house - top lose their grossness in the pale effulgence ; the noise 
 that arise from the street be few and be soften , and the 
 footstep on the pavement pass more tranquilly away . in these 
 field of Mr. Tulkinghorn 's inhabiting , where the shepherd play on 
 Chancery pipe that have no stop , and keep their sheep in the fold 
 by hook and by crook until they have shorn they exceed close , 
 every noise be merge , this moonlight night , into a distant ringing 
 hum , as if the city be a vast glass , vibrate . 
 what be that ? who fire a gun or pistol ? where be it ? 
 the few foot - passenger start , stop , and stare about they . some 
 window and door be open , and people come out to look . it be 
 a loud report and echo and rattle heavily . it shake one house , 
 or so a man say who be pass . it have arouse all the dog in 
 the neighbourhood , who bark vehemently . terrified cat scamper 
 across the road . while the dog be yet bark and howl - there 
 be one dog howl like a demon - the church - clock , as if they be 
 startle too , begin to strike . the hum from the street , likewise , 
 seem to swell into a shout . but it be soon over . before the last 
 clock begin to strike ten , there be a lull . when it have cease , 
 the fine night , the bright large moon , and multitude of star , be 
 leave at peace again . 
 have Mr. Tulkinghorn be disturb ? his window be dark and 
 quiet , and his door be shut . it must be something unusual indeed 
 to bring he out of his shell . nothing be hear of he , nothing be 
 see of he . what power of cannon might it take to shake that 
 rusty old man out of his immovable composure ? 
 for many year the persistent Roman have be point , with no 
 particular meaning , from that ceiling . it be not likely that he 
 have any new meaning in he to - night . once point , always 
 pointing - like any Roman , or even Briton , with a single idea . 
 there he be , no doubt , in his impossible attitude , point , 
 unavailingly , all night long . moonlight , darkness , dawn , sunrise , 
 day . there he be still , eagerly pointing , and no one mind he . 
 but a little after the coming of the day come people to clean the 
 room . and either the Roman have some new meaning in he , not 
 express before , or the foremost of they go wild , for look up 
 at his outstretched hand and look down at what be below it , that 
 person shriek and fly . the other , look in as the first one 
 look , shriek and fly too , and there be an alarm in the street . 
 what do it mean ? no light be admit into the darken chamber , 
 and people unaccustomed to it enter , and treading softly but 
 heavily , carry a weight into the bedroom and lie it down . there be 
 whispering and wonder all day , strict search of every corner , 
 careful tracing of step , and careful noting of the disposition of 
 every article of furniture . all eye look up at the Roman , and all 
 voice murmur , " if he could only tell what he see ! " 
 he be point at a table with a bottle   nearly full of wine   and a 
 glass upon it and two candle that be blow out suddenly soon 
 after be light . he be point at an empty chair and at a 
 stain upon the ground before it that might be almost cover with a 
 hand . these object lie directly within his range . an excited 
 imagination might suppose that there be something in they so 
 terrific as to drive the rest of the composition , not only the 
 attendant big - legged boy , but the cloud and flower and pillar 
 too - in short , the very body and soul of Allegory , and all the 
 brain it have - stark mad . it happen surely that every one who 
 come into the darken room and look at these thing look up at 
 the Roman and that he be invest in all eye with mystery and awe , 
 as if he be a paralysed dumb witness . 
 so it shall happen surely , through many year to come , that ghostly 
 story shall be tell of the stain upon the floor , so easy to be 
 cover , so hard to be get out , and that the Roman , point from 
 the ceiling shall point , so long as dust and damp and spider spare 
 he , with far great significance than he ever have in Mr. 
 Tulkinghorn 's time , and with a deadly meaning . for Mr. 
 Tulkinghorn 's time be over for evermore , and the Roman point at 
 the murderous hand uplifted against his life , and point 
 helplessly at he , from night to morning , lie face downward on 
 the floor , shoot through the heart . 
 CHAPTER XLIX 
 Dutiful Friendship 
 a great annual occasion have come round in the establishment of Mr. 
 Matthew Bagnet , otherwise Lignum Vitae , ex - artilleryman and present 
 bassoon - player . an occasion of feasting and festival . the 
 celebration of a birthday in the family . 
 it be not Mr. Bagnet 's birthday . Mr. Bagnet merely distinguish 
 that epoch in the musical instrument business by kiss the 
 child with an extra smack before breakfast , smoke an 
 additional pipe after dinner , and wonder towards evening what 
 his poor old mother be think about it - a subject of infinite 
 speculation , and render so by his mother have depart this 
 life twenty year . some man rarely revert to their father , but 
 seem , in the bank - book of their remembrance , to have transfer 
 all the stock of filial affection into their mother 's name . 
 Mr. Bagnet be one of these . perhaps his exalted appreciation 
 of the merit of the old girl cause he usually to make the 
 noun - substantive " goodness " of the feminine gender . 
 it be not the birthday of one of the three child . those 
 occasion be keep with some mark of distinction , but they rarely 
 overleap the bound of happy return and a pudding . on young 
 Woolwich 's last birthday , Mr. Bagnet certainly do , after observe 
 on his growth and general advancement , proceed , in a moment of 
 profound reflection on the change work by time , to examine he 
 in the catechism , accomplish with extreme accuracy the question 
 number one and two , " what be your name ? " and " who give you that 
 name ? " but there fail in the exact precision of his memory and 
 substituting for number three the question " and how do you like 
 that name ? " which he propound with a sense of its importance , in 
 itself so edify and improve as to give it quite an orthodox 
 air . this , however , be a speciality on that particular birthday , 
 and not a general solemnity . 
 it be the old girl 's birthday , and that be the great holiday and 
 reddest - letter day in Mr. Bagnet 's calendar . the auspicious event 
 be always commemorate accord to certain form settle and 
 prescribe by Mr. Bagnet some year since . Mr. Bagnet , be 
 deeply convinced that to have a pair of fowl for dinner be to 
 attain the high pitch of imperial luxury , invariably go forth 
 himself very early in the morning of this day to buy a pair ; he be , 
 as invariably , take in by the vendor and instal in the 
 possession of the old inhabitant of any coop in Europe . 
 return with these triumph of toughness tie up in a clean blue 
 and white cotton handkerchief   essential to the arrangement , he 
 in a casual manner invite Mrs. Bagnet to declare at breakfast what 
 she would like for dinner . Mrs. Bagnet , by a coincidence never 
 know to fail , reply fowl , Mr. Bagnet instantly produce his 
 bundle from a place of concealment amidst general amazement and 
 rejoice . he far require that the old girl shall do nothing 
 all day long but sit in her very good gown and be serve by himself 
 and the young people . as he be not illustrious for his cookery , 
 this may be suppose to be a matter of state rather than enjoyment 
 on the old girl 's part , but she keep her state with all imaginable 
 cheerfulness . 
 on this present birthday , Mr. Bagnet have accomplish the usual 
 preliminary . he have buy two specimen of poultry , which , if 
 there be any truth in adage , be certainly not catch with chaff , 
 to be prepare for the spit ; he have amazed and rejoice the family 
 by their unlooke - for production ; he be himself direct the 
 roasting of the poultry ; and Mrs. Bagnet , with her wholesome brown 
 finger itch to prevent what she see go wrong , sit in she 
 gown of ceremony , an honour guest . 
 Quebec and Malta lie the cloth for dinner , while Woolwich , serve , 
 as beseem he , under his father , keep the fowl revolve . to 
 these young scullion Mrs. Bagnet occasionally impart a wink , or a 
 shake of the head , or a crooked face , as they make mistake . 
 " at half after one . " say Mr. Bagnet . " to the minute . they will be 
 do . " 
 Mrs. Bagnet , with anguish , behold one of they at a standstill 
 before the fire and beginning to burn . 
 " you shall have a dinner , old girl , " say Mr. Bagnet . " fit for a 
 queen . " 
 Mrs. Bagnet show her white tooth cheerfully , but to the perception 
 of her son , betray so much uneasiness of spirit that he be 
 impel by the dictate of affection to ask she , with his eye , 
 what be the matter , thus stand , with his eye wide open , more 
 oblivious of the fowl than before , and not afford the least 
 hope of a return to consciousness . fortunately his eld sister 
 perceive the cause of the agitation in Mrs. Bagnet 's breast and 
 with an admonitory poke recall he . the stop fowl go round 
 again , Mrs. Bagnet close her eye in the intensity of her relief . 
 " George will look we up , " say Mr. Bagnet . " at half after four . 
 to the moment . how many year , old girl . have George look we up . 
 this afternoon ? " 
 " ah , Lignum , Lignum , as many as make an old woman of a young one , I 
 begin to think . just about that , and no less , " return Mrs. 
 Bagnet , laugh and shake her head . 
 " old girl , " say Mr. Bagnet , " never mind . you would be as young as 
 ever you be . if you be not   young . which you be . as everybody 
 know . " 
 Quebec and Malta here exclaim , with clapping of hand , that Bluffy 
 be sure to bring mother something , and begin to speculate on what 
 it will be . 
 " do you know , Lignum , " say Mrs. Bagnet , cast a glance on the 
 table - cloth , and wink ' salt ! " at Malta with her right eye , and 
 shake the pepper away from Quebec with her head , " I begin to 
 think George be in the roving way again . 
 " George , " return Mr. Bagnet , " will never desert . and leave his 
 old comrade . in the lurch . do not   be afraid of it . " 
 " no , Lignum . no . I do not   say he will . I do not   think he will . 
 but if he could get over this money trouble of his , I believe he 
 would be off . " 
 Mr. Bagnet ask why . 
 " well , " return his wife , consider , " George seem to I to be 
 get not a little impatient and restless . I do not   say but what 
 he be as free as ever . of course he must be free or he would not   be 
 George , but he smart and seem put out . " 
 " he be extra - drill , " say Mr. Bagnet . " by a lawyer . who would 
 put the devil out . " 
 " there be something in that , " his wife assent ; " but so it be , 
 Lignum . " 
 further conversation be prevent , for the time , by the necessity 
 under which Mr. Bagnet find himself of direct the whole force 
 of his mind to the dinner , which be a little endanger by the dry 
 humour of the fowl in not yield any gravy , and also by the make 
 gravy acquire no flavour and turn out of a flaxen complexion . 
 with a similar perverseness , the potato crumble off fork in the 
 process of peel , upheave from their centre in every 
 direction , as if they be subject to earthquake . the leg of the 
 fowl , too , be long than could be desire , and extremely scaly . 
 overcome these disadvantage to the good of his ability , Mr. 
 Bagnet at last dish and they sit down at table , Mrs. Bagnet 
 occupy the guest 's place at his right hand . 
 it be well for the old girl that she have but one birthday in a 
 year , for two such indulgence in poultry might be injurious . 
 every kind of fine tendon and ligament that be in the nature of 
 poultry to possess be develop in these specimen in the singular 
 form of guitar - string . their limb appear to have strike root 
 into their breast and body , as aged tree strike root into the 
 earth . their leg be so hard as to encourage the idea that they 
 must have devote the great part of their long and arduous life 
 to pedestrian exercise and the walking of match . but Mr. 
 Bagnet , unconscious of these little defect , set his heart on Mrs. 
 Bagnet eat a most severe quantity of the delicacy before she ; 
 and as that good old girl would not cause he a moment 's 
 disappointment on any day , least of all on such a day , for any 
 consideration , she imperil her digestion fearfully . how young 
 Woolwich clean the drum - stick without be of ostrich descent , 
 his anxious mother be at a loss to understand . 
 the old girl have another trial to undergo after the conclusion of 
 the repast in sit in state to see the room clear , the hearth 
 sweep , and the dinner - service wash up and polish in the 
 backyard . the great delight and energy with which the two young 
 lady apply themselves to these duty , turn up their skirt in 
 imitation of their mother and skating in and out on little 
 scaffold of patten , inspire the high hope for the future , but 
 some anxiety for the present . the same cause lead to confusion of 
 tongue , a clattering of crockery , a rattling of tin mug , a 
 whisking of broom , and an expenditure of water , all in excess , 
 while the saturation of the young lady themselves be almost too 
 move a spectacle for Mrs. Bagnet to look upon with the calmness 
 proper to her position . at last the various cleansing process 
 be triumphantly complete ; Quebec and Malta appear in fresh 
 attire , smile and dry ; pipe , tobacco , and something to drink be 
 place upon the table ; and the old girl enjoy the first peace of 
 mind she ever know on the day of this delightful entertainment . 
 when Mr. Bagnet take his usual seat , the hand of the clock be 
 very near to half - past four ; as they mark it accurately , Mr. Bagnet 
 announce , " George ! military time . " 
 it be George , and he have hearty congratulation for the old girl 
  whom he kiss on the great occasion , and for the child , and 
 for Mr. Bagnet . " happy return to all ! " say Mr. George . 
 " but , George , old man ! " cry Mrs. Bagnet , look at he 
 curiously . " what be come to you ? " 
 " come to I ? " 
 " ah ! you be so white , George - for you - and look so shocked . now 
 do not   he , Lignum ? " 
 " George , " say Mr. Bagnet , " tell the old girl . what be the matter . " 
 " I do not   know I look white , " say the trooper , pass his hand 
 over his brow , " and I do not   know I look shocked , and I be sorry I 
 do . but the truth be , that boy who be take in at my place die 
 yesterday afternoon , and it have rather knock I over . " 
 " poor creetur ! " say Mrs. Bagnet with a mother 's pity . " be he 
 go ? dear , dear ! " 
 " I do not   mean to say anything about it , for it be not birthday 
 talk , but you have get it out of I , you see , before I sit down . I 
 should have rouse up in a minute , " say the trooper , make 
 himself speak more gaily , " but you be so quick , Mrs. Bagnet . " 
 " you be right . the old girl , " say Mr. Bagnet . " be as quick . as 
 powder . " 
 " and what be more , she be the subject of the day , and we will stick to 
 she , " cry Mr. George . " see here , I have bring a little brooch 
 along with I . it be a poor thing , you know , but it be a keepsake . 
 that be all the good it be , Mrs. Bagnet . " 
 Mr. George produce his present , which be greet with admire 
 leaping and clapping by the young family , and with a species of 
 reverential admiration by Mr. Bagnet . " old girl , " say Mr. Bagnet . 
 " tell he my opinion of it . " 
 " why , it be a wonder , George ! " Mrs. Bagnet exclaim . " it be the 
 beautifull thing that ever be see ! " 
 " good ! " say Mr. Bagnet . " my opinion . " 
 " it be so pretty , George , " cry Mrs. Bagnet , turn it on all 
 side and hold it out at arm 's length , " that it seem too choice 
 for I . " 
 " bad ! " say Mr. Bagnet . " not my opinion . " 
 " but whatever it be , a hundred thousand thank , old fellow , " say 
 Mrs. Bagnet , her eye sparkle with pleasure and her hand 
 stretch out to he ; " and though I have be a crossgrained 
 soldier 's wife to you sometimes , George , we be as strong friend , 
 I be sure , in reality , as ever can be . now you shall fasten it on 
 yourself , for good luck , if you will , George . " 
 the child close up to see it do , and Mr. Bagnet look over 
 young Woolwich 's head to see it do with an interest so maturely 
 wooden , yet pleasantly childish , that Mrs. Bagnet can not help 
 laugh in her airy way and say , " oh , Lignum , Lignum , what a 
 precious old chap you be ! " but the trooper fail to fasten the 
 brooch . his hand shake , he be nervous , and it fall off . " would 
 any one believe this ? " say he , catch it as it drop and look 
 round . " I be so out of sort that I bungle at an easy job like 
 this ! " 
 Mrs. Bagnet conclude that for such a case there be no remedy like 
 a pipe , and fasten the brooch herself in a twinkling , cause the 
 trooper to be induct into his usual snug place and the pipe to 
 be get into action . " if that do not   bring you round , George , " say 
 she , " just throw your eye across here at your present now and then , 
 and the two together must do it . " 
 " you ought to do it of yourself , " George answer ; " I know that very 
 well , Mrs. Bagnet . I will tell you how , one way and another , the 
 blue have get to be too many for I . here be this poor lad . 
 ' twa dull work to see he die as he do , and not be able to help 
 he . " 
 " what do you mean , George ? you do help he . you take he under 
 your roof . " 
 " I help he so far , but that be little . I mean , Mrs. Bagnet , 
 there he be , die without ever have be teach much more than 
 to know his right hand from his left . and he be too far go to 
 be help out of that . " 
 " ah , poor creetur ! " say Mrs. Bagnet . 
 " then , " say the trooper , not yet light his pipe , and pass 
 his heavy hand over his hair , " that bring up Gridley in a man 's 
 mind . his be a bad case too , in a different way . then the two 
 get mix up in a man 's mind with a flinty old rascal who have to do 
 with both . and to think of that rusty carbine , stock and barrel , 
 stand up on end in his corner , hard , indifferent , take 
 everything so evenly - it make flesh and blood tingle , I do assure 
 you . " 
 " my advice to you , " return Mrs. Bagnet , " be to light your pipe and 
 tingle that way . it be wholesomer and comfortabler , and well for 
 the health altogether . " 
 " you be right , " say the trooper , " and I will do it . " 
 so he do it , though still with an indignant gravity that 
 impress the young bagnet , and even cause Mr. Bagnet to defer 
 the ceremony of drink Mrs. Bagnet 's health , always give by 
 himself on these occasion in a speech of exemplary terseness . but 
 the young lady have compose what Mr. Bagnet be in the habit of 
 call " the mixtur , " and George 's pipe be now in a glow , Mr. 
 Bagnet consider it his duty to proceed to the toast of the 
 evening . he address the assemble company in the following 
 term . 
 " George . Woolwich . Quebec . Malta . this be her birthday . take a 
 day 's march . and you will not   find such another . here be towards 
 she ! " 
 the toast have be drunk with enthusiasm , Mrs. Bagnet return 
 thank in a neat address of correspond brevity . this model 
 composition be limit to the three word " and wish your ! " 
 which the old girl follow up with a nod at everybody in succession 
 and a well - regulate swig of the mixture . this she again follow 
 up , on the present occasion , by the wholly unexpected exclamation , 
 " here be a man ! " 
 here be a man , much to the astonishment of the little company , 
 look in at the parlour - door . he be a sharp - eyed man - a quick 
 keen man - and he take in everybody 's look at he , all at once , 
 individually and collectively , in a manner that stamp he a 
 remarkable man . 
 " George , " say the man , nodding , " how do you find yourself ? " 
 " why , it be Bucket ! " cry Mr. George . 
 " yes , " say the man , come in and close the door . " I be go 
 down the street here when I happen to stop and look in at the 
 musical instrument in the shop - window - a friend of mine be in want 
 of a second - hand wiolinceller of a good tone - and I see a party 
 enjoy themselves , and I think it be you in the corner ; I 
 think I could not   be mistake . how go the world with you , 
 George , at the present moment ? pretty smooth ? and with you , 
 ma'am ? and with you , governor ? and Lord , " say Mr. Bucket , 
 open his arm , " here 's child too ! you may do anything with 
 I if you only show I child . give we a kiss , my pet . no 
 occasion to inquire who your father and mother be . never see such 
 a likeness in my life ! " 
 Mr. Bucket , not unwelcome , have sit himself down next to Mr. George 
 and take Quebec and Malta on his knee . " you pretty dear , " say 
 Mr. Bucket , " give we another kiss ; it be the only thing I be greedy 
 in . Lord bless you , how healthy you look ! and what may be the 
 age of these two , ma'am ? I should put them down at the figure of 
 about eight and ten . " 
 " you be very near , sir , " say Mrs. Bagnet . 
 " I generally be near , " return Mr. Bucket , " be so fond of 
 child . a friend of mine have have nineteen of them , ma'am , all by 
 one mother , and she be still as fresh and rosy as the morning . not 
 so much so as yourself , but , upon my soul , she come near you ! and 
 what do you call these , my darling ? " pursue Mr. Bucket , pinch 
 Malta 's cheek . " these be peach , these be . bless your heart ! 
 and what do you think about father ? do you think father could 
 recommend a second - hand wiolinceller of a good tone for Mr. 
 Bucket 's friend , my dear ? my name 's Bucket . ai not   that a funny 
 name ? " 
 these blandishment have entirely win the family heart . Mrs. 
 Bagnet forget the day to the extent of fill a pipe and a glass 
 for Mr. Bucket and wait upon he hospitably . she would be glad 
 to receive so pleasant a character under any circumstance , but she 
 tell he that as a friend of George 's she be particularly glad to 
 see he this evening , for George have not be in his usual spirit . 
 " not in his usual spirit ? " exclaim Mr. Bucket . " why , I never 
 hear of such a thing ! what be the matter , George ? you do not 
 intend to tell I you have   be out of spirit . what should you be 
 out of spirit for ? you have not   get anything on your mind , you 
 know . " 
 " nothing particular , " return the trooper . 
 " I should think not , " rejoin Mr. Bucket . " what could you have on 
 your mind , you know ! and have these pet get anything on their 
 mind , eh ? not they , but they will be upon the mind of some of the 
 young fellow , some of these day , and make them precious low- 
 spirited . I be not   much of a prophet , but I can tell you that , 
 ma'am . " 
 Mrs. Bagnet , quite charm , hop Mr. Bucket have a family of his 
 own . 
 " there , ma'am ! " say Mr. Bucket . " would you believe it ? no , I 
 have not . my wife and a lodger constitute my family . Mrs. Bucket 
 be as fond of child as myself and as wishful to have them , but 
 no . so it be . worldly good be divide unequally , and man must 
 not repine . what a very nice backyard , ma'am ! any way out of that 
 yard , now ? " 
 there be no way out of that yard . 
 " be not   there really ? " say Mr. Bucket . " I should have think 
 there might have be . well , I do not   know as I ever see a backyard 
 that take my fancy more . would you allow I to look at it ? thank 
 you . no , I see there be no way out . but what a very good- 
 proportion yard it be ! " 
 have cast his sharp eye all about it , Mr. Bucket return to his 
 chair next his friend Mr. George and pat Mr. George affectionately 
 on the shoulder . 
 " how be your spirit now , George ? " 
 " all right now , " return the trooper . 
 " that be your sort ! " say Mr. Bucket . " why should you ever have 
 be otherwise ? a man of your fine figure and constitution have no 
 right to be out of spirit . that be not   a chest to be out of 
 spirit , be it , ma'am ? and you have not   get anything on your mind , 
 you know , George ; what could you have on your mind ! " 
 somewhat harp on this phrase , consider the extent and variety 
 of his conversational power , Mr. Bucket twice or thrice repeat it 
 to the pipe he light , and with a listening face that be 
 particularly his own . but the sun of his sociality soon recover 
 from this brief eclipse and shin again . 
 " and this be brother , be it , my dear ? " say Mr. Bucket , refer 
 to Quebec and Malta for information on the subject of young 
 Woolwich . " and a nice brother he be - half - brother I mean to say . 
 for he be too old to be your boy , ma'am . " 
 " I can certify at all event that he be not anybody else 's , " 
 return Mrs. Bagnet , laugh . 
 " well , you do surprise I ! yet he be like you , there be no denying . 
 Lord , he be wonderfully like you ! but about what you may call the 
 brow , you know , THERE his father come out ! " Mr. Bucket compare 
 the face with one eye shut up , while Mr. Bagnet smoke in stolid 
 satisfaction . 
 this be an opportunity for Mrs. Bagnet to inform he that the boy 
 be George 's godson . 
 " George 's godson , be he ? " rejoin Mr. Bucket with extreme 
 cordiality . " I must shake hand over again with George 's godson . 
 Godfather and godson do credit to one another . and what do you 
 intend to make of he , ma'am ? do he show any turn for any 
 musical instrument ? " 
 Mr. Bagnet suddenly interpose , " play the fife . beautiful . " 
 " would you believe it , governor , " say Mr. Bucket , strike by the 
 coincidence , " that when I be a boy I play the fife myself ? not 
 in a scientific way , as I expect he do , but by ear . Lord bless 
 you ! ' British Grenadiers ' - there be a tune to warm an Englishman 
 up ! could you give we ' British Grenadiers , ' my fine fellow ? " 
 nothing could be more acceptable to the little circle than this 
 call upon young Woolwich , who immediately fetch his fife and 
 perform the stir melody , during which performance Mr. Bucket , 
 much enliven , beat time and never fall to come in sharp with 
 the burden , " british Gra - a - anadeer ! " in short , he show so much 
 musical taste that Mr. Bagnet actually take his pipe from his lip 
 to express his conviction that he be a singer . Mr. Bucket receive 
 the harmonious impeachment so modestly , confess how that he do 
 once chaunt a little , for the expression of the feeling of his own 
 bosom , and with no presumptuous idea of entertain his friend , 
 that he be ask to sing . not to be behindhand in the sociality of 
 the evening , he comply and give they " believe I , if all those 
 endear young Charms . " this ballad , he inform Mrs. Bagnet , he 
 consider to have be his most powerful ally in move the heart 
 of Mrs. Bucket when a maiden , and induce she to approach the 
 altar - Mr. Bucket 's own word be " to come up to the scratch . " 
 this sparkle stranger be such a new and agreeable feature in the 
 evening that Mr. George , who testify no great emotion of 
 pleasure on his entrance , begin , in spite of himself , to be rather 
 proud of he . he be so friendly , be a man of so many resource , 
 and so easy to get on with , that it be something to have make he 
 know there . Mr. Bagnet become , after another pipe , so sensible 
 of the value of his acquaintance that he solicit the honour of his 
 company on the old girl 's next birthday . if anything can more 
 closely cement and consolidate the esteem which Mr. Bucket have 
 form for the family , it be the discovery of the nature of the 
 occasion . he drink to Mrs. Bagnet with a warmth approach to 
 rapture , engage himself for that day twelvemonth more than 
 thankfully , make a memorandum of the day in a large black pocket- 
 book with a girdle to it , and breathe a hope that Mrs. Bucket and 
 Mrs. Bagnet may before then become , in a manner , sister . as he 
 say himself , what be public life without private tie ? he be in 
 his humble way a public man , but it be not in that sphere that he 
 find happiness . no , it must be seek within the confine of 
 domestic bliss . 
 it be natural , under these circumstance , that he , in his turn , 
 should remember the friend to whom he be indebted for so promising 
 an acquaintance . and he do . he keep very close to he . 
 whatever the subject of the conversation , he keep a tender eye 
 upon he . he wait to walk home with he . he be interested in his 
 very boot and observe even they attentively as Mr. George sit 
 smoke cross - legged in the chimney - corner . 
 at length Mr. George rise to depart . at the same moment Mr. 
 Bucket , with the secret sympathy of friendship , also rise . he 
 dot upon the child to the last and remember the commission he 
 have undertake for an absent friend . 
 " respect that second - hand wiolinceller , governor - could you 
 recommend I such a thing ? " 
 " score , " say Mr. Bagnet . 
 " I be oblige to you , " return Mr. Bucket , squeeze his hand . 
 " you be a friend in need . a good tone , mind you ! my friend be a 
 regular dab at it . ecod , he saw away at Mozart and Handel and the 
 rest of the big - wig like a thorough workman . and you need not , " 
 say Mr. Bucket in a considerate and private voice , " you need not 
 commit yourself to too low a figure , governor . I do not   want to pay 
 too large a price for my friend , but I want you to have your proper 
 percentage and be remunerate for your loss of time . that be but 
 fair . every man must live , and ought to it . " 
 Mr. Bagnet shake his head at the old girl to the effect that they 
 have find a jewel of price . 
 " suppose I be to give you a look in , say , at half arter ten to- 
 morrow morning . perhaps you could name the figure of a few 
 wiolinceller of a good tone ? " say Mr. Bucket . 
 nothing easy . Mr. and Mrs. Bagnet both engage to have the 
 requisite information ready and even hint to each other at the 
 practicability of have a small stock collect there for 
 approval . 
 " thank you , " say Mr. Bucket , " thank you . good night , ma'am . good 
 night , governor . good night , darling . I be much oblige to you 
 for one of the pleasant evening I ever spend in my life . " 
 they , on the contrary , be much oblige to he for the pleasure he 
 have give they in his company ; and so they part with many 
 expression of goodwill on both side . " now George , old boy , " say 
 Mr. Bucket , take his arm at the shop - door , " come along ! " as they 
 go down the little street and the Bagnets pause for a minute 
 look after they , Mrs. Bagnet remark to the worthy Lignum that 
 Mr. Bucket " almost cling to George like , and seem to be really 
 fond of he . " 
 the neighbouring street be narrow and ill - paved , it be a little 
 inconvenient to walk there two abreast and arm in arm . Mr. George 
 therefore soon propose to walk singly . but Mr. Bucket , who can not 
 make up his mind to relinquish his friendly hold , reply , " wait 
 half a minute , George . I should wish to speak to you first . " 
 immediately afterwards , he twist he into a public - house and into 
 a parlour , where he confront he and clap his own back against 
 the door . 
 " now , George , " say Mr. Bucket , " duty be duty , and friendship be 
 friendship . I never want the two to clash if I can help it . I 
 have endeavour to make thing pleasant to - night , and I put it to 
 you whether I have do it or not . you must consider yourself in 
 custody , George . " 
 " Custody ? what for ? " return the trooper , thunderstruck . 
 " now , George , " say Mr. Bucket , urge a sensible view of the case 
 upon he with his fat forefinger , " duty , as you know very well , be 
 one thing , and conversation be another . it be my duty to inform you 
 that any observation you may make will be liable to be use 
 against you . therefore , George , be careful what you say . you 
 do not   happen to have hear of a murder ? " 
 " murder ! " 
 " now , George , " say Mr. Bucket , keep his forefinger in an 
 impressive state of action , " bear in mind what I have   say to you . I 
 ask you nothing . you have   be in low spirit this afternoon . I 
 say , you do not   happen to have hear of a murder ? " 
 " no . where have there be a murder ? " 
 " now , George , " say Mr. Bucket , " do not   you go and commit yourself . 
 I be a - go to tell you what I want you for . there have be a 
 murder in Lincoln 's Inn Fields - gentleman of the name of 
 Tulkinghorn . he be shoot last night . I want you for that . " 
 the trooper sink upon a seat behind he , and great drop start out 
 upon his forehead , and a deadly pallor overspread his face . 
 " Bucket ! it be not possible that Mr. Tulkinghorn have be kill 
 and that you suspect I ? " 
 " George , " return Mr. Bucket , keep his forefinger go , " it be 
 certainly possible , because it be the case . this deed be do last 
 night at ten o'clock . now , you know where you be last night at 
 ten o'clock , and you will be able to prove it , no doubt . " 
 " last night ! last night ? " repeat the trooper thoughtfully . then 
 it flash upon he . " why , great heaven , I be there last night ! " 
 " so I have understand , George , " return Mr. Bucket with great 
 deliberation . " so I have understand . likewise you have   be very 
 often there . you have   be see hang about the place , and you have 
 be hear more than once in a wrangle with he , and it be possible 
  - I do not   say it be certainly so , mind you , but it be possible - that 
 he may have be hear to call you a threatening , murdering , 
 dangerous fellow . " 
 the trooper gasp as if he would admit it all if he could speak . 
 " now , George , " continue Mr. Bucket , put his hat upon the table 
 with an air of business rather in the upholstery way than 
 otherwise , " my wish be , as it have be all the evening , to make 
 thing pleasant . I tell you plainly there be a reward out , of a 
 hundred guineas , offer by Sir Leicester Dedlock , Baronet . you 
 and I have always be pleasant together ; but I have get a duty to 
 discharge ; and if that hundred guineas be to be make , it may as 
 well be make by I as any other man . on all of which account , I 
 should hope it be clear to you that I must have you , and that I be 
 damned if I do not   have you . be I to call in any assistance , or be 
 the trick do ? " 
 Mr. George have recover himself and stand up like a soldier . 
 " come , " he say ; " I be ready . " 
 " George , " continue Mr. Bucket , " wait a bit ! " with his upholsterer 
 manner , as if the trooper be a window to be fit up , he take 
 from his pocket a pair of handcuff . " this be a serious charge , 
 George , and such be my duty . " 
 the trooper flush angrily and hesitate a moment , but hold out 
 his two hand , clasp together , and say , " there ! put they on ! " 
 Mr. Bucket adjust they in a moment . " how do you find they ? be 
 they comfortable ? if not , say so , for I wish to make thing as 
 pleasant as be consistent with my duty , and I have   get another pair 
 in my pocket . " this remark he offer like a most respectable 
 tradesman anxious to execute an order neatly and to the perfect 
 satisfaction of his customer . " they will do as they be ? very well ! 
 now , you see , George " - he take a cloak from a corner and begin 
 adjust it about the trooper 's neck - " I be mindful of your 
 feeling when I come out , and bring this on purpose . there ! 
 who be the wiser ? " 
 " only I , " return the trooper , " but as I know it , do I one more 
 good turn and pull my hat over my eye . " 
 " really , though ! do you mean it ? ai not   it a pity ? it look so . " 
 " I can not   look chance man in the face with these thing on , " Mr. 
 George hurriedly reply . " do , for God 's sake , pull my hat 
 forward . " 
 so strongly entreat , Mr. Bucket complie , put his own hat on , 
 and conduct his prize into the street , the trooper marching on as 
 steadily as usual , though with his head less erect , and Mr. Bucket 
 steer he with his elbow over the crossing and up the turning . 
 CHAPTER L 
 Esther 's Narrative 
 it happen that when I come home from Deal I find a note from 
 Caddy Jellyby   as we always continue to call she , inform I 
 that her health , which have be for some time very delicate , be 
 bad and that she would be more glad than she could tell I if I 
 would go to see she . it be a note of a few line , write from 
 the couch on which she lie and enclose to I in another from her 
 husband , in which he second her entreaty with much solicitude . 
 Caddy be now the mother , and I the godmother , of such a poor 
 little baby - such a tiny old - faced mite , with a countenance that 
 seem to be scarcely anything but cap - border , and a little lean , 
 long - finger hand , always clench under its chin . it would lie 
 in this attitude all day , with its bright speck of eye open , 
 wonder   as I use to imagine   how it come to be so small and 
 weak . whenever it be move it cry , but at all other time it 
 be so patient that the sole desire of its life appear to be to 
 lie quiet and think . it have curious little dark vein in its face 
 and curious little dark mark under its eye like faint 
 remembrance of poor Caddy 's inky day , and altogether , to those 
 who be not use to it , it be quite a piteous little sight . 
 but it be enough for Caddy that SHE be use to it . the project 
 with which she beguile her illness , for little Esther 's education , 
 and little Esther 's marriage , and even for her own old age as the 
 grandmother of little Esther 's little esther , be so prettily 
 expressive of devotion to this pride of her life that I should be 
 tempt to recall some of they but for the timely remembrance that 
 I be get on irregularly as it be . 
 to return to the letter . Caddy have a superstition about I which 
 have be strengthen in her mind ever since that night long ago 
 when she have lain asleep with her head in my lap . she almost - I 
 think I must say quite - believe that I do she good whenever I be 
 near she . now although this be such a fancy of the affectionate 
 girl 's that I be almost ashamed to mention it , still it might have 
 all the force of a fact when she be really ill . therefore I set 
 off to Caddy , with my guardian 's consent , post - haste ; and she and 
 Prince make so much of I that there never be anything like it . 
 next day I go again to sit with she , and next day I go again . 
 it be a very easy journey , for I have only to rise a little early 
 in the morning , and keep my account , and attend to housekeeping 
 matter before leave home . 
 but when I have make these three visit , my guardian say to I , on 
 my return at night , " now , little woman , little woman , this will 
 never do . constant dropping will wear away a stone , and constant 
 coaching will wear out a Dame Durden . we will go to London for a 
 while and take possession of our old lodging . " 
 " not for I , dear guardian , " say I , " for I never feel tired , " 
 which be strictly true . I be only too happy to be in such 
 request . 
 " for I then , " return my guardian , " or for Ada , or for both of 
 we . it be somebody 's birthday to - morrow , I think . " 
 " truly I think it be , " say I , kiss my darling , who would be 
 twenty - one to - morrow . 
 " well , " observe my guardian , half pleasantly , half seriously , 
 " that be a great occasion and will give my fair cousin some 
 necessary business to transact in assertion of her independence , 
 and will make London a more convenient place for all of we . so to 
 London we will go . that be settle , there be another thing - how 
 have you leave Caddy ? " 
 " very unwell , guardian . I fear it will be some time before she 
 regain her health and strength . " 
 " what do you call some time , now ? " ask my guardian thoughtfully . 
 " some week , I be afraid . " 
 " ah ! " he begin to walk about the room with his hand in his 
 pocket , show that he have be think as much . " now , what do 
 you say about her doctor ? be he a good doctor , my love ? " 
 I feel oblige to confess that I know nothing to the contrary but 
 that Prince and I have agree only that evening that we would like 
 his opinion to be confirm by some one . 
 " well , you know , " return my guardian quickly , " there be 
 Woodcourt . " 
 I have not mean that , and be rather take by surprise . for a 
 moment all that I have have in my mind in connexion with Mr. 
 Woodcourt seem to come back and confuse I . 
 " you do not   object to he , little woman ? " 
 " object to he , guardian ? oh no ! " 
 " and you do not   think the patient would object to he ? " 
 so far from that , I have no doubt of she be prepared to have a 
 great reliance on he and to like he very much . I say that he 
 be no stranger to she personally , for she have see he often in 
 his kind attendance on Miss Flite . 
 " very good , " say my guardian . " he have be here to - day , my dear , 
 and I will see he about it to - morrow . " 
 I feel in this short conversation - though I do not know how , for 
 she be quiet , and we interchange no look - that my dear girl well 
 remember how merrily she have clasp I round the waist when no 
 other hand than Caddy 's have bring I the little parting token . 
 this cause I to feel that I ought to tell she , and Caddy too , 
 that I be go to be the mistress of Bleak House and that if I 
 avoid that disclosure any long I might become less worthy in my 
 own eye of its master 's love . therefore , when we go upstairs 
 and have wait listen until the clock strike twelve in order 
 that only I might be the first to wish my darling all good wish 
 on her birthday and to take she to my heart , I set before she , just 
 as I have set before myself , the goodness and honour of her cousin 
 John and the happy life that be in store for for I . if ever my 
 darling be fonder of I at one time than another in all our 
 intercourse , she be surely fondest of I that night . and I be so 
 rejoice to know it and so comfort by the sense of have do 
 right in cast this last idle reservation away that I be ten 
 time happy than I have be before . I have scarcely think it a 
 reservation a few hour ago , but now that it be go I feel as if 
 I understand its nature well . 
 next day we go to London . we find our old lodging vacant , and 
 in half an hour be quietly establish there , as if we have never 
 go away . Mr. Woodcourt din with we to celebrate my darling 's 
 birthday , and we be as pleasant as we could be with the great 
 blank among we that Richard 's absence naturally make on such an 
 occasion . after that day I be for some week - eight or nine as I 
 remember - very much with Caddy , and thus it fall out that I see 
 less of Ada at this time than any other since we have first come 
 together , except the time of my own illness . she often come to 
 Caddy 's , but our function there be to amuse and cheer she , and we 
 do not talk in our usual confidential manner . whenever I go 
 home at night we be together , but Caddy 's rest be break by 
 pain , and I often remain to nurse she . 
 with her husband and her poor little mite of a baby to love and 
 their home to strive for , what a good creature Caddy be ! so self- 
 denying , so uncomplaining , so anxious to get well on their account , 
 so afraid of give trouble , and so thoughtful of the unassisted 
 labour of her husband and the comfort of old Mr. Turveydrop ; I 
 have never know the good of she until now . and it seem so 
 curious that her pale face and helpless figure should be lie 
 there day after day where dancing be the business of life , where 
 the kit and the apprentice begin early every morning in the ball- 
 room , and where the untidy little boy waltz by himself in the 
 kitchen all the afternoon . 
 at Caddy 's request I take the supreme direction of her apartment , 
 trim it up , and push she , couch and all , into a light and 
 more airy and more cheerful corner than she have yet occupy ; then , 
 every day , when we be in our neat array , I use to lay my 
 small small namesake in her arm and sit down to chat or work or 
 read to she . it be at one of the first of these quiet time that 
 I tell Caddy about Bleak House . 
 we have other visitor besides Ada . first of all we have Prince , who 
 in his hurried interval of teaching use to come softly in and sit 
 softly down , with a face of love anxiety for Caddy and the very 
 little child . whatever Caddy 's condition really be , she never 
 fail to declare to Prince that she be all but well - which I , 
 heaven forgive I , never fail to confirm . this would put Prince 
 in such good spirit that he would sometimes take the kit from his 
 pocket and play a chord or two to astonish the baby , which I never 
 know it to do in the least degree , for my tiny namesake never 
 notice it at all . 
 then there be Mrs. Jellyby . she would come occasionally , with her 
 usual distraught manner , and sit calmly look mile beyond her 
 grandchild as if her attention be absorb by a young 
 Borrioboolan on its native shore . as bright - eyed as ever , as 
 serene , and as untidy , she would say , " well , Caddy , child , and how 
 do you do to - day ? " and then would sit amiably smile and take 
 no notice of the reply or would sweetly glide off into a 
 calculation of the number of letter she have lately receive and 
 answer or of the coffee - bear power of Borrioboola - Gha . this 
 she would always do with a serene contempt for our limited sphere 
 of action , not to be disguise . 
 then there be old Mr. Turveydrop , who be from morning to night 
 and from night to morning the subject of innumerable precaution . 
 if the baby cry , it be nearly stifle lest the noise should make 
 he uncomfortable . if the fire want stir in the night , it 
 be surreptitiously do lest his rest should be break . if Caddy 
 require any little comfort that the house contain , she first 
 carefully discuss whether he be likely to require it too . in 
 return for this consideration he would come into the room once a 
 day , all but bless it - show a condescension , and a patronage , 
 and a grace of manner in dispense the light of his high- 
 shoulder presence from which I might have suppose he   if I have 
 not know well   to have be the benefactor of Caddy 's life . 
 " my Caroline , " he would say , make the near approach that he 
 could to bend over she . " tell I that you be well to - day . " 
 " oh , much well , thank you , Mr. Turveydrop , " Caddy would reply . 
 " delighted ! enchant ! and our dear Miss Summerson . she be not 
 quite prostrate by fatigue ? " here he would crease up his eyelid 
 and kiss his finger to I , though I be happy to say he have cease 
 to be particular in his attention since I have be so altered . 
 " not at all , " I would assure he . 
 " Charming ! we must take care of our dear Caroline , Miss Summerson . 
 we must spare nothing that will restore she . we must nourish she . 
 my dear Caroline " - he would turn to his daughter - in - law with 
 infinite generosity and protection - " want for nothing , my love . 
 Frame a wish and gratify it , my daughter . everything this house 
 contain , everything my room contain , be at your service , my dear . 
 do not , " he would sometimes add in a burst of deportment , " even 
 allow my simple requirement to be consider if they should at any 
 time interfere with your own , my Caroline . your necessity be 
 great than mine . " 
 he have establish such a long prescriptive right to this 
 deportment   his son 's inheritance from his mother   that I several 
 time know both Caddy and her husband to be melt to tear by 
 these affectionate self - sacrifice . 
 " Nay , my dear , " he would remonstrate ; and when I see Caddy 's thin 
 arm about his fat neck as he say it , I would be melt too , though 
 not by the same process . " Nay , nay ! I have promise never to 
 leave ye . be dutiful and affectionate towards I , and I ask no 
 other return . now , bless ye ! I be go to the Park . " 
 he would take the air there presently and get an appetite for his 
 hotel dinner . I hope I do old Mr. Turveydrop no wrong , but I never 
 see any well trait in he than these I faithfully record , except 
 that he certainly conceive a liking for Peepy and would take the 
 child out walk with great pomp , always on those occasion 
 send he home before he go to dinner himself , and occasionally 
 with a halfpenny in his pocket . but even this disinterestedness 
 be attend with no inconsiderable cost , to my knowledge , for 
 before Peepy be sufficiently decorate to walk hand in hand with 
 the professor of deportment , he have to be newly dress , at the 
 expense of Caddy and her husband , from top to toe . 
 last of our visitor , there be Mr. Jellyby . really when he use 
 to come in of an evening , and ask Caddy in his meek voice how she 
 be , and then sit down with his head against the wall , and make no 
 attempt to say anything more , I like he very much . if he find 
 I bustle about do any little thing , he sometimes half take 
 his coat off , as if with an intention of help by a great 
 exertion ; but he never get any far . his sole occupation be to 
 sit with his head against the wall , look hard at the thoughtful 
 baby ; and I could not quite divest my mind of a fancy that they 
 understand one another . 
 I have not count Mr. Woodcourt among our visitor because he be 
 now Caddy 's regular attendant . she soon begin to improve under his 
 care , but he be so gentle , so skilful , so unwearye in the pain 
 he take that it be not to be wonder at , I be sure . I see a good 
 deal of Mr. Woodcourt during this time , though not so much as might 
 be suppose , for know Caddy to be safe in his hand , I often 
 slip home at about the hour when he be expect . we 
 frequently meet , notwithstanding . I be quite reconcile to myself 
 now , but I still feel glad to think that he be sorry for I , and 
 he still be sorry for I I believe . he help Mr. Badger in his 
 professional engagement , which be numerous , and have as yet no 
 settle project for the future . 
 it be when Caddy begin to recover that I begin to notice a change 
 in my dear girl . I can not say how it first present itself to I , 
 because I observe it in many slight particular which be nothing 
 in themselves and only become something when they be piece 
 together . but I make it out , by put they together , that Ada 
 be not so frankly cheerful with I as she use to be . her 
 tenderness for I be as love and true as ever ; I do not for a 
 moment doubt that ; but there be a quiet sorrow about she which she 
 do not confide to I , and in which I trace some hide regret . 
 now , I could not understand this , and I be so anxious for the 
 happiness of my own pet that it cause I some uneasiness and set 
 I think often . at length , feel sure that Ada suppress 
 this something from I lest it should make I unhappy too , it come 
 into my head that she be a little grieve - for I - by what I have 
 tell she about Bleak House . 
 how I persuade myself that this be likely , I do not   know . I have 
 no idea that there be any selfish reference in my do so . I be 
 not grieve for myself : I be quite contented and quite happy . 
 still , that Ada might be think - for I , though I have abandon 
 all such thought - of what once be , but be now all change , 
 seem so easy to believe that I believe it . 
 what could I do to reassure my darling   I consider then   and show 
 she that I have no such feeling ? well ! I could only be as brisk 
 and busy as possible , and that I have try to be all along . 
 however , as Caddy 's illness have certainly interfere , more or less , 
 with my home duty - though I have always be there in the morning 
 to make my guardian 's breakfast , and he have a hundred time laugh 
 and say there must be two little woman , for his little woman be 
 never miss - I resolve to be doubly diligent and gay . so I go 
 about the house hum all the tune I know , and I sit work and 
 work in a desperate manner , and I talk and talk , morning , 
 noon , and night . 
 and still there be the same shade between I and my darling . 
 " so , Dame Trot , " observe my guardian , shut up his book one 
 night when we be all three together , ' so Woodcourt have restore 
 Caddy Jellyby to the full enjoyment of life again ? " 
 " yes , " I say ; " and to be repay by such gratitude as hers be to be 
 make rich , guardian . " 
 " I wish it be , " he return , " with all my heart . " 
 so do I too , for that matter . I say so . 
 " Aye ! we would make he as rich as a Jew if we know how . would we 
 not , little woman ? " 
 I laugh as I work and reply that I be not sure about that , 
 for it might spoil he , and he might not be so useful , and there 
 might be many who could ill spare he . as Miss Flite , and Caddy 
 herself , and many other . 
 " true , " say my guardian . " I have forget that . but we would 
 agree to make he rich enough to live , I suppose ? rich enough to 
 work with tolerable peace of mind ? rich enough to have his own 
 happy home and his own household god - and household goddess , too , 
 perhaps ? " 
 that be quite another thing , I say . we must all agree in that . 
 " to be sure , " say my guardian . " all of we . I have a great regard 
 for Woodcourt , a high esteem for he ; and I have be sound he 
 delicately about his plan . it be difficult to offer aid to an 
 independent man with that just kind of pride which he possess . 
 and yet I would be glad to do it if I might or if I know how . he 
 seem half inclined for another voyage . but that appear like 
 cast such a man away . " 
 " it might open a new world to he , " say I. 
 " so it might , little woman , " my guardian assent . " I doubt if 
 he expect much of the old world . do you know I have fancy that 
 he sometimes feel some particular disappointment or misfortune 
 encounter in it . you never hear of anything of that sort ? " 
 I shake my head . 
 " Humph , " say my guardian . " I be mistaken , I dare say . " as there 
 be a little pause here , which I think , for my dear girl 's 
 satisfaction , have well be fill up , I hum an air as I work 
 which be a favourite with my guardian . 
 " and do you think Mr. Woodcourt will make another voyage ? " I ask 
 he when I have hum it quietly all through . 
 " I do not   quite know what to think , my dear , but I should say it be 
 likely at present that he will give a long trip to another 
 country . " 
 " I be sure he will take the good wish of all our heart with he 
 wherever he go , " say I ; " and though they be not rich , he will 
 never be the poor for they , guardian , at least . " 
 " never , little woman , " he reply . 
 I be sit in my usual place , which be now beside my guardian 's 
 chair . that have not be my usual place before the letter , but it 
 be now . I look up to Ada , who be sit opposite , and I see , 
 as she look at I , that her eye be fill with tear and that 
 tear be fall down her face . I feel that I have only to be 
 placid and merry once for all to undeceive my dear and set she 
 love heart at rest . I really be so , and I have nothing to do but 
 to be myself . 
 so I make my sweet girl lean upon my shoulder - how little thinking 
 what be heavy on her mind ! - and I say she be not quite well , and 
 put my arm about she , and take she upstairs . when we be in our 
 own room , and when she might perhaps have tell I what I be so 
 unprepared to hear , I give she no encouragement to confide in I ; I 
 never think she stand in need of it . 
 " oh , my dear good Esther , " say Ada , " if I could only make up my 
 mind to speak to you and my cousin John when you be together ! " 
 " why , my love ! " I remonstrate . " Ada , why should you not speak to 
 we ! " 
 Ada only drop her head and press I close to her heart . 
 " you surely do not   forget , my beauty , " say I , smile , " what quiet , 
 old - fashioned people we be and how I have settle down to be the 
 discreetest of dame ? you do not   forget how happily and peacefully 
 my life be all mark out for I , and by whom ? I be certain that 
 you do not   forget by what a noble character , Ada . that can never 
 be . " 
 " no , never , Esther . " 
 " why then , my dear , " say I , " there can be nothing amiss - and why 
 should you not speak to we ? " 
 " nothing amiss , Esther ? " return Ada . " oh , when I think of all 
 these year , and of his fatherly care and kindness , and of the old 
 relation among we , and of you , what shall I do , what shall I do ! " 
 I look at my child in some wonder , but I think it well not to 
 answer otherwise than by cheer she , and so I turn off into 
 many little recollection of our life together and prevent she 
 from say more . when she lie down to sleep , and not before , I 
 return to my guardian to say good night , and then I come back to 
 Ada and sit near she for a little while . 
 she be asleep , and I think as I look at she that she be a 
 little change . I have think so more than once lately . I could 
 not decide , even look at she while she be unconscious , how she 
 be change , but something in the familiar beauty of her face 
 look different to I . my guardian 's old hope of she and Richard 
 arise sorrowfully in my mind , and I say to myself , " she have be 
 anxious about he , " and I wonder how that love would end . 
 when I have come home from Caddy 's while she be ill , I have often 
 find Ada at work , and she have always put her work away , and I have 
 never know what it be . some of it now lie in a drawer near she , 
 which be not quite closed . I do not open the drawer , but I still 
 rather wonder what the work could he , for it be evidently 
 nothing for herself . 
 and I notice as I kiss my dear that she lie with one hand under 
 her pillow so that it be hide . 
 how much less amiable I must have be than they think I , how 
 much less amiable than I think myself , to be so preoccupied with 
 my own cheerfulness and contentment as to think that it only rest 
 with I to put my dear girl right and set her mind at peace ! 
 but I lay down , self - deceive , in that belief . and I awake in it 
 next day to find that there be still the same shade between I and 
 my darling . 
 CHAPTER LI 
 Enlightened 
 when Mr. Woodcourt arrive in London , he go , that very same day , 
 to Mr. Vholes 's in Symond 's Inn . for he never once , from the 
 moment when I entreat he to be a friend to Richard , neglect or 
 forgot his promise . he have tell I that he accept the charge as 
 a sacred trust , and he be ever true to it in that spirit . 
 he find Mr. Vholes in his office and inform Mr. Vholes of his 
 agreement with Richard that he should call there to learn his 
 address . 
 " just so , sir , " say Mr. Vholes . " Mr. C. 's address be not a 
 hundred mile from here , sir , Mr. C. 's address be not a hundred 
 mile from here . would you take a seat , sir ? " 
 Mr. Woodcourt thank Mr. Vholes , but he have no business with he 
 beyond what he have mention . 
 " just so , sir . I believe , sir , " say Mr. Vholes , still quietly 
 insist on the seat by not give the address , " that you have 
 influence with Mr. C. indeed I be aware that you have . " 
 " I be not aware of it myself , " return Mr. Woodcourt ; " but I 
 suppose you know well . " 
 " Sir , " rejoin Mr. Vholes , self - contain as usual , voice and all , 
 " it be a part of my professional duty to know well . it be a part 
 of my professional duty to study and to understand a gentleman who 
 confide his interest to I . in my professional duty I shall not 
 be want , sir , if I know it . I may , with the good intention , be 
 want in it without know it ; but not if I know it , sir . " 
 Mr. Woodcourt again mention the address . 
 " give I leave , sir , " say Mr. Vholes . " bear with I for a moment . 
 Sir , Mr. C. be play for a considerable stake , and can not play 
 without - need I say what ? " 
 " money , I presume ? " 
 " Sir , " say Mr. Vholes , " to be honest with you   honesty be my 
 golden rule , whether I gain by it or lose , and I find that I 
 generally lose , money be the word . now , sir , upon the chance of 
 Mr. C. 's game I express to you no opinion , no opinion . it might be 
 highly impolitic in Mr. C. , after play so long and so high , to 
 leave off ; it might be the reverse ; I say nothing . no , sir , " say 
 Mr. Vholes , bring his hand flat down upon his desk in a positive 
 manner , " nothing . " 
 " you seem to forget , " return Mr. Woodcourt , " that I ask you to 
 say nothing and have no interest in anything you say . " 
 " pardon I , sir ! " retort Mr. Vholes . " you do yourself an 
 injustice . no , sir ! pardon I ! you shall not - shall not in my 
 office , if I know it - do yourself an injustice . you be interested 
 in anything , and in everything , that relate to your friend . I 
 know human nature much well , sir , than to admit for an instant 
 that a gentleman of your appearance be not interested in whatever 
 concern his friend . " 
 " well , " reply Mr. Woodcourt , " that may be . I be particularly 
 interested in his address . " 
 " the number , sir , " say Mr. Vholes parenthetically , " I believe I 
 have already mention . if Mr. C. be to continue to play for this 
 considerable stake , sir , he must have fund . understand I ! there 
 be fund in hand at present . I ask for nothing ; there be fund 
 in hand . but for the onward play , more fund must be provide , 
 unless Mr. C. be to throw away what he have already venture , which 
 be wholly and solely a point for his consideration . this , sir , I 
 take the opportunity of state openly to you as the friend of Mr. 
 C. without fund I shall always be happy to appear and act for Mr. 
 C. to the extent of all such cost as be safe to be allow out of 
 the estate , not beyond that . I could not go beyond that , sir , 
 without wrong some one . I must either wrong my three dear girl 
 or my venerable father , who be entirely dependent on I , in the 
 Vale of Taunton ; or some one . whereas , sir , my resolution be   call 
 it weakness or folly if you please   to wrong no one . " 
 Mr. Woodcourt rather sternly rejoin that he be glad to hear it . 
 " I wish , sir , " say Mr. Vholes , " to leave a good name behind I . 
 therefore I take every opportunity of openly state to a friend of 
 Mr. C. how Mr. C. be situate . as to myself , sir , the labourer be 
 worthy of his hire . if I undertake to put my shoulder to the 
 wheel , I do it , and I earn what I get . I be here for that purpose . 
 my name be paint on the door outside , with that object . " 
 " and Mr. Carstone 's address , Mr. Vholes ? " 
 " Sir , " return Mr. Vholes , " as I believe I have already mention , 
 it be next door . on the second story you will find Mr. C. 's 
 apartment . Mr. C. desire to be near his professional adviser , 
 and I be far from object , for I court inquiry . " 
 upon this Mr. Woodcourt wish Mr. Vholes good day and go in 
 search of Richard , the change in whose appearance he begin to 
 understand now but too well . 
 he find he in a dull room , fadedly furnish , much as I have find 
 he in his barrack - room but a little while before , except that he 
 be not write but be sit with a book before he , from which 
 his eye and thought be far astray . as the door chance to be 
 stand open , Mr. Woodcourt be in his presence for some moment 
 without be perceive , and he tell I that he never could forget 
 the haggardness of his face and the dejection of his manner before 
 he be arouse from his dream . 
 " Woodcourt , my dear fellow , " cry Richard , start up with 
 extend hand , " you come upon my vision like a ghost . " 
 " a friendly one , " he reply , " and only wait , as they say ghost 
 do , to be address . how do the mortal world go ? " they be 
 seat now , near together . 
 " badly enough , and slowly enough , " say Richard , ' speak at least 
 for my part of it . " 
 " what part be that ? " 
 " the Chancery part . " 
 " I never hear , " return Mr. Woodcourt , shake his head , " of its 
 go well yet . " 
 " nor I , " say Richard moodily . " who ever do ? " he brighten 
 again in a moment and say with his natural openness , " Woodcourt , I 
 should be sorry to be misunderstood by you , even if I gain by it 
 in your estimation . you must know that I have do no good this 
 long time . I have not intend to do much harm , but I seem to have 
 be capable of nothing else . it may be that I should have do 
 well by keep out of the net into which my destiny have work 
 I , but I think not , though I dare say you will soon hear , if you 
 have not already hear , a very different opinion . to make short of 
 a long story , I be afraid I have want an object ; but I have an 
 object now - or it have I - and it be too late to discuss it . take 
 I as I be , and make the good of I . " 
 " a bargain , " say Mr. Woodcourt . " do as much by I in return . " 
 " oh ! you , " return Richard , " you can pursue your art for its own 
 sake , and can put your hand upon the plough and never turn , and can 
 strike a purpose out of anything . you and I be very different 
 creature . " 
 he speak regretfully and lapse for a moment into his weary 
 condition . 
 " well , well ! " he cry , shake it off . " everything have an end . 
 we shall see ! so you will take I as I be , and make the good of 
 I ? " 
 " Aye ! indeed I will . " they shake hand upon it laughingly , but in 
 deep earnestness . I can answer for one of they with my heart of 
 heart . 
 " you come as a godsend , " say Richard , " for I have see nobody here 
 yet but vhole . Woodcourt , there be one subject I should like to 
 mention , for once and for all , in the beginning of our treaty . you 
 can hardly make the good of I if I do not . you know , I dare say , 
 that I have an attachment to my cousin Ada ? " 
 Mr. Woodcourt reply that I have hint as much to he . " now 
 pray , " return Richard , " do not   think I a heap of selfishness . 
 do not   suppose that I be split my head and half break my 
 heart over this miserable Chancery suit for my own right and 
 interest alone . Ada 's be bind up with mine ; they can not   be 
 separate ; vhole work for both of we . do think of that ! " 
 he be so very solicitous on this head that Mr. Woodcourt give he 
 the strong assurance that he do he no injustice . 
 " you see , " say Richard , with something pathetic in his manner of 
 linger on the point , though it be off - hand and unstudie , " to 
 an upright fellow like you , bring a friendly face like your 
 here , I can not bear the thought of appear selfish and mean . I 
 want to see Ada right , Woodcourt , as well as myself ; I want to do 
 my utmost to right she , as well as myself ; I venture what I can 
 scrape together to extricate she , as well as myself . do , I beseech 
 you , think of that ! " 
 afterwards , when Mr. Woodcourt come to reflect on what have pass , 
 he be so very much impressed by the strength of Richard 's anxiety 
 on this point that in tell I generally of his first visit to 
 Symond 's inn he particularly dwelt upon it . it revive a fear I 
 have have before that my dear girl 's little property would be 
 absorb by Mr. Vholes and that Richard 's justification to himself 
 would be sincerely this . it be just as I begin to take care of 
 Caddy that the interview take place , and I now return to the time 
 when Caddy have recover and the shade be still between I and my 
 darling . 
 I propose to Ada that morning that we should go and see Richard . 
 it a little surprise I to find that she hesitate and be not so 
 radiantly willing as I have expect . 
 " my dear , " say I , " you have not have any difference with Richard 
 since I have be so much away ? " 
 " no , Esther . " 
 " not hear of he , perhaps ? " say I. 
 " yes , I have hear of he , " say Ada . 
 such tear in her eye , and such love in her face . I could not 
 make my darling out . should I go to Richard 's by myself ? I say . 
 no , Ada think I have well not go by myself . would she go with 
 I ? yes , Ada think she have well go with I . should we go now ? 
 yes , let we go now . well , I could not understand my darling , with 
 the tear in her eye and the love in her face ! 
 we be soon equip and go out . it be a sombre day , and drop 
 of chill rain fall at interval . it be one of those colourless 
 day when everything look heavy and harsh . the house frown at 
 we , the dust rise at we , the smoke swoop at we , nothing make any 
 compromise about itself or wear a softened aspect . I fancy my 
 beautiful girl quite out of place in the rugged street , and I 
 think there be more funeral pass along the dismal pavement 
 than I have ever see before . 
 we have first to find out Symond 's Inn . we be go to inquire in 
 a shop when Ada say she think it be near Chancery Lane . " we 
 be not likely to be far out , my love , if we go in that direction , " 
 say I. so to Chancery Lane we go , and there , sure enough , we 
 see it write up . Symond 's Inn . 
 we have next to find out the number . " or Mr. Vholes 's office will 
 do , " I recollect , " for Mr. Vholes 's office be next door . " upon 
 which Ada say , perhaps that be Mr. Vholes 's office in the corner 
 there . and it really be . 
 then come the question , which of the two next door ? I be go 
 for the one , and my darling be go for the other ; and my darling 
 be right again . so up we go to the second story , when we come 
 to Richard 's name in great white letter on a hearse - like panel . 
 I should have knock , but Ada say perhaps we have well turn the 
 handle and go in . thus we come to Richard , pore over a table 
 cover with dusty bundle of paper which seem to I like dusty 
 mirror reflect his own mind . wherever I look I see the 
 ominous word that run in it repeat . Jarndyce and Jarndyce . 
 he receive we very affectionately , and we sit down . " if you have 
 come a little early , " he say , " you would have find Woodcourt 
 here . there never be such a good fellow as Woodcourt be . he 
 find time to look in between - while , when anybody else with half 
 his work to do would be think about not be able to come . and 
 he be so cheery , so fresh , so sensible , so earnest , so - everything 
 that I be not , that the place brighten whenever he come , and 
 darken whenever he go again . " 
 " God bless he , " I think , " for his truth to I ! " 
 " he be not so sanguine , Ada , " continue Richard , cast his 
 deject look over the bundle of paper , " as Vholes and I be 
 usually , but he be only an outsider and be not in the mystery . 
 we have go into they , and he have not . he can not   be expect to 
 know much of such a labyrinth . " 
 as his look wander over the paper again and he pass his two 
 hand over his head , I notice how sunken and how large his eye 
 appear , how dry his lip be , and how his finger - nail be all 
 bite away . 
 " be this a healthy place to live in , Richard , do you think ? " say I. 
 " why , my dear Minerva , " answer Richard with his old gay laugh , 
 " it be neither a rural nor a cheerful place ; and when the sun 
 shin here , you may lay a pretty heavy wager that it be shin 
 brightly in an open spot . but it be well enough for the time . it be 
 near the office and near Vholes . " 
 " perhaps , " I hint , " a change from both - " 
 " might do I good ? " say Richard , force a laugh as he finish 
 the sentence . " I should not   wonder ! but it can only come in one 
 way now - in one of two way , I should rather say . either the suit 
 must be end , Esther , or the suitor . but it shall be the suit , my 
 dear girl , the suit , my dear girl ! " 
 these latter word be address to Ada , who be sit near 
 to he . her face be turn away from I and towards he , I 
 could not see it . 
 " we be do very well , " pursue Richard . " vhole will tell you 
 so . we be really spin along . ask Vholes . we be give they 
 no rest . vhole know all their winding and turning , and we be 
 upon they everywhere . we have astonish they already . we shall 
 rouse up that nest of sleeper , mark my word ! " 
 his hopefulness have long be more painful to I than his 
 despondency ; it be so unlike hopefulness , have something so fierce 
 in its determination to be it , be so hungry and eager , and yet so 
 conscious of be force and unsustainable that it have long 
 touch I to the heart . but the commentary upon it now indelibly 
 write in his handsome face make it far more distressing than it 
 use to be . I say indelibly , for I feel persuade that if the 
 fatal cause could have be for ever terminate , accord to his 
 bright vision , in that same hour , the trace of the premature 
 anxiety , self - reproach , and disappointment it have occasion he 
 would have remain upon his feature to the hour of his death . 
 " the sight of our dear little woman , " say Richard , Ada still 
 remain silent and quiet , " be so natural to I , and her 
 compassionate face be so like the face of old day - " 
 ah ! no , no . I smile and shake my head . 
 " - so exactly like the face of old day , " say Richard in his 
 cordial voice , and take my hand with the brotherly regard which 
 nothing ever change , " that I can not   make pretence with she . I 
 fluctuate a little ; that be the truth . sometimes I hope , my dear , 
 and sometimes I - do not   quite despair , but nearly . I get , " say 
 Richard , relinquish my hand gently and walk across the room , 
 ' so tired ! " 
 he take a few turn up and down and sink upon the sofa . " I get , " 
 he repeat gloomily , ' so tired . it be such weary , weary work ! " 
 he be lean on his arm say these word in a meditative voice 
 and look at the ground when my darling rise , put off her bonnet , 
 kneel down beside he with her golden hair fall like sunlight 
 on his head , clasp she two arm round his neck , and turn she 
 face to I . oh , what a love and devoted face I see ! 
 " Esther , dear , " she say very quietly , " I be not go home again . " 
 a light shone in upon I all at once . 
 " never any more . I be go to stay with my dear husband . we have 
 be marry above two month . go home without I , my own Esther ; 
 I shall never go home any more ! " with those word my darling draw 
 his head down on her breast and hold it there . and if ever in my 
 life I see a love that nothing but death could change , I see it 
 then before I . 
 " speak to Esther , my dearest , " say Richard , break the silence 
 presently . " tell she how it be . " 
 I meet she before she could come to I and fold she in my arm . 
 we neither of we speak , but with her cheek against my own I want 
 to hear nothing . " my pet , " say I. " my love . my poor , poor 
 girl ! " I pity she so much . I be very fond of Richard , but the 
 impulse that I have upon I be to pity she so much . 
 " Esther , will you forgive I ? will my cousin John forgive I ? " 
 " my dear , " say I , " to doubt it for a moment be to do he a great 
 wrong . and as to I ! " why , as to I , what have I to forgive ! 
 I dry my sobbing darling 's eye and sit beside she on the sofa , 
 and Richard sit on my other side ; and while I be remind of that 
 so different night when they have first take I into their 
 confidence and have go on in their own wild happy way , they tell 
 I between they how it be . 
 " all I have be Richard 's , " Ada say ; " and Richard would not take 
 it , Esther , and what could I do but be his wife when I love he 
 dearly ! " 
 " and you be so fully and so kindly occupy , excellent Dame 
 Durden , " say Richard , " that how could we speak to you at such a 
 time ! and besides , it be not a long - consider step . we go out 
 one morning and be marry . " 
 " and when it be do , Esther , " say my darling , " I be always 
 think how to tell you and what to do for the good . and 
 sometimes I think you ought to know it directly , and sometimes I 
 think you ought not to know it and keep it from my cousin John ; 
 and I could not tell what to do , and I fret very much . " 
 how selfish I must have be not to have think of this before ! I 
 do not   know what I say now . I be so sorry , and yet I be so fond 
 of they and so glad that they be fond of I ; I pity they so 
 much , and yet I feel a kind of pride in their love one another . 
 I never have experience such painful and pleasurable emotion at one 
 time , and in my own heart I do not know which predominate . but I 
 be not there to darken their way ; I do not do that . 
 when I be less foolish and more compose , my darling take she 
 wedding - ring from her bosom , and kiss it , and put it on . then I 
 remember last night and tell Richard that ever since her marriage 
 she have wear it at night when there be no one to see . then Ada 
 blushingly ask I how do I know that , my dear . then I tell Ada 
 how I have see her hand conceal under her pillow and have little 
 thought why , my dear . then they begin tell I how it be all 
 over again , and I begin to be sorry and glad again , and foolish 
 again , and to hide my plain old face as much as I could lest I 
 should put they out of heart . 
 thus the time go on until it become necessary for I to think of 
 return . when that time arrive it be the bad of all , for 
 then my darling completely break down . she clung round my neck , 
 call I by every dear name she could think of and say what 
 should she do without I ! nor be Richard much well ; and as for 
 I , I should have be the bad of the three if I have not severely 
 say to myself , " now Esther , if you do , I will never speak to you 
 again ! " 
 " why , I declare , " say I , " I never see such a wife . I do not   think 
 she love her husband at all . here , Richard , take my child , for 
 goodness ' sake . " but I hold she tight all the while , and could 
 have weep over she I do not   know how long . 
 " I give this dear young couple notice , " say I , " that I be only 
 go away to come back to - morrow and that I shall be always come 
 backwards and forwards until Symond 's Inn be tired of the sight of 
 I . so I shall not say good - bye , Richard . for what would be the 
 use of that , you know , when I be come back so soon ! " 
 I have give my darling to he now , and I mean to go ; but I 
 linger for one more look of the precious face which it seem to 
 rive my heart to turn from . 
 so I say   in a merry , bustling manner   that unless they give I 
 some encouragement to come back , I be not sure that I could take 
 that liberty , upon which my dear girl look up , faintly smile 
 through her tear , and I fold her lovely face between my hand , 
 and give it one last kiss , and laugh , and run away . 
 and when I get downstairs , oh , how I cry ! it almost seem to I 
 that I have lose my Ada for ever . I be so lonely and so blank 
 without she , and it be so desolate to be go home with no hope 
 of see she there , that I could get no comfort for a little while 
 as I walk up and down in a dim corner sob and cry . 
 I come to myself by and by , after a little scolding , and take a 
 coach home . the poor boy whom I have find at St. Albans have 
 reappear a short time before and be lie at the point of death ; 
 indeed , be then dead , though I do not know it . my guardian have 
 go out to inquire about he and do not return to dinner . be 
 quite alone , I cry a little again , though on the whole I do not 
 think I behave so very , very ill . 
 it be only natural that I should not be quite accustomed to the 
 loss of my darling yet . three or four hour be not a long time 
 after year . but my mind dwelt so much upon the uncongenial scene 
 in which I have leave she , and I picture it as such an overshadow 
 stony - hearted one , and I so long to be near she and take some 
 sort of care of she , that I determine to go back in the evening 
 only to look up at her window . 
 it be foolish , I dare say , but it do not then seem at all so to 
 I , and it do not seem quite so even now . I take Charley into my 
 confidence , and we go out at dusk . it be dark when we come to 
 the new strange home of my dear girl , and there be a light behind 
 the yellow blind . we walk past cautiously three or four time , 
 look up , and narrowly miss encounter Mr. Vholes , who come 
 out of his office while we be there and turn his head to look 
 up too before go home . the sight of his lank black figure and 
 the lonesome air of that nook in the dark be favourable to the 
 state of my mind . I think of the youth and love and beauty of my 
 dear girl , shut up in such an ill - assorted refuge , almost as if it 
 be a cruel place . 
 it be very solitary and very dull , and I do not doubt that I 
 might safely steal upstairs . I leave Charley below and go up with 
 a light foot , not distress by any glare from the feeble oil 
 lantern on the way . I listen for a few moment , and in the 
 musty rotting silence of the house believe that I could hear the 
 murmur of their young voice . I put my lip to the hearse - like 
 panel of the door as a kiss for my dear and come quietly down 
 again , think that one of these day I would confess to the 
 visit . 
 and it really do I good , for though nobody but Charley and I know 
 anything about it , I somehow feel as if it have diminish the 
 separation between Ada and I and have bring we together again for 
 those moment . I go back , not quite accustomed yet to the 
 change , but all the well for that hover about my darling . 
 my guardian have come home and be stand thoughtfully by the dark 
 window . when I go in , his face clear and he come to his seat , 
 but he catch the light upon my face as I take mine . 
 " little woman , " say he , " you have be cry . " 
 " why , yes , guardian , " say I , " I be afraid I have be , a little . 
 Ada have be in such distress , and be so very sorry , guardian . " 
 I put my arm on the back of his chair , and I see in his glance that 
 my word and my look at her empty place have prepare he . 
 " be she married , my dear ? " 
 I tell he all about it and how her first entreaty have refer 
 to his forgiveness . 
 " she have no need of it , " say he . " Heaven bless she and her 
 husband ! " but just as my first impulse have be to pity she , so 
 be his . " poor girl , poor girl ! Poor Rick ! poor Ada ! " 
 neither of we speak after that , until he say with a sigh , " well , 
 well , my dear ! Bleak House be thin fast . " 
 " but its mistress remain , guardian . " though I be timid about 
 say it , I venture because of the sorrowful tone in which he have 
 speak . " she will do all she can to make it happy , " say I. 
 " she will succeed , my love ! " 
 the letter have make no difference between we except that the seat 
 by his side have come to be mine ; it make none now . he turn his 
 old bright fatherly look upon I , lay his hand on my hand in his 
 old way , and say again , " she will succeed , my dear . nevertheless , 
 Bleak House be thin fast , o little woman ! " 
 I be sorry presently that this be all we say about that . I be 
 rather disappointed . I fear I might not quite have be all I 
 have mean to be since the letter and the answer . 
 CHAPTER LII 
 Obstinacy 
 but one other day have intervene when , early in the morning as we 
 be go to breakfast , Mr. Woodcourt come in haste with the 
 astounding news that a terrible murder have be commit for which 
 Mr. George have be apprehend and be in custody . when he tell 
 we that a large reward be offer by Sir Leicester Dedlock for the 
 murderer 's apprehension , I do not in my first consternation 
 understand why ; but a few more word explain to I that the 
 murder person be Sir Leicester 's lawyer , and immediately my 
 mother 's dread of he rush into my remembrance . 
 this unforeseen and violent removal of one whom she have long 
 watch and distrust and who have long watch and distrust she , 
 one for whom she could have have few interval of kindness , always 
 dread in he a dangerous and secret enemy , appear so awful 
 that my first thought be of she . how appalling to hear of such 
 a death and be able to feel no pity ! how dreadful to remember , 
 perhaps , that she have sometimes even wish the old man away who 
 be so swiftly hurry out of life ! 
 such crowd reflection , increase the distress and fear I 
 always feel when the name be mention , make I so agitated that I 
 could scarcely hold my place at the table . I be quite unable to 
 follow the conversation until I have have a little time to recover . 
 but when I come to myself and see how shock my guardian be and 
 find that they be earnestly speak of the suspect man and 
 recall every favourable impression we have form of he out of 
 the good we have know of he , my interest and my fear be so 
 strongly arouse in his behalf that I be quite set up again . 
 " Guardian , you do not   think it possible that he be justly accuse ? " 
 " my dear , I can't think so . this man whom we have see so open- 
 hearted and compassionate , who with the might of a giant have the 
 gentleness of a child , who look as brave a fellow as ever live 
 and be so simple and quiet with it , this man justly accuse of such 
 a crime ? I can not   believe it . it be not that I do not   or I will not . I 
 can not ! " 
 " and I can not , " say Mr. Woodcourt . " still , whatever we believe or 
 know of he , we have well not forget that some appearance be 
 against he . he bear an animosity towards the deceased gentleman . 
 he have openly mention it in many place . he be say to have 
 express himself violently towards he , and he certainly do about 
 he , to my knowledge . he admit that he be alone on the scene of 
 the murder within a few minute of its commission . I sincerely 
 believe he to be as innocent of any participation in it as I be , 
 but these be all reason for suspicion fall upon he . " 
 " true , " say my guardian . and he add , turn to I , " it would 
 be do he a very bad service , my dear , to shut our eye to the 
 truth in any of these respect . " 
 I feel , of course , that we must admit , not only to ourselves but to 
 other , the full force of the circumstance against he . yet I 
 know withal   I could not help say   that their weight would not 
 induce we to desert he in his need . 
 " Heaven forbid ! " return my guardian . " we will stand by he , as 
 he himself stand by the two poor creature who be go . " he mean 
 Mr. Gridley and the boy , to both of whom Mr. George have give 
 shelter . 
 Mr. Woodcourt then tell we that the trooper 's man have be with he 
 before day , after wander about the street all night like a 
 distract creature . that one of the trooper 's first anxiety be 
 that we should not suppose he guilty . that he have charge his 
 messenger to represent his perfect innocence with every solemn 
 assurance be could send we . that Mr. Woodcourt have only quiet 
 the man by undertake to come to our house very early in the 
 morning with these representation . he add that he be now upon 
 his way to see the prisoner himself . 
 my guardian say directly he would go too . now , besides that I 
 like the retired soldier very much and that he like I , I have 
 that secret interest in what have happen which be only know to 
 my guardian . I feel as if it come close and near to I . it seem 
 to become personally important to myself that the truth should be 
 discover and that no innocent people should be suspect , for 
 suspicion , once run wild , might run wilder . 
 in a word , I feel as if it be my duty and obligation to go with 
 they . my guardian do not seek to dissuade I , and I go . 
 it be a large prison with many court and passage so like one 
 another and so uniformly pave that I seem to gain a new 
 comprehension , as I pass along , of the fondness that solitary 
 prisoner , shut up among the same star wall from year to year , 
 have have - as I have read - for a weed or a stray blade of grass . in 
 an arched room by himself , like a cellar upstairs , with wall so 
 glaringly white that they make the massive iron window - bar and 
 iron - bind door even more profoundly black than they be , we find 
 the trooper stand in a corner . he have be sit on a bench 
 there and have rise when he hear the lock and bolt turn . 
 when he see we , he come forward a step with his usual heavy tread , 
 and there stop and make a slight bow . but as I still advance , 
 put out my hand to he , he understand we in a moment . 
 " this be a load off my mind , I do assure you , miss and gentleman , " 
 say he , salute we with great heartiness and draw a long 
 breath . " and now I do not   so much care how it end . " 
 he scarcely seem to be the prisoner . what with his coolness and 
 his soldierly bear , he look far more like the prison guard . 
 " this be even a rougher place than my gallery to receive a lady 
 in , " say Mr. George , " but I know Miss Summerson will make the good 
 of it . " as he hand I to the bench on which he have be sit , 
 I sit down , which seem to give he great satisfaction . 
 " I thank you , miss , " say he . 
 " now , George , " observe my guardian , " as we require no new 
 assurance on your part , so I believe we need give you none on 
 ours . " 
 " not at all , sir . I thank you with all my heart . if I be not 
 innocent of this crime , I could not   look at you and keep my secret 
 to myself under the condescension of the present visit . I feel the 
 present visit very much . I be not one of the eloquent sort , but I 
 feel it , Miss Summerson and gentleman , deeply . " 
 he lay his hand for a moment on his broad chest and bent his head 
 to we . although he square himself again directly , he express a 
 great amount of natural emotion by these simple mean . 
 " first , " say my guardian , " can we do anything for your personal 
 comfort , George ? " 
 " for which , sir ? " he inquire , clear his throat . 
 " for your personal comfort . be there anything you want that would 
 lessen the hardship of this confinement ? " 
 " well , sir , " reply George , after a little cogitation , " I be 
 equally oblige to you , but tobacco be against the rule , I 
 can not   say that there be . " 
 " you will think of many little thing perhaps , by and by . 
 whenever you do , George , let we know . " 
 " thank you , sir . Howsoever , " observe Mr. George with one of his 
 sunburnt smile , " a man who have be knock about the world in a 
 vagabond kind of a way as long as I have get on well enough in a 
 place like the present , so far as that go . " 
 " next , as to your case , " observe my guardian . 
 " exactly so , sir , " return Mr. George , fold his arm upon his 
 breast with perfect self - possession and a little curiosity . 
 " how do it stand now ? " 
 " why , sir , it be under remand at present . Bucket give I to 
 understand that he will probably apply for a series of remand from 
 time to time until the case be more complete . how it be to be make 
 more complete I do not   myself see , but I dare say Bucket will manage 
 it somehow . " 
 " why , heaven save we , man , " exclaim my guardian , surprise into 
 his old oddity and vehemence , " you talk of yourself as if you be 
 somebody else ! " 
 " no offence , sir , " say Mr. George . " I be very sensible of your 
 kindness . but I do not   see how an innocent man be to make up his 
 mind to this kind of thing without knock his head against the 
 wall unless he take it in that point of view . 
 " that be true enough to a certain extent , " return my guardian , 
 soften . " but my good fellow , even an innocent man must take 
 ordinary precaution to defend himself . " 
 " certainly , sir . and I have do so . I have state to the 
 magistrate , ' gentleman , I be as innocent of this charge as 
 yourself ; what have be state against I in the way of fact be 
 perfectly true ; I know no more about it . ' I intend to continue 
 state that , sir . what more can I do ? it be the truth . " 
 " but the mere truth will not   do , " rejoin my guardian . 
 " will not   it indeed , sir ? rather a bad look - out for I ! " Mr. George 
 good - humouredly observe . 
 " you must have a lawyer , " pursue my guardian . " we must engage a 
 good one for you . " 
 " I ask your pardon , sir , " say Mr. George with a step backward . " I 
 be equally oblige . but I must decidedly beg to be excuse from 
 anything of that sort . " 
 " you will not   have a lawyer ? " 
 " no , sir . " Mr. George shake his head in the most emphatic manner . 
 " I thank you all the same , sir , but - no lawyer ! " 
 " why not ? " 
 " I do not   take kindly to the breed , " say Mr. George . " Gridley 
 do not . and - if you will excuse my saying so much - I should hardly 
 have think you do yourself , sir . " 
 " that be equity , " my guardian explain , a little at a loss ; " that be 
 equity , George . " 
 " be it , indeed , sir ? " return the trooper in his off - hand manner . 
 " I be not acquaint with those shade of name myself , but in a 
 general way I object to the breed . " 
 unfold his arm and change his position , he stand with one 
 massive hand upon the table and the other on his hip , as complete a 
 picture of a man who be not to be move from a fix purpose as 
 ever I see . it be in vain that we all three talk to he and 
 endeavour to persuade he ; he listen with that gentleness which 
 go so well with his bluff bearing , but be evidently no more 
 shake by our representation that his place of confinement be . 
 " pray think , once more , Mr. George , " say I. " have you no wish in 
 reference to your case ? " 
 " I certainly could wish it to be try , miss , " he return , " by 
 court - martial ; but that be out of the question , as I be well aware . 
 if you will be so good as to favour I with your attention for a 
 couple of minute , miss , not more , I will endeavour to explain myself 
 as clearly as I can . " 
 he look at we all three in turn , shake his head a little as if he 
 be adjust it in the stock and collar of a tight uniform , and 
 after a moment 's reflection go on . 
 " you see , miss , I have be handcuff and take into custody and 
 bring here . I be a marked and disgrace man , and here I be . my 
 shoot gallery be rummage , high and low , by Bucket ; such 
 property as I have - ' tis small - be turn this way and that till it 
 do not   know itself ; and   as aforesaid   here I be ! I do not 
 particular complain of that . though I be in these present quarter 
 through no immediately precede fault of mine , I can very well 
 understand that if I have not   go into the vagabond way in my youth , 
 this would not   have happen . it have happen . then come the 
 question how to meet it " 
 he rub his swarthy forehead for a moment with a good - humour 
 look and say apologetically , " I be such a short - wind talker that 
 I must think a bit . " have think a bit , he look up again and 
 resume . 
 " how to meet it . now , the unfortunate deceased be himself a 
 lawyer and have a pretty tight hold of I . I do not   wish to rake up 
 his ash , but he have , what I should call if he be live , a devil 
 of a tight hold of I . I do not   like his trade the well for that . 
 if I have keep clear of his trade , I should have keep outside this 
 place . but that be not what I mean . now , suppose I have kill he . 
 suppose I really have discharge into his body any one of those 
 pistol recently fire off that Bucket have find at my place , and 
 dear I , might have find there any day since it have be my place . 
 what should I have do as soon as I be hard and fast here ? got a 
 lawyer . " 
 he stop on hear some one at the lock and bolt and do not 
 resume until the door have be open and be shut again . for what 
 purpose open , I will mention presently . 
 " I should have get a lawyer , and he would have say   as I have 
 often read in the newspaper , ' my client say nothing , my client 
 reserve his defence ' : my client this , that , and t'other . well , 
 ' tis not the custom of that breed to go straight , accord to my 
 opinion , or to think that other man do . say I be innocent and I 
 get a lawyer . he would be as likely to believe I guilty as not ; 
 perhaps more . what would he do , whether or not ? Act as if I be - 
 shut my mouth up , tell I not to commit myself , keep circumstance 
 back , chop the evidence small , quibble , and get I off perhaps ! 
 but , Miss Summerson , do I care for get off in that way ; or 
 would I rather be hang in my own way - if you will excuse my 
 mention anything so disagreeable to a lady ? " 
 he have warm into his subject now , and be under no further 
 necessity to wait a bit . 
 " I would rather be hang in my own way . and I mean to be ! I 
 do not   intend to say , " look round upon we with his powerful arm 
 akimbo and his dark eyebrow raise , " that I be more partial to 
 be hang than another man . what I say be , I must come off 
 clear and full or not at all . therefore , when I hear state 
 against I what be true , I say it be true ; and when they tell I , 
 ' whatever you say will be use , ' I tell they I do not   mind that ; I 
 mean it to be use . if they can not   make I innocent out of the 
 whole truth , they be not likely to do it out of anything less , or 
 anything else . and if they be , it be worth nothing to I . " 
 take a pace or two over the stone floor , he come back to the 
 table and finish what he have to say . 
 " I thank you , miss and gentleman both , many time for your 
 attention , and many time more for your interest . that be the plain 
 state of the matter as it point itself out to a mere trooper with 
 a blunt broadsword kind of a mind . I have never do well in life 
 beyond my duty as a soldier , and if the bad come after all , I 
 shall reap pretty much as I have sow . when I get over the first 
 crash of be seize as a murderer - it do not   take a rover who have 
 knock about so much as myself so very long to recover from a 
 crash - I work my way round to what you find I now . as such I 
 shall remain . no relation will be disgrace by I or make unhappy 
 for I , and - and that be all I have   get to say . " 
 the door have be open to admit another soldier - look man of 
 less prepossess appearance at first sight and a weather - tan , 
 bright - eyed wholesome woman with a basket , who , from her entrance , 
 have be exceedingly attentive to all Mr. George have say . Mr. 
 George have receive they with a familiar nod and a friendly look , 
 but without any more particular greeting in the midst of his 
 address . he now shake they cordially by the hand and say , " Miss 
 Summerson and gentleman , this be an old comrade of mine , Matthew 
 Bagnet . and this be his wife , Mrs. Bagnet . " 
 Mr. Bagnet make we a stiff military bow , and Mrs. Bagnet drop we 
 a curtsy . 
 " real good friend of mine , they be , " sald Mr. George . " it be at 
 their house I be take . " 
 " with a second - hand wiolinceller , " Mr. Bagnet put in , twitch his 
 head angrily . " of a good tone . for a friend . that money be no 
 object to . " 
 " Mat , " say Mr. George , " you have hear pretty well all I have be 
 say to this lady and these two gentleman . I know it meet your 
 approval ? " 
 Mr. Bagnet , after consider , refer the point to his wife . 
 " old girl , " say he . " tell he . whether or not . it meet my 
 approval . " 
 " why , George , " exclaim Mrs. Bagnet , who have be unpack her 
 basket , in which there be a piece of cold pickle pork , a little 
 tea and sugar , and a brown loaf , " you ought to know it do not . you 
 ought to know it be enough to drive a person wild to hear you . you 
 will not   be get off this way , and you will not   be get off that way - what 
 do you mean by such picking and choose ? it be stuff and nonsense , 
 George . " 
 " do not   be severe upon I in my misfortune , Mrs. Bagnet , " say the 
 trooper lightly . 
 " oh ! bother your misfortune , " cry Mrs. Bagnet , " if they do not 
 make you more reasonable than that come to . I never be so 
 ashamed in my life to hear a man talk folly as I have be to hear 
 you talk this day to the present company . lawyer ? why , what but 
 too many cook should hinder you from have a dozen lawyer if the 
 gentleman recommend they to you " 
 " this be a very sensible woman , " say my guardian . " I hope you 
 will persuade he , Mrs. Bagnet . " 
 " persuade he , sir ? " she return . " Lord bless you , no . you do not 
 know George . now , there ! " Mrs. Bagnet leave her basket to point 
 he out with both her bare brown hand . " there he stand ! as 
 self - willed and as determine a man , in the wrong way , as ever put 
 a human creature under heaven out of patience ! you could as soon 
 take up and shoulder an eight and forty pounder by your own 
 strength as turn that man when he have get a thing into his head and 
 fix it there . why , do not   I know he ! " cry Mrs. Bagnet . " do not 
 I know you , George ! you do not   mean to set up for a new character 
 with I after all these year , I hope ? " 
 her friendly indignation have an exemplary effect upon her husband , 
 who shake his head at the trooper several time as a silent 
 recommendation to he to yield . between while , Mrs. Bagnet look 
 at I ; and I understand from the play of her eye that she wish 
 I to do something , though I do not comprehend what . 
 " but I have give up talk to you , old fellow , year and year , " 
 say Mrs. Bagnet as she blow a little dust off the pickled pork , 
 look at I again ; " and when lady and gentleman know you as 
 well as I do , they will give up talk to you too . if you be not 
 too headstrong to accept of a bit of dinner , here it be . " 
 " I accept it with many thank , " return the trooper . 
 " do you though , indeed ? " say Mrs. Bagnet , continue to grumble on 
 good - humouredly . " I be sure I be surprised at that . I wonder you 
 do not   starve in your own way also . it would only be like you . 
 perhaps you will set your mind upon that next . " here she again 
 look at I , and I now perceive from her glance at the door and 
 at I , by turn , that she wish we to retire and to await she 
 follow we outside the prison . communicate this by similar 
 mean to my guardian and Mr. Woodcourt , I rise . 
 " we hope you will think well of it , Mr. George , " say I , " and we 
 shall come to see you again , trust to find you more reasonable . " 
 " more grateful , Miss Summerson , you can not   find I , " he return . 
 " but more persuadable we can , I hope , " say I. " and let I entreat 
 you to consider that the clearing up of this mystery and the 
 discovery of the real perpetrator of this deed may be of the last 
 importance to other besides yourself . " 
 he hear I respectfully but without much heed these word , 
 which I speak a little turn from he , already on my way to the 
 door ; he be observe   this they afterwards tell I   my height and 
 figure , which seem to catch his attention all at once . 
 " ' tis curious , " say he . " and yet I think so at the time ! " 
 my guardian ask he what he mean . 
 " why , sir , " he answer , " when my ill fortune take I to the dead 
 man 's staircase on the night of his murder , I see a shape so like 
 Miss Summerson 's go by I in the dark that I have half a mind to 
 speak to it . " 
 for an instant I feel such a shudder as I never feel before or 
 since and hope I shall never feel again . 
 " it come downstairs as I go up , " say the trooper , " and cross 
 the moonlight window with a loose black mantle on ; I notice a 
 deep fringe to it . however , it have nothing to do with the present 
 subject , except that Miss Summerson look so like it at the 
 moment that it come into my head . " 
 I can not separate and define the feeling that arise in I after 
 this ; it be enough that the vague duty and obligation I have feel 
 upon I from the first of follow the investigation be , without 
 my distinctly daring to ask myself any question , increase , and 
 that I be indignantly sure of there be no possibility of a 
 reason for my be afraid . 
 we three go out of the prison and walk up and down at some short 
 distance from the gate , which be in a retired place . we have not 
 wait long when Mr. and Mrs. Bagnet come out too and quickly 
 join we . 
 there be a tear in each of Mrs. Bagnet 's eye , and her face be 
 flushed and hurry . " I do not   let George see what I think about 
 it , you know , miss , " be her first remark when she come up , " but 
 he be in a bad way , poor old fellow ! " 
 " not with care and prudence and good help , " say my guardian . 
 " a gentleman like you ought to know good , sir , " return Mrs. 
 Bagnet , hurriedly dry her eye on the hem of her grey cloak , 
 " but I be uneasy for he . he have be so careless and say so much 
 that he never mean . the gentleman of the jury might not 
 understand he as Lignum and I do . and then such a number of 
 circumstance have happen bad for he , and such a number of 
 people will be bring forward to speak against he , and Bucket be 
 so deep . " 
 " with a second - hand wiolinceller . and say he play the fife . 
 when a boy , " Mr. Bagnet add with great solemnity . 
 " now , I tell you , miss , " say Mrs. Bagnet ; " and when I say miss , I 
 mean all ! just come into the corner of the wall and I will tell 
 you ! " 
 Mrs. Bagnet hurry we into a more secluded place and be at first 
 too breathless to proceed , occasion Mr. Bagnet to say , " old 
 girl ! tell them ! " 
 " why , then , miss , " the old girl proceed , untie the string of 
 her bonnet for more air , " you could as soon move Dover Castle as 
 move George on this point unless you have get a new power to move 
 he with . and I have get it ! " 
 " you be a jewel of a woman , " say my guardian . " go on ! " 
 " now , I tell you , miss , " she proceed , clap her hand in her 
 hurry and agitation a dozen time in every sentence , " that what he 
 say concern no relation be all bosh . they do not   know of he , 
 but he do know of they . he have say more to I at odd time than 
 to anybody else , and it warn't   for nothing that he once speak to my 
 Woolwich about whiten and wrinkle mother ' head . for fifty 
 pound he have see his mother that day . she be alive and must be 
 bring here straight ! " 
 instantly Mrs. Bagnet put some pin into her mouth and begin 
 pin up her skirt all round a little high than the level of 
 her grey cloak , which she accomplish with surpass dispatch and 
 dexterity . 
 " Lignum , " say Mrs. Bagnet , " you take care of the child , old 
 man , and give I the umbrella ! I be away to Lincolnshire to bring 
 that old lady here . " 
 " but , bless the woman , " cry my guardian with his hand in his 
 pocket , " how be she go ? what money have she get ? " 
 Mrs. Bagnet make another application to her skirt and bring 
 forth a leathern purse in which she hastily count over a few 
 shilling and which she then shut up with perfect satisfaction . 
 " never you mind for I , miss . I be a soldier 's wife and accustom 
 to travel my own way . Lignum , old boy , " kiss he , " one for 
 yourself , three for the child . now I be away into Lincolnshire 
 after George 's mother ! " 
 and she actually set off while we three stand look at one 
 another lose in amazement . she actually trudge away in her grey 
 cloak at a sturdy pace , and turn the corner , and be go . 
 " Mr. Bagnet , " say my guardian . " do you mean to let she go in that 
 way ? " 
 " can not   help it , " he return . " make she way home once from another 
 quarter of the world . with the same grey cloak . and same 
 umbrella . whatever the old girl say , do . do it ! whenever the 
 old girl say , I'LL do it . she do it . " 
 " then she be as honest and genuine as she look , " rejoin my 
 guardian , " and it be impossible to say more for she . " 
 " she be Colour - Sergeant of the Nonpareil battalion , " say Mr. 
 Bagnet , look at we over his shoulder as he go his way also . 
 " and there be not such another . but I never own to it before she . 
 Discipline must be maintain . " 
 CHAPTER LIII 
 the Track 
 Mr. Bucket and his fat forefinger be much in consultation together 
 under exist circumstance . when Mr. Bucket have a matter of this 
 press interest under his consideration , the fat forefinger seem 
 to rise , to the dignity of a familiar demon . he put it to his 
 ear , and it whisper information ; he put it to his lip , and it 
 enjoin he to secrecy ; he rub it over his nose , and it sharpen 
 his scent ; he shake it before a guilty man , and it charm he to 
 his destruction . the Augurs of the Detective Temple invariably 
 predict that when Mr. Bucket and that finger be in much 
 conference , a terrible avenger will be hear of before long . 
 otherwise mildly studious in his observation of human nature , on 
 the whole a benignant philosopher not disposed to be severe upon 
 the folly of mankind , Mr. Bucket pervade a vast number of house 
 and stroll about an infinity of street , to outward appearance 
 rather languish for want of an object . he be in the friendly 
 condition towards his specie and will drink with most of they . he 
 be free with his money , affable in his manner , innocent in his 
 conversation - but through the placid stream of his life there 
 glide an under - current of forefinger . 
 time and place can not bind Mr. Bucket . like man in the abstract , 
 he be here to - day and go to - morrow - but , very unlike man indeed , 
 he be here again the next day . this evening he will be casually 
 look into the iron extinguisher at the door of Sir Leicester 
 Dedlock 's house in town ; and to - morrow morning he will be walk 
 on the lead at Chesney Wold , where erst the old man walk whose 
 ghost be propitiate with a hundred guineas . drawer , desk , 
 pocket , all thing belong to he , Mr. Bucket examine . a few 
 hour afterwards , he and the Roman will be alone together compare 
 forefinger . 
 it be likely that these occupation be irreconcilable with home 
 enjoyment , but it be certain that Mr. Bucket at present do not go 
 home . though in general he highly appreciate the society of Mrs. 
 Bucket - a lady of a natural detective genius , which if it have be 
 improve by professional exercise , might have do great thing , 
 but which have pause at the level of a clever amateur - he hold 
 himself aloof from that dear solace . Mrs. Bucket be dependent on 
 their lodger   fortunately an amiable lady in whom she take an 
 interest   for companionship and conversation . 
 a great crowd assemble in Lincoln 's Inn Fields on the day of the 
 funeral . Sir Leicester Dedlock attend the ceremony in person ; 
 strictly speak , there be only three other human follower , that 
 be to say , Lord Doodle , William Buffy , and the debilitated cousin 
  throw in as a make - weight , but the amount of inconsolable 
 carriage be immense . the peerage contribute more four - wheel 
 affliction than have ever be see in that neighbourhood . such be 
 the assemblage of armorial bearing on coach panel that the 
 Herald 's College might be suppose to have lose its father and 
 mother at a blow . the Duke of Foodle send a splendid pile of dust 
 and ash , with silver wheel - box , patent axle , all the last 
 improvement , and three bereaved worm , six foot high , hold on 
 behind , in a bunch of woe . all the state coachman in London seem 
 plunge into mourning ; and if that dead old man of the rusty garb 
 be not beyond a taste in horseflesh   which appear impossible , it 
 must be highly gratified this day . 
 quiet among the undertaker and the equipage and the calf of so 
 many leg all steep in grief , Mr. Bucket sit conceal in one of 
 the inconsolable carriage and at his ease survey the crowd 
 through the lattice blind . he have a keen eye for a crowd - as for 
 what not ? - and look here and there , now from this side of the 
 carriage , now from the other , now up at the house window , now 
 along the people 's head , nothing escape he . 
 " and there you be , my partner , eh ? " say Mr. Bucket to himself , 
 apostrophize Mrs. Bucket , station , by his favour , on the step 
 of the deceased 's house . " and so you be . and so you be ! and 
 very well indeed you be look , Mrs. Bucket ! " 
 the procession have not start yet , but be wait for the cause of 
 its assemblage to be bring out . Mr. Bucket , in the foremost 
 emblazon carriage , use his two fat forefinger to hold the 
 lattice a hair 's breadth open while he look . 
 and it say a great deal for his attachment , as a husband , that he 
 be still occupy with Mrs. B. " there you be , my partner , eh ? " he 
 murmuringly repeat . " and our lodger with you . I be take notice 
 of you , Mrs. Bucket ; I hope you be all right in your health , my 
 dear ! " 
 not another word do Mr. Bucket say , but sit with most attentive 
 eye until the sack depository of noble secret be bring down - 
 where be all those secret now ? do he keep they yet ? do they 
 fly with he on that sudden journey ? - and until the procession 
 move , and Mr. Bucket 's view be change . after which he compose 
 himself for an easy ride and take note of the fitting of the 
 carriage in case he should ever find such knowledge useful . 
 contrast enough between Mr. Tulkinghorn shut up in his dark 
 carriage and Mr. Bucket shut up in HIS . between the immeasurable 
 track of space beyond the little wound that have throw the one into 
 the fix sleep which jolt so heavily over the stone of the 
 street , and the narrow track of blood which keep the other in the 
 watchful state express in every hair of his head ! but it be all 
 one to both ; neither be troubled about that . 
 Mr. Bucket sit out the procession in his own easy manner and 
 glide from the carriage when the opportunity he have settle with 
 himself arrive . he make for Sir Leicester Dedlock 's , which be at 
 present a sort of home to he , where he come and go as he like 
 at all hour , where he be always welcome and make much of , where 
 he know the whole establishment , and walk in an atmosphere of 
 mysterious greatness . 
 no knock or ring for Mr. Bucket . he have cause himself to be 
 provide with a key and can pass in at his pleasure . as he be 
 cross the hall , Mercury inform he , " here be another letter for 
 you , Mr. Bucket , come by post , " and give it he . 
 " another one , eh ? " say Mr. Bucket . 
 if Mercury should chance to be possess by any linger curiosity 
 as to Mr. Bucket 's letter , that wary person be not the man to 
 gratify it . Mr. Bucket look at he as if his face be a vista of 
 some mile in length and he be leisurely contemplate the same . 
 " do you happen to carry a box ? " say Mr. Bucket . 
 unfortunately Mercury be no snuff - taker . 
 " could you fetch I a pinch from anywhere ? " say Mr. Bucket . 
 " Thankee . it do not   matter what it be ; I be not particular as to the 
 kind . thankee ! " 
 have leisurely help himself from a canister borrow from 
 somebody downstairs for the purpose , and have make a considerable 
 show of taste it , first with one side of his nose and then with 
 the other , Mr. Bucket , with much deliberation , pronounce it of the 
 right sort and go on , letter in hand . 
 now although Mr. Bucket walk upstairs to the little library within 
 the large one with the face of a man who receive some score of 
 letter every day , it happen that much correspondence be not 
 incidental to his life . he be no great scribe , rather handle his 
 pen like the pocket - staff he carry about with he always 
 convenient to his grasp , and discourage correspondence with 
 himself in other as be too artless and direct a way of do 
 delicate business . far , he often see damaging letter 
 produce in evidence and have occasion to reflect that it be a 
 green thing to write they . for these reason he have very little to 
 do with letter , either as sender or receiver . and yet he have 
 receive a round half - dozen within the last twenty - four hour . 
 " and this , " say Mr. Bucket , spread it out on the table , " be in 
 the same hand , and consist of the same two word . " 
 what two word ? 
 he turn the key in the door , ungirdle his black pocket - book   book 
 of fate to many , lay another letter by it , and read , boldly 
 write in each , " Lady Dedlock . " 
 " yes , yes , " say Mr. Bucket . " but I could have make the money 
 without this anonymous information . " 
 have put the letter in his book of fate and girdle it up again , 
 he unlock the door just in time to admit his dinner , which be 
 bring upon a goodly tray with a decanter of sherry . Mr. Bucket 
 frequently observe , in friendly circle where there be no 
 restraint , that he like a toothful of your fine old brown East 
 Inder sherry well than anything you can offer he . consequently 
 he fill and empty his glass with a smack of his lip and be 
 proceed with his refreshment when an idea enter his mind . 
 Mr. Bucket softly open the door of communication between that room 
 and the next and look in . the library be desert , and the fire 
 be sink low . Mr. Bucket 's eye , after take a pigeon - flight 
 round the room , alight upon a table where letter be usually put 
 as they arrive . several letter for Sir Leicester be upon it . 
 Mr. Bucket draw near and examine the direction . " no , " he say , 
 " there be none in that hand . it be only I as be write to . I can 
 break it to Sir Leicester Dedlock , Baronet , to - morrow . " 
 with that he return to finish his dinner with a good appetite , and 
 after a light nap , be summon into the drawing - room . Sir 
 Leicester have receive he there these several evening past to 
 know whether he have anything to report . the debilitated cousin 
  much exhausted by the funeral   and Volumnia be in attendance . 
 Mr. Bucket make three distinctly different bow to these three 
 people . a bow of homage to Sir Leicester , a bow of gallantry to 
 Volumnia , and a bow of recognition to the debilitate Cousin , to 
 whom it airily say , " you be a swell about town , and you know I , 
 and I know you . " have distribute these little specimen of his 
 tact , Mr. Bucket rub his hand . 
 " have you anything new to communicate , officer ? " inquire Sir 
 Leicester . " do you wish to hold any conversation with I in 
 private ? " 
 " why - not to - night , Sir Leicester Dedlock , Baronet . " 
 " because my time , " pursue Sir Leicester , " be wholly at your 
 disposal with a view to the vindication of the outraged majesty of 
 the law . " 
 Mr. Bucket cough and glance at Volumnia , rouge and necklace , as 
 though he would respectfully observe , " I do assure you , you be a 
 pretty creetur . I have   see hundred bad look at your time of 
 life , I have indeed . " 
 the fair Volumnia , not quite unconscious perhaps of the humanizing 
 influence of her charm , pause in the writing of cocked - hat note 
 and meditatively adjust the pearl necklace . Mr. Bucket price 
 that decoration in his mind and think it as likely as not that 
 Volumnia be write poetry . 
 " if I have not , " pursue Sir Leicester , " in the most emphatic 
 manner , adjure you , officer , to exercise your utmost skill in this 
 atrocious case , I particularly desire to take the present 
 opportunity of rectify any omission I may have make . let no 
 expense be a consideration . I be prepared to defray all charge . 
 you can incur none in pursuit of the object you have undertake 
 that I shall hesitate for a moment to bear . " 
 Mr. Bucket make Sir Leicester 's bow again as a response to this 
 liberality . 
 " my mind , " Sir Leicester add with a generous warmth , " have not , as 
 may be easily suppose , recover its tone since the late 
 diabolical occurrence . it be not likely ever to recover its tone . 
 but it be full of indignation to - night after undergo the ordeal 
 of consign to the tomb the remain of a faithful , a zealous , a 
 devoted adherent . " 
 Sir Leicester 's voice tremble and his grey hair stir upon his 
 head . tear be in his eye ; the good part of his nature be 
 arouse . 
 " I declare , " he say , " I solemnly declare that until this crime be 
 discover and , in the course of justice , punish , I almost feel 
 as if there be a stain upon my name . a gentleman who have devote 
 a large portion of his life to I , a gentleman who have devote the 
 last day of his life to I , a gentleman who have constantly sit at 
 my table and sleep under my roof , go from my house to his own , 
 and be strike down within an hour of his leave my house . I 
 can not say but that he may have be follow from my house , 
 watch at my house , even first mark because of his association 
 with my house - which may have suggest his possess great 
 wealth and be altogether of great importance than his own 
 retire demeanour would have indicate . if I can not with my mean 
 and influence and my position bring all the perpetrator of such a 
 crime to light , I fail in the assertion of my respect for that 
 gentleman 's memory and of my fidelity towards one who be ever 
 faithful to I . " 
 while he make this protestation with great emotion and 
 earnestness , look round the room as if he be address an 
 assembly , Mr. Bucket glance at he with an observant gravity in 
 which there might be , but for the audacity of the thought , a touch 
 of compassion . 
 " the ceremony of to - day , " continue Sir Leicester , ' strikingly 
 illustrative of the respect in which my deceased friend " - he lay a 
 stress upon the word , for death level all distinction - " be hold 
 by the flower of the land , have , I say , aggravate the shock I have 
 receive from this most horrible and audacious crime . if it be 
 my brother who have commit it , I would not spare he . " 
 Mr. Bucket look very grave . Volumnia remark of the deceased that 
 he be the trusty and dear person ! 
 " you must feel it as a deprivation to you , miss , " reply Mr. Bucket 
 soothingly , " no doubt . he be calculate to be a deprivation , I be 
 sure he be . " 
 Volumnia give Mr. Bucket to understand , in reply , that her 
 sensitive mind be fully make up never to get the well of it as 
 long as she live , that her nerve be unstrung for ever , and that 
 she have not the least expectation of ever smile again . meanwhile 
 she fold up a cocked hat for that redoubtable old general at Bath , 
 descriptive of her melancholy condition . 
 " it give a start to a delicate female , " say Mr. Bucket 
 sympathetically , " but it will wear off . " 
 Volumnia wish of all thing to know what be do ? whether they 
 be go to convict , or whatever it be , that dreadful soldier ? 
 whether he have any accomplice , or whatever the thing be call in 
 the law ? and a great deal more to the like artless purpose . 
 " why you see , miss , " return Mr. Bucket , bring the finger into 
 persuasive action - and such be his natural gallantry that he have 
 almost say " my dear " - " it be not   easy to answer those question at 
 the present moment . not at the present moment . I have   keep myself 
 on this case , Sir Leicester Dedlock , Baronet , " whom Mr. Bucket 
 take into the conversation in right of his importance , " morning , 
 noon , and night . but for a glass or two of sherry , I do not   think I 
 could have have my mind so much upon the stretch as it have be . I 
 could answer your question , miss , but duty forbid it . Sir 
 Leicester Dedlock , Baronet , will very soon be make acquainted with 
 all that have be trace . and I hope that he may find it " - Mr. 
 Bucket again look grave - " to his satisfaction . " 
 the debilitated cousin only hop some fler'll be execute - zample . 
 think more interest 's want - get man hang presentime - than get 
 man place ten thousand a year . have not   a doubt - zample - far well 
 hang wrong fler than no fler . 
 " you know life , you know , sir , " say Mr. Bucket with a 
 complimentary twinkle of his eye and crook of his finger , " and you 
 can confirm what I have   mention to this lady . you do not   want to be 
 tell that from information I have receive I have go to work . 
 you be up to what a lady can not   be expect to be up to . Lord ! 
 especially in your elevated station of society , miss , " say Mr. 
 Bucket , quite redden at another narrow escape from " my dear . " 
 " the officer , Volumnia , " observe Sir Leicester , " be faithful to 
 his duty , and perfectly right . " 
 Mr. Bucket murmur , " glad to have the honour of your approbation , 
 Sir Leicester Dedlock , Baronet . " 
 " in fact , Volumnia , " proceed Sir Leicester , " it be not hold up 
 a good model for imitation to ask the officer any such question 
 as you have put to he . he be the good judge of his own 
 responsibility ; he act upon his responsibility . and it do not 
 become we , who assist in make the law , to impede or interfere 
 with those who carry they into execution . or , " say Sir Leicester 
 somewhat sternly , for Volumnia be go to cut in before he have 
 round his sentence , " or who vindicate their outraged majesty . " 
 Volumnia with all humility explain that she have not merely the 
 plea of curiosity to urge   in common with the giddy youth of her 
 sex in general   but that she be perfectly die with regret and 
 interest for the darling man whose loss they all deplore . 
 " very well , Volumnia , " return Sir Leicester . " then you can not be 
 too discreet . " 
 Mr. Bucket take the opportunity of a pause to be hear again . 
 " Sir Leicester Dedlock , Baronet , I have no objection to tell 
 this lady , with your leave and among ourselves , that I look upon 
 the case as pretty well complete . it be a beautiful case - a 
 beautiful case - and what little be want to complete it , I expect 
 to be able to supply in a few hour . " 
 " I be very glad indeed to hear it , " say Sir Leicester . " highly 
 creditable to you . " 
 " Sir Leicester Dedlock , Baronet , " return Mr. Bucket very 
 seriously , " I hope it may at one and the same time do I credit and 
 prove satisfactory to all . when I depict it as a beautiful case , 
 you see , miss , " Mr. Bucket go on , glance gravely at Sir 
 Leicester , " I mean from my point of view . as consider from other 
 point of view , such case will always involve more or less 
 unpleasantness . very strange thing come to our knowledge in 
 family , miss ; bless your heart , what you would think to be 
 phenomenon , quite . " 
 Volumnia , with her innocent little scream , suppose so . 
 " Aye , and even in gen - teel family , in high family , in great 
 family , " say Mr. Bucket , again gravely eye Sir Leicester 
 aside . " I have have the honour of be employ in high family 
 before , and you have no idea - come , I will go so far as to say not 
 even you have any idea , sir , " this to the debilitated cousin , " what 
 game go on ! " 
 the cousin , who have be cast sofa - pillow on his head , in a 
 prostration of boredom yawn , " Vayli , " be the use - up for " very 
 likely . " 
 Sir Leicester , deeming it time to dismiss the officer , here 
 majestically interpose with the word , " very good . thank you ! " 
 and also with a wave of his hand , imply not only that there be 
 an end of the discourse , but that if high family fall into low 
 habit they must take the consequence . " you will not forget , 
 officer , " he add with condescension , " that I be at your disposal 
 when you please . " 
 Mr. Bucket   still grave   inquire if to - morrow morning , now , would 
 suit , in case he should be as for'ard as he expect to be . Sir 
 Leicester reply , " all time be alike to I . " Mr. Bucket make 
 his three bow and be withdraw when a forget point occur to 
 he . 
 " might I ask , by the by , " he say in a low voice , cautiously 
 return , " who post the reward - bill on the staircase . " 
 " I order it to be put up there , " reply Sir Leicester . 
 " would it be consider a liberty , Sir Leicester Dedlock , Baronet , 
 if I be to ask you why ? " 
 " not at all . I choose it as a conspicuous part of the house . I 
 think it can not be too prominently keep before the whole 
 establishment . I wish my people to be impress with the enormity 
 of the crime , the determination to punish it , and the hopelessness 
 of escape . at the same time , officer , if you in your well 
 knowledge of the subject see any objection - " 
 Mr. Bucket see none now ; the bill have be put up , have well 
 not be take down . repeat his three bow he withdraw , close 
 the door on Volumnia 's little scream , which be a preliminary to she 
 remark that that charmingly horrible person be a perfect Blue 
 Chamber . 
 in his fondness for society and his adaptability to all grade , Mr. 
 Bucket be presently stand before the hall - fire - bright and warm 
 on the early winter night - admire Mercury . 
 " why , you be six foot two , I suppose ? " say Mr. Bucket . 
 " Three , " say Mercury . 
 " be you so much ? but then , you see , you be broad in proportion 
 and do not   look it . you be not one of the weak - legged one , you 
 be not . be you ever model now ? " Mr. Bucket ask , convey the 
 expression of an artist into the turn of his eye and head . 
 Mercury never be model . 
 " then you ought to be , you know , " say Mr. Bucket ; " and a friend of 
 mine that you will hear of one day as a Royal Academy sculptor would 
 stand something handsome to make a drawing of your proportion for 
 the marble . my Lady 's out , be not   she ? " 
 " out to dinner . " 
 " go out pretty well every day , do not   she ? " 
 " yes . " 
 " not to be wonder at ! " say Mr. Bucket . " such a fine woman as 
 she , so handsome and so graceful and so elegant , be like a fresh 
 lemon on a dinner - table , ornamental wherever she go . be your 
 father in the same way of life as yourself ? " 
 answer in the negative . 
 " mine be , " say Mr. Bucket . " my father be first a page , then a 
 footman , then a butler , then a steward , then an inn - keeper . live 
 universally respect , and die lament . say with his last 
 breath that he consider service the most honourable part of his 
 career , and so it be . I have   a brother in service , and a brother- 
 in - law . my Lady a good temper ? " 
 Mercury reply , " as good as you can expect . " 
 " ah ! " say Mr. Bucket . " a little spoilt ? a little capricious ? 
 Lord ! what can you anticipate when they be so handsome as that ? 
 and we like them all the well for it , do not   we ? " 
 Mercury , with his hand in the pocket of his bright peach - blossom 
 small - clothe , stretch his symmetrical silk leg with the air of 
 a man of gallantry and can not   deny it . come the roll of wheel and 
 a violent ringing at the bell . " talk of the angel , " say Mr. 
 Bucket . " here she be ! " 
 the door be throw open , and she pass through the hall . still 
 very pale , she be dress in slight mourning and wear two 
 beautiful bracelet . either their beauty or the beauty of her arm 
 be particularly attractive to Mr. Bucket . he look at they with an 
 eager eye and rattle something in his pocket - halfpence perhaps . 
 notice he at his distance , she turn an inquire look on the 
 other Mercury who have bring her home . 
 " Mr. Bucket , my Lady . " 
 Mr. Bucket make a leg and come forward , pass his familiar 
 demon over the region of his mouth . 
 " be you wait to see Sir Leicester ? " 
 " no , my Lady , I have   see he ! " 
 " have you anything to say to I ? " 
 " not just at present , my Lady . " 
 " have you make any new discovery ? " 
 " a few , my Lady . " 
 this be merely in pass . she scarcely make a stop , and sweep 
 upstairs alone . Mr. Bucket , move towards the staircase - foot , 
 watch she as she go up the step the old man come down to his 
 grave , past murderous group of statuary repeat with their 
 shadowy weapon on the wall , past the print bill , which she look 
 at go by , out of view . 
 " she be a lovely woman , too , she really be , " say Mr. Bucket , come 
 back to Mercury . " do not   look quite healthy though . " 
 be not quite healthy , Mercury inform he . suffer much from 
 headache . 
 really ? that be a pity ! walking , Mr. Bucket would recommend for 
 that . well , she try walk , Mercury rejoin . Walks sometimes 
 for two hour when she have they bad . by night , too . 
 " be you sure you be quite so much as six foot three ? " ask Mr. 
 Bucket . " beg your pardon for interrupt you a moment ? " 
 not a doubt about it . 
 " you be so well put together that I should not   have think it . but 
 the household troop , though consider fine man , be build so 
 straggling . Walks by night , do she ? when it be moonlight , 
 though ? " 
 oh , yes . when it be moonlight ! of course . oh , of course ! 
 conversational and acquiescent on both side . 
 " I suppose you be not   in the habit of walk yourself ? " say Mr. 
 Bucket . " not much time for it , I should say ? " 
 besides which , Mercury do not   like it . prefer carriage exercise . 
 " to be sure , " say Mr. Bucket . " that make a difference . now I 
 think of it , " say Mr. Bucket , warm his hand and look 
 pleasantly at the blaze , ' she go out walk the very night of 
 this business . " 
 " to be sure she do ! I let she into the garden over the way . " 
 " and leave she there . certainly you do . I see you do it . " 
 " I do not   see you , " say Mercury . 
 " I be rather in a hurry , " return Mr. Bucket , " for I be go to 
 visit a aunt of mine that live at Chelsea - next door but two to 
 the old original Bun House - ninety year old the old lady be , a 
 single woman , and get a little property . yes , I chance to be 
 pass at the time . let us see . what time might it be ? it be not 
 ten . " 
 " half - past nine . " 
 " you be right . so it be . and if I do not   deceive myself , my Lady 
 be muffle in a loose black mantle , with a deep fringe to it ? " 
 " of course she be . " 
 of course she be . Mr. Bucket must return to a little work he have 
 to get on with upstairs , but he must shake hand with Mercury in 
 acknowledgment of his agreeable conversation , and will he - this be 
 all he ask - will he , when he have a leisure half - hour , think of 
 bestow it on that Royal Academy sculptor , for the advantage of 
 both party ? 
 CHAPTER LIV 
 spring a mine 
 refresh by sleep , Mr. Bucket rise betime in the morning and 
 prepare for a field - day . smartene up by the aid of a clean shirt 
 and a wet hairbrush , with which instrument , on occasion of 
 ceremony , he lubricate such thin lock as remain to he after his 
 life of severe study , Mr. Bucket lay in a breakfast of two mutton 
 chop as a foundation to work upon , together with tea , egg , toast , 
 and marmalade on a corresponding scale . have much enjoy these 
 strengthen matter and have hold subtle conference with his 
 familiar demon , he confidently instruct Mercury " just to mention 
 quietly to Sir Leicester Dedlock , Baronet , that whenever he be ready 
 for I , I be ready for he . " a gracious message be return that 
 Sir Leicester will expedite his dressing and join Mr. Bucket in the 
 library within ten minute , Mr. Bucket repair to that apartment 
 and stand before the fire with his finger on his chin , look at 
 the blaze coal . 
 thoughtful Mr. Bucket be , as a man may be with weighty work to do , 
 but compose , sure , confident . from the expression of his face he 
 might be a famous whist - player for a large stake - say a hundred 
 guineas certain - with the game in his hand , but with a high 
 reputation involve in his play his hand out to the last card in 
 a masterly way . not in the least anxious or disturbed be Mr. 
 Bucket when Sir Leicester appear , but he eye the baronet aside as 
 he come slowly to his easy - chair with that observant gravity of 
 yesterday in which there might have be yesterday , but for the 
 audacity of the idea , a touch of compassion . 
 " I be sorry to have keep you wait , officer , but I be rather 
 later than my usual hour this morning . I be not well . the 
 agitation and the indignation from which I have recently suffer 
 have be too much for I . I be subject to - gout " - Sir Leicester 
 be go to say indisposition and would have say it to anybody 
 else , but Mr. Bucket palpably know all about it - " and recent 
 circumstance have bring it on . " 
 as he take his seat with some difficulty and with an air of pain , 
 Mr. Bucket draw a little nearer , stand with one of his large 
 hand on the library - table . 
 " I be not aware , officer , " Sir Leicester observe ; raise his eye 
 to his face , " whether you wish we to be alone , but that be entirely 
 as you please . if you do , well and good . if not , Miss Dedlock 
 would be interested - " 
 " why , Sir Leicester Dedlock , Baronet , " return Mr. Bucket with his 
 head persuasively on one side and his forefinger pendant at one ear 
 like an earring , " we can not   be too private just at present . you 
 will presently see that we can not   be too private . a lady , under the 
 circumstance , and especially in Miss Dedlock 's elevated station of 
 society , can not   but be agreeable to I , but speak without a view 
 to myself , I will take the liberty of assure you that I know we 
 can not   be too private . " 
 " that be enough . " 
 " so much so , Sir Leicester Dedlock , Baronet , " Mr. Bucket resume , 
 " that I be on the point of ask your permission to turn the key 
 in the door . " 
 " by all mean . " Mr. Bucket skilfully and softly take that 
 precaution , stoop on his knee for a moment from mere force of 
 habit so to adjust the key in the lock as that no one shall peep in 
 from the outerside . 
 " Sir Leicester Dedlock , Baronet , I mention yesterday evening that 
 I want but a very little to complete this case . I have now 
 complete it and collect proof against the person who do this 
 crime . " 
 " against the soldier ? " 
 " no , Sir Leicester Dedlock ; not the soldier . " 
 Sir Leicester look astounded and inquire , " be the man in 
 custody ? " 
 Mr. Bucket tell he , after a pause , " it be a woman . " 
 Sir Leicester lean back in his chair , and breathlessly ejaculate , 
 " Good heaven ! " 
 " now , Sir Leicester Dedlock , Baronet , " Mr. Bucket begin , stand 
 over he with one hand spread out on the library - table and the 
 forefinger of the other in impressive use , " it be my duty to prepare 
 you for a train of circumstance that may , and I go so far as to 
 say that will , give you a shock . but Sir Leicester Dedlock , 
 Baronet , you be a gentleman , and I know what a gentleman be and 
 what a gentleman be capable of . a gentleman can bear a shock when 
 it must come , boldly and steadily . a gentleman can make up his 
 mind to stand up against almost any blow . why , take yourself , Sir 
 Leicester Dedlock , Baronet . if there be a blow to be inflict on 
 you , you naturally think of your family . you ask yourself , how 
 would all they ancestor of your , away to Julius Caesar - not to go 
 beyond he at present - have bear that blow ; you remember score of 
 they that would have bear it well ; and you bear it well on their 
 account , and to maintain the family credit . that be the way you 
 argue , and that be the way you act , Sir Leicester Dedlock , Baronet . " 
 Sir Leicester , lean back in his chair and grasp the elbow , 
 sit look at he with a stony face . 
 " now , Sir Leicester Dedlock , " proceed Mr. Bucket , " thus prepare 
 you , let I beg of you not to trouble your mind for a moment as to 
 anything have come to MY knowledge . I know so much about so many 
 character , high and low , that a piece of information more or less 
 do not   signify a straw . I do not   suppose there be a move on the board 
 that would surprise I , and as to this or that move have take 
 place , why my know it be no odd at all , any possible move 
 whatever   provide it be in a wrong direction   be a probable move 
 accord to my experience . therefore , what I say to you , Sir 
 Leicester Dedlock , Baronet , be , do not   you go and let yourself be 
 put out of the way because of my know anything of your family 
 affair . " 
 " I thank you for your preparation , " return Sir Leicester after a 
 silence , without move hand , foot , or feature , " which I hope be 
 not necessary ; though I give it credit for be well intend . be 
 so good as to go on . also " - Sir Leicester seem to shrink in the 
 shadow of his figure - " also , to take a seat , if you have no 
 objection . " 
 none at all . Mr. Bucket bring a chair and diminish his shadow . 
 " now , Sir Leicester Dedlock , Baronet , with this short preface I 
 come to the point . Lady Dedlock - " 
 Sir Leicester raise himself in his seat and stare at he 
 fiercely . Mr. Bucket bring the finger into play as an emollient . 
 " Lady Dedlock , you see she be universally admired . that be what her 
 ladyship be ; she be universally admire , " say Mr. Bucket . 
 " I would greatly prefer , officer , " Sir Leicester return stiffly , 
 " my Lady 's name be entirely omit from this discussion . " 
 " so would I , Sir Leicester Dedlock , Baronet , but - it be impossible . " 
 " impossible ? " 
 Mr. Bucket shake his relentless head . 
 " Sir Leicester Dedlock , Baronet , it be altogether impossible . what 
 I have get to say be about her ladyship . she be the pivot it all 
 turn on . " 
 " Officer , " retort Sir Leicester with a fiery eye and a quivering 
 lip , " you know your duty . do your duty , but be careful not to 
 overstep it . I would not suffer it . I would not endure it . 
 you bring my Lady 's name into this communication upon your 
 responsibility - upon your responsibility . my Lady 's name be 
 not a name for common person to trifle with ! " 
 " Sir Leicester Dedlock , Baronet , I say what I must say , and no 
 more . " 
 " I hope it may prove so . very well . go on . go on , sir ! " 
 glance at the angry eye which now avoid he and at the angry 
 figure tremble from head to foot , yet strive to be still , Mr. 
 Bucket feel his way with his forefinger and in a low voice 
 proceed . 
 " Sir Leicester Dedlock , Baronet , it become my duty to tell you 
 that the deceased Mr. Tulkinghorn long entertain mistrust and 
 suspicion of Lady Dedlock . " 
 " if he have dare to breathe they to I , sir - which he never do - I 
 would have kill he myself ! " exclaim Sir Leicester , strike his 
 hand upon the table . but in the very heat and fury of the act he 
 stop , fix by the know eye of Mr. Bucket , whose forefinger be 
 slowly go and who , with mingled confidence and patience , shake 
 his head . 
 " Sir Leicester Dedlock , the deceased Mr. Tulkinghorn be deep and 
 close , and what he fully have in his mind in the very beginning I 
 can not   quite take upon myself to say . but I know from his lip that 
 he long ago suspect Lady Dedlock of have discover , through 
 the sight of some handwriting - in this very house , and when you 
 yourself , Sir Leicester Dedlock , be present - the existence , in 
 great poverty , of a certain person who have be her lover before 
 you court she and who ought to have be her husband . " Mr. 
 Bucket stop and deliberately repeat , " ought to have be her 
 husband , not a doubt about it . I know from his lip that when that 
 person soon afterwards die , he suspect Lady Dedlock of visit 
 his wretched lodging and his wretched grave , alone and in secret . 
 I know from my own inquiry and through my eye and ear that Lady 
 Dedlock do make such visit in the dress of her own maid , for the 
 deceased Mr. Tulkinghorn employ I to reckon up her ladyship - if 
 you will excuse my make use of the term we commonly employ - and I 
 reckon she up , so far , completely . I confront the maid in the 
 chamber in Lincoln 's Inn Fields with a witness who have be Lady 
 Dedlock 's guide , and there could not   be the shadow of a doubt that 
 she have wear the young woman 's dress , unknown to she . Sir 
 Leicester Dedlock , Baronet , I do endeavour to pave the way a 
 little towards these unpleasant disclosure yesterday by say 
 that very strange thing happen even in high family sometimes . 
 all this , and more , have happen in your own family , and to and 
 through your own Lady . it be my belief that the deceased Mr. 
 Tulkinghorn follow up these inquiry to the hour of his death 
 and that he and Lady Dedlock even have bad blood between they upon 
 the matter that very night . now , only you put that to Lady 
 Dedlock , Sir Leicester Dedlock , Baronet , and ask her ladyship 
 whether , even after he have leave here , she do not   go down to his 
 chamber with the intention of say something further to he , 
 dress in a loose black mantle with a deep fringe to it . " 
 Sir Leicester sit like a statue , gaze at the cruel finger that 
 be probe the life - blood of his heart . 
 " you put that to her ladyship , Sir Leicester Dedlock , Baronet , from 
 I , Inspector Bucket of the Detective . and if her ladyship make 
 any difficulty about admit of it , you tell she that it be no 
 use , that Inspector Bucket know it and know that she pass the 
 soldier as you call he   though he be not in the army now   and 
 know that she know she pass he on the staircase . now , Sir 
 Leicester Dedlock , Baronet , why do I relate all this ? " 
 Sir Leicester , who have cover his face with his hand , utter a 
 single groan , request he to pause for a moment . by and by he 
 take his hand away , and so preserve his dignity and outward 
 calmness , though there be no more colour in his face than in his 
 white hair , that Mr. Bucket be a little awed by he . something 
 frozen and fix be upon his manner , over and above its usual shell 
 of haughtiness , and Mr. Bucket soon detect an unusual slowness in 
 his speech , with now and then a curious trouble in beginning , which 
 occasion he to utter inarticulate sound . with such sound he 
 now break silence , soon , however , control himself to say that 
 he do not comprehend why a gentleman so faithful and zealous as 
 the late Mr. Tulkinghorn should have communicate to he nothing of 
 this painful , this distressing , this unlooked - for , this 
 overwhelming , this incredible intelligence . 
 " again , Sir Leicester Dedlock , Baronet , " return Mr. Bucket , " put 
 it to her ladyship to clear that up . put it to her ladyship , if 
 you think it right , from Inspector Bucket of the Detective . you will 
 find , or I be much mistaken , that the deceased Mr. Tulkinghorn have 
 the intention of communicate the whole to you as soon as he 
 consider it ripe , and far , that he have give her ladyship so 
 to understand . why , he might have be go to reveal it the very 
 morning when I examine the body ! you do not   know what I be go to 
 say and do five minute from this present time , Sir Leicester 
 Dedlock , Baronet ; and suppose I be to be pick off now , you 
 might wonder why I have not   do it , do not   you see ? " 
 true . Sir Leicester , avoid , with some trouble those obtrusive 
 sound , say , " true . " at this juncture a considerable noise of 
 voice be hear in the hall . Mr. Bucket , after listen , go to 
 the library - door , softly unlock and open it , and listen again . 
 then he draw in his head and whisper hurriedly but composedly , 
 " Sir Leicester Dedlock , Baronet , this unfortunate family affair have 
 take air , as I expect it might , the deceased Mr. Tulkinghorn 
 be cut down so sudden . the chance to hush it be to let in these 
 people now in a wrangle with your footman . would you mind sit 
 quiet - on the family account - while I reckon them up ? and would you 
 just throw in a nod when I seem to ask you for it ? " 
 Sir Leicester indistinctly answer , " Officer . the good you can , 
 the good you can ! " and Mr. Bucket , with a nod and a sagacious crook 
 of the forefinger , slip down into the hall , where the voice 
 quickly die away . he be not long in return ; a few pace ahead 
 of Mercury and a brother deity also powder and in peach - blossom 
 small , who bear between they a chair in which be an incapable old 
 man . another man and two woman come behind . direct the 
 pitching of the chair in an affable and easy manner , Mr. Bucket 
 dismiss the Mercuries and lock the door again . Sir Leicester 
 look on at this invasion of the sacred precinct with an icy 
 stare . 
 " now , perhaps you may know I , lady and gentleman , " say Mr. 
 Bucket in a confidential voice . " I be Inspector Bucket of the 
 Detective , I be ; and this , " produce the tip of his convenient 
 little staff from his breast - pocket , " be my authority . now , you 
 want to see Sir Leicester Dedlock , Baronet . well ! you do see 
 he , and mind you , it be not   every one as be admit to that 
 honour . your name , old gentleman , be Smallweed ; that be what your 
 name be ; I know it well . " 
 " well , and you never hear any harm of it ! " cry Mr. Smallweed in 
 a shrill loud voice . 
 " you do not   happen to know why they kill the pig , do you ? " retort 
 Mr. Bucket with a steadfast look , but without loss of temper . 
 " no ! " 
 " why , they kill he , " say Mr. Bucket , " on account of his have 
 so much cheek . do not   you get into the same position , because it 
 be not   worthy of you . you be not   in the habit of converse with a 
 deaf person , be you ? " 
 " yes , " snarl Mr. Smallweed , " my wife 's deaf . " 
 " that account for your pitch your voice so high . but as she 
 be not   here ; just pitch it an octave or two low , will you , and 
 I will not only be oblige to you , but it will do you more credit , " 
 say Mr. Bucket . " this other gentleman be in the preach line , I 
 think ? " 
 " name of Chadband , " Mr. Smallweed put in , speak henceforth in a 
 much low key . 
 " once have a friend and brother serjeant of the same name , " say Mr. 
 Bucket , offer his hand , " and consequently feel a liking for it . 
 Mrs. Chadband , no doubt ? " 
 " and Mrs. Snagsby , " Mr. Smallweed introduce . 
 " Husband a law - stationer and a friend of my own , " say Mr. Bucket . 
 " love he like a brother ! now , what be up ? " 
 " do you mean what business have we come upon ? " Mr. Smallweed ask , 
 a little dash by the suddenness of this turn . 
 " ah ! you know what I mean . let we hear what it be all about in 
 presence of Sir Leicester Dedlock , Baronet . come . " 
 Mr. Smallweed , beckon Mr. Chadband , take a moment 's counsel 
 with he in a whisper . Mr. Chadband , express a considerable 
 amount of oil from the pore of his forehead and the palm of his 
 hand , say aloud , " yes . you first ! " and retire to his former 
 place . 
 " I be the client and friend of Mr. Tulkinghorn , " pip Grandfather 
 Smallweed then ; " I do business with he . I be useful to he , and 
 he be useful to I . Krook , dead and go , be my brother - in - law . 
 he be own brother to a brimstone magpie - leastways Mrs. Smallweed . 
 I come into Krook 's property . I examine all his paper and all 
 his effect . they be all dig out under my eye . there be a 
 bundle of letter belong to a dead and go lodger as be hid 
 away at the back of a shelf in the side of Lady Jane 's bed - his 
 cat 's bed . he hide all manner of thing away , everywhere . Mr. 
 Tulkinghorn want them and get them , but I look them over first . 
 I be a man of business , and I take a squint at them . they be 
 letter from the lodger 's sweetheart , and she sign Honoria . dear 
 I , that be not a common name , Honoria , be it ? there be no lady in 
 this house that sign Honoria be there ? oh , no , I do not   think so ! 
 oh , no , I do not   think so ! and not in the same hand , perhaps ? oh , 
 no , I do not   think so ! " 
 here Mr. Smallweed , seize with a fit of cough in the midst of 
 his triumph , break off to ejaculate , " oh , dear I ! oh , Lord ! I be 
 shake all to piece ! " 
 " now , when you be ready , " say Mr. Bucket after await his 
 recovery , " to come to anything that concern Sir Leicester Dedlock , 
 Baronet , here the gentleman sit , you know . " 
 " have not   I come to it , Mr. Bucket ? " cry Grandfather Smallweed . 
 " be not   the gentleman concern yet ? not with Captain Hawdon , and 
 his ever affectionate Honoria , and their child into the bargain ? 
 come , then , I want to know where those letter be . that concern 
 I , if it do not   concern Sir Leicester Dedlock . I will know where 
 they be . I will not   have them disappear so quietly . I hand them 
 over to my friend and solicitor , Mr. Tulkinghorn , not to anybody 
 else . " 
 " why , he pay you for they , you know , and handsome too , " say Mr. 
 Bucket . 
 " I do not   care for that . I want to know who be get them . and I tell 
 you what we want - what we all here want , Mr. Bucket . we want more 
 painstaking and search - making into this murder . we know where the 
 interest and the motive be , and you have not do enough . if 
 George the vagabond dragoon have any hand in it , he be only an 
 accomplice , and be set on . you know what I mean as well as any 
 man . " 
 " now I tell you what , " say Mr. Bucket , instantaneously alter 
 his manner , come close to he , and communicate an extraordinary 
 fascination to the forefinger , " I be damned if I be a - go to have 
 my case spoilt , or interfere with , or anticipate by so much as 
 half a second of time by any human being in creation . you want 
 more painstaking and search - making ! you do ? do you see this hand , 
 and do you think that I do not   know the right time to stretch it out 
 and put it on the arm that fire that shot ? " 
 such be the dread power of the man , and so terribly evident it be 
 that he make no idle boast , that Mr. Smallweed begin to 
 apologize . Mr. Bucket , dismiss his sudden anger , check he . 
 " the advice I give you be , do not   you trouble your head about the 
 murder . that be my affair . you keep half an eye on the newspaper , 
 and I should not   wonder if you be to read something about it before 
 long , if you look sharp . I know my business , and that be all I have 
 get to say to you on that subject . now about those letter . you 
 want to know who be get them . I do not   mind tell you . I have get 
 them . be that the packet ? " 
 Mr. Smallweed look , with greedy eye , at the little bundle Mr. 
 Bucket produce from a mysterious part of his coat , and identify 
 it as the same . 
 " what have you get to say next ? " ask Mr. Bucket . " now , do not   open 
 your mouth too wide , because you do not   look handsome when you do 
 it . " 
 " I want five hundred pound . " 
 " no , you do not ; you mean fifty , " say Mr. Bucket humorously . 
 it appear , however , that Mr. Smallweed mean five hundred . 
 " that be , I be depute by Sir Leicester Dedlock , Baronet , to 
 consider   without admit or promise anything   this bit of 
 business , " say Mr. Bucket - Sir Leicester mechanically bow his 
 head - " and you ask I to consider a proposal of five hundred 
 pound . why , it be an unreasonable proposal ! two fifty would be 
 bad enough , but well than that . had not   you well say two 
 fifty ? " 
 Mr. Smallweed be quite clear that he have well not . 
 " then , " say Mr. Bucket , " let us hear Mr. Chadband . Lord ! many a 
 time I have   hear my old fellow - serjeant of that name ; and a moderate 
 man he be in all respect , as ever I come across ! " 
 thus invite , Mr. Chadband step forth , and after a little sleek 
 smiling and a little oil - grind with the palm of his hand , 
 deliver himself as follow , " my friend , we be now - Rachael , my 
 wife , and i - in the mansion of the rich and great . why be we now 
 in the mansion of the rich and great , my friend ? be it because 
 we be invite ? because we be bid to feast with they , because 
 we be bid to rejoice with they , because we be bid to play 
 the lute with they , because we be bid to dance with they ? no . 
 then why be we here , my friend ? air we in possession of a sinful 
 secret , and do we require corn , and wine , and oil , or what be much 
 the same thing , money , for the keeping thereof ? probably so , my 
 friend . " 
 " you be a man of business , you be , " return Mr. Bucket , very 
 attentive , " and consequently you be go on to mention what the 
 nature of your secret be . you be right . you could not   do well . " 
 " let we then , my brother , in a spirit of love , " say Mr. Chadband 
 with a cunning eye , " proceed unto it . Rachael , my wife , advance ! " 
 Mrs. Chadband , more than ready , so advance as to jostle her 
 husband into the background and confront Mr. Bucket with a hard , 
 frown smile . 
 " since you want to know what we know , " say she , " I will tell you . I 
 help to bring up Miss Hawdon , her ladyship 's daughter . I be in 
 the service of her ladyship 's sister , who be very sensitive to the 
 disgrace her ladyship bring upon she , and give out , even to her 
 ladyship , that the child be dead - she be very nearly so - when she 
 be bear . but she be alive , and I know she . " with these word , and 
 a laugh , and lay a bitter stress on the word " ladyship , " Mrs. 
 Chadband fold her arm and look implacably at Mr. Bucket . 
 " I suppose now , " return that officer , " you will he expect a 
 twenty - pound note or a present of about that figure ? " 
 Mrs. Chadband merely laugh and contemptuously tell he he can 
 " offer " twenty pence . 
 " my friend the law - stationer 's good lady , over there , " say Mr. 
 Bucket , lure Mrs. Snagsby forward with the finger . " what may 
 your game be , ma'am ? " 
 Mrs. Snagsby be at first prevent , by tear and lamentation , from 
 state the nature of her game , but by degree it confusedly come 
 to light that she be a woman overwhelm with injury and wrong , 
 whom Mr. Snagsby have habitually deceive , abandon , and seek to 
 keep in darkness , and whose chief comfort , under her affliction , 
 have be the sympathy of the late Mr. Tulkinghorn , who show so 
 much commiseration for she on one occasion of his calling in Cook 's 
 Court in the absence of her perjure husband that she have of late 
 habitually carry to he all her woe . everybody it appear , the 
 present company except , have plot against Mrs. Snagsby 's peace . 
 there be Mr. Guppy , clerk to Kenge and Carboy , who be at first as 
 open as the sun at noon , but who suddenly shut up as close as 
 midnight , under the influence - no doubt - of Mr. Snagsby 's suborning 
 and tamper . there be Mr. Weevle , friend of Mr. Guppy , who live 
 mysteriously up a court , owe to the like coherent cause . there 
 be Krook , deceased ; there be Nimrod , deceased ; and there be Jo , 
 deceased ; and they be " all in it . " in what , Mrs. Snagsby do 
 not with particularity express , but she know that Jo be Mr. 
 Snagsby 's son , " as well as if a trumpet have speak it , " and she 
 follow Mr. Snagsby when he go on his last visit to the boy , and 
 if he be not his son why do he go ? the one occupation of her 
 life have be , for some time back , to follow Mr. Snagsby to and 
 fro , and up and down , and to piece suspicious circumstance 
 together - and every circumstance that have happen have be most 
 suspicious ; and in this way she have pursue her object of detect 
 and confound her false husband , night and day . thus do it come 
 to pass that she bring the Chadbands and Mr. Tulkinghorn 
 together , and confer with Mr. Tulkinghorn on the change in Mr. 
 Guppy , and help to turn up the circumstance in which the present 
 company be interested , casually , by the wayside , be still and 
 ever on the great high road that be to terminate in Mr. Snagsby 's 
 full exposure and a matrimonial separation . all this , Mrs. 
 Snagsby , as an injured woman , and the friend of Mrs. Chadband , and 
 the follower of Mr. Chadband , and the mourner of the late Mr. 
 Tulkinghorn , be here to certify under the seal of confidence , with 
 every possible confusion and involvement possible and impossible , 
 have no pecuniary motive whatever , no scheme or project but the 
 one mention , and bring here , and take everywhere , her own 
 dense atmosphere of dust , arise from the ceaseless work of her 
 mill of jealousy . 
 while this exordium be in hand - and it take some time - Mr. Bucket , 
 who have see through the transparency of Mrs. Snagsby 's vinegar at 
 a glance , confer with his familiar demon and bestow his shrewd 
 attention on the Chadbands and Mr. Smallweed . Sir Leicester 
 Dedlock remain immovable , with the same icy surface upon he , 
 except that he once or twice look towards Mr. Bucket , as rely 
 on that officer alone of all mankind . 
 " very good , " say Mr. Bucket . " now I understand you , you know , and 
 be depute by Sir Leicester Dedlock , Baronet , to look into this 
 little matter , " again Sir Leicester mechanically bow in 
 confirmation of the statement , " can give it my fair and full 
 attention . now I will not   allude to conspire to extort money or 
 anything of that sort , because we be man and woman of the world 
 here , and our object be to make thing pleasant . but I tell you 
 what I do wonder at ; I be surprised that you should think of make 
 a noise below in the hall . it be so opposed to your interest . 
 that be what I look at . " 
 " we want to get in , " plead Mr. Smallweed . 
 " why , of course you want to get in , " Mr. Bucket assert with 
 cheerfulness ; " but for a old gentleman at your time of life - what I 
 call truly venerable , mind you ! - with his wit sharpen , as I have 
 no doubt they be , by the loss of the use of his limb , which 
 occasion all his animation to mount up into his head , not to 
 consider that if he do not   keep such a business as the present as 
 close as possible it can not   be worth a mag to he , be so curious ! 
 you see your temper get the well of you ; that be where you lose 
 ground , " say Mr. Bucket in an argumentative and friendly way . 
 " I only say I would not   go without one of the servant come up to 
 Sir Leicester Dedlock , " return Mr. Smallweed . 
 " that be it ! that be where your temper get the well of you . now , 
 you keep it under another time and you will make money by it . shall 
 I ring for they to carry you down ? " 
 " when be we to hear more of this ? " Mrs. Chadband sternly demand . 
 " bless your heart for a true woman ! always curious , your 
 delightful sex be ! " reply Mr. Bucket with gallantry . " I shall 
 have the pleasure of give you a call to - morrow or next day - not 
 forget Mr. Smallweed and his proposal of two fifty . " 
 " five hundred ! " exclaim Mr. Smallweed . 
 " all right ! nominally five hundred . " Mr. Bucket have his hand on 
 the bell - rope . " shall I wish you good day for the present on the 
 part of myself and the gentleman of the house ? " he ask in an 
 insinuate tone . 
 nobody have the hardihood to object to his do so , he do it , 
 and the party retire as they come up . Mr. Bucket follow they to 
 the door , and return , say with an air of serious business , " Sir 
 Leicester Dedlock , Baronet , it be for you to consider whether or not 
 to buy this up . I should recommend , on the whole , it be be 
 buy up myself ; and I think it may be buy pretty cheap . you 
 see , that little pickled cowcumber of a Mrs. Snagsby have be use 
 by all side of the speculation and have do a deal more harm in 
 bring odd and end together than if she have mean it . Mr. 
 Tulkinghorn , deceased , he hold all these horse in his hand and 
 could have drive them his own way , I have not   a doubt ; but he be 
 fetch off the box head - foremost , and now they have get their leg 
 over the trace , and be all drag and pull their own way . 
 so it be , and such be life . the cat be away , and the mouse they 
 play ; the frost break up , and the water run . now , with regard to 
 the party to be apprehend . " 
 Sir Leicester seem to wake , though his eye have be wide open , 
 and he look intently at Mr. Bucket as Mr. Bucket refer to his 
 watch . 
 " the party to be apprehend be now in this house , " proceed Mr. 
 Bucket , put up his watch with a steady hand and with rise 
 spirit , " and I be about to take she into custody in your presence . 
 Sir Leicester Dedlock , Baronet , do not   you say a word nor yet stir . 
 there will be no noise and no disturbance at all . I will come back in 
 the course of the evening , if agreeable to you , and endeavour to 
 meet your wish respect this unfortunate family matter and the 
 nobbi way of keep it quiet . now , Sir Leicester Dedlock , 
 Baronet , do not   you be nervous on account of the apprehension at 
 present come off . you shall see the whole case clear , from first 
 to last . " 
 Mr. Bucket ring , go to the door , briefly whisper Mercury , shut 
 the door , and stand behind it with his arm fold . after a 
 suspense of a minute or two the door slowly open and a Frenchwoman 
 enter . Mademoiselle Hortense . 
 the moment she be in the room Mr. Bucket clap the door to and put 
 his back against it . the suddenness of the noise occasion she to 
 turn , and then for the first time she see Sir Leicester Dedlock in 
 his chair . 
 " I ask you pardon , " she mutter hurriedly . " they tell I there be 
 no one here . " 
 her step towards the door bring she front to front with Mr. 
 Bucket . suddenly a spasm shoot across her face and she turn 
 deadly pale . 
 " this be my lodger , Sir Leicester Dedlock , " say Mr. Bucket , 
 nod at she . " this foreign young woman have be my lodger for 
 some week back . " 
 " what do Sir Leicester care for that , you think , my angel ? " return 
 mademoiselle in a jocular strain . 
 " why , my angel , " return Mr. Bucket , " we shall see . " 
 Mademoiselle Hortense eye he with a scowl upon her tight face , 
 which gradually change into a smile of scorn , " you be very 
 mysterieuse . be you drunk ? " 
 " tolerable sober , my angel , " return Mr. Bucket . 
 " I come from arrive at this so detestable house with your wife . 
 your wife have leave I since some minute . they tell I downstair 
 that your wife be here . I come here , and your wife be not here . 
 what be the intention of this fool 's play , say then ? " mademoiselle 
 demand , with her arm composedly cross , but with something in 
 her dark cheek beat like a clock . 
 Mr. Bucket merely shake the finger at she . 
 " ah , my God , you be an unhappy idiot ! " cry mademoiselle with a 
 toss of her head and a laugh . " leave I to pass downstairs , great 
 pig . " with a stamp of her foot and a menace . 
 " now , mademoiselle , " say Mr. Bucket in a cool determined way , " you 
 go and sit down upon that sofy . " 
 " I will not sit down upon nothing , " she reply with a shower of 
 nod . 
 " now , mademoiselle , " repeat Mr. Bucket , make no demonstration 
 except with the finger , " you sit down upon that sofy . " 
 " why ? " 
 " because I take you into custody on a charge of murder , and you 
 do not   need to be tell it . now , I want to be polite to one of your 
 sex and a foreigner if I can . if I can not , I must be rough , and 
 there be rougher one outside . what I be to be depend on you . so 
 I recommend you , as a friend , afore another half a blessed moment 
 have pass over your head , to go and sit down upon that sofy . " 
 Mademoiselle complie , say in a concentrated voice while that 
 something in her cheek beat fast and hard , " you be a devil . " 
 " now , you see , " Mr. Bucket proceed approvingly , " you be 
 comfortable and conduct yourself as I should expect a foreign 
 young woman of your sense to do . so I will give you a piece of 
 advice , and it be this , do not   you talk too much . you be not 
 expect to say anything here , and you can not   keep too quiet a 
 tongue in your head . in short , the less you PARLAY , the well , 
 you know . " Mr. Bucket be very complacent over this french 
 explanation . 
 Mademoiselle , with that tigerish expansion of the mouth and her 
 black eye dart fire upon he , sit upright on the sofa in a 
 rigid state , with her hand clench - and her foot too , one might 
 suppose - muttering , " oh , you Bucket , you be a devil ! " 
 " now , Sir Leicester Dedlock , Baronet , " say Mr. Bucket , and from 
 this time forth the finger never rest , " this young woman , my 
 lodger , be her ladyship 's maid at the time I have mention to 
 you ; and this young woman , besides be extraordinary vehement and 
 passionate against her ladyship after be discharge - " 
 " lie ! " cry mademoiselle . " I discharge myself . " 
 " now , why do not   you take my advice ? " return Mr. Bucket in an 
 impressive , almost in an imploring , tone . " I be surprised at the 
 indiscreetness you commit . you will say something that will be use 
 against you , you know . you be sure to come to it . never you mind 
 what I say till it be give in evidence . it be not address to 
 you . " 
 " discharge , too , " cry mademoiselle furiously , " by her ladyship ! 
 Eh , my faith , a pretty ladyship ! why , I r - r - r - ruin my character by 
 remain with a ladyship so infame ! " 
 " upon my soul I wonder at you ! " Mr. Bucket remonstrate . " I 
 think the French be a polite nation , I do , really . yet to 
 hear a female going on like that before Sir Leicester Dedlock , 
 Baronet ! " 
 " he be a poor abuse ! " cry mademoiselle . " I spit upon his house , 
 upon his name , upon his imbecility , " all of which she make the 
 carpet represent . " oh , that he be a great man ! oh , yes , superb ! 
 oh , heaven ! bah ! " 
 " well , Sir Leicester Dedlock , " proceed Mr. Bucket , " this 
 intemperate foreigner also angrily take it into her head that she 
 have establish a claim upon Mr. Tulkinghorn , deceased , by 
 attend on the occasion I tell you of at his chamber , though she 
 be liberally pay for her time and trouble . " 
 " lie ! " cry mademoiselle . " I ref - use his money all togezzer . " 
 " if you will parlay , you know , " say Mr. Bucket parenthetically , 
 " you must take the consequence . now , whether she become my 
 lodger , Sir Leicester Dedlock , with any deliberate intention then 
 of do this deed and blind I , I give no opinion on ; but she 
 live in my house in that capacity at the time that she be 
 hover about the chamber of the deceased Mr. Tulkinghorn with a 
 view to a wrangle , and likewise persecute and half frightening 
 the life out of an unfortunate stationer . " 
 " lie ! " cry mademoiselle . " all lie ! " 
 " the murder be commit , Sir Leicester Dedlock , Baronet , and you 
 know under what circumstance . now , I beg of you to follow I 
 close with your attention for a minute or two . I be send for , and 
 the case be entrust to I . I examine the place , and the body , 
 and the paper , and everything . from information I receive   from 
 a clerk in the same house   I take George into custody as have 
 be see hang about there on the night , and at very nigh the 
 time of the murder , also as have be overhear in high word 
 with the deceased on former occasion - even threaten he , as the 
 witness make out . if you ask I , Sir Leicester Dedlock , whether 
 from the first I believe George to be the murderer , I tell you 
 candidly no , but he might be , notwithstanding , and there be enough 
 against he to make it my duty to take he and get he keep under 
 remand . now , observe ! " 
 as Mr. Bucket bend forward in some excitement - for he - and 
 inaugurate what he be go to say with one ghostly beat of his 
 forefinger in the air , Mademoiselle Hortense fix her black eye 
 upon he with a dark frown and set her dry lip closely and firmly 
 together . 
 " I go home , Sir Leicester Dedlock , Baronet , at night and find 
 this young woman have supper with my wife , Mrs. Bucket . she have 
 make a mighty show of be fond of Mrs. Bucket from her first 
 offer herself as our lodger , but that night she make more than 
 ever - in fact , overdo it . likewise she overdo her respect , and 
 all that , for the lamented memory of the deceased Mr. Tulkinghorn . 
 by the live Lord it flash upon I , as I sit opposite to she at 
 the table and see she with a knife in her hand , that she have do 
 it ! " 
 Mademoiselle be hardly audible in strain through her tooth and 
 lip the word , " you be a devil . " 
 " now where , " pursue Mr. Bucket , " have she be on the night of the 
 murder ? she have be to the theayter .   she really be there , I 
 have since find , both before the deed and after it .   I know I have 
 an artful customer to deal with and that proof would be very 
 difficult ; and I lay a trap for she - such a trap as I never lay 
 yet , and such a venture as I never make yet . I work it out in my 
 mind while I be talk to she at supper . when I go upstairs to 
 bed , our house be small and this young woman 's ear sharp , I 
 stuff the sheet into Mrs. Bucket 's mouth that she should not   say a 
 word of surprise and tell she all about it . my dear , do not   you 
 give your mind to that again , or I shall link your foot together at 
 the ankle . " Mr. Bucket , break off , have make a noiseless 
 descent upon mademoiselle and lay his heavy hand upon her 
 shoulder . 
 " what be the matter with you now ? " she ask he . 
 " do not   you think any more , " return Mr. Bucket with admonitory 
 finger , " of throw yourself out of window . that be what be the 
 matter with I . come ! just take my arm . you need not   get up ; I will 
 sit down by you . now take my arm , will you ? I be a married man , 
 you know ; you be acquaint with my wife . just take my arm . " 
 vainly endeavour to moisten those dry lip , with a painful sound 
 she struggle with herself and complie . 
 " now we be all right again . Sir Leicester Dedlock , Baronet , this 
 case could never have be the case it be but for Mrs. Bucket , who 
 be a woman in fifty thousand - in a hundred and fifty thousand ! to 
 throw this young woman off her guard , I have never set foot in our 
 house since , though I have   communicate with Mrs. Bucket in the 
 baker 's loaf and in the milk as often as require . my whisper 
 word to Mrs. Bucket when she have the sheet in her mouth be , ' my 
 dear , can you throw she off continually with natural account of my 
 suspicion against George , and this , and that , and t'other ? can 
 you do without rest and keep watch upon her night and day ? can you 
 undertake to say , ' she shall do nothing without my knowledge , she 
 shall be my prisoner without suspect it , she shall no more 
 escape from I than from death , and her life shall be my life , and 
 her soul my soul , till I have get she , if she do this murder ? ' 
 Mrs. Bucket say to I , as well as she could speak on account of 
 the sheet , ' Bucket , I can ! ' and she have act up to it glorious ! " 
 " lie ! " mademoiselle interpose . " all lie , my friend ! " 
 " Sir Leicester Dedlock , Baronet , how do my calculation come out 
 under these circumstance ? when I calculate that this impetuous 
 young woman would overdo it in new direction , be I wrong or 
 right ? I be right . what do she try to do ? do not   let it give 
 you a turn ? to throw the murder on her ladyship . " 
 Sir Leicester rise from his chair and stagger down again . 
 " and she get encouragement in it from hear that I be always 
 here , which be do a - purpose . now , open that pocket - book of 
 mine , Sir Leicester Dedlock , if I may take the liberty of throw 
 it towards you , and look at the letter send to I , each with the 
 two word ' Lady Dedlock ' in it . open the one direct to yourself , 
 which I stop this very morning , and read the three word ' Lady 
 Dedlock , Murderess ' in it . these letter have be fall about 
 like a shower of lady - bird . what do you say now to Mrs. Bucket , 
 from her spy - place have see they all ' write by this young 
 woman ? what do you say to Mrs. Bucket have , within this half- 
 hour , secure the corresponding ink and paper , fellow half - sheet 
 and what not ? what do you say to Mrs. Bucket have watch the 
 posting of them every one by this young woman , Sir Leicester 
 Dedlock , Baronet ? " Mr. Bucket ask , triumphant in his admiration 
 of his lady 's genius . 
 two thing be especially observable as Mr. Bucket proceed to a 
 conclusion . first , that he seem imperceptibly to establish a 
 dreadful right of property in mademoiselle . secondly , that the 
 very atmosphere she breathe seem to narrow and contract about she 
 as if a close net or a pall be be draw near and yet nearer 
 around her breathless figure . 
 " there be no doubt that her ladyship be on the spot at the 
 eventful period , " say Mr. Bucket , " and my foreign friend here see 
 she , I believe , from the upper part of the staircase . her ladyship 
 and George and my foreign friend be all pretty close on one 
 another 's heel . but that do not   signify any more , so I will not go 
 into it . I find the wadding of the pistol with which the deceased 
 Mr. Tulkinghorn be shoot . it be a bit of the print description 
 of your house at Chesney Wold . not much in that , you will say , Sir 
 Leicester Dedlock , Baronet . no . but when my foreign friend here 
 be so thoroughly off her guard as to think it a safe time to tear 
 up the rest of that leaf , and when Mrs. Bucket put the piece 
 together and find the wadding wanting , it begin to look like 
 Queer Street . " 
 " these be very long lie , " mademoiselle interpose . " you prose 
 great deal . be it that you have almost all finish , or be you 
 speak always ? " 
 " Sir Leicester Dedlock , Baronet , " proceed Mr. Bucket , who delight 
 in a full title and do violence to himself when he dispense with 
 any fragment of it , " the last point in the case which I be now 
 go to mention show the necessity of patience in our business , 
 and never do a thing in a hurry . I watch this young woman 
 yesterday without her knowledge when she be look at the 
 funeral , in company with my wife , who plan to take she there ; 
 and I have so much to convict she , and I see such an expression in 
 her face , and my mind so rise against her malice towards her 
 ladyship , and the time be altogether such a time for bring down 
 what you may call retribution upon she , that if I have be a 
 young hand with less experience , I should have take she , 
 certain . equally , last night , when her ladyship , as be so 
 universally admire I be sure , come home look - why , Lord , a man 
 might almost say like Venus rise from the ocean - it be so 
 unpleasant and inconsistent to think of her be charge with a 
 murder of which she be innocent that I feel quite to want to put 
 an end to the job . what should I have lose ? Sir Leicester 
 Dedlock , Baronet , I should have lose the weapon . my prisoner here 
 propose to Mrs. Bucket , after the departure of the funeral , that 
 they should go per bus a little way into the country and take tea 
 at a very decent house of entertainment . now , near that house of 
 entertainment there be a piece of water . at tea , my prisoner get up 
 to fetch her pocket handkercher from the bedroom where the bonnet 
 be ; she be rather a long time go and come back a little out of 
 wind . as soon as they come home this be report to I by Mrs. 
 Bucket , along with her observation and suspicion . I have the 
 piece of water drag by moonlight , in presence of a couple of our 
 man , and the pocket pistol be bring up before it have be there 
 half - a - dozen hour . now , my dear , put your arm a little far 
 through mine , and hold it steady , and I shall not   hurt you ! " 
 in a trice Mr. Bucket snap a handcuff on her wrist . " that be one , " 
 say Mr. Bucket . " now the other , darling . two , and all tell ! " 
 he rise ; she rise too . " where , " she ask he , darken she 
 large eye until their droop lid almost conceal they - and yet 
 they stare , " where be your false , your treacherous , and curse 
 wife ? " 
 " she be go forrard to the Police Office , " return Mr. Bucket . 
 " you will see she there , my dear . " 
 " I would like to kiss she ! " exclaim Mademoiselle Hortense , pant 
 tigress - like . 
 " you would bite she , I suspect , " say Mr. Bucket . 
 " I would ! " make her eye very large . " I would love to tear she 
 limb from limb . " 
 " bless you , darling , " say Mr. Bucket with the great composure , 
 " I be fully prepared to hear that . your sex have such a surprising 
 animosity against one another when you do differ . you do not   mind 
 I half so much , do you ? " 
 " no . though you be a devil still . " 
 " Angel and devil by turn , eh ? " cry Mr. Bucket . " but I be in my 
 regular employment , you must consider . let I put your shawl tidy . 
 I have   be lady 's maid to a good many before now . anything want 
 to the bonnet ? there be a cab at the door . " 
 Mademoiselle Hortense , cast an indignant eye at the glass , 
 shake herself perfectly neat in one shake and look , to do she 
 justice , uncommonly genteel . 
 " listen then , my angel , " say she after several sarcastic nod . 
 " you be very spiritual . but can you restore he back to life ? " 
 Mr. Bucket answer , " not exactly . " 
 " that be droll . listen yet one time . you be very spiritual . can 
 you make a honourable lady of she ? " 
 " do not   be so malicious , " say Mr. Bucket . 
 " or a haughty gentleman of HIM ? " cry mademoiselle , refer to 
 Sir Leicester with ineffable disdain . " eh ! oh , then regard he ! 
 the poor infant ! ha ! ha ! ha ! " 
 " come , come , why this be bad parlaying than the other , " say Mr. 
 Bucket . " come along ! " 
 " you can not do these thing ? then you can do as you please with 
 I . it be but the death , it be all the same . let we go , my angel . 
 Adieu , you old man , grey . I pity you , and I despise you ! " 
 with these last word she snap her tooth together as if her mouth 
 close with a spring . it be impossible to describe how Mr. Bucket 
 get she out , but he accomplish that feat in a manner so peculiar 
 to himself , enfold and pervade she like a cloud , and hover 
 away with she as if he be a homely Jupiter and she the object of 
 his affection . 
 Sir Leicester , leave alone , remain in the same attitude , as though 
 he be still listen and his attention be still occupy . at 
 length he gaze round the empty room , and find it desert , 
 rise unsteadily to his foot , push back his chair , and walk a 
 few step , support himself by the table . then he stop , and 
 with more of those inarticulate sound , lift up his eye and seem 
 to stare at something . 
 Heaven know what he see . the green , green wood of Chesney Wold , 
 the noble house , the picture of his forefather , stranger 
 deface they , officer of police coarsely handle his most 
 precious heirloom , thousand of finger point at he , thousand 
 of face sneer at he . but if such shadow flit before he to 
 his bewilderment , there be one other shadow which he can name with 
 something like distinctness even yet and to which alone he 
 address his tearing of his white hair and his extended arm . 
 it be she in association with whom , save that she have be for 
 year a main fibre of the root of his dignity and pride , he have 
 never have a selfish thought . it be she whom he have love , admire , 
 honour , and set up for the world to respect . it be she who , at 
 the core of all the constrain formality and conventionality 
 of his life , have be a stock of living tenderness and love , 
 susceptible as nothing else be of be strike with the agony he 
 feel . he see she , almost to the exclusion of himself , and can not 
 bear to look upon she cast down from the high place she have grace 
 so well . 
 and even to the point of his sinking on the ground , oblivious of 
 his suffering , he can yet pronounce her name with something like 
 distinctness in the midst of those intrusive sound , and in a tone 
 of mourning and compassion rather than reproach . 
 CHAPTER LV 
 Flight 
 Inspector Bucket of the Detective have not yet strike his great 
 blow , as just now chronicle , but be yet refresh himself with 
 sleep preparatory to his field - day , when through the night and 
 along the freezing wintry road a chaise and pair come out of 
 Lincolnshire , make its way towards London . 
 railroad shall soon traverse all this country , and with a rattle 
 and a glare the engine and train shall shoot like a meteor over the 
 wide night - landscape , turn the moon paler ; but as yet such 
 thing be non - existent in these part , though not wholly 
 unexpected . preparation be afoot , measurement be make , ground 
 be stake out . bridge be begin , and their not yet united pier 
 desolately look at one another over road and stream like brick 
 and mortar couple with an obstacle to their union ; fragment of 
 embankment be throw up and leave as precipice with torrent of 
 rusty cart and barrow tumble over they ; tripod of tall pole 
 appear on hilltop , where there be rumour of tunnel ; everything 
 look chaotic and abandon in full hopelessness . along the 
 freeze road , and through the night , the post - chaise make its 
 way without a railroad on its mind . 
 Mrs. Rouncewell , so many year housekeeper at Chesney Wold , sit 
 within the chaise ; and by her side sit Mrs. Bagnet with her grey 
 cloak and umbrella . the old girl would prefer the bar in front , as 
 be expose to the weather and a primitive sort of perch more in 
 accordance with her usual course of travel , but Mrs. Rouncewell 
 be too thoughtful of her comfort to admit of she propose it . the 
 old lady can not make enough of the old girl . she sit , in her 
 stately manner , hold her hand , and regardless of its roughness , 
 put it often to her lip . " you be a mother , my dear soul , " say 
 she many time , " and you find out my George 's mother ! " 
 " why , George , " return Mrs. Bagnet , " be always free with I , 
 ma'am , and when he say at our house to my Woolwich that of all the 
 thing my Woolwich could have to think of when he grow to be a man , 
 the comfortable would be that he have never bring a sorrowful 
 line into his mother 's face or turn a hair of her head grey , then 
 I feel sure , from his way , that something fresh have bring his own 
 mother into his mind . I have often know he say to I , in past 
 time , that he have behave bad to she . " 
 " never , my dear ! " return Mrs. Rouncewell , burst into tear . 
 " my blessing on he , never ! he be always fond of I , and love 
 to I , be my George ! but he have a bold spirit , and he run a 
 little wild and go for a soldier . and I know he wait at first , 
 in let we know about himself , till he should rise to be an 
 officer ; and when he do not   rise , I know he consider himself 
 beneath we , and would not   be a disgrace to we . for he have a lion 
 heart , have my George , always from a baby ! " 
 the old lady 's hand stray about she as of yore , while she recall , 
 all in a tremble , what a likely lad , what a fine lad , what a gay 
 good - humour clever lad he be ; how they all take to he down at 
 Chesney Wold ; how Sir Leicester take to he when he be a young 
 gentleman ; how the dog take to he ; how even the people who have 
 be angry with he forgave he the moment he be gone , poor boy . 
 and now to see he after all , and in a prison too ! and the broad 
 stomacher heave , and the quaint upright old - fashioned figure bend 
 under its load of affectionate distress . 
 Mrs. Bagnet , with the instinctive skill of a good warm heart , 
 leave the old housekeeper to her emotion for a little while - not 
 without pass the back of her hand across her own motherly eye - 
 and presently chirp up in her cheery manner , " so I say to George 
 when I go to call he in to tea   he pretend to be smoke his 
 pipe outside , ' what ail you this afternoon , George , for gracious 
 sake ? I have see all sort , and I have see you pretty often in 
 season and out of season , abroad and at home , and I never see you 
 so melancholy penitent . ' ' why , Mrs. Bagnet , ' say George , ' it be 
 because I be melancholy and penitent both , this afternoon , that you 
 see I so . ' ' what have you do , old fellow ? ' I say . ' why , Mrs. 
 Bagnet , ' say George , shake his head , ' what I have do have be 
 do this many a long year , and be good not try to be undo now . 
 if I ever get to heaven it will not   be for be a good son to a 
 widow mother ; I say no more . ' now , ma'am , when George say to I 
 that it be well not try to be undo now , I have my thought as I 
 have often have before , and I draw it out of George how he come to 
 have such thing on he that afternoon . then George tell I that 
 he have see by chance , at the lawyer 's office , a fine old lady that 
 have bring his mother plain before he , and he run on about that 
 old lady till he quite forget himself and paint her picture to I 
 as she use to be , year upon year back . so I say to George when 
 he have do , who be this old lady he have see ? and George tell I 
 it be Mrs. Rouncewell , housekeeper for more than half a century to 
 the Dedlock family down at Chesney Wold in Lincolnshire . George 
 have frequently tell I before that he be a Lincolnshire man , and I 
 say to my old Lignum that night , ' Lignum , that be his mother for 
 five and for - ty pound ! ' " 
 all this Mrs. Bagnet now relate for the twentieth time at least 
 within the last four hour . trill it out like a kind of bird , 
 with a pretty high note , that it may be audible to the old lady 
 above the hum of the wheel . 
 " bless you , and thank you , " say Mrs. Rouncewell . " bless you , and 
 thank you , my worthy soul ! " 
 " dear heart ! " cry Mrs. Bagnet in the most natural manner . " no 
 thank to I , I be sure . thank to yourself , ma'am , for be so 
 ready to pay them ! and mind once more , ma'am , what you have good do 
 on find George to be your own son be to make he - for your sake 
  - have every sort of help to put himself in the right and clear 
 himself of a charge of which he be as innocent as you or I . it 
 will not   do to have truth and justice on his side ; he must have law 
 and lawyer , " exclaim the old girl , apparently persuade that the 
 latter form a separate establishment and have dissolve partnership 
 with truth and justice for ever and a day . 
 " he shall have , " say Mrs. Rouncewell , " all the help that can be 
 get for he in the world , my dear . I will spend all I have , and 
 thankfully , to procure it . Sir Leicester will do his good , the 
 whole family will do their good . I - I know something , my dear ; and 
 will make my own appeal , as his mother part from he all these 
 year , and find he in a jail at last . " 
 the extreme disquietude of the old housekeeper 's manner in say 
 this , her broken word , and her wringing of her hand make a 
 powerful impression on Mrs. Bagnet and would astonish she but that 
 she refer they all to her sorrow for her son 's condition . and yet 
 Mrs. Bagnet wonder too why Mrs. Rouncewell should murmur so 
 distractedly , " my Lady , my Lady , my Lady ! " over and over again . 
 the frosty night wear away , and the dawn break , and the post- 
 chaise come roll on through the early mist like the ghost of a 
 chaise depart . it have plenty of spectral company in ghost of 
 tree and hedge , slowly vanish and give place to the 
 reality of day . London reach , the traveller alight , the old 
 housekeeper in great tribulation and confusion , Mrs. Bagnet quite 
 fresh and collect - as she would be if her next point , with no new 
 equipage and outfit , be the Cape of Good Hope , the Island of 
 Ascension , Hong Kong , or any other military station . 
 but when they set out for the prison where the trooper be confine , 
 the old lady have manage to draw about she , with her lavender- 
 coloured dress , much of the staid calmness which be its usual 
 accompaniment . a wonderfully grave , precise , and handsome piece of 
 old china she look , though her heart beat fast and her stomacher 
 be ruffle more than even the remembrance of this wayward son have 
 ruffle it these many year . 
 approach the cell , they find the door opening and a warder in 
 the act of come out . the old girl promptly make a sign of 
 entreaty to he to say nothing ; assent with a nod , he suffer 
 they to enter as he shut the door . 
 so George , who be write at his table , suppose himself to be 
 alone , do not raise his eye , but remain absorb . the old 
 housekeeper look at he , and those wandering hand of her be 
 quite enough for Mrs. Bagnet 's confirmation , even if she could see 
 the mother and the son together , know what she know , and doubt 
 their relationship . 
 not a rustle of the housekeeper 's dress , not a gesture , not a word 
 betray she . she stand look at he as he write on , all 
 unconscious , and only her flutter hand give utterance to her 
 emotion . but they be very eloquent , very , very eloquent . Mrs. 
 Bagnet understand they . they speak of gratitude , of joy , of 
 grief , of hope ; of inextinguishable affection , cherish with no 
 return since this stalwart man be a stripling ; of a well son 
 love less , and this son love so fondly and so proudly ; and they 
 speak in such touching language that Mrs. Bagnet 's eye brim up 
 with tear and they run glisten down her sun - brown face . 
 " George Rouncewell ! oh , my dear child , turn and look at I ! " 
 the trooper start up , clasp his mother round the neck , and fall 
 down on his knee before she . whether in a late repentance , 
 whether in the first association that come back upon he , he put 
 his hand together as a child do when it say its prayer , and 
 raise they towards her breast , bow down his head , and cry . 
 " my George , my dear son ! always my favourite , and my favourite 
 still , where have you be these cruel year and year ? grow such 
 a man too , grow such a fine strong man . grow so like what I know 
 he must be , if it please God he be alive ! " 
 she can ask , and he can answer , nothing connect for a time . all 
 that time the old girl , turn away , lean one arm against the 
 whitened wall , lean her honest forehead upon it , wipe her eye 
 with her serviceable grey cloak , and quite enjoy herself like the 
 good of old girl as she be . 
 " Mother , " say the trooper when they be more compose , " forgive I 
 first of all , for I know my need of it . " 
 forgive he ! she do it with all her heart and soul . she always 
 have do it . she tell he how she have have it write in her will , 
 these many year , that he be her beloved son George . she have 
 never believe any ill of he , never . if she have die without this 
 happiness - and she be an old woman now and can not   look to live very 
 long - she would have bless he with her last breath , if she have 
 have her sens , as her beloved son George . 
 " Mother , I have be an undutiful trouble to you , and I have my 
 reward ; but of late year I have have a kind of glimmering of a 
 purpose in I too . when I leave home I do not   care much , mother - I 
 be afraid not a great deal - for leaving ; and go away and ' list , 
 harum - scarum , make believe to think that I care for nobody , no 
 not I , and that nobody care for I . " 
 the trooper have dry his eye and put away his handkerchief , but 
 there be an extraordinary contrast between his habitual manner of 
 express himself and carry himself and the soften tone in 
 which he speak , interrupt occasionally by a half - stifle sob . 
 " so I write a line home , mother , as you too well know , to say I have 
 ' list under another name , and I go abroad . abroad , at one time 
 I think I would write home next year , when I might be well off ; 
 and when that year be out , I think I would write home next year , 
 when I might be well off ; and when that year be out again , 
 perhaps I do not   think much about it . so on , from year to year , 
 through a service of ten year , till I begin to get old , and to 
 ask myself why should I ever write . " 
 " I do not   find any fault , child - but not to ease my mind , George ? 
 not a word to your love mother , who be grow old too ? " 
 this almost overturn the trooper afresh , but he set himself up 
 with a great , rough , sound clearance of his throat . 
 " Heaven forgive I , mother , but I think there would be small 
 consolation then in hear anything about I . there be you , 
 respect and esteem . there be my brother , as I read in chance 
 North Country paper now and then , rise to be prosperous and 
 famous . there be I a dragoon , roving , unsettled , not self - make 
 like he , but self - unmade - all my early advantage throw away , 
 all my little learn unlearnt , nothing pick up but what 
 unfit I for most thing that I could think of . what business 
 have I to make myself know ? after let all that time go by I , 
 what good could come of it ? the bad be past with you , mother . 
 I know by that time   be a man   how you have mourn for I , and 
 weep for I , and pray for I ; and the pain be over , or be 
 soften down , and I be well in your mind as it be . " 
 the old lady sorrowfully shake her head , and take one of his 
 powerful hand , lay it lovingly upon her shoulder . 
 " no , I do not   say that it be so , mother , but that I make it out to 
 be so . I say just now , what good could come of it ? well , my dear 
 mother , some good might have come of it to myself - and there be 
 the meanness of it . you would have seek I out ; you would have 
 purchase my discharge ; you would have take I down to Chesney 
 Wold ; you would have bring I and my brother and my brother 's 
 family together ; you would all have consider anxiously how to do 
 something for I and set I up as a respectable civilian . but how 
 could any of you feel sure of I when I could not   so much as feel 
 sure of myself ? how could you help regard as an incumbrance and 
 a discredit to you an idle dragooning chap who be an incumbrance 
 and a discredit to himself , except under discipline ? how could 
 I look my brother 's child in the face and pretend to set they an 
 example - I , the vagabond boy who have run away from home and be 
 the grief and unhappiness of my mother 's life ? ' no , George . ' such 
 be my word , mother , when I pass this in review before I : ' you 
 have make your bed . now , lie upon it . ' " 
 Mrs. Rouncewell , draw up her stately form , shake her head at 
 the old girl with a swell pride upon she , as much as to say , " I 
 tell you so ! " the old girl relieve her feeling and testify her 
 interest in the conversation by give the trooper a great poke 
 between the shoulder with her umbrella ; this action she afterwards 
 repeat , at interval , in a species of affectionate lunacy , never 
 fail , after the administration of each of these remonstrance , 
 to resort to the whitened wall and the grey cloak again . 
 " this be the way I bring myself to think , mother , that my good 
 amend be to lie upon that bed I have make , and die upon it . and I 
 should have do it   though I have be to see you more than once 
 down at Chesney Wold , when you little think of I   but for my old 
 comrade 's wife here , who I find have be too many for I . but I 
 thank she for it . I thank you for it , Mrs. Bagnet , with all my 
 heart and might . " 
 to which Mrs. Bagnet respond with two poke . 
 and now the old lady impress upon her son George , her own dear 
 recover boy , her joy and pride , the light of her eye , the happy 
 close of her life , and every fond name she can think of , that he 
 must be govern by the good advice obtainable by money and 
 influence , that he must yield up his case to the great lawyer 
 that can be get , that he must act in this serious plight as he 
 shall be advise to act and must not be self - willed , however right , 
 but must promise to think only of his poor old mother 's anxiety and 
 suffering until he be release , or he will break her heart . 
 " Mother , ' tis little enough to consent to , " return the trooper , 
 stop she with a kiss ; " tell I what I shall do , and I will make a 
 late beginning and do it . Mrs. Bagnet , you will take care of my 
 mother , I know ? " 
 a very hard poke from the old girl 's umbrella . 
 " if you will bring she acquainted with Mr. Jarndyce and Miss 
 Summerson , she will find they of her way of thinking , and they will 
 give she the good advice and assistance . " 
 " and , George , " say the old lady , " we must send with all haste for 
 your brother . he be a sensible sound man as they tell I - out in 
 the world beyond Chesney Wold , my dear , though I do not   know much of 
 it myself - and will be of great service . " 
 " Mother , " return the trooper , " be it too soon to ask a favour ? " 
 " surely not , my dear . " 
 " then grant I this one great favour . do not   let my brother know . " 
 " not know what , my dear ? " 
 " not know of I . in fact , mother , I can not   bear it ; I can not   make up 
 my mind to it . he have prove himself so different from I and have 
 do so much to raise himself while I have   be soldier that I 
 have not   brass enough in my composition to see he in this place and 
 under this charge . how could a man like he be expect to have 
 any pleasure in such a discovery ? it be impossible . no , keep my 
 secret from he , mother ; do I a great kindness than I deserve 
 and keep my secret from my brother , of all man . " 
 " but not always , dear George ? " 
 " why , mother , perhaps not for good and all - though I may come to 
 ask that too - but keep it now , I do entreat you . if it be ever 
 break to he that his rip of a brother have turn up , I could 
 wish , " say the trooper , shake his head very doubtfully , " to 
 break it myself and be govern as to advance or retreat by 
 the way in which he seem to take it . " 
 as he evidently have a rooted feeling on this point , and as the 
 depth of it be recognize in Mrs. Bagnet 's face , his mother yield 
 her implicit assent to what he ask . for this he thank she 
 kindly . 
 " in all other respect , my dear mother , I will be as tractable and 
 obedient as you can wish ; on this one alone , I stand out . so now I 
 be ready even for the lawyer . I have be draw up , " he glance 
 at his writing on the table , " an exact account of what I know of 
 the deceased and how I come to be involve in this unfortunate 
 affair . it be enter , plain and regular , like an orderly - book ; not 
 a word in it but what be want for the fact . I do intend to read 
 it , straight on end , whensoever I be call upon to say anything 
 in my defence . I hope I may be let to do it still ; but I have no 
 long a will of my own in this case , and whatever be say or do , 
 I give my promise not to have any . " 
 matter be bring to this so far satisfactory pass , and time 
 be on the wane , Mrs. Bagnet propose a departure . again and 
 again the old lady hang upon her son 's neck , and again and again 
 the trooper hold she to his broad chest . 
 " where be you go to take my mother , Mrs. Bagnet ? " 
 " I be go to the town house , my dear , the family house . I have 
 some business there that must be look to directly , " Mrs. 
 Rouncewell answer . 
 " will you see my mother safe there in a coach , Mrs. Bagnet ? but of 
 course I know you will . why should I ask it ! " 
 why indeed , Mrs. Bagnet express with the umbrella . 
 " take she , my old friend , and take my gratitude along with you . 
 kiss to Quebec and Malta , love to my godson , a hearty shake of 
 the hand to Lignum , and this for yourself , and I wish it be ten 
 thousand pound in gold , my dear ! " so say , the trooper put his 
 lip to the old girl 's tan forehead , and the door shut upon he 
 in his cell . 
 no entreaty on the part of the good old housekeeper will induce 
 Mrs. Bagnet to retain the coach for her own conveyance home . 
 jump out cheerfully at the door of the Dedlock mansion and 
 hand Mrs. Rouncewell up the step , the old girl shake hand and 
 trudge off , arrive soon afterwards in the bosom of the Bagnet 
 family and fall to wash the green as if nothing have 
 happen . 
 my Lady be in that room in which she hold her last conference with 
 the murder man , and be sit where she sit that night , and be 
 look at the spot where he stand upon the hearth study she so 
 leisurely , when a tap come at the door . who be it ? Mrs. 
 Rouncewell . what have bring Mrs. Rouncewell to town so 
 unexpectedly ? 
 " Trouble , my Lady . sad trouble . oh , my Lady , may I beg a word 
 with you ? " 
 what new occurrence be it that make this tranquil old woman 
 tremble so ? far happy than her Lady , as her Lady have often 
 thought , why do she falter in this manner and look at she with 
 such strange mistrust ? 
 " what be the matter ? sit down and take your breath . " 
 " oh , my Lady , my Lady . I have find my son - my young , who go 
 away for a soldier so long ago . and he be in prison . " 
 " for debt ? " 
 " oh , no , my Lady ; I would have pay any debt , and joyful . " 
 " for what be he in prison then ? " 
 " charge with a murder , my Lady , of which he be as innocent as - as 
 I be . accuse of the murder of Mr. Tulkinghorn . " 
 what do she mean by this look and this implore gesture ? why 
 do she come so close ? what be the letter that she hold ? 
 " Lady Dedlock , my dear Lady , my good Lady , my kind Lady ! you must 
 have a heart to feel for I , you must have a heart to forgive I . 
 I be in this family before you be bear . I be devoted to it . 
 but think of my dear son wrongfully accuse . " 
 " I do not accuse he . " 
 " no , my Lady , no . but other do , and he be in prison and in 
 danger . oh , Lady Dedlock , if you can say but a word to help to 
 clear he , say it ! " 
 what delusion can this be ? what power do she suppose be in the 
 person she petition to avert this unjust suspicion , if it be 
 unjust ? her Lady 's handsome eye regard she with astonishment , 
 almost with fear . 
 " my Lady , I come away last night from Chesney Wold to find my son 
 in my old age , and the step upon the Ghost 's Walk be so constant 
 and so solemn that I never hear the like in all these year . 
 Night after night , as it have fall dark , the sound have echo 
 through your room , but last night it be awfullest . and as it 
 fall dark last night , my Lady , I get this letter . " 
 " what letter be it ? " 
 " hush ! hush ! " the housekeeper look round and answer in a 
 frightened whisper , " my Lady , I have not breathe a word of it , I 
 do not   believe what be write in it , I know it can not   be true , I be 
 sure and certain that it be not true . but my son be in danger , and 
 you must have a heart to pity I . if you know of anything that be 
 not know to other , if you have any suspicion , if you have any 
 clue at all , and any reason for keep it in your own breast , oh , 
 my dear Lady , think of I , and conquer that reason , and let it be 
 know ! this be the most I consider possible . I know you be not a 
 hard lady , but you go your own way always without help , and you be 
 not familiar with your friend ; and all who admire you - and all do 
  - as a beautiful and elegant lady , know you to be one far away from 
 themselves who can not   be approach close . my Lady , you may have 
 some proud or angry reason for disdain to utter something that 
 you know ; if so , pray , oh , pray , think of a faithful servant whose 
 whole life have be pass in this family which she dearly love , 
 and relent , and help to clear my son ! my Lady , my good Lady , " the 
 old housekeeper plead with genuine simplicity , " I be so humble in 
 my place and you be by nature so high and distant that you may not 
 think what I feel for my child , but I feel so much that I have come 
 here to make so bold as to beg and pray you not to be scornful of 
 we if you can do we any right or justice at this fearful time ! " 
 Lady Dedlock raise she without one word , until she take the 
 letter from her hand . 
 " be I to read this ? " 
 " when I be go , my Lady , if you please , and then remember the 
 most that I consider possible . " 
 " I know of nothing I can do . I know of nothing I reserve that can 
 affect your son . I have never accuse he . " 
 " my Lady , you may pity he the more under a false accusation after 
 read the letter . " 
 the old housekeeper leave she with the letter in her hand . in 
 truth she be not a hard lady naturally , and the time have be when 
 the sight of the venerable figure sue to she with such strong 
 earnestness would have move she to great compassion . but so long 
 accustomed to suppress emotion and keep down reality , so long 
 school for her own purpose in that destructive school which 
 shut up the natural feeling of the heart like fly in amber and 
 spread one uniform and dreary gloss over the good and bad , the 
 feeling and the unfeeling , the sensible and the senseless , she have 
 subdue even her wonder until now . 
 she open the letter . Spread out upon the paper be a print 
 account of the discovery of the body as it lie face downward on the 
 floor , shoot through the heart ; and underneath be write her own 
 name , with the word " murderess " attach . 
 it fall out of her hand . how long it may have lain upon the 
 ground she know not , but it lie where it fall when a servant 
 stand before she announce the young man of the name of Guppy . 
 the word have probably be repeat several time , for they be 
 ring in her head before she begin to understand they . 
 " let he come in ! " 
 he come in . hold the letter in her hand , which she have take 
 from the floor , she try to collect her thought . in the eye of 
 Mr. Guppy she be the same Lady Dedlock , hold the same prepare , 
 proud , chilling state . 
 " your ladyship may not be at first dispose to excuse this visit 
 from one who have never be welcome to your ladyship " - which he 
 do not   complain of , for he be bind to confess that there never have 
 be any particular reason on the face of thing why he should be - 
 " but I hope when I mention my motif to your ladyship you will not 
 find fault with I , " say Mr. Guppy . 
 " do so . " 
 " thank your ladyship . I ought first to explain to your ladyship , " 
 Mr. Guppy sit on the edge of a chair and put his hat on the 
 carpet at his foot , " that Miss Summerson , whose image , as I 
 formerly mention to your ladyship , be at one period of my life 
 imprint on my ' eart until erase by circumstance over which I 
 have no control , communicate to I , after I have the pleasure of 
 wait on your ladyship last , that she particularly wish I to 
 take no step whatever in any manner at all relate to she . and 
 Miss Summerson 's wish be to I a law   except as connect with 
 circumstance over which I have no control , I consequently never 
 expect to have the distinguished honour of wait on your 
 ladyship again . " 
 and yet he be here now , Lady Dedlock moodily remind he . 
 " and yet I be here now , " Mr. Guppy admit . " my object be to 
 communicate to your ladyship , under the seal of confidence , why I 
 be here . " 
 he can not do so , she tell he , too plainly or too briefly . " nor 
 can I , " Mr. Guppy return with a sense of injury upon he , " too 
 particularly request your ladyship to take particular notice that 
 it be no personal affair of mine that bring I here . I have no 
 interested view of my own to serve in come here . if it be not 
 for my promise to Miss Summerson and my keeping of it sacred - I , in 
 point of fact , should not   have darken these door again , but 
 should have see them far first . " 
 Mr. Guppy consider this a favourable moment for stick up his 
 hair with both hand . 
 " your ladyship will remember when I mention it that the last time I 
 be here I run against a party very eminent in our profession and 
 whose loss we all deplore . that party certainly do from that time 
 apply himself to cut in against I in a way that I will call 
 sharp practice , and do make it , at every turn and point , extremely 
 difficult for I to be sure that I have not   inadvertently lead up to 
 something contrary to Miss Summerson 's wish . self - praise be no 
 recommendation , but I may say for myself that I be not so bad a man 
 of business neither . " 
 Lady Dedlock look at he in stern inquiry . Mr. Guppy immediately 
 withdraw his eye from her face and look anywhere else . 
 " indeed , it have be make so hard , " he go on , " to have any idea 
 what that party be up to in combination with other that until the 
 loss which we all deplore I be gravel - an expression which your 
 ladyship , move in the high circle , will be so good as to 
 consider tantamount to knock over . small likewise - a name by 
 which I refer to another party , a friend of mine that your ladyship 
 be not acquaint with - get to be so close and double - faced that at 
 time it be not   easy to keep one 's hand off his ' ead . however , 
 what with the exertion of my humble ability , and what with the 
 help of a mutual friend by the name of Mr. Tony Weevle   who be of a 
 high aristocratic turn and have your ladyship 's portrait always 
 hang up in his room , I have now reason for an apprehension as 
 to which I come to put your ladyship upon your guard . first , will 
 your ladyship allow I to ask you whether you have have any strange 
 visitor this morning ? I do not   mean fashionable visitor , but such 
 visitor , for instance , as Miss Barbary 's old servant , or as a 
 person without the use of his low extremity , carry upstairs 
 similarly to a guy ? " 
 " no ! " 
 " then I assure your ladyship that such visitor have be here and 
 have be receive here . because I see they at the door , and 
 wait at the corner of the square till they come out , and take 
 half an hour 's turn afterwards to avoid they . " 
 " what have I to do with that , or what have you ? I do not 
 understand you . what do you mean ? " 
 " your ladyship , I come to put you on your guard . there may be no 
 occasion for it . very well . then I have only do my good to keep 
 my promise to Miss Summerson . I strongly suspect   from what Small 
 have drop , and from what we have corkscrew out of he   that 
 those letter I be to have bring to your ladyship be not 
 destroy when I suppose they be . that if there be anything to 
 be blow upon , it be blow upon . that the visitor I have allude 
 to have be here this morning to make money of it . and that the 
 money be make , or make . " 
 Mr. Guppy pick up his hat and rise . 
 " your ladyship , you know good whether there be anything in what I 
 say or whether there be nothing . something or nothing , I have act 
 up to Miss Summerson 's wish in let thing alone and in 
 undo what I have begin to do , as far as possible ; that be 
 sufficient for I . in case I should be take a liberty in put 
 your ladyship on your guard when there be no necessity for it , you 
 will endeavour , I should hope , to outlive my presumption , and I 
 shall endeavour to outlive your disapprobation . I now take my 
 farewell of your ladyship , and assure you that there be no danger of 
 your ever be wait on by I again . " 
 she scarcely acknowledge these parting word by any look , but when 
 he have be go a little while , she ring her bell . 
 " where be Sir Leicester ? " 
 Mercury report that he be at present shut up in the library alone . 
 " have Sir Leicester have any visitor this morning ? " 
 Several , on business . Mercury proceed to a description of they , 
 which have be anticipate by Mr. Guppy . enough ; he may go . 
 so ! all be break down . her name be in these many mouth , her 
 husband know his wrong , her shame will be publish - may be 
 spread while she think about it - and in addition to the 
 thunderbolt so long foresee by she , so unforeseen by he , she be 
 denounce by an invisible accuser as the murderess of her enemy . 
 her enemy he be , and she have often , often , often wish he dead . 
 her enemy he be , even in his grave . this dreadful accusation come 
 upon she like a new torment at his lifeless hand . and when she 
 recall how she be secretly at his door that night , and how she 
 may be represent to have send her favourite girl away so soon 
 before merely to release herself from observation , she shudder as 
 if the hangman 's hand be at her neck . 
 she have throw herself upon the floor and lie with her hair all 
 wildly scatter and her face bury in the cushion of a couch . 
 she rise up , hurry to and fro , fling herself down again , and 
 rock and moan . the horror that be upon she be unutterable . if 
 she really be the murderess , it could hardly be , for the moment , 
 more intense . 
 for as her murderous perspective , before the doing of the deed , 
 however subtle the precaution for its commission , would have be 
 close up by a gigantic dilatation of the hateful figure , 
 prevent she from see any consequence beyond it ; and as those 
 consequence would have rush in , in an unimagined flood , the 
 moment the figure be lay low - which always happen when a murder 
 be do ; so , now she see that when he use to be on the watch 
 before she , and she use to think , " if some mortal stroke would but 
 fall on this old man and take he from my way ! " it be but wish 
 that all he hold against she in his hand might be fling to the 
 wind and chance - sown in many place . so , too , with the wicked 
 relief she have feel in his death . what be his death but the key- 
 stone of a gloomy arch remove , and now the arch begin to fall in 
 a thousand fragment , each crush and mangle piecemeal ! 
 thus , a terrible impression steal upon and overshadow she that 
 from this pursuer , living or dead - obdurate and imperturbable 
 before she in his well - remember shape , or not more obdurate and 
 imperturbable in his coffin - bed - there be no escape but in death . 
 Hunted , she fly . the complication of her shame , her dread , 
 remorse , and misery , overwhelm she at its height ; and even her 
 strength of self - reliance be overturn and whirl away like a 
 leaf before a mighty wind . 
 she hurriedly address these line to her husband , seal , and 
 leave they on her table : 
 if I be seek for , or accuse of , his murder , believe that I be 
 wholly innocent . believe no other good of I , for I be innocent of 
 nothing else that you have hear , or will hear , lay to my charge . 
 he prepare I , on that fatal night , for his disclosure of my guilt 
 to you . after he have leave I , I go out on pretence of walk in 
 the garden where I sometimes walk , but really to follow he and 
 make one last petition that he would not protract the dreadful 
 suspense on which I have be rack by he , you do not know how 
 long , but would mercifully strike next morning . 
 I find his house dark and silent . I ring twice at his door , but 
 there be no reply , and I come home . 
 I have no home left . I will encumber you no more . may you , in 
 your just resentment , be able to forget the unworthy woman on whom 
 you have waste a most generous devotion - who avoid you only with 
 a deep shame than that with which she hurry from herself - and 
 who write this last adieu . 
 she veil and dress quickly , leave all her jewel and her money , 
 listen , go downstairs at a moment when the hall be empty , open 
 and shut the great door , flutter away in the shrill frosty wind . 
 CHAPTER LVI 
 Pursuit 
 Impassive , as behove its high breeding , the Dedlock town house 
 stare at the other house in the street of dismal grandeur and 
 give no outward sign of anything go wrong within . carriage 
 rattle , door be batter at , the world exchange call ; ancient 
 charmer with skeleton throat and peachy cheek that have a rather 
 ghastly bloom upon they see by daylight , when indeed these 
 fascinating creature look like Death and the Lady fuse together , 
 dazzle the eye of man . forth from the frigid mew come easily 
 swing carriage guide by short - legged coachman in flaxen wig , 
 deep sink into downy hammercloth , and up behind mount luscious 
 mercury bear stick of state and wear cocked hat 
 broadwise , a spectacle for the angel . 
 the Dedlock town house change not externally , and hour pass 
 before its exalt dullness be disturb within . but Volumnia the 
 fair , be subject to the prevalent complaint of boredom and 
 find that disorder attack her spirit with some virulence , 
 venture at length to repair to the library for change of scene . 
 her gentle tap at the door produce no response , she open it 
 and peep in ; see no one there , take possession . 
 the sprightly Dedlock be repute , in that grass - grow city of the 
 ancient , Bath , to be stimulate by an urgent curiosity which 
 impel she on all convenient and inconvenient occasion to sidle 
 about with a golden glass at her eye , peer into object of every 
 description . certain it be that she avail herself of the present 
 opportunity of hover over her kinsman 's letter and paper like 
 a bird , take a short peck at this document and a blink with her 
 head on one side at that document , and hop about from table to 
 table with her glass at her eye in an inquisitive and restless 
 manner . in the course of these research she stumble over 
 something , and turn her glass in that direction , see she 
 kinsman lie on the ground like a felled tree . 
 Volumnia 's pet little scream acquire a considerable augmentation 
 of reality from this surprise , and the house be quickly in 
 commotion . servant tear up and down stair , bell be violently 
 rung , doctor be send for , and Lady Dedlock be seek in all 
 direction , but not find . nobody have see or hear she since she 
 last ring her bell . her letter to Sir Leicester be discover on 
 her table , but it be doubtful yet whether he have not receive 
 another missive from another world require to be personally 
 answer , and all the live language , and all the dead , be as 
 one to he . 
 they lie he down upon his bed , and chafe , and rub , and fan , and 
 put ice to his head , and try every mean of restoration . Howbeit , 
 the day have ebb away , and it be night in his room before his 
 stertorous breathing lull or his fixed eye show any consciousness 
 of the candle that be occasionally pass before they . but when 
 this change begin , it go on ; and by and by he nod or move his 
 eye or even his hand in token that he hear and comprehend . 
 he fall down , this morning , a handsome stately gentleman , somewhat 
 infirm , but of a fine presence , and with a well - fill face . he 
 lie upon his bed , an aged man with sunken cheek , the decrepit 
 shadow of himself . his voice be rich and mellow and he have so 
 long be thoroughly persuade of the weight and import to mankind 
 of any word he say that his word really have come to sound as if 
 there be something in they . but now he can only whisper , and 
 what he whisper sound like what it be - mere jumble and jargon . 
 his favourite and faithful housekeeper stand at his bedside . it 
 be the first act he notice , and he clearly derive pleasure from 
 it . after vainly try to make himself understand in speech , he 
 make sign for a pencil . so inexpressively that they can not at 
 first understand he ; it be his old housekeeper who make out what 
 he want and bring in a slate . 
 after pause for some time , he slowly scrawl upon it in a hand 
 that be not his , " Chesney Wold ? " 
 no , she tell he ; he be in London . he be take ill in the 
 library this morning . right thankful she be that she happen to 
 come to London and be able to attend upon he . 
 " it be not an illness of any serious consequence , Sir Leicester . 
 you will be much well to - morrow , Sir Leicester . all the 
 gentleman say so . " this , with the tear course down her fair old 
 face . 
 after make a survey of the room and look with particular 
 attention all round the bed where the doctor stand , he write , " my 
 Lady . " 
 " my Lady go out , Sir Leicester , before you be take ill , and 
 do not   know of your illness yet . " 
 he point again , in great agitation , at the two word . they all 
 try to quiet he , but he point again with increase agitation . on 
 their look at one another , not know what to say , he take the 
 slate once more and write " my Lady . for God 's sake , where ? " and 
 make an implore moan . 
 it be think well that his old housekeeper should give he Lady 
 Dedlock 's letter , the content of which no one know or can 
 surmise . she open it for he and put it out for his perusal . 
 have read it twice by a great effort , he turn it down so that it 
 shall not be see and lie moan . he pass into a kind of 
 relapse or into a swoon , and it be an hour before he open his 
 eye , recline on his faithful and attach old servant 's arm . 
 the doctor know that he be good with she , and when not actively 
 engage about he , stand aloof . 
 the slate come into requisition again , but the word he want to 
 write he can not remember . his anxiety , his eagerness , and 
 affliction at this pass be pitiable to behold . it seem as if he 
 must go mad in the necessity he feel for haste and the inability 
 under which he labour of express to do what or to fetch whom . 
 he have write the letter B , and there stop . of a sudden , in 
 the height of his misery , he put Mr. before it . the old 
 housekeeper suggest Bucket . thank heaven ! that be his meaning . 
 Mr. Bucket be find to be downstairs , by appointment . shall he 
 come up ? 
 there be no possibility of misconstrue Sir Leicester 's burning 
 wish to see he or the desire he signify to have the room clear 
 of every one but the housekeeper . it be speedily do , and Mr. 
 Bucket appear . of all man upon earth , Sir Leicester seem fall 
 from his high estate to place his sole trust and reliance upon this 
 man . 
 " Sir Leicester Dedlock , Baronet , I be sorry to see you like this . I 
 hope you will cheer up . I be sure you will , on account of the family 
 credit . " 
 Sir Leicester put her letter in his hand and look intently in his 
 face while he read it . a new intelligence come into Mr. Bucket 's 
 eye as he read on ; with one hook of his finger , while that eye be 
 still glance over the word , he indicate , " Sir Leicester 
 Dedlock , Baronet , I understand you . " 
 Sir Leicester write upon the slate . " full forgiveness . find - " 
 Mr. Bucket stop his hand . 
 " Sir Leicester Dedlock , Baronet , I will find she . but my search 
 after she must be begin out of hand . not a minute must be lose . " 
 with the quickness of thought , he follow Sir Leicester Dedlock 's 
 look towards a little box upon a table . 
 " bring it here , Sir Leicester Dedlock , Baronet ? certainly . open 
 it with one of these here key ? certainly . the little key ? to 
 be sure . take the note out ? so I will . count them ? that be soon 
 do . twenty and thirty 's fifty , and twenty 's seventy , and fifty 's 
 one twenty , and forty 's one sixty . take them for expense ? that 
 I will do , and render an account of course . do not   spare money ? no I 
 will not . " 
 the velocity and certainty of Mr. Bucket 's interpretation on all 
 these head be little short of miraculous . Mrs. Rouncewell , who 
 hold the light , be giddy with the swiftness of his eye and hand 
 as he start up , furnish for his journey . 
 " you be George 's mother , old lady ; that be about what you be , I 
 believe ? " say Mr. Bucket aside , with his hat already on and 
 button his coat . 
 " yes , sir , I be his distressed mother . " 
 " so I think , accord to what he mention to I just now . 
 well , then , I will tell you something . you need not   be distressed no 
 more . your son 's all right . now , do not   you begin a - crying , 
 because what you have   get to do be to take care of Sir Leicester 
 Dedlock , Baronet , and you will not   do that by cry . as to your son , 
 he be all right , I tell you ; and he send his love duty , and 
 hop you be the same . he be discharge honourable ; that be about 
 what he be ; with no more imputation on his character than there be 
 on your , and yours be a tidy one , I'LL bet a pound . you may trust 
 I , for I take your son . he conduct himself in a game way , too , 
 on that occasion ; and he be a fine - make man , and you be a fine - make 
 old lady , and you be a mother and son , the pair of you , as might be 
 show for model in a caravan . Sir Leicester Dedlock , Baronet , 
 what you have   trust to I I will go through with . do not   you be 
 afraid of my turning out of my way , right or left , or take a 
 sleep , or a wash , or a shave till I have find what I go in search 
 of . say everything as be kind and forgive on your part ? Sir 
 Leicester Dedlock , Baronet , I will . and I wish you well , and 
 these family affair smooth over - as , Lord , many other family 
 affair equally have be , and equally will be , to the end of time . " 
 with this peroration , Mr. Bucket , button up , go quietly out , 
 look steadily before he as if he be already pierce the 
 night in quest of the fugitive . 
 his first step be to take himself to Lady Dedlock 's room and look 
 all over they for any trifling indication that may help he . the 
 room be in darkness now ; and to see Mr. Bucket with a wax - light 
 in his hand , hold it above his head and take a sharp mental 
 inventory of the many delicate object so curiously at variance 
 with himself , would be to see a sight - which nobody do see , as he 
 be particular to lock himself in . 
 " a spicy boudoir , this , " say Mr. Bucket , who feel in a manner 
 furbish up in his French by the blow of the morning . " must have 
 cost a sight of money . Rum article to cut away from , these ; she 
 must have be hard put to it ! " 
 open and shut table - drawer and look into casket and 
 jewel - case , he see the reflection of himself in various mirror , 
 and moralize thereon . 
 " one might suppose I be a - move in the fashionable circle and 
 get myself up for almac 's , " say Mr. Bucket . " I begin to think 
 I must be a swell in the Guards without know it . " 
 ever look about , he have open a dainty little chest in an inner 
 drawer . his great hand , turn over some glove which it can 
 scarcely feel , they be so light and soft within it , come upon a 
 white handkerchief . 
 " Hum ! let us have a look at you , " say Mr. Bucket , put down the 
 light . " what should you be keep by yourself for ? what be your 
 motive ? be you her ladyship 's property , or somebody else 's ? 
 you have   get a mark upon you somewhere or another , I suppose ? " 
 he find it as he speak , " Esther Summerson . " 
 " oh ! " say Mr. Bucket , pausing , with his finger at his ear . " come , 
 I will take you . " 
 he complete his observation as quietly and carefully as he have 
 carry they on , leave everything else precisely as he find it , 
 glide away after some five minute in all , and pass into the 
 street . with a glance upward at the dimly light window of Sir 
 Leicester 's room , he set off , full - swing , to the near coach- 
 stand , pick out the horse for his money , and direct to be drive 
 to the shooting gallery . Mr. Bucket do not claim to be a 
 scientific judge of horse , but he lay out a little money on the 
 principal event in that line , and generally sum up his knowledge 
 of the subject in the remark that when he see a horse as can go , 
 he know he . 
 his knowledge be not at fault in the present instance . clattering 
 over the stone at a dangerous pace , yet thoughtfully bring his 
 keen eye to bear on every slinking creature whom he pass in the 
 midnight street , and even on the light in upper window where 
 people be go or go to bed , and on all the turning that he 
 rattle by , and alike on the heavy sky , and on the earth where the 
 snow lie thin - for something may present itself to assist he , 
 anywhere - he dash to his destination at such a speed that when he 
 stop the horse half smother he in a cloud of steam . 
 " unbear he half a moment to freshen he up , and I will be back . " 
 he run up the long wooden entry and find the trooper smoke his 
 pipe . 
 " I think I should , George , after what you have go through , my 
 lad . I have not   a word to spare . now , honour ! all to save a 
 woman . Miss Summerson that be here when Gridley die - that be 
 the name , I know - all right - where do she live ? " 
 the trooper have just come from there and give he the address , 
 near Oxford Street . 
 " you will not   repent it , George . good night ! " 
 he be off again , with an impression of have see Phil sit by 
 the frosty fire star at he open - mouthed , and gallop away 
 again , and get out in a cloud of steam again . 
 Mr. Jarndyce , the only person up in the house , be just go to 
 bed , rise from his book on hear the rapid ringing at the bell , 
 and come down to the door in his dressing - gown . 
 " do not   be alarm , sir . " in a moment his visitor be confidential 
 with he in the hall , have shut the door , and stand with his hand 
 upon the lock . " I have   have the pleasure of see you before . 
 Inspector Bucket . look at that handkerchief , sir , Miss Esther 
 Summerson 's . find it myself put away in a drawer of Lady 
 Dedlock 's , quarter of an hour ago . not a moment to lose . Matter 
 of life or death . you know Lady Dedlock ? " 
 " yes . " 
 " there have be a discovery there to - day . family affair have come 
 out . Sir Leicester Dedlock , Baronet , have have a fit - apoplexy or 
 paralysis - and could not   be bring to , and precious time have be 
 lose . Lady Dedlock disappear this afternoon and leave a letter 
 for he that look bad . run your eye over it . here it be ! " 
 Mr. Jarndyce , have read it , ask he what he think . 
 " I do not   know . it look like suicide . anyway , there be more and 
 more danger , every minute , of its drawing to that . I would give a 
 hundred pound an hour to have get the start of the present time . 
 now , Mr. Jarndyce , I be employ by Sir Leicester Dedlock , Baronet , 
 to follow she and find she , to save she and take she his 
 forgiveness . I have money and full power , but I want something 
 else . I want Miss Summerson . " 
 Mr. Jarndyce in a troubled voice repeat , " Miss Summerson ? " 
 " now , Mr. Jarndyce " - Mr. Bucket have read his face with the great 
 attention all along - " I speak to you as a gentleman of a humane 
 heart , and under such press circumstance as do not   often happen . 
 if ever delay be dangerous , it be dangerous now ; and if ever you 
 could not   afterwards forgive yourself for cause it , this be the 
 time . eight or ten hour , worth , as I tell you , a hundred pound 
 apiece at least , have be lose since Lady Dedlock disappear . I 
 be charge to find she . I be Inspector Bucket . besides all the 
 rest that be heavy on she , she have upon she , as she believe , 
 suspicion of murder . if I follow she alone , she , be in 
 ignorance of what Sir Leicester Dedlock , Baronet , have communicate 
 to I , may be drive to desperation . but if I follow she in 
 company with a young lady , answer to the description of a young 
 lady that she have a tenderness for - I ask no question , and I say no 
 more than that - she will give I credit for be friendly . let I 
 come up with she and be able to have the hold upon she of put 
 that young lady for'ard , and I will save she and prevail with she if 
 she be alive . let I come up with she alone - a hard matter - and 
 I will do my good , but I do not   answer for what the good may be . time 
 fly ; it be get on for one o'clock . when one strike , there be 
 another hour go , and it be worth a thousand pound now instead of a 
 hundred . " 
 this be all true , and the press nature of the case can not be 
 question . Mr. Jarndyce beg he to remain there while he speak 
 to Miss Summerson . Mr. Bucket say he will , but act on his 
 usual principle , do no such thing , follow upstairs instead and 
 keep his man in sight . so he remain , dodge and lurk about 
 in the gloom of the staircase while they confer . in a very little 
 time Mr. Jarndyce come down and tell he that Miss Summerson will 
 join he directly and place herself under his protection to 
 accompany he where he please . Mr. Bucket , satisfied , express 
 high approval and await she come at the door . 
 there he mount a high tower in his mind and look out far and 
 wide . many solitary figure he perceive creep through the 
 street ; many solitary figure out on heath , and road , and lie 
 under haystack . but the figure that he seek be not among they . 
 other solitary he perceive , in nook of bridge , look over ; 
 and in shadow place down by the river 's level ; and a dark , dark , 
 shapeless object drift with the tide , more solitary than all , 
 cling with a drown hold on his attention . 
 where be she ? live or dead , where be she ? if , as he fold the 
 handkerchief and carefully put it up , it be able with an 
 enchant power to bring before he the place where she find it 
 and the night - landscape near the cottage where it cover the 
 little child , would he descry she there ? on the waste where the 
 brick - kiln be burn with a pale blue flare , where the straw- 
 roof of the wretched hut in which the brick be make be be 
 scatter by the wind , where the clay and water be hard frozen and 
 the mill in which the gaunt blind horse go round all day look 
 like an instrument of human torture - traverse this deserted , 
 blighted spot there be a lonely figure with the sad world to 
 itself , pelt by the snow and drive by the wind , and cast out , it 
 would seem , from all companionship . it be the figure of a woman , 
 too ; but it be miserably dress , and no such clothe ever come 
 through the hall and out at the great door of the Dedlock mansion . 
 CHAPTER LVII 
 Esther 's Narrative 
 I have go to bed and fall asleep when my guardian knock at the 
 door of my room and beg I to get up directly . on my hurrying 
 to speak to he and learn what have happen , he tell I , after a 
 word or two of preparation , that there have be a discovery at Sir 
 Leicester Dedlock 's . that my mother have flee , that a person be 
 now at our door who be empower to convey to she the full 
 assurance of affectionate protection and forgiveness if he could 
 possibly find she , and that I be seek for to accompany he in 
 the hope that my entreaty might prevail upon she if his fail . 
 something to this general purpose I make out , but I be throw into 
 such a tumult of alarm , and hurry and distress , that in spite of 
 every effort I could make to subdue my agitation , I do not seem , 
 to myself , fully to recover my right mind until hour have pass . 
 but I dress and wrap up expeditiously without wake Charley 
 or any one and go down to Mr. Bucket , who be the person 
 entrust with the secret . in take I to he my guardian tell I 
 this , and also explain how it be that he have come to think of 
 I . Mr. Bucket , in a low voice , by the light of my guardian 's 
 candle , read to I in the hall a letter that my mother have leave 
 upon her table ; and I suppose within ten minute of my have be 
 arouse I be sit beside he , roll swiftly through the 
 street . 
 his manner be very keen , and yet considerate when he explain to 
 I that a great deal might depend on my be able to answer , 
 without confusion , a few question that he wish to ask I . these 
 be , chiefly , whether I have have much communication with my mother 
  to whom he only refer as Lady Dedlock , when and where I have 
 speak with her last , and how she have become possess of my 
 handkerchief . when I have satisfy he on these point , he ask 
 I particularly to consider - take time to think - whether within 
 my knowledge there be any one , no matter where , in whom she might 
 be at all likely to confide under circumstance of the last 
 necessity . I could think of no one but my guardian . but by and by 
 I mention Mr. Boythorn . he come into my mind as connect with 
 his old chivalrous manner of mention my mother 's name and with 
 what my guardian have inform I of his engagement to her sister 
 and his unconscious connexion with her unhappy story . 
 my companion have stop the driver while we hold this 
 conversation , that we might the well hear each other . he now 
 tell he to go on again and say to I , after consider within 
 himself for a few moment , that he have make up his mind how to 
 proceed . he be quite willing to tell I what his plan be , but I 
 do not feel clear enough to understand it . 
 we have not drive very far from our lodging when we stop in a 
 by - street at a public - look place light up with gas . Mr. 
 Bucket take I in and sit I in an arm - chair by a bright fire . it 
 be now past one , as I see by the clock against the wall . two 
 police officer , look in their perfectly neat uniform not at all 
 like people who be up all night , be quietly write at a desk ; 
 and the place seem very quiet altogether , except for some beating 
 and call out at distant door underground , to which nobody pay 
 any attention . 
 a third man in uniform , whom Mr. Bucket call and to whom he 
 whisper his instruction , go out ; and then the two other 
 advise together while one write from Mr. Bucket 's subdued 
 dictation . it be a description of my mother that they be busy 
 with , for Mr. Bucket bring it to I when it be do and read it 
 in a whisper . it be very accurate indeed . 
 the second officer , who have attend to it closely , then copy it 
 out and call in another man in uniform   there be several in an 
 outer room , who take it up and go away with it . all this be 
 do with the great dispatch and without the waste of a moment ; 
 yet nobody be at all hurry . as soon as the paper be send out 
 upon its travel , the two officer resume their former quiet work 
 of write with neatness and care . Mr. Bucket thoughtfully come 
 and warm the sol of his boot , first one and then the other , at 
 the fire . 
 " be you well wrap up , Miss Summerson ? " he ask I as his eye 
 meet mine . " it be a desperate sharp night for a young lady to be out 
 in . " 
 I tell he I care for no weather and be warmly clothe . 
 " it may be a long job , " he observe ; " but so that it end well , 
 never mind , miss . " 
 " I pray to heaven it may end well ! " say I. 
 he nod comfortingly . " you see , whatever you do , do not   you go 
 and fret yourself . you keep yourself cool and equal for anything 
 that may happen , and it will be the well for you , the well for 
 I , the well for Lady Dedlock , and the well for Sir Leicester 
 Dedlock , Baronet . " 
 he be really very kind and gentle , and as he stand before the fire 
 warm his boot and rub his face with his forefinger , I feel 
 a confidence in his sagacity which reassure I . it be not yet a 
 quarter to two when I hear horse ' foot and wheel outside . " now , 
 Miss Summerson , " say he , " we be off , if you please ! " 
 he give I his arm , and the two officer courteously bow I out , 
 and we find at the door a phaeton or barouche with a postilion and 
 post horse . Mr. Bucket hand I in and take his own seat on the 
 box . the man in uniform whom he have send to fetch this equipage 
 then hand he up a dark lantern at his request , and when he have 
 give a few direction to the driver , we rattle away . 
 I be far from sure that I be not in a dream . we rattle with 
 great rapidity through such a labyrinth of street that I soon lose 
 all idea where we be , except that we have cross and re - cross 
 the river , and still seem to be traverse a low - lie , 
 waterside , dense neighbourhood of narrow thoroughfare chequer by 
 dock and basin , high pile of warehouse , swing - bridge , and 
 mast of ship . at length we stop at the corner of a little 
 slimy turning , which the wind from the river , rush up it , do 
 not purify ; and I see my companion , by the light of his lantern , in 
 conference with several man who look like a mixture of police and 
 sailor . against the mouldering wall by which they stand , there 
 be a bill , on which I could discern the word , " find drown " ; 
 and this and an inscription about drag possess I with the awful 
 suspicion shadow forth in our visit to that place . 
 I have no need to remind myself that I be not there by the 
 indulgence of any feeling of mine to increase the difficulty of 
 the search , or to lessen its hope , or enhance its delay . I 
 remain quiet , but what I suffer in that dreadful spot I never 
 can forget . and still it be like the horror of a dream . a man 
 yet dark and muddy , in long swollen sodden boot and a hat like 
 they , be call out of a boat and whisper with Mr. Bucket , who 
 go away with he down some slippery step - as if to look at 
 something secret that he have to show . they come back , wipe their 
 hand upon their coat , after turn over something wet ; but thank 
 God it be not what I fear ! 
 after some further conference , Mr. Bucket   whom everybody seem to 
 know and defer to   go in with the other at a door and leave I in 
 the carriage , while the driver walk up and down by his horse to 
 warm himself . the tide be come in , as I judge from the sound 
 it make , and I could hear it break at the end of the alley with a 
 little rush towards I . it never do so - and I think it do so , 
 hundred of time , in what can have be at the most a quarter of 
 an hour , and probably be less - but the thought shudder through 
 I that it would cast my mother at the horse ' foot . 
 Mr. Bucket come out again , exhort the other to be vigilant , 
 darken his lantern , and once more take his seat . " do not   you be 
 alarm , Miss Summerson , on account of our come down here , " he 
 say , turn to I . " I only want to have everything in train and 
 to know that it be in train by look after it myself . get on , my 
 lad ! " 
 we appear to retrace the way we have come . not that I have take 
 note of any particular object in my perturbed state of mind , but 
 judge from the general character of the street . we call at 
 another office or station for a minute and cross the river again . 
 during the whole of this time , and during the whole search , my 
 companion , wrap up on the box , never relax in his vigilance a 
 single moment ; but when we cross the bridge he seem , if 
 possible , to be more on the alert than before . he stand up to look 
 over the parapet , he alight and go back after a shadowy female 
 figure that flit past we , and he gaze into the profound black 
 pit of water with a face that make my heart die within I . the 
 river have a fearful look , so overcast and secret , creep away so 
 fast between the low flat line of shore - so heavy with indistinct 
 and awful shape , both of substance and shadow ; so death - like and 
 mysterious . I have see it many time since then , by sunlight and 
 by moonlight , but never free from the impression of that journey . 
 in my memory the light upon the bridge be always burn dim , the 
 cutting wind be eddying round the homeless woman whom we pass , the 
 monotonous wheel be whirl on , and the light of the carriage- 
 lamp reflect back look palely in upon I - a face rise out of 
 the dreaded water . 
 clattering and clatter through the empty street , we come at 
 length from the pavement on to dark smooth road and begin to leave 
 the house behind we . after a while I recognize the familiar way 
 to Saint Albans . at Barnet fresh horse be ready for we , and we 
 change and go on . it be very cold indeed , and the open country 
 be white with snow , though none be fall then . 
 " an old acquaintance of your , this road , Miss Summerson , " say Mr. 
 Bucket cheerfully . 
 " yes , " I return . " have you gather any intelligence ? " 
 " none that can be quite depended on as yet , " he answer , " but it be 
 early time as yet . " 
 he have go into every late or early public - house where there be a 
 light   they be not a few at that time , the road be then much 
 frequent by drover   and have get down to talk to the turnpike- 
 keeper . I have hear he order drink , and chink money , and 
 make himself agreeable and merry everywhere ; but whenever he take 
 his seat upon the box again , his face resume its watchful steady 
 look , and he always say to the driver in the same business tone , 
 " get on , my lad ! " 
 with all these stoppage , it be between five and six o'clock and 
 we be yet a few mile short of Saint Albans when he come out of 
 one of these house and hand I in a cup of tea . 
 " drink it , Miss Summerson , it will do you good . you be begin to 
 get more yourself now , be not   you ? " 
 I thank he and say I hop so . 
 " you be what you may call stunned at first , " he return ; " and 
 Lord , no wonder ! do not   speak loud , my dear . it be all right . 
 she be on ahead . " 
 I do not   know what joyful exclamation I make or be go to make , 
 but he put up his finger and I stop myself . 
 " pass through here on foot this evening about eight or nine . I 
 hear of she first at the archway toll , over at Highgate , but 
 could not   make quite sure . trace she all along , on and off . 
 pick she up at one place , and drop she at another ; but she be 
 before we now , safe . take hold of this cup and saucer , ostler . 
 now , if you be not   bring up to the butter trade , look out and see 
 if you can catch half a crown in your t'other hand . one , two , 
 three , and there you be ! now , my lad , try a gallop ! " 
 we be soon in Saint Albans and alight a little before day , when 
 I be just begin to arrange and comprehend the occurrence of 
 the night and really to believe that they be not a dream . 
 leave the carriage at the posting - house and order fresh horse 
 to be ready , my companion give I his arm , and we go towards 
 home . 
 " as this be your regular abode , Miss Summerson , you see , " he 
 observe , " I should like to know whether you have   be ask for by 
 any stranger answer the description , or whether Mr. Jarndyce 
 have . I do not   much expect it , but it might be . " 
 as we ascend the hill , he look about he with a sharp eye - the 
 day be now break - and remind I that I have come down it one 
 night , as I have reason for remembering , with my little servant and 
 poor Jo , whom he call Toughey . 
 I wonder how he know that . 
 " when you pass a man upon the road , just yonder , you know , " say 
 Mr. Bucket . 
 yes , I remember that too , very well . 
 " that be I , " say Mr. Bucket . 
 see my surprise , he go on , " I drive down in a gig that 
 afternoon to look after that boy . you might have hear my wheel 
 when you come out to look after he yourself , for I be aware of 
 you and your little maid go up when I be walk the horse 
 down . make an inquiry or two about he in the town , I soon hear 
 what company he be in and be come among the brick - field to 
 look for he when I observe you bring he home here . " 
 " have he commit any crime ? " I ask . 
 " none be charge against he , " say Mr. Bucket , coolly lift off 
 his hat , " but I suppose he be not   over - particular . no . what I 
 want he for be in connexion with keep this very matter of 
 Lady Dedlock quiet . he have be make his tongue more free than 
 welcome as to a small accidental service he have be pay for by 
 the deceased Mr. Tulkinghorn ; and it would not   do , at any sort of 
 price , to have he play those game . so have warn he out 
 of London , I make an afternoon of it to warn he to keep out of it 
 now he be away , and go far from it , and maintain a bright 
 look - out that I do not   catch he come back again . " 
 " poor creature ! " say I. 
 " poor enough , " assent Mr. Bucket , " and trouble enough , and well 
 enough away from London , or anywhere else . I be regularly turn 
 on my back when I find he take up by your establishment , I do 
 assure you . " 
 I ask he why . " why , my dear ? " say Mr. Bucket . " naturally 
 there be no end to his tongue then . he might as well have be 
 bear with a yard and a half of it , and a remnant over . " 
 although I remember this conversation now , my head be in confusion 
 at the time , and my power of attention hardly do more than enable 
 I to understand that he enter into these particular to divert 
 I . with the same kind intention , manifestly , he often speak to I 
 of indifferent thing , while his face be busy with the one object 
 that we have in view . he still pursue this subject as we turn in 
 at the garden - gate . 
 " ah ! " say Mr. Bucket . " here we be , and a nice retire place it 
 be . put a man in mind of the country house in the Woodpecker- 
 tapping , that be know by the smoke which so gracefully curl . 
 they be early with the kitchen fire , and that denote good 
 servant . but what you have   always get to be careful of with 
 servant be who come to see them ; you never know what they be up to 
 if you do not   know that . and another thing , my dear . whenever you 
 find a young man behind the kitchen - door , you give that young man 
 in charge on suspicion of be secrete in a dwelling - house with 
 an unlawful purpose . " 
 we be now in front of the house ; he look attentively and 
 closely at the gravel for footprint before he raise his eye to 
 the window . 
 " do you generally put that elderly young gentleman in the same room 
 when he be on a visit here , Miss Summerson ? " he inquire , glance 
 at Mr. Skimpole 's usual chamber . 
 " you know Mr. Skimpole ! " say I. 
 " what do you call he again ? " return Mr. Bucket , bend down his 
 ear . " Skimpole , be it ? I have   often wonder what his name might 
 be . Skimpole . not John , I should say , nor yet Jacob ? " 
 " Harold , " I tell he . 
 " Harold . yes . he be a queer bird be Harold , " say Mr. Bucket , 
 eye I with great expression . 
 " he be a singular character , " say I. 
 " no idea of money , " observe Mr. Bucket . " he take it , though ! " 
 I involuntarily return for answer that I perceive Mr. Bucket 
 know he . 
 " why , now I will tell you , Miss Summerson , " he reply . " your mind 
 will be all the well for not run on one point too 
 continually , and I will tell you for a change . it be he as point 
 out to I where Toughey be . I make up my mind that night to come 
 to the door and ask for Toughey , if that be all ; but willing to 
 try a move or so first , if any such be on the board , I just 
 pitch up a morsel of gravel at that window where I see a shadow . 
 as soon as Harold open it and I have have a look at he , think I , 
 you be the man for I . so I smooth he down a bit about not 
 want to disturb the family after they be go to bed and about 
 its be a thing to be regret that charitable young lady 
 should harbour vagrant ; and then , when I pretty well understand 
 his way , I say I should consider a fypunnote well bestow if I 
 could relieve the premise of Toughey without cause any noise or 
 trouble . then say he , lift up his eyebrow in the gay way , 
 ' it be no use mention a fypunnote to I , my friend , because I be a 
 mere child in such matter and have no idea of money . ' of course I 
 understand what his take it so easy meant ; and be now quite 
 sure he be the man for I , I wrap the note round a little stone 
 and throw it up to he . well ! he laugh and beam , and look as 
 innocent as you like , and say , ' but I do not   know the value of 
 these thing . what be I to do with this ? ' ' spend it , sir , ' say 
 I. ' but I shall be take in , ' he say , ' they will not   give I the 
 right change , I shall lose it , it be no use to I . ' Lord , you never 
 see such a face as he carry it with ! of course he tell I where 
 to find Toughey , and I find he . " 
 I regard this as very treacherous on the part of Mr. Skimpole 
 towards my guardian and as pass the usual bound of his childish 
 innocence . 
 " bound , my dear ? " return Mr. Bucket . " Bounds ? now , Miss 
 Summerson , I will give you a piece of advice that your husband will 
 find useful when you be happily married and have get a family 
 about you . whenever a person say to you that they be as innocent 
 as can be in all concern money , look well after your own money , 
 for they be dead certain to collar it if they can . whenever a 
 person proclaim to you ' in worldly matter I be a child , ' you 
 consider that that person be only a - cry off from be hold 
 accountable and that you have get that person 's number , and it be 
 Number one . now , I be not a poetical man myself , except in a vocal 
 way when it go round a company , but I be a practical one , and 
 that be my experience . so be this rule . fast and loose in one 
 thing , fast and loose in everything . I never know it fail . no 
 more will you . nor no one . with which caution to the unwary , my 
 dear , I take the liberty of pull this here bell , and so go back 
 to our business . " 
 I believe it have not be for a moment out of his mind , any more 
 than it have be out of my mind , or out of his face . the whole 
 household be amazed to see I , without any notice , at that time 
 in the morning , and so accompanied ; and their surprise be not 
 diminish by my inquiry . no one , however , have be there . it 
 could not be doubt that this be the truth . 
 " then , Miss Summerson , " say my companion , " we can not   be too soon at 
 the cottage where those brickmaker be to be find . Most 
 inquiry there I leave to you , if you will be so good as to make 
 them . the naturalest way be the good way , and the naturalest way be 
 your own way . " 
 we set off again immediately . on arrive at the cottage , we find 
 it shut up and apparently desert , but one of the neighbour who 
 know I and who come out when I be try to make some one hear 
 inform I that the two woman and their husband now live 
 together in another house , make of loose rough brick , which stand 
 on the margin of the piece of ground where the kiln be and where 
 the long row of brick be dry . we lose no time in repair 
 to this place , which be within a few hundred yard ; and as the 
 door stand ajar , I push it open . 
 there be only three of they sit at breakfast , the child lie 
 asleep on a bed in the corner . it be Jenny , the mother of the 
 dead child , who be absent . the other woman rise on see I ; and 
 the man , though they be , as usual , sulky and silent , each give I 
 a morose nod of recognition . a look pass between they when Mr. 
 Bucket follow I in , and I be surprised to see that the woman 
 evidently know he . 
 I have ask leave to enter of course . Liz   the only name by which 
 I know she   rise to give I her own chair , but I sit down on a 
 stool near the fire , and Mr. Bucket take a corner of the bedstead . 
 now that I have to speak and be among people with whom I be not 
 familiar , I become conscious of be hurried and giddy . it be 
 very difficult to begin , and I could not help burst into tear . 
 " Liz , " say I , " I have come a long way in the night and through the 
 snow to inquire after a lady - " 
 " who have be here , you know , " Mr. Bucket strike in , address the 
 whole group with a compose propitiatory face ; " that be the lady the 
 young lady mean . the lady that be here last night , you know . " 
 " and who tell you as there be anybody here ? " inquire Jenny 's 
 husband , who have make a surly stop in his eating to listen and now 
 measure he with his eye . 
 " a person of the name of Michael Jackson , with a blue welveteen 
 waistcoat with a double row of mother of pearl button , " Mr. Bucket 
 immediately answer . 
 " he have as good mind his own business , whoever he be , " growl the 
 man . 
 " he be out of employment , I believe , " say Mr. Bucket apologetically 
 for Michael Jackson , " and so get talk . " 
 the woman have not resume her chair , but stand falter with she 
 hand upon its broken back , look at I . I think she would have 
 speak to I privately if she have dare . she be still in this 
 attitude of uncertainty when her husband , who be eat with a 
 lump of bread and fat in one hand and his clasp - knife in the other , 
 strike the handle of his knife violently on the table and tell she 
 with an oath to mind her own business at any rate and sit down . 
 " I should like to have see Jenny very much , " say I , " for I be 
 sure she would have tell I all she could about this lady , whom I 
 be very anxious indeed - you can not think how anxious - to overtake . 
 will Jenny be here soon ? where be she ? " 
 the woman have a great desire to answer , but the man , with another 
 oath , openly kick at her foot with his heavy boot . he leave it to 
 Jenny 's husband to say what he choose , and after a dogged silence 
 the latter turn his shaggy head towards I . 
 " I be not partial to gentlefolk come into my place , as you have 
 heerd I say afore now , I think , miss . I let their place be , and 
 it be curious they can not   let my place be . there would be a pretty shine 
 make if I be to go a - wisitin THEM , I think . Howsoever , I do not   so 
 much complain of you as of some other , and I be agreeable to make 
 you a civil answer , though I give notice that I be not a - go to be 
 draw like a badger . will Jenny be here soon ? no she will not . 
 where be she ? she be go up to Lunnun . " 
 " do she go last night ? " I ask . 
 " do she go last night ? ah ! she go last night , " he answer with 
 a sulky jerk of his head . 
 " but be she here when the lady come ? and what do the lady say to 
 she ? and where be the lady go ? I beg and pray you to be so kind 
 as to tell I , " say I , " for I be in great distress to know . " 
 " if my master would let I speak , and not say a word of harm - " the 
 woman timidly begin . 
 " your master , " say her husband , mutter an imprecation with slow 
 emphasis , " will break your neck if you meddle with wot do not 
 concern you . " 
 after another silence , the husband of the absent woman , turn to 
 I again , answer I with his usual grumbling unwillingness . 
 " Wos Jenny here when the lady come ? yes , she wo here when the 
 lady come . wot do the lady say to she ? well , I will tell you wot 
 the lady say to she . she say , ' you remember I as come one time 
 to talk to you about the young lady as have be a - wisiting of you ? 
 you remember I as give you somethink handsome for a handkercher 
 wot she have leave ? ' ah , she remember . so we all do . well , 
 then , wos that young lady up at the house now ? no , she warn't   up 
 at the house now . well , then , lookee here . the lady be upon a 
 journey all alone , strange as we might think it , and could she rest 
 herself where you be a setten for a hour or so . yes she could , and 
 so she do . then she go - it might be at twenty minute past 
 eleven , and it might be at twenty minute past twelve ; we be not   get 
 no watch here to know the time by , nor yet clock . where do she 
 go ? I do not   know where she go'd . she go one way , and Jenny go 
 another ; one go right to Lunnun , and t'other go right from it . 
 that be all about it . ask this man . he heerd it all , and see it 
 all . he know . " 
 the other man repeat , " that be all about it . " 
 " be the lady cry ? " I inquire . 
 " Devil a bit , " return the first man . " her shoe be the bad , 
 and her clothe be the bad , but she warn't   - not as I see . " 
 the woman sit with her arm cross and her eye upon the ground . 
 her husband have turn his seat a little so as to face she and keep 
 his hammer - like hand upon the table as if it be in readiness to 
 execute his threat if she disobey he . 
 " I hope you will not object to my ask your wife , " say I , " how 
 the lady look . " 
 " come , then ! " he gruffly cry to she . " you hear what she say . 
 cut it short and tell she . " 
 " bad , " reply the woman . " pale and exhaust . very bad . " 
 " do she speak much ? " 
 " not much , but her voice be hoarse . " 
 she answer , look all the while at her husband for leave . 
 " be she faint ? " say I. " do she eat or drink here ? " 
 " go on ! " say the husband in answer to her look . " tell she and cut 
 it short . " 
 " she have a little water , miss , and Jenny fetch she some bread and 
 tea . but she hardly touch it . " 
 " and when she go from here , " I be proceed , when Jenny 's 
 husband impatiently take I up . 
 " when she go from here , she go right away nor'ard by the high 
 road . ask on the road if you doubt I , and see if it warn't   so . 
 now , there be the end . that be all about it . " 
 I glance at my companion , and find that he have already rise 
 and be ready to depart , thank they for what they have tell I , 
 and take my leave . the woman look full at Mr. Bucket as he go 
 out , and he look full at she . 
 " now , Miss Summerson , " he say to I as we walk quickly away . 
 " they have   get her ladyship 's watch among them . that be a positive 
 fact . " 
 " you see it ? " I exclaim . 
 " just as good as see it , " he return . " else why should he talk 
 about his ' twenty minute past ' and about his have no watch to 
 tell the time by ? twenty minute ! he do not   usually cut his time 
 so fine as that . if he come to half - hour , it be as much as he 
 do . now , you see , either her ladyship give he that watch or he 
 take it . I think she give it he . now , what should she give it 
 he for ? what should she give it he for ? " 
 he repeat this question to himself several time as we hurry 
 on , appear to balance between a variety of answer that arise in 
 his mind . 
 " if time could be spar , " say Mr. Bucket , " which be the only 
 thing that can not   be spar in this case , I might get it out of that 
 woman ; but it be too doubtful a chance to trust to under present 
 circumstance . they be up to keep a close eye upon she , and 
 any fool know that a poor creetur like she , beat and kick and 
 scarred and bruise from head to foot , will stand by the husband 
 that ill use she through thick and thin . there be something keep 
 back . it be a pity but what we have see the other woman . " 
 I regret it exceedingly , for she be very grateful , and I feel 
 sure would have resist no entreaty of mine . 
 " it be possible , Miss Summerson , " say Mr. Bucket , ponder on it , 
 " that her ladyship send she up to London with some word for you , 
 and it be possible that her husband get the watch to let she go . it 
 do not   come out altogether so plain as to please I , but it be on the 
 card . now , I do not   take kindly to lay out the money of Sir 
 Leicester Dedlock , Baronet , on these rough , and I do not   see my way 
 to the usefulness of it at present . no ! so far our road , Miss 
 Summerson , be for'ard - straight ahead - and keep everything 
 quiet ! " 
 we call at home once more that I might send a hasty note to my 
 guardian , and then we hurry back to where we have leave the 
 carriage . the horse be bring out as soon as we be see 
 come , and we be on the road again in a few minute . 
 it have set in snow at daybreak , and it now snow hard . the air 
 be so thick with the darkness of the day and the density of the 
 fall that we could see but a very little way in any direction . 
 although it be extremely cold , the snow be but partially frozen , 
 and it churn - with a sound as if it be a beach of small shell 
  - under the hoof of the horse into mire and water . they sometimes 
 slip and flounder for a mile together , and we be oblige to 
 come to a standstill to rest they . one horse fall three time in 
 this first stage , and tremble so and be so shake that the driver 
 have to dismount from his saddle and lead he at last . 
 I could eat nothing and could not sleep , and I grow so nervous 
 under those delay and the slow pace at which we travel that I 
 have an unreasonable desire upon I to get out and walk . yield 
 to my companion 's well sense , however , I remain where I be . 
 all this time , keep fresh by a certain enjoyment of the work in 
 which he be engage , he be up and down at every house we come to , 
 address people whom he have never behold before as old 
 acquaintance , run in to warm himself at every fire he see , 
 talk and drink and shake hand at every bar and tap , 
 friendly with every waggoner , wheelwright , blacksmith , and toll- 
 taker , yet never seem to lose time , and always mount to the 
 box again with his watchful , steady face and his business - like " get 
 on , my lad ! " 
 when we be change horse the next time , he come from the 
 stable - yard , with the wet snow encrust upon he and drop off 
 him - plashing and crash through it to his wet knee as he have 
 be do frequently since we leave Saint Albans - and speak to I 
 at the carriage side . 
 " keep up your spirit . it be certainly true that she come on here , 
 Miss Summerson . there be not a doubt of the dress by this time , and 
 the dress have be see here . " 
 " still on foot ? " say I. 
 " still on foot . I think the gentleman you mention must be the 
 point she be aim at , and yet I do not   like his live down in her 
 own part of the country neither . " 
 " I know so little , " say I. " there may be some one else nearer 
 here , of whom I never hear . " 
 " that be true . but whatever you do , do not   you fall a - crying , my 
 dear ; and do not   you worry yourself no more than you can help . get 
 on , my lad ! " 
 the sleet fall all that day unceasingly , a thick mist come on 
 early , and it never rise or lighten for a moment . such road I 
 have never see . I sometimes fear we have miss the way and get 
 into the plough ground or the marsh . if I ever think of the 
 time I have be out , it present itself as an indefinite period of 
 great duration , and I seem , in a strange way , never to have be 
 free from the anxiety under which I then labour . 
 as we advance , I begin to feel misgiving that my companion lose 
 confidence . he be the same as before with all the roadside 
 people , but he look graver when he sit by himself on the box . I 
 see his finger uneasily go across and across his mouth during 
 the whole of one long weary stage . I overheard that he begin to 
 ask the driver of coach and other vehicle come towards we 
 what passenger they have see in other coach and vehicle that 
 be in advance . their reply do not encourage he . he always 
 give I a reassuring beck of his finger and lift of his eyelid as 
 he get upon the box again , but he seem perplex now when he 
 say , " get on , my lad ! " 
 at last , when we be change , he tell I that he have lose the 
 track of the dress so long that he begin to be surprised . it be 
 nothing , he say , to lose such a track for one while , and to take 
 it up for another while , and so on ; but it have disappear here in 
 an unaccountable manner , and we have not come upon it since . this 
 corroborate the apprehension I have form , when he begin to look 
 at direction - post , and to leave the carriage at cross road for a 
 quarter of an hour at a time while he explore they . but I be not 
 to be down - hearted , he tell I , for it be as likely as not that 
 the next stage might set we right again . 
 the next stage , however , end as that one end ; we have no new 
 clue . there be a spacious inn here , solitary , but a comfortable 
 substantial building , and as we drive in under a large gateway 
 before I know it , where a landlady and her pretty daughter come to 
 the carriage - door , entreat I to alight and refresh myself while 
 the horse be make ready , I think it would be uncharitable to 
 refuse . they take I upstairs to a warm room and leave I there . 
 it be at the corner of the house , I remember , look two way . 
 on one side to a stable - yard open to a by - road , where the ostler 
 be unharness the splashed and tired horse from the muddy 
 carriage , and beyond that to the by - road itself , across which the 
 sign be heavily swing ; on the other side to a wood of dark 
 pine - tree . their branch be encumber with snow , and it 
 silently drop off in wet heap while I stand at the window . 
 Night be set in , and its bleakness be enhance by the 
 contrast of the picture fire glow and gleam in the window- 
 pane . as I look among the stem of the tree and follow the 
 discolour mark in the snow where the thaw be sink into it 
 and undermine it , I think of the motherly face brightly set off 
 by daughter that have just now welcome I and of MY mother lie 
 down in such a wood to die . 
 I be frighten when I find they all about I , but I remember 
 that before I faint I try very hard not to do it ; and that be 
 some little comfort . they cushion I up on a large sofa by the 
 fire , and then the comely landlady tell I that I must travel no 
 further to - night , but must go to bed . but this put I into such a 
 tremble lest they should detain I there that she soon recall she 
 word and compromise for a rest of half an hour . 
 a good endearing creature she be . she and her three fair girl , 
 all so busy about I . I be to take hot soup and broiled fowl , 
 while Mr. Bucket dry himself and din elsewhere ; but I could not 
 do it when a snug round table be presently spread by the fireside , 
 though I be very unwilling to disappoint they . however , I could 
 take some toast and some hot negus , and as I really enjoy that 
 refreshment , it make some recompense . 
 Punctual to the time , at the half - hour 's end the carriage come 
 rumble under the gateway , and they take I down , warm , 
 refresh , comfort by kindness , and safe   I assure they   not to 
 faint any more . after I have get in and have take a grateful leave 
 of they all , the young daughter - a bloom girl of nineteen , 
 who be to be the first marry , they have tell I - get upon the 
 carriage step , reach in , and kiss I . I have never see she , 
 from that hour , but I think of she to this hour as my friend . 
 the transparent window with the fire and light , look so bright 
 and warm from the cold darkness out of door , be soon go , and 
 again we be crush and churn the loose snow . we go on 
 with toil enough , but the dismal road be not much bad than 
 they have be , and the stage be only nine mile . my companion 
 smoking on the box - I have think at the last inn of beg he to 
 do so when I see he stand at a great fire in a comfortable 
 cloud of tobacco - be as vigilant as ever and as quickly down and 
 up again when we come to any human abode or any human creature . he 
 have light his little dark lantern , which seem to be a favourite 
 with he , for we have lamp to the carriage ; and every now and then 
 he turn it upon I to see that I be do well . there be a 
 folding - window to the carriage - head , but I never close it , for it 
 seem like shut out hope . 
 we come to the end of the stage , and still the lost trace be not 
 recover . I look at he anxiously when we stop to change , 
 but I know by his yet graver face as he stand watch the ostler 
 that he have hear nothing . almost in an instant afterwards , as I 
 lean back in my seat , he look in , with his lighted lantern in 
 his hand , an excited and quite different man . 
 " what be it ? " say I , start . " be she here ? " 
 " no , no . do not   deceive yourself , my dear . nobody be here . but 
 I have   get it ! " 
 the crystallized snow be in his eyelash , in his hair , lie in 
 ridge on his dress . he have to shake it from his face and get his 
 breath before he speak to I . 
 " now , Miss Summerson , " say he , beat his finger on the apron , 
 " do not   you be disappoint at what I be a - go to do . you know I . 
 I be Inspector Bucket , and you can trust I . we have   come a long way ; 
 never mind . four horse out there for the next stage up ! quick ! " 
 there be a commotion in the yard , and a man come run out of 
 the stable to know if he mean up or down . 
 " up , I tell you ! up ! ai not   it English ? up ! " 
 " up ? " say I , astonish . " to London ! be we go back ? " 
 " Miss Summerson , " he answer , " back . straight back as a die . you 
 know I . do not   be afraid . I will follow the other , by G - " 
 " the other ? " I repeat . " who ? " 
 " you call she Jenny , do not   you ? I will follow she . bring those 
 two pair out here for a crown a man . wake up , some of you ! " 
 " you will not desert this lady we be in search of ; you will not 
 abandon she on such a night and in such a state of mind as I know 
 she to be in ! " say I , in an agony , and grasp his hand . 
 " you be right , my dear , I will not . but I will follow the other . look 
 alive here with they horse . send a man for'ard in the saddle to 
 the next stage , and let he send another for'ard again , and order 
 four on , up , right through . my darling , do not   you be afraid ! " 
 these order and the way in which he run about the yard urge they 
 cause a general excitement that be scarcely less bewildering to 
 I than the sudden change . but in the height of the confusion , a 
 mount man gallop away to order the relay , and our horse be 
 put to with great speed . 
 " my dear , " say Mr. Bucket , jump to his seat and look in 
 again , " - you will excuse I if I be too familiar - do not   you fret and 
 worry yourself no more than you can help . I say nothing else at 
 present ; but you know I , my dear ; now , do not   you ? " 
 I endeavour to say that I know he be far more capable than I of 
 decide what we ought to do , but be he sure that this be right ? 
 could I not go forward by myself in search of - I grasp his hand 
 again in my distress and whisper it to he - of my own mother . 
 " my dear , " he answer , " I know , I know , and would I put you wrong , 
 do you think ? Inspector Bucket . now you know I , do not   you ? " 
 what could I say but yes ! 
 " then you keep up as good a heart as you can , and you rely upon I 
 for stand by you , no less than by Sir Leicester Dedlock , 
 Baronet . now , be you right there ? " 
 " all right , sir ! " 
 " off she go , then . and get on , my lad ! " 
 we be again upon the melancholy road by which we have come , 
 tear up the miry sleet and thaw snow as if they be tear up 
 by a waterwheel . 
 CHAPTER lviii 
 a Wintry Day and Night 
 still impassive , as behove its breeding , the Dedlock town house 
 carry itself as usual towards the street of dismal grandeur . 
 there be powdered head from time to time in the little window of 
 the hall , look out at the untaxed powder fall all day from 
 the sky ; and in the same conservatory there be peach blossom 
 turn itself exotically to the great hall fire from the nipping 
 weather out of door . it be give out that my Lady have go down 
 into Lincolnshire , but be expect to return presently . 
 Rumour , busy overmuch , however , will not go down into Lincolnshire . 
 it persist in flit and chatter about town . it know that 
 that poor unfortunate man , Sir Leicester , have be sadly use . it 
 hear , my dear child , all sort of shocking thing . it make the 
 world of five mile round quite merry . not to know that there be 
 something wrong at the Dedlocks ' be to augur yourself unknown . one 
 of the peachy - cheek charmer with the skeleton throat be already 
 apprise of all the principal circumstance that will come out 
 before the Lords on Sir Leicester 's application for a bill of 
 divorce . 
 at Blaze and Sparkle 's the jeweller and at Sheen and Gloss 's the 
 mercer , it be and will be for several hour the topic of the age , 
 the feature of the century . the patroness of those establishment , 
 albeit so loftily inscrutable , be as nicely weigh and measure 
 there as any other article of the stock - in - trade , be perfectly 
 understand in this new fashion by the raw hand behind the counter . 
 " our people , Mr. Jones , " say Blaze and Sparkle to the hand in 
 question on engage he , " our people , sir , be sheep - mere sheep . 
 where two or three marked one go , all the rest follow . keep those 
 two or three in your eye , Mr. Jones , and you have the flock . " so , 
 likewise , Sheen and Gloss to their Jones , in reference to know 
 where to have the fashionable people and how to bring what they 
  Sheen and Gloss   choose into fashion . on similar unerring 
 principle , Mr. Sladdery the librarian , and indeed the great 
 farmer of gorgeous sheep , admit this very day , " why yes , sir , 
 there certainly be report concern Lady Dedlock , very current 
 indeed among my high connexion , sir . you see , my high connexion 
 must talk about something , sir ; and it be only to get a subject 
 into vogue with one or two lady I could name to make it go down 
 with the whole . just what I should have do with those lady , 
 sir , in the case of any novelty you have leave to I to bring in , 
 they have do of themselves in this case through know Lady 
 Dedlock and be perhaps a little innocently jealous of she too , 
 sir . you will find , sir , that this topic will be very popular among 
 my high connexion . if it have be a speculation , sir , it would 
 have bring money . and when I say so , you may trust to my being 
 right , sir , for I have make it my business to study my high 
 connexion and to be able to wind it up like a clock , sir . " 
 thus rumour thrive in the capital , and will not go down into 
 Lincolnshire . by half - past five , post meridian , Horse Guards ' 
 time , it have even elicit a new remark from the honourable Mr. 
 Stables , which bid fair to outshine the old one , on which he have 
 so long rest his colloquial reputation . this sparkle sally be 
 to the effect that although he always know she be the well - groom 
 woman in the stud , he have no idea she be a bolter . it be 
 immensely receive in turf - circle . 
 at feast and festival also , in firmament she have often grace , 
 and among constellation she outshone but yesterday , she be still 
 the prevalent subject . what be it ? who be it ? when be it ? 
 where be it ? how be it ? she be discuss by her dear friend 
 with all the genteelest slang in vogue , with the last new word , the 
 last new manner , the last new drawl , and the perfection of polite 
 indifference . a remarkable feature of the theme be that it be 
 find to be so inspiring that several people come out upon it who 
 never come out before - positively say thing ! William Buffy 
 carry one of these smartness from the place where he din down 
 to the House , where the Whip for his party hand it about with his 
 snuff - box to keep man together who want to be off , with such effect 
 that the Speaker   who have have it privately insinuate into his own 
 ear under the corner of his wig   cry , " order at the bar ! " three 
 time without make an impression . 
 and not the least amazing circumstance connect with her be 
 vaguely the town talk be that people hover on the confine of 
 Mr. Sladdery 's high connexion , people who know nothing and ever do 
 know nothing about she , think it essential to their reputation to 
 pretend that she be their topic too , and to retail she at second- 
 hand with the last new word and the last new manner , and the last 
 new drawl , and the last new polite indifference , and all the rest 
 of it , all at second - hand but consider equal to new in inferior 
 system and to fainter star . if there be any man of letter , art , 
 or science among these little dealer , how noble in he to support 
 the feeble sister on such majestic crutch ! 
 so go the wintry day outside the Dedlock mansion . how within it ? 
 Sir Leicester , lie in his bed , can speak a little , though with 
 difficulty and indistinctness . he be enjoin to silence and to 
 rest , and they have give he some opiate to lull his pain , for his 
 old enemy be very hard with he . he be never asleep , though 
 sometimes he seem to fall into a dull wake doze . he cause his 
 bedstead to be move out near to the window when he hear it be 
 such inclement weather , and his head to be so adjusted that he 
 could see the drive snow and sleet . he watch it as it fall , 
 throughout the whole wintry day . 
 upon the least noise in the house , which be keep hush , his hand 
 be at the pencil . the old housekeeper , sit by he , know what 
 he would write and whisper , " no , he have not come back yet , Sir 
 Leicester . it be late last night when he go . he have be but a 
 little time go yet . " 
 he withdraw his hand and fall to look at the sleet and snow 
 again until they seem , by be long look at , to fall so thick 
 and fast that he be oblige to close his eye for a minute on the 
 giddy whirl of white flake and icy blot . 
 he begin to look at they as soon as it be light . the day be not 
 yet far spend when he conceive it to be necessary that her room 
 should be prepare for she . it be very cold and wet . let there be 
 good fire . let they know that she be expect . please see to it 
 yourself . he write to this purpose on his slate , and Mrs. 
 Rouncewell with a heavy heart obey . 
 " for I dread , George , " the old lady say to her son , who wait 
 below to keep her company when she have a little leisure , " I dread , 
 my dear , that my Lady will never more set foot within these wall . " 
 " that be a bad presentiment , mother . " 
 " nor yet within the wall of Chesney Wold , my dear . " 
 " that be bad . but why , mother ? " 
 " when I see my Lady yesterday , George , she look to I - and I may 
 say at I too - as if the step on the Ghost 's Walk have almost walk 
 she down . " 
 " come , come ! you alarm yourself with old - story fear , mother . " 
 " no I do not , my dear . no I do not . it be go on for sixty year 
 that I have be in this family , and I never have any fear for it 
 before . but it be break up , my dear ; the great old Dedlock 
 family be break up . " 
 " I hope not , mother . " 
 " I be thankful I have live long enough to be with Sir Leicester in 
 this illness and trouble , for I know I be not too old nor too 
 useless to be a welcome sight to he than anybody else in my place 
 would be . but the step on the Ghost 's Walk will walk my Lady down , 
 George ; it have be many a day behind she , and now it will pass she 
 and go on . " 
 " well , mother dear , I say again , I hope not . " 
 " ah , so do I , George , " the old lady return , shake her head and 
 part she fold hand . " but if my fear come true , and he have 
 to know it , who will tell he ! " 
 " be these her room ? " 
 " these be my Lady 's room , just as she leave they . " 
 " why , now , " say the trooper , glance round he and speak in a 
 low voice , " I begin to understand how you come to think as you do 
 think , mother . room get an awful look about they when they be 
 fit up , like these , for one person you be use to see in they , 
 and that person be away under any shadow , let alone be God know 
 where . " 
 he be not far out . as all parting foreshadow the great final one , 
 so , empty room , bereft of a familiar presence , mournfully whisper 
 what your room and what mine must one day be . my Lady 's state have a 
 hollow look , thus gloomy and abandon ; and in the inner apartment , 
 where Mr. Bucket last night make his secret perquisition , the trace 
 of her dress and her ornament , even the mirror accustom to 
 reflect they when they be a portion of herself , have a desolate 
 and vacant air . dark and cold as the wintry day be , it be dark 
 and cold in these deserted chamber than in many a hut that will 
 barely exclude the weather ; and though the servant heap fire in 
 the grate and set the couch and the chair within the warm glass 
 screen that let their ruddy light shoot through to the furth 
 corner , there be a heavy cloud upon the room which no light will 
 dispel . 
 the old housekeeper and her son remain until the preparation be 
 complete , and then she return upstairs . Volumnia have take Mrs. 
 Rouncewell 's place in the meantime , though pearl necklace and 
 rouge pot , however calculate to embellish bath , be but 
 indifferent comfort to the invalid under present circumstance . 
 Volumnia , not be suppose to know   and indeed not know   what 
 be the matter , have find it a ticklish task to offer appropriate 
 observation and consequently have supply their place with 
 distract smoothing of the bed - linen , elaborate locomotion on 
 tiptoe , vigilant peeping at her kinsman 's eye , and one 
 exasperate whisper to herself of , " he be asleep . " in disproof of 
 which superfluous remark Sir Leicester have indignantly write on 
 the slate , " I be not . " 
 Yielding , therefore , the chair at the bedside to the quaint old 
 housekeeper , Volumnia sit at a table a little remove , 
 sympathetically sigh . Sir Leicester watch the sleet and snow 
 and listen for the return step that he expect . in the ear 
 of his old servant , look as if she have step out of an old 
 picture - frame to attend a summon Dedlock to another world , the 
 silence be fraught with echo of her own word , " who will tell 
 he ! " 
 he have be under his valet 's hand this morning to be make 
 presentable and be as well get up as the circumstance will allow . 
 he be prop with pillow , his grey hair be brush in its usual 
 manner , his linen be arrange to a nicety , and he be wrap in a 
 responsible dressing - gown . his eye - glass and his watch be ready 
 to his hand . it be necessary - less to his own dignity now perhaps 
 than for her sake - that he should be see as little disturbed and 
 as much himself as may be . woman will talk , and Volumnia , though a 
 Dedlock , be no exceptional case . he keep she here , there be 
 little doubt , to prevent she talk somewhere else . he be very 
 ill , but he make his present stand against distress of mind and 
 body most courageously . 
 the fair Volumnia , be one of those sprightly girl who can not 
 long continue silent without imminent peril of seizure by the 
 dragon Boredom , soon indicate the approach of that monster with a 
 series of undisguisable yawn . find it impossible to suppress 
 those yawn by any other process than conversation , she compliment 
 Mrs. Rouncewell on her son , declare that he positively be one of 
 the fine figure she ever see and as soldierly a look person , 
 she should think , as what be his name , her favourite Life Guardsman 
  - the man she dot on , the dearest of creature - who be kill at 
 Waterloo . 
 Sir Leicester hear this tribute with so much surprise and stare 
 about he in such a confused way that Mrs. Rouncewell feel it 
 necessary to explain . 
 " Miss Dedlock do not   speak of my eld son , Sir Leicester , but my 
 youngest . I have find he . he have come home . " 
 Sir Leicester break silence with a harsh cry . " George ? your son 
 George come home , Mrs. Rouncewell ? " 
 the old housekeeper wipe her eye . " thank God . yes , Sir 
 Leicester . " 
 do this discovery of some one lose , this return of some one so 
 long go , come upon he as a strong confirmation of his hope ? 
 do he think , " shall I not , with the aid I have , recall she safely 
 after this , there be few hour in her case than there be 
 year in his ? " 
 it be of no use entreat he ; he be determined to speak now , and 
 he do . in a thick crowd of sound , but still intelligibly enough 
 to be understand . 
 " why do you not tell I , Mrs. Rouncewell ? " 
 " it happen only yesterday , Sir Leicester , and I doubt your 
 be well enough to be talk to of such thing . " 
 besides , the giddy Volumnia now remember with her little scream 
 that nobody be to have know of his be Mrs. Rouncewell 's son 
 and that she be not to have tell . but Mrs. Rouncewell protest , 
 with warmth enough to swell the stomacher , that of course she would 
 have tell Sir Leicester as soon as he get well . 
 " where be your son George , Mrs. Rouncewell ? " ask Sir Leicester , 
 Mrs. Rouncewell , not a little alarmed by his disregard of the 
 doctor 's injunction , reply , in London . 
 " where in London ? " 
 Mrs. Rouncewell be constrain to admit that he be in the house . 
 " bring he here to my room . bring he directly . " 
 the old lady can do nothing but go in search of he . Sir 
 Leicester , with such power of movement as he have , arrange himself 
 a little to receive he . when he have do so , he look out again 
 at the fall sleet and snow and listen again for the return 
 step . a quantity of straw have be tumble down in the street to 
 deaden the noise there , and she might be drive to the door 
 perhaps without his hearing wheel . 
 he be lie thus , apparently forgetful of his new and minor 
 surprise , when the housekeeper return , accompany by her trooper 
 son . Mr. George approach softly to the bedside , make his bow , 
 square his chest , and stand , with his face flush , very heartily 
 ashamed of himself . 
 " Good heaven , and it be really George Rouncewell ! " exclaim Sir 
 Leicester . " do you remember I , George ? " 
 the trooper need to look at he and to separate this sound from 
 that sound before he know what he have say , but do this and 
 be a little help by his mother , he reply , " I must have a 
 very bad memory , indeed , Sir Leicester , if I fail to remember 
 you . " 
 " when I look at you , George Rouncewell , " Sir Leicester observe 
 with difficulty , " I see something of a boy at Chesney Wold - I 
 remember well - very well . " 
 he look at the trooper until tear come into his eye , and then he 
 look at the sleet and snow again . 
 " I ask your pardon , Sir Leicester , " say the trooper , " but would 
 you accept of my arm to raise you up ? you would lie easy , Sir 
 Leicester , if you would allow I to move you . " 
 " if you please , George Rouncewell ; if you will be so good . " 
 the trooper take he in his arm like a child , lightly raise he , 
 and turn he with his face more towards the window . " thank you . 
 you have your mother 's gentleness , " return Sir Leicester , " and 
 your own strength . thank you . " 
 he sign to he with his hand not to go away . George quietly 
 remain at the bedside , wait to be speak to . 
 " why do you wish for secrecy ? " it take Sir Leicester some time 
 to ask this . 
 " truly I be not much to boast of , Sir Leicester , and I - I should 
 still , Sir Leicester , if you be not so indisposed - which I hope 
 you will not be long - I should still hope for the favour of be 
 allow to remain unknown in general . that involve explanation 
 not very hard to be guess at , not very well time here , and not 
 very creditable to myself . however opinion may differ on a 
 variety of subject , I should think it would be universally agree , 
 Sir Leicester , that I be not much to boast of . " 
 " you have be a soldier , " observe Sir Leicester , " and a faithful 
 one . " 
 George make his military bow . " as far as that go , Sir 
 Leicester , I have do my duty under discipline , and it be the 
 least I could do . " 
 " you find I , " say Sir Leicester , whose eye be much attract 
 towards he , " far from well , George Rouncewell . " 
 " I be very sorry both to hear it and to see it , Sir Leicester . " 
 " I be sure you be . no . in addition to my old malady , I have 
 have a sudden and bad attack . something that deaden , " make an 
 endeavour to pass one hand down one side , " and confuse , " touch 
 his lip . 
 George , with a look of assent and sympathy , make another bow . the 
 different time when they be both young man   the trooper much the 
 young of the two   and look at one another down at Chesney Wold 
 arise before they both and soften both . 
 Sir Leicester , evidently with a great determination to say , in his 
 own manner , something that be on his mind before relapse into 
 silence , try to raise himself among his pillow a little more . 
 George , observant of the action , take he in his arm again and 
 place he as he desire to be . " thank you , George . you be 
 another self to I . you have often carry my spare gun at 
 Chesney Wold , George . you be familiar to I in these strange 
 circumstance , very familiar . " he have put Sir Leicester 's sounder 
 arm over his shoulder in lift he up , and Sir Leicester be slow 
 in draw it away again as he say these word . 
 " I be about to add , " he presently go on , " I be about to add , 
 respect this attack , that it be unfortunately simultaneous with 
 a slight misunderstanding between my Lady and myself . I do not 
 mean that there be any difference between we   for there have be 
 none , but that there be a misunderstanding of certain 
 circumstance important only to ourselves , which deprive I , for a 
 little while , of my Lady 's society . she have find it necessary to 
 make a journey - I trust will shortly return . Volumnia , do I make 
 myself intelligible ? the word be not quite under my command in 
 the manner of pronounce they . " 
 Volumnia understand he perfectly , and in truth he deliver 
 himself with far great plainness than could have be suppose 
 possible a minute ago . the effort by which he do so be write 
 in the anxious and labour expression of his face . nothing but 
 the strength of his purpose enable he to make it . 
 " therefore , Volumnia , I desire to say in your presence - and in the 
 presence of my old retainer and friend , Mrs. Rouncewell , whose 
 truth and fidelity no one can question , and in the presence of her 
 son George , who come back like a familiar recollection of my youth 
 in the home of my ancestor at Chesney Wold - in case I should 
 relapse , in case I should not recover , in case I should lose both 
 my speech and the power of writing , though I hope for well 
 thing - " 
 the old housekeeper weep silently ; Volumnia in the great 
 agitation , with the fresh bloom on her cheek ; the trooper with 
 his arm fold and his head a little bent , respectfully attentive . 
 " therefore I desire to say , and to call you all to witness - 
 beginning , Volumnia , with yourself , most solemnly - that I be on 
 unaltered term with Lady Dedlock . that I assert no cause whatever 
 of complaint against she . that I have ever have the strong 
 affection for she , and that I retain it undiminishe . say this to 
 herself , and to every one . if you ever say less than this , you 
 will be guilty of deliberate falsehood to I . " 
 Volumnia tremblingly protest that she will observe his injunction 
 to the letter . 
 " my Lady be too high in position , too handsome , too accomplished , 
 too superior in most respect to the good of those by whom she be 
 surround , not to have her enemy and traducer , I dare say . let 
 it be know to they , as I make it known to you , that be of sound 
 mind , memory , and understanding , I revoke no disposition I have 
 make in her favour . I abridge nothing I have ever bestow upon 
 she . I be on unaltered term with she , and I recall - have the 
 full power to do it if I be so disposed , as you see - no act I 
 have do for her advantage and happiness . " 
 his formal array of word might have at any other time , as it have 
 often have , something ludicrous in it , but at this time it be 
 serious and affect . his noble earnestness , his fidelity , his 
 gallant shielding of she , his generous conquest of his own wrong 
 and his own pride for her sake , be simply honourable , manly , and 
 true . nothing less worthy can be see through the lustre of such 
 quality in the commonest mechanic , nothing less worthy can be 
 see in the well - bear gentleman . in such a light both aspire 
 alike , both rise alike , both child of the dust shine equally . 
 overpower by his exertion , he lay his head back on his pillow 
 and close his eye for not more than a minute , when he again 
 resume his watching of the weather and his attention to the 
 muffle sound . in the rendering of those little service , and in 
 the manner of their acceptance , the trooper have become instal as 
 necessary to he . nothing have be say , but it be quite 
 understand . he fall a step or two backward to be out of sight and 
 mount guard a little behind his mother 's chair . 
 the day be now begin to decline . the mist and the sleet into 
 which the snow have all resolve itself be dark , and the blaze 
 begin to tell more vividly upon the room wall and furniture . the 
 gloom augment ; the bright gas spring up in the street ; and the 
 pertinacious oil lamp which yet hold their ground there , with 
 their source of life half frozen and half thaw , twinkle gaspingly 
 like fiery fish out of water - as they be . the world , which have 
 be rumble over the straw and pull at the bell , " to inquire , " 
 begin to go home , begin to dress , to dine , to discuss its dear 
 friend with all the last new mode , as already mention . 
 now do Sir Leicester become bad , restless , uneasy , and in great 
 pain . Volumnia , light a candle   with a predestine aptitude for 
 do something objectionable , be bid to put it out again , for 
 it be not yet dark enough . yet it be very dark too , as dark as it 
 will be all night . by and by she try again . no ! put it out . 
 it be not dark enough yet . 
 his old housekeeper be the first to understand that he be strive 
 to uphold the fiction with himself that it be not grow late . 
 " Dear Sir Leicester , my honoured master , " she softly whisper , " I 
 must , for your own good , and my duty , take the freedom of beg 
 and pray that you will not lie here in the lone darkness 
 watch and wait and drag through the time . let I draw 
 the curtain , and light the candle , and make thing more 
 comfortable about you . the church - clock will strike the hour 
 just the same , Sir Leicester , and the night will pass away just the 
 same . my Lady will come back , just the same . " 
 " I know it , Mrs. Rouncewell , but I be weak - and he have be so long 
 go . " 
 " not so very long , Sir Leicester . not twenty - four hour yet . " 
 " but that be a long time . oh , it be a long time ! " 
 he say it with a groan that wring her heart . 
 she know that this be not a period for bring the rough light 
 upon he ; she think his tear too sacred to be see , even by she . 
 therefore she sit in the darkness for a while without a word , then 
 gently begin to move about , now stir the fire , now stand at 
 the dark window look out . finally he tell she , with recovered 
 self - command , " as you say , Mrs. Rouncewell , it be no bad for 
 be confess . it be get late , and they be not come . light 
 the room ! " when it be light and the weather shut out , it be only 
 leave to he to listen . 
 but they find that however dejected and ill he be , he brighten 
 when a quiet pretence be make of look at the fire in her room 
 and be sure that everything be ready to receive she . poor 
 pretence as it be , these allusion to she be expect keep up 
 hope within he . 
 midnight come , and with it the same blank . the carriage in the 
 street be few , and other late sound in that neighbourhood there 
 be none , unless a man so very nomadically drunk as to stray into 
 the frigid zone go brawl and bellow along the pavement . 
 upon this wintry night it be so still that listen to the intense 
 silence be like look at intense darkness . if any distant sound 
 be audible in this case , it depart through the gloom like a feeble 
 light in that , and all be heavy than before . 
 the corporation of servant be dismiss to bed   not unwilling to 
 go , for they be up all last night , and only Mrs. Rouncewell and 
 George keep watch in Sir Leicester 's room . as the night lag 
 tardily on - or rather when it seem to stop altogether , at between 
 two and three o'clock - they find a restless craving on he to know 
 more about the weather , now he can not see it . hence George , 
 patrol regularly every half - hour to the room so carefully 
 look after , extend his march to the hall - door , look about he , 
 and bring back the good report he can make of the bad of night , 
 the sleet still fall and even the stone footway lie ankle- 
 deep in icy sludge . 
 Volumnia , in her room up a retired landing on the staircase - the 
 second turning past the end of the carving and gilding , a cousinly 
 room contain a fearful abortion of a portrait of Sir Leicester 
 banish for its crime , and command in the day a solemn yard 
 plant with dry - up shrub like antediluvian specimen of black 
 tea - be a prey to horror of many kind . not last nor least among 
 they , possibly , be a horror of what may befall her little income in 
 the event , as she express it , " of anything happen " to Sir 
 Leicester . anything , in this sense , mean one thing only ; and 
 that the last thing that can happen to the consciousness of any 
 baronet in the known world . 
 an effect of these horror be that Volumnia find she can not go to 
 bed in her own room or sit by the fire in her own room , but must 
 come forth with her fair head tie up in a profusion of shawl , and 
 her fair form enrobe in drapery , and parade the mansion like a 
 ghost , particularly haunt the room , warm and luxurious , 
 prepare for one who still do not return . solitude under such 
 circumstance be not to be think of , Volumnia be attend by 
 she maid , who , impress from her own bed for that purpose , 
 extremely cold , very sleepy , and generally an injure maid as 
 condemn by circumstance to take office with a cousin , when she 
 have resolve to be maid to nothing less than ten thousand a year , 
 have not a sweet expression of countenance . 
 the periodical visit of the trooper to these room , however , in 
 the course of his patrolling be an assurance of protection and 
 company both to mistress and maid , which render they very 
 acceptable in the small hour of the night . whenever he be hear 
 advance , they both make some little decorative preparation to 
 receive he ; at other time they divide their watch into short 
 scrap of oblivion and dialogue not wholly free from acerbity , as 
 to whether Miss Dedlock , sit with her foot upon the fender , be 
 or be not fall into the fire when rescue   to her great 
 displeasure   by her guardian genius the maid . 
 " how be Sir Leicester now , Mr. George ? " inquire Volumnia , 
 adjust her cowl over her head . 
 " why , Sir Leicester be much the same , miss . he be very low and 
 ill , and he even wander a little sometimes . " 
 " have he ask for I ? " inquire Volumnia tenderly . 
 " why , no , I can not   say he have , miss . not within my hearing , that be 
 to say . " 
 " this be a truly sad time , Mr. George . " 
 " it be indeed , miss . had not   you well go to bed ? " 
 " you have a deal well go to bed , Miss Dedlock , " quoth the maid 
 sharply . 
 but Volumnia answer no ! no ! she may be ask for , she may be 
 want at a moment 's notice . she never should forgive herself " if 
 anything be to happen " and she be not on the spot . she decline 
 to enter on the question , moot by the maid , how the spot come to 
 be there , and not in her room   which be near to Sir Leicester 's , 
 but staunchly declare that on the spot she will remain . Volumnia 
 far make a merit of not have " close an eye " - as if she have 
 twenty or thirty - though it be hard to reconcile this statement 
 with she have most indisputably open two within five minute . 
 but when it come to four o'clock , and still the same blank , 
 Volumnia 's constancy begin to fail she , or rather it begin to 
 strengthen , for she now consider that it be her duty to be ready 
 for the morrow , when much may be expect of she , that , in fact , 
 howsoever anxious to remain upon the spot , it may be require of 
 she , as an act of self - devotion , to desert the spot . so when the 
 trooper reappear with his , " had not   you well go to bed , miss ? " 
 and when the maid protest , more sharply than before , " you have a 
 deal well go to bed , Miss Dedlock ! " she meekly rise and say , 
 " do with I what you think well ! " 
 Mr. George undoubtedly think it well to escort she on his arm to 
 the door of her cousinly chamber , and the maid as undoubtedly 
 think it well to hustle she into bed with mighty little ceremony . 
 accordingly , these step be take ; and now the trooper , in his 
 round , have the house to himself . 
 there be no improvement in the weather . from the portico , from the 
 eave , from the parapet , from every ledge and post and pillar , 
 drip the thawed snow . it have creep , as if for shelter , into the 
 lintel of the great door - under it , into the corner of the 
 window , into every chink and crevice of retreat , and there waste 
 and die . it be fall still ; upon the roof , upon the skylight , 
 even through the skylight , and drip , drip , drip , with the 
 regularity of the Ghost 's Walk , on the stone floor below . 
 the trooper , his old recollection awaken by the solitary 
 grandeur of a great house - no novelty to he once at Chesney Wold - 
 go up the stair and through the chief room , hold up his 
 light at arm 's length . think of his varied fortune within the 
 last few week , and of his rustic boyhood , and of the two period 
 of his life so strangely bring together across the wide 
 intermediate space ; think of the murder man whose image be 
 fresh in his mind ; think of the lady who have disappear from 
 these very room and the token of whose recent presence be all 
 here ; think of the master of the house upstairs and of the 
 foreboding , " who will tell he ! " he look here and look there , and 
 reflect how he might see something now , which it would tax his 
 boldness to walk up to , lay his hand upon , and prove to be a fancy . 
 but it be all blank , blank as the darkness above and below , while 
 he go up the great staircase again , blank as the oppressive 
 silence . 
 " all be still in readiness , George Rouncewell ? " 
 " quite orderly and right , Sir Leicester . " 
 " no word of any kind ? " 
 the trooper shake his head . 
 " no letter that can possibly have be overlook ? " 
 but he know there be no such hope as that and lay his head down 
 without look for an answer . 
 very familiar to he , as he say himself some hour ago , George 
 Rouncewell lift he into easy position through the long 
 remainder of the blank wintry night , and equally familiar with his 
 unexpressed wish , extinguish the light and undraw the curtain 
 at the first late break of day . the day come like a phantom . 
 Cold , colourless , and vague , it send a warning streak before it of 
 a deathlike hue , as if it cry out , " look what I be bring you 
 who watch there ! who will tell he ! " 
 CHAPTER LIX 
 Esther 's Narrative 
 it be three o'clock in the morning when the house outside London 
 do at last begin to exclude the country and to close we in with 
 street . we have make our way along road in a far bad condition 
 than when we have traverse they by daylight , both the fall and the 
 thaw have last ever since ; but the energy of my companion never 
 slacken . it have only be , as I think , of less assistance than 
 the horse in get we on , and it have often aid they . they have 
 stop exhausted half - way up hill , they have be drive through 
 stream of turbulent water , they have slip down and become 
 entangle with the harness ; but he and his little lantern have be 
 always ready , and when the mishap be set right , I have never hear 
 any variation in his cool , " get on , my lad ! " 
 the steadiness and confidence with which he have direct our 
 journey back I could not account for . never waver , he never 
 even stop to make an inquiry until we be within a few mile of 
 London . a very few word , here and there , be then enough for 
 he ; and thus we come , at between three and four o'clock in the 
 morning , into Islington . 
 I will not dwell on the suspense and anxiety with which I reflect 
 all this time that we be leave my mother far and far 
 behind every minute . I think I have some strong hope that he must 
 be right and could not fail to have a satisfactory object in 
 follow this woman , but I torment myself with question it 
 and discuss it during the whole journey . what be to ensue when 
 we find she and what could compensate we for this loss of time 
 be question also that I could not possibly dismiss ; my mind be 
 quite torture by long dwelling on such reflection when we 
 stop . 
 we stop in a high - street where there be a coach - stand . my 
 companion pay our two driver , who be as completely cover with 
 splash as if they have be drag along the road like the 
 carriage itself , and give they some brief direction where to take 
 it , lift I out of it and into a hackney - coach he have choose from 
 the rest . 
 " why , my dear ! " he say as he do this . " how wet you be ! " 
 I have not be conscious of it . but the melt snow have find its 
 way into the carriage , and I have get out two or three time when a 
 fall horse be plunge and have to be get up , and the wet have 
 penetrate my dress . I assure he it be no matter , but the 
 driver , who know he , would not be dissuade by I from run 
 down the street to his stable , whence he bring an armful of clean 
 dry straw . they shake it out and strew it well about I , and I 
 find it warm and comfortable . 
 " now , my dear , " say Mr. Bucket , with his head in at the window 
 after I be shut up . " we be a - go to mark this person down . it 
 may take a little time , but you do not   mind that . you be pretty 
 sure that I have   get a motive . ai not   you ? " 
 I little think what it be , little thought in how short a time I 
 should understand it well , but I assure he that I have 
 confidence in he . 
 " so you may have , my dear , " he return . " and I tell you what ! if 
 you only repose half as much confidence in I as I repose in you 
 after what I have   experience of you , that will do . Lord ! you be no 
 trouble at all . I never see a young woman in any station of 
 society - and I have   see many elevated one too - conduct herself like 
 you have conduct yourself since you be call out of your bed . 
 you be a pattern , you know , that be what you be , " say Mr. Bucket 
 warmly ; " you be a pattern . " 
 I tell he I be very glad , as indeed I be , to have be no 
 hindrance to he , and that I hop I should be none now . 
 " my dear , " he return , " when a young lady be as mild as she be 
 game , and as game as she be mild , that be all I ask , and more than I 
 expect . she then become a queen , and that be about what you be 
 yourself . " 
 with these encourage word - they really be encouraging to I 
 under those lonely and anxious circumstance - he get upon the box , 
 and we once more drive away . where we drive I neither know then 
 nor have ever know since , but we appear to seek out the 
 narrow and bad street in London . whenever I see he 
 direct the driver , I be prepare for our descending into a 
 deep complication of such street , and we never fail to do so . 
 sometimes we emerge upon a wide thoroughfare or come to a large 
 building than the generality , well light . then we stop at 
 office like those we have visit when we begin our journey , and I 
 see he in consultation with other . sometimes he would get down 
 by an archway or at a street corner and mysteriously show the light 
 of his little lantern . this would attract similar light from 
 various dark quarter , like so many insect , and a fresh 
 consultation would be hold . by degree we appear to contract our 
 search within narrow and easy limit . single police - officer 
 on duty could now tell Mr. Bucket what he want to know and point 
 to he where to go . at last we stop for a rather long 
 conversation between he and one of these man , which I suppose to 
 be satisfactory from his manner of nod from time to time . when 
 it be finish he come to I look very busy and very attentive . 
 " now , Miss Summerson , " he say to I , " you will not   be alarm whatever 
 come off , I know . it be not necessary for I to give you any 
 further caution than to tell you that we have mark this person 
 down and that you may be of use to I before I know it myself . I 
 do not   like to ask such a thing , my dear , but would you walk a 
 little way ? " 
 of course I get out directly and take his arm . 
 " it be not   so easy to keep your foot , " say Mr. Bucket , " but take 
 time . " 
 although I look about I confusedly and hurriedly as we cross 
 the street , I think I know the place . " be we in Holborn ? " I 
 ask he . 
 " yes , " say Mr. Bucket . " do you know this turning ? " 
 " it look like Chancery Lane . " 
 " and be christen so , my dear , " say Mr. Bucket . 
 we turn down it , and as we go shuffle through the sleet , I 
 hear the clock strike half - past five . we pass on in silence 
 and as quickly as we could with such a foot - hold , when some one 
 come towards we on the narrow pavement , wrap in a cloak , 
 stop and stand aside to give I room . in the same moment I 
 hear an exclamation of wonder and my own name from Mr. Woodcourt . 
 I know his voice very well . 
 it be so unexpected and so - I do not   know what to call it , whether 
 pleasant or painful - to come upon it after my feverish wandering 
 journey , and in the midst of the night , that I could not keep back 
 the tear from my eye . it be like hear his voice in a strange 
 country . 
 " my dear Miss Summerson , that you should be out at this hour , and 
 in such weather ! " 
 he have hear from my guardian of my have be call away on some 
 uncommon business and say so to dispense with any explanation . I 
 tell he that we have but just leave a coach and be go - but then 
 I be oblige to look at my companion . 
 " why , you see , Mr. Woodcourt " - he have catch the name from I - " we 
 be a - go at present into the next street . Inspector Bucket . " 
 Mr. Woodcourt , disregard my remonstrance , have hurriedly take 
 off his cloak and be put it about I . " that be a good move , 
 too , " say Mr. Bucket , assist , " a very good move . " 
 " may I go with you ? " say Mr. Woodcourt . I do not   know whether to 
 I or to my companion . 
 " why , Lord ! " exclaim Mr. Bucket , take the answer on himself . 
 " of course you may . " 
 it be all say in a moment , and they take I between they , wrap 
 in the cloak . 
 " I have just leave Richard , " say Mr. Woodcourt . " I have be 
 sit with he since ten o'clock last night . " 
 " oh , dear I , he be ill ! " 
 " no , no , believe I ; not ill , but not quite well . he be depressed 
 and faint - you know he get so worried and so worn sometimes - and 
 Ada send to I of course ; and when I come home I find her note and 
 come straight here . well ! Richard revive so much after a little 
 while , and Ada be so happy and so convinced of its be my doing , 
 though God know I have little enough to do with it , that I remain 
 with he until he have be fast asleep some hour . as fast asleep 
 as she be now , I hope ! " 
 his friendly and familiar way of speak of they , his unaffected 
 devotion to they , the grateful confidence with which I know he have 
 inspire my darling , and the comfort he be to she ; could I 
 separate all this from his promise to I ? how thankless I must 
 have be if it have not recall the word he say to I when he 
 be so move by the change in my appearance : " I will accept he as 
 a trust , and it shall be a sacred one ! " 
 we now turn into another narrow street . " Mr. Woodcourt , " say 
 Mr. Bucket , who have eye he closely as we come along , " our 
 business take we to a law - stationer 's here , a certain Mr. 
 Snagsby 's . what , you know he , do you ? " he be so quick that he 
 see it in an instant . 
 " yes , I know a little of he and have call upon he at this 
 place . " 
 " indeed , sir ? " say Mr. Bucket . " then you will be so good as to 
 let I leave Miss Summerson with you for a moment while I go and 
 have half a word with he ? " 
 the last police - officer with whom he have confer be stand 
 silently behind we . I be not aware of it until he strike in on my 
 say I hear some one cry . 
 " do not   be alarm , miss , " he return . " it be Snagsby 's servant . " 
 " why , you see , " say Mr. Bucket , " the girl 's subject to fit , and 
 have them bad upon she to - night . a most contrary circumstance it be , 
 for I want certain information out of that girl , and she must be 
 bring to reason somehow . " 
 " at all event , they would not   be up yet if it be not   for she , Mr. 
 Bucket , " say the other man . " she be be at it pretty well all 
 night , sir . " 
 " well , that be true , " he return . " my light 's burn out . show 
 yours a moment . " 
 all this pass in a whisper a door or two from the house in which 
 I could faintly hear crying and moaning . in the little round of 
 light produce for the purpose , Mr. Bucket go up to the door and 
 knock . the door be open after he have knock twice , and he 
 go in , leave we stand in the street . 
 " Miss Summerson , " say Mr. Woodcourt , " if without obtrude myself 
 on your confidence I may remain near you , pray let I do so . " 
 " you be truly kind , " I answer . " I need wish to keep no secret 
 of my own from you ; if I keep any , it be another 's . " 
 " I quite understand . trust I , I will remain near you only so long 
 as I can fully respect it . " 
 " I trust implicitly to you , " I say . " I know and deeply feel how 
 sacredly you keep your promise . " 
 after a short time the little round of light shine out again , and 
 Mr. Bucket advance towards we in it with his earnest face . 
 " please to come in , Miss Summerson , " he say , " and sit down by the 
 fire . Mr. Woodcourt , from information I have receive I understand 
 you be a medical man . would you look to this girl and see if 
 anything can be do to bring she round . she have a letter 
 somewhere that I particularly want . it be not in her box , and I 
 think it must be about she ; but she be so twisted and clench up 
 that she be difficult to handle without hurt . " 
 we all three go into the house together ; although it be cold and 
 raw , it smell close too from be up all night . in the passage 
 behind the door stand a scared , sorrowful - look little man in a 
 grey coat who seem to have a naturally polite manner and speak 
 meekly . 
 " Downstairs , if you please , Mr. Bucket , " say he . " the lady will 
 excuse the front kitchen ; we use it as our workaday sitting - room . 
 the back be Guster 's bedroom , and in it she be a - carrying on , poor 
 thing , to a frightful extent ! " 
 we go downstairs , follow by Mr. Snagsby , as I soon find the 
 little man to be . in the front kitchen , sit by the fire , be 
 Mrs. Snagsby , with very red eye and a very severe expression of 
 face . 
 " my little woman , " say Mr. Snagsby , enter behind we , " to wave - 
 not to put too fine a point upon it , my dear - hostility for one 
 single moment in the course of this prolonged night , here be 
 Inspector Bucket , Mr. Woodcourt , and a lady . " 
 she look very much astonish , as she have reason for do , and 
 look particularly hard at I . 
 " my little woman , " say Mr. Snagsby , sit down in the remotest 
 corner by the door , as if he be take a liberty , " it be not 
 unlikely that you may inquire of I why Inspector Bucket , Mr. 
 Woodcourt , and a lady call upon we in Cook 's Court , Cursitor 
 Street , at the present hour . I do not   know . I have not the least 
 idea . if I be to be inform , I should despair of understanding , 
 and I would rather not be tell . " 
 he appear so miserable , sit with his head upon his hand , and 
 I appear so unwelcome , that I be go to offer an apology when 
 Mr. Bucket take the matter on himself . 
 " now , Mr. Snagsby , " say he , " the good thing you can do be to go 
 along with Mr. Woodcourt to look after your Guster - " 
 " my Guster , Mr. Bucket ! " cry Mr. Snagsby . " go on , sir , go on . I 
 shall be charge with that next . " 
 " and to hold the candle , " pursue Mr. Bucket without correct 
 himself , " or hold she , or make yourself useful in any way you be 
 ask . which there be not a man alive more ready to do , for you be 
 a man of urbanity and suavity , you know , and you have   get the sort of 
 heart that can feel for another . Mr. Woodcourt , would you be so 
 good as see to she , and if you can get that letter from she , to let 
 I have it as soon as ever you can ? " 
 as they go out , Mr. Bucket make I sit down in a corner by the 
 fire and take off my wet shoe , which he turn up to dry upon the 
 fender , talk all the time . 
 " do not   you be at all put out , miss , by the want of a hospitable 
 look from Mrs. Snagsby there , because she be under a mistake 
 altogether . she will find that out soon than will be agreeable to 
 a lady of she generally correct manner of form her thought , 
 because I be a - go to explain it to she . " here , stand on the 
 hearth with his wet hat and shawl in his hand , himself a pile of 
 wet , he turn to Mrs. Snagsby . " now , the first thing that I say 
 to you , as a married woman possess what you may call charm , you 
 know - ' believe I , if all those endearing , ' and cetrer - you be well 
 acquaint with the song , because it be in vain for you to tell I 
 that you and good society be stranger - charm - attraction , mind 
 you , that ought to give you confidence in yourself - be , that you have 
 do it . " 
 Mrs. Snagsby look rather alarmed , relent a little and falter , 
 what do Mr. Bucket mean . 
 " what do Mr. Bucket mean ? " he repeat , and I see by his face 
 that all the time he talk he be listen for the discovery of 
 the letter , to my own great agitation , for I know then how 
 important it must be ; " I will tell you what he mean , ma'am . go and 
 see Othello act . that be the tragedy for you . " 
 Mrs. Snagsby consciously ask why . 
 " why ? " say Mr. Bucket . " because you will come to that if you do not 
 look out . why , at the very moment while I speak , I know what your 
 mind be not wholly free from respect this young lady . but shall 
 I tell you who this young lady be ? now , come , you be what I call 
 an intellectual woman - with your soul too large for your body , if 
 you come to that , and chafe it - and you know I , and you 
 recollect where you see I last , and what be talk of in that 
 circle . do not   you ? yes ! very well . this young lady be that 
 young lady . " 
 Mrs. Snagsby appear to understand the reference well than I do 
 at the time . 
 " and Toughey - him as you call Jo - be mix up in the same 
 business , and no other ; and the law - writer that you know of be 
 mix up in the same business , and no other ; and your husband , with 
 no more knowledge of it than your great grandfather , be mix up 
  by Mr. Tulkinghorn , deceased , his good customer   in the same 
 business , and no other ; and the whole bileing of people be mixed 
 up in the same business , and no other . and yet a married woman , 
 possess your attraction , shut her eye   and sparkler too , 
 and go and run her delicate - form head against a wall . why , I 
 be ashamed of you !   I expect Mr. Woodcourt might have get it by 
 this time . " 
 Mrs. Snagsby shake her head and put she handkerchief to her eye . 
 " be that all ? " say Mr. Bucket excitedly . " no . see what happen . 
 another person mix up in that business and no other , a person in 
 a wretched state , come here to - night and be see a - speak to 
 your maid - servant ; and between she and your maid - servant there 
 pass a paper that I would give a hundred pound for , down . what 
 do you do ? you hide and you watch them , and you pounce upon that 
 maid - servant - know what she be subject to and what a little thing 
 will bring them on - in that surprising manner and with that severity 
 that , by the Lord , she go off and keep off , when a life may be 
 hang upon that girl 's word ! " 
 he so thoroughly mean what he say now that I involuntarily 
 clasp my hand and feel the room turn away from I . but it 
 stop . Mr. Woodcourt come in , put a paper into his hand , and 
 go away again . 
 " now , Mrs. Snagsby , the only amend you can make , " say Mr. Bucket , 
 rapidly glance at it , " be to let I speak a word to this young 
 lady in private here . and if you know of any help that you can 
 give to that gentleman in the next kitchen there or can think of 
 any one thing that be likeli than another to bring the girl round , 
 do your swift and good ! " in an instant she be go , and he have 
 shut the door . " now my dear , you be steady and quite sure of 
 yourself ? " 
 " quite , " say I. 
 " whose writing be that ? " 
 it be my mother 's . a pencil - writing , on a crushed and tear piece 
 of paper , blot with wet . fold roughly like a letter , and 
 direct to I at my guardian 's . 
 " you know the hand , " he say , " and if you be firm enough to read 
 it to I , do ! but be particular to a word . " 
 it have be write in portion , at different time . I read what 
 follow : 
 " I come to the cottage with two object . first , to see the dear 
 one , if I could , once more - but only to see she - not to speak to 
 she or let she know that I be near . the other object , to elude 
 pursuit and to be lose . do not blame the mother for her share . 
 the assistance that she render I , she render on my strong 
 assurance that it be for the dear one 's good . you remember she 
 dead child . the man 's consent I buy , but her help be freely 
 give . " 
 " ' I come . ' that be write , " say my companion , " when she rest 
 there . it bear out what I make of it . I be right . " 
 the next be write at another time : 
 " I have wander a long distance , and for many hour , and I know 
 that I must soon die . these street ! I have no purpose but to 
 die . when I leave , I have a bad , but I be save from add that 
 guilt to the rest . cold , wet , and fatigue be sufficient cause 
 for my be find dead , but I shall die of other , though I suffer 
 from these . it be right that all that have sustain I should 
 give way at once and that I should die of terror and my conscience . " 
 " take courage , " say Mr. Bucket . " there be only a few word more . " 
 those , too , be write at another time . to all appearance , 
 almost in the dark : 
 " I have do all I could do to be lose . I shall be soon forget 
 so , and shall disgrace he least . I have nothing about I by which 
 I can be recognize . this paper I part with now . the place where 
 I shall lie down , if I can get so far , have be often in my mind . 
 Farewell . forgive . " 
 Mr. Bucket , support I with his arm , lower I gently into my 
 chair . " cheer up ! do not   think I hard with you , my dear , but as 
 soon as ever you feel equal to it , get your shoe on and be ready . " 
 I do as he require , but I be leave there a long time , pray for 
 my unhappy mother . they be all occupy with the poor girl , and 
 I hear Mr. Woodcourt direct they and speak to she often . at 
 length he come in with Mr. Bucket and say that as it be important 
 to address she gently , he think it well that I should ask she for 
 whatever information we desire to obtain . there be no doubt that 
 she could now reply to question if she be soothe and not 
 alarm . the question , Mr. Bucket say , be how she come by the 
 letter , what pass between she and the person who give she the 
 letter , and where the person go . hold my mind as steadily as 
 I could to these point , I go into the next room with they . Mr. 
 Woodcourt would have remain outside , but at my solicitation go 
 in with we . 
 the poor girl be sit on the floor where they have lay she 
 down . they stand around she , though at a little distance , that she 
 might have air . she be not pretty and look weak and poor , but 
 she have a plaintive and a good face , though it be still a little 
 wild . I kneel on the ground beside she and put her poor head 
 upon my shoulder , whereupon she draw her arm round my neck and 
 burst into tear . 
 " my poor girl , " say I , lay my face against her forehead , for 
 indeed I be cry too , and tremble , " it seem cruel to trouble 
 you now , but more depend on our know something about this 
 letter than I could tell you in an hour . " 
 she begin piteously declare that she do not   mean any harm , she 
 do not   mean any harm , Mrs. Snagsby ! 
 " we be all sure of that , " say I. " but pray tell I how you get 
 it . " 
 " yes , dear lady , I will , and tell you true . I will tell true , 
 indeed , Mrs. Snagsby . " 
 " I be sure of that , " say I. " and how be it ? " 
 " I have be out on an errand , dear lady - long after it be dark - 
 quite late ; and when I come home , I find a common - look person , 
 all wet and muddy , look up at our house . when she see I come 
 in at the door , she call I back and say do I live here . and I 
 say yes , and she say she know only one or two place about here , 
 but have lose her way and could not   find they . oh , what shall I do , 
 what shall I do ! they will not   believe I ! she do not   say any harm 
 to I , and I do not   say any harm to she , indeed , Mrs. Snagsby ! " 
 it be necessary for her mistress to comfort she - which she do , I 
 must say , with a good deal of contrition - before she could be get 
 beyond this . 
 " she could not find those place , " say I. 
 " no ! " cry the girl , shake her head . " no ! could not   find they . 
 and she be so faint , and lame , and miserable , oh so wretched , that 
 if you have see she , Mr. Snagsby , you would have give she half a 
 crown , I know ! " 
 " well , Guster , my girl , " say he , at first not know what to say . 
 " I hope I should . " 
 " and yet she be so well speak , " say the girl , look at I with 
 wide open eye , " that it make a person 's heart bleed . and so she 
 say to I , do I know the way to the burying ground ? and I ask 
 she which bury ground . and she say , the poor burying ground . 
 and so I tell she I have be a poor child myself , and it be 
 accord to parish . but she say she mean a poor burying 
 ground not very far from here , where there be an archway , and a 
 step , and an iron gate . " 
 as I watch her face and soothe she to go on , I see that Mr. 
 Bucket receive this with a look which I could not separate from 
 one of alarm . 
 " oh , dear , dear ! " cry the girl , press her hair back with her 
 hand . " what shall I do , what shall I do ! she mean the burying 
 ground where the man be bury that take the sleep - stuff - that 
 you come home and tell we of , Mr. Snagsby - that frighten I so , 
 Mrs. Snagsby . oh , I be frighten again . hold I ! " 
 " you be so much well now , " sald I. " Pray , pray tell I more . " 
 " yes I will , yes I will ! but do not   be angry with I , that be a dear 
 lady , because I have be so ill . " 
 angry with she , poor soul ! 
 " there ! now I will , now I will . so she say , could I tell she how 
 to find it , and I say yes , and I tell she ; and she look at I 
 with eye like almost as if she be blind , and herself all wave 
 back . and so she take out the letter , and show it I , and say 
 if she be to put that in the post - office , it would be rub out 
 and not minded and never send ; and would I take it from she , and 
 send it , and the messenger would be pay at the house . and so I 
 say yes , if it be no harm , and she say no - no harm . and so I 
 take it from she , and she say she have nothing to give I , and I 
 say I be poor myself and consequently want nothing . and so she 
 say God bless you , and go . " 
 " and do she go - " 
 " yes , " cry the girl , anticipate the inquiry . " yes ! she go 
 the way I have show she . then I come in , and Mrs. Snagsby come 
 behind I from somewhere and lay hold of I , and I be 
 frightened . " 
 Mr. Woodcourt take she kindly from I . Mr. Bucket wrap I up , 
 and immediately we be in the street . Mr. Woodcourt hesitate , 
 but I say , " do not   leave I now ! " and Mr. Bucket add , " you will be 
 well with we , we may want you ; do not   lose time ! " 
 I have the most confused impression of that walk . I recollect 
 that it be neither night nor day , that morning be dawn but the 
 street - lamp be not yet put out , that the sleet be still fall 
 and that all the way be deep with it . I recollect a few chilled 
 people pass in the street . I recollect the wet house - top , the 
 clogged and burst gutter and water - spout , the mound of 
 blacken ice and snow over which we pass , the narrowness of the 
 court by which we go . at the same time I remember that the poor 
 girl seem to be yet tell her story audibly and plainly in my 
 hearing , that I could feel she rest on my arm , that the stain 
 house - front put on human shape and look at I , that great 
 water - gate seem to be open and closing in my head or in the 
 air , and that the unreal thing be more substantial than the 
 real . 
 at last we stand under a dark and miserable cover way , where one 
 lamp be burn over an iron gate and where the morning faintly 
 struggle in . the gate be close . beyond it be a burial ground 
  - a dreadful spot in which the night be very slowly stirring , but 
 where I could dimly see heap of dishonour graf and stone , 
 hem in by filthy house with a few dull light in their window 
 and on whose wall a thick humidity break out like a disease . on 
 the step at the gate , drench in the fearful wet of such a place , 
 which ooze and splash down everywhere , I see , with a cry of pity 
 and horror , a woman lie - Jenny , the mother of the dead child . 
 I run forward , but they stop I , and Mr. Woodcourt entreat I 
 with the great earnestness , even with tear , before I go up to 
 the figure to listen for an instant to what Mr. Bucket say . I do 
 so , as I think . I do so , as I be sure . 
 " Miss Summerson , you will understand I , if you think a moment . they 
 change clothe at the cottage . " 
 they change clothe at the cottage . I could repeat the word in 
 my mind , and I know what they mean of themselves , but I attach 
 no meaning to they in any other connexion . 
 " and one return , " say Mr. Bucket , " and one go on . and the one 
 that go on only go on a certain way agree upon to deceive and 
 then turn across country and go home . think a moment ! " 
 I could repeat this in my mind too , but I have not the least idea 
 what it mean . I see before I , lie on the step , the mother of 
 the dead child . she lie there with one arm creep round a bar of 
 the iron gate and seem to embrace it . she lie there , who have so 
 lately speak to my mother . she lie there , a distressed , 
 unsheltered , senseless creature . she who have bring my mother 's 
 letter , who could give I the only clue to where my mother be ; 
 she , who be to guide we to rescue and save she whom we have seek 
 so far , who have come to this condition by some mean connect with 
 my mother that I could not follow , and might be pass beyond our 
 reach and help at that moment ; she lie there , and they stop I ! 
 I see but do not comprehend the solemn and compassionate look in 
 Mr. Woodcourt 's face . I see but do not comprehend his touch 
 the other on the breast to keep he back . I see he stand 
 uncover in the bitter air , with a reverence for something . but 
 my understanding for all this be go . 
 I even hear it say between they , " shall she go ? " 
 " she have well go . her hand should be the first to touch she . 
 they have a high right than our . " 
 I pass on to the gate and stoop down . I lift the heavy head , 
 put the long dank hair aside , and turn the face . and it be my 
 mother , cold and dead . 
 CHAPTER LX 
 Perspective 
 I proceed to other passage of my narrative . from the goodness of 
 all about I I derive such consolation as I can never think of 
 unmoved . I have already say so much of myself , and so much still 
 remain , that I will not dwell upon my sorrow . I have an illness , 
 but it be not a long one ; and I would avoid even this mention of 
 it if I could quite keep down the recollection of their sympathy . 
 I proceed to other passage of my narrative . 
 during the time of my illness , we be still in London , where Mrs. 
 Woodcourt have come , on my guardian 's invitation , to stay with we . 
 when my guardian think I well and cheerful enough to talk with 
 he in our old way - though I could have do that soon if he 
 would have believe I - I resume my work and my chair beside his . 
 he have appoint the time himself , and we be alone . 
 " Dame Trot , " say he , receive I with a kiss , " welcome to the 
 growlery again , my dear . I have a scheme to develop , little woman . 
 I propose to remain here , perhaps for six month , perhaps for a 
 long time - as it may be . quite to settle here for a while , in 
 short . " 
 " and in the meanwhile leave Bleak House ? " say I. 
 " Aye , my dear ? Bleak House , " he return , " must learn to take care 
 of itself . " 
 I think his tone sound sorrowful , but look at he , I see his 
 kind face light up by its pleasantest smile . 
 " Bleak House , " he repeat - and his tone do not sound sorrowful , I 
 find - " must learn to take care of itself . it be a long way from 
 Ada , my dear , and Ada stand much in need of you . " 
 " it be like you , guardian , " say I , " to have be take that into 
 consideration for a happy surprise to both of we . " 
 " not so disinterested either , my dear , if you mean to extol I for 
 that virtue , since if you be generally on the road , you could be 
 seldom with I . and besides , I wish to hear as much and as often 
 of Ada as I can in this condition of estrangement from poor Rick . 
 not of she alone , but of he too , poor fellow . " 
 " have you see Mr. Woodcourt , this morning , guardian ? " 
 " I see Mr. Woodcourt every morning , Dame Durden . " 
 " do he still say the same of Richard ? " 
 " just the same . he know of no direct bodily illness that he have ; 
 on the contrary , he believe that he have none . yet he be not easy 
 about he ; who can be ? " 
 my dear girl have be to see we lately every day , some time twice 
 in a day . but we have foresee , all along , that this would only 
 last until I be quite myself . we know full well that her fervent 
 heart be as full of affection and gratitude towards her cousin 
 John as it have ever be , and we acquit Richard of lay any 
 injunction upon she to stay away ; but we know on the other hand 
 that she feel it a part of her duty to he to be spar of her 
 visit at our house . my guardian 's delicacy have soon perceive 
 this and have try to convey to she that he think she be right . 
 " dear , unfortunate , mistaken Richard , " say I. " when will he awake 
 from his delusion ! " 
 " he be not in the way to do so now , my dear , " reply my guardian . 
 " the more he suffer , the more averse he will be to I , have make 
 I the principal representative of the great occasion of his 
 suffering . " 
 I could not help add , " so unreasonably ! " 
 " ah , Dame Trot , Dame Trot , " return my guardian , " what shall we 
 find reasonable in Jarndyce and Jarndyce ! unreason and injustice 
 at the top , unreason and injustice at the heart and at the bottom , 
 unreason and injustice from begin to end - if it ever have an 
 end - how should poor Rick , always hover near it , pluck reason 
 out of it ? he no more gather grape from thorn or fig from 
 thistle than old man do in old time . " 
 his gentleness and consideration for Richard whenever we speak of 
 he touch I so that I be always silent on this subject very 
 soon . 
 " I suppose the Lord Chancellor , and the Vice Chancellors , and the 
 whole Chancery battery of great gun would be infinitely astonish 
 by such unreason and injustice in one of their suitor , " pursue my 
 guardian . " when those learn gentleman begin to raise moss - rose 
 from the powder they sow in their wig , I shall begin to be 
 astonish too ! " 
 he check himself in glance towards the window to look where the 
 wind be and lean on the back of my chair instead . 
 " well , well , little woman ! to go on , my dear . this rock we must 
 leave to time , chance , and hopeful circumstance . we must not 
 shipwreck Ada upon it . she can not afford , and he can not afford , 
 the remotest chance of another separation from a friend . therefore 
 I have particularly beg of Woodcourt , and I now particularly beg 
 of you , my dear , not to move this subject with Rick . let it rest . 
 next week , next month , next year , soon or later , he will see I 
 with clear eye . I can wait . " 
 but I have already discuss it with he , I confess ; and so , I 
 think , have Mr. Woodcourt . 
 " so he tell I , " return my guardian . " very good . he have make 
 his protest , and Dame Durden have make her , and there be nothing 
 more to be say about it . now I come to Mrs. Woodcourt . how do 
 you like she , my dear ? " 
 in answer to this question , which be oddly abrupt , I say I like 
 she very much and think she be more agreeable than she use to 
 be . 
 " I think so too , " say my guardian . " less pedigree ? not so much 
 of Morgan ap - what be his name ? " 
 that be what I mean , I acknowledge , though he be a very 
 harmless person , even when we have have more of he . 
 " still , upon the whole , he be as well in his native mountain , " 
 say my guardian . " I agree with you . then , little woman , can I do 
 well for a time than retain Mrs. Woodcourt here ? " 
 no . and yet - 
 my guardian look at I , wait for what I have to say . 
 I have nothing to say . at least I have nothing in my mind that I 
 could say . I have an undefined impression that it might have be 
 well if we have have some other inmate , but I could hardly have 
 explain why even to myself . or , if to myself , certainly not to 
 anybody else . 
 " you see , " say my guardian , " our neighbourhood be in Woodcourt 's 
 way , and he can come here to see she as often as he like , which be 
 agreeable to they both ; and she be familiar to we and fond of you . " 
 yes . that be undeniable . I have nothing to say against it . I 
 could not have suggest a well arrangement , but I be not quite 
 easy in my mind . Esther , Esther , why not ? Esther , think ! 
 " it be a very good plan indeed , dear guardian , and we could not do 
 well . " 
 " sure , little woman ? " 
 quite sure . I have have a moment 's time to think , since I have urge 
 that duty on myself , and I be quite sure . 
 " good , " say my guardian . " it shall be do . carry 
 unanimously . " 
 " carry unanimously , " I repeat , go on with my work . 
 it be a cover for his book - table that I happen to be 
 ornament . it have be lay by on the night precede my sad 
 journey and never resume . I show it to he now , and he admire 
 it highly . after I have explain the pattern to he and all the 
 great effect that be to come out by and by , I think I would go 
 back to our last theme . 
 " you say , dear guardian , when we speak of Mr. Woodcourt before Ada 
 leave we , that you think he would give a long trial to another 
 country . have you be advise he since ? " 
 " yes , little woman , pretty often . " 
 " have he decide to do so ? " 
 " I rather think not . " 
 " some other prospect have open to he , perhaps ? " say I. 
 " why - yes - perhaps , " return my guardian , begin his answer in 
 a very deliberate manner . " about half a year hence or so , there be 
 a medical attendant for the poor to be appoint at a certain place 
 in Yorkshire . it be a thriving place , pleasantly situate - stream 
 and street , town and country , mill and moor - and seem to present 
 an opening for such a man . I mean a man whose hope and aim may 
 sometimes lie   as most man 's sometimes do , I dare say   above the 
 ordinary level , but to whom the ordinary level will be high enough 
 after all if it should prove to be a way of usefulness and good 
 service lead to no other . all generous spirit be ambitious , I 
 suppose , but the ambition that calmly trust itself to such a road , 
 instead of spasmodically try to fly over it , be of the kind I 
 care for . it be Woodcourt 's kind . " 
 " and will he get this appointment ? " I ask . 
 " why , little woman , " return my guardian , smile , " not be an 
 oracle , I can not confidently say , but I think so . his reputation 
 stand very high ; there be people from that part of the country 
 in the shipwreck ; and strange to say , I believe the good man have 
 the good chance . you must not suppose it to be a fine endowment . 
 it be a very , very commonplace affair , my dear , an appointment to a 
 great amount of work and a small amount of pay ; but well thing 
 will gather about it , it may be fairly hop . " 
 " the poor of that place will have reason to bless the choice if it 
 fall on Mr. Woodcourt , guardian . " 
 " you be right , little woman ; that I be sure they will . " 
 we say no more about it , nor do he say a word about the future of 
 Bleak House . but it be the first time I have take my seat at his 
 side in my mourning dress , and that account for it , I consider . 
 I now begin to visit my dear girl every day in the dull dark corner 
 where she live . the morning be my usual time , but whenever I 
 find I have an hour or so to spare , I put on my bonnet and bustle 
 off to Chancery Lane . they be both so glad to see I at all 
 hour , and use to brighten up so when they hear I open the 
 door and come in   be quite at home , I never knock , that I 
 have no fear of become troublesome just yet . 
 on these occasion I frequently find Richard absent . at other 
 time he would be write or read paper in the cause at that 
 table of his , so covered with paper , which be never disturb . 
 sometimes I would come upon he linger at the door of Mr. 
 Vholes 's office . sometimes I would meet he in the neighbourhood 
 lounge about and bite his nail . I often meet he wander in 
 Lincoln 's Inn , near the place where I have first see he , oh how 
 different , how different ! 
 that the money Ada bring he be melt away with the candle I 
 use to see burn after dark in Mr. Vholes 's office I know very 
 well . it be not a large amount in the beginning , he have marry 
 in debt , and I could not fail to understand , by this time , what be 
 mean by Mr. Vholes 's shoulder be at the wheel - as I still hear 
 it be . my dear make the good of housekeeper and try hard to 
 save , but I know that they be get poor and poorer every 
 day . 
 she shine in the miserable corner like a beautiful star . she 
 adorn and grace it so that it become another place . Paler than 
 she have be at home , and a little quieter than I have think 
 natural when she be yet so cheerful and hopeful , her face be so 
 unshadowed that I half believe she be blind by her love for 
 Richard to his ruinous career . 
 I go one day to dine with they while I be under this impression . 
 as I turn into Symond 's Inn , I meet little Miss Flite come out . 
 she have be to make a stately call upon the ward in Jarndyce , as 
 she still call they , and have derive the high gratification 
 from that ceremony . Ada have already tell I that she call every 
 Monday at five o'clock , with one little extra white bow in her 
 bonnet , which never appear there at any other time , and with she 
 large reticule of document on her arm . 
 " my dear ! " she begin . " so delighted ! how do you do ! so glad to 
 see you . and you be go to visit our interesting Jarndyce 
 ward ? to be sure ! our beauty be at home , my dear , and will be 
 charm to see you . " 
 " then Richard be not come in yet ? " say I. " I be glad of that , for 
 I be afraid of be a little late . " 
 " no , he be not come in , " return Miss Flite . " he have have a long 
 day in court . I leave he there with Vholes . you do not   like 
 Vholes , I hope ? don't like Vholes . Dan - gerous man ! " 
 " I be afraid you see Richard oftener than ever now , " say I. 
 " my dearest , " return Miss Flite , " daily and hourly . you know 
 what I tell you of the attraction on the Chancellor 's table ? my 
 dear , next to myself he be the most constant suitor in court . he 
 begin quite to amuse our little party . ve - ry friendly little 
 party , be we not ? " 
 it be miserable to hear this from her poor mad lip , though it be 
 no surprise . 
 " in short , my value friend , " pursue Miss Flite , advance her 
 lip to my ear with an air of equal patronage and mystery , " I must 
 tell you a secret . I have make he my executor . Nominated , 
 constitute , and appoint he . in my will . ye - es . " 
 " indeed ? " say I. 
 " Ye - es , " repeat Miss Flite in her most genteel accent , " my 
 executor , administrator , and assign .   our Chancery phrase , my 
 love .   I have reflect that if I should wear out , he will be able 
 to watch that judgment . be so very regular in his attendance . " 
 it make I sigh to think of he . 
 " I do at one time mean , " say Miss Flite , echo the sigh , " to 
 nominate , constitute , and appoint poor Gridley . also very regular , 
 my charming girl . I assure you , most exemplary ! but he wear out , 
 poor man , so I have appoint his successor . do not   mention it . 
 this be in confidence . " 
 she carefully open her reticule a little way and show I a 
 fold piece of paper inside as the appointment of which she speak . 
 " another secret , my dear . I have add to my collection of bird . " 
 " really , Miss Flite ? " say I , know how it please she to have 
 her confidence receive with an appearance of interest . 
 she nod several time , and her face become overcast and gloomy . 
 " two more . I call they the Wards in Jarndyce . they be cage up 
 with all the other . with Hope , Joy , Youth , Peace , Rest , Life , 
 Dust , Ashes , Waste , Want , Ruin , Despair , Madness , Death , Cunning , 
 Folly , word , Wigs , Rags , Sheepskin , Plunder , Precedent , Jargon , 
 Gammon , and Spinach ! " 
 the poor soul kiss I with the most troubled look I have ever see 
 in she and go her way . her manner of run over the name of 
 her bird , as if she be afraid of hear they even from her own 
 lip , quite chill I . 
 this be not a cheer preparation for my visit , and I could have 
 dispense with the company of Mr. Vholes , when Richard   who arrive 
 within a minute or two after I   bring he to share our dinner . 
 although it be a very plain one , Ada and Richard be for some 
 minute both out of the room together help to get ready what we 
 be to eat and drink . Mr. Vholes take that opportunity of hold 
 a little conversation in a low voice with I . he come to the 
 window where I be sit and begin upon Symond 's Inn . 
 " a dull place , Miss Summerson , for a life that be not an official 
 one , " say Mr. Vholes , smear the glass with his black glove to 
 make it clear for I . 
 " there be not much to see here , " say I. 
 " nor to hear , miss , " return Mr. Vholes . " a little music do 
 occasionally stray in , but we be not musical in the law and soon 
 eject it . I hope Mr. Jarndyce be as well as his friend could wish 
 he ? " 
 I thank Mr. Vholes and say he be quite well . 
 " I have not the pleasure to be admit among the number of his 
 friend myself , " say Mr. Vholes , " and I be aware that the 
 gentleman of our profession be sometimes regard in such quarter 
 with an unfavourable eye . our plain course , however , under good 
 report and evil report , and all kind of prejudice   we be the 
 victim of prejudice , be to have everything openly carry on . 
 how do you find Mr. C. look , Miss Summerson ? " 
 " he look very ill . dreadfully anxious . " 
 " just so , " say Mr. Vholes . 
 he stand behind I with his long black figure reach nearly to 
 the ceiling of those low room , feel the pimple on his face as 
 if they be ornament and speak inwardly and evenly as though 
 there be not a human passion or emotion in his nature . 
 " Mr. Woodcourt be in attendance upon Mr. C. , I believe ? " he 
 resume . 
 " Mr. Woodcourt be his disinterested friend , " I answer . 
 " but I mean in professional attendance , medical attendance . " 
 " that can do little for an unhappy mind , " say I. 
 " just so , " say Mr. Vholes . 
 so slow , so eager , so bloodless and gaunt , I feel as if Richard 
 be waste away beneath the eye of this adviser and there be 
 something of the vampire in he . 
 " Miss Summerson , " say Mr. Vholes , very slowly rub his gloved 
 hand , as if , to his cold sense of touch , they be much the same 
 in black kid or out of it , " this be an ill - advise marriage of Mr. 
 C. 's . " 
 I beg he would excuse I from discuss it . they have be 
 engage when they be both very young , I tell he   a little 
 indignantly   and when the prospect before they be much fair and 
 brighter . when Richard have not yield himself to the unhappy 
 influence which now darken his life . 
 " just so , " assent Mr. Vholes again . " still , with a view to 
 everything be openly carry on , I will , with your permission , 
 Miss Summerson , observe to you that I consider this a very ill- 
 advise marriage indeed . I owe the opinion not only to Mr. C. 's 
 connexion , against whom I should naturally wish to protect myself , 
 but also to my own reputation - dear to myself as a professional man 
 aim to keep respectable ; dear to my three girl at home , for 
 whom I be strive to realize some little independence ; dear , I 
 will even say , to my aged father , whom it be my privilege to 
 support . " 
 " it would become a very different marriage , a much happy and 
 well marriage , another marriage altogether , Mr. Vholes , " say I , 
 " if Richard be persuade to turn his back on the fatal pursuit in 
 which you be engage with he . " 
 Mr. Vholes , with a noiseless cough - or rather gasp - into one of his 
 black glove , incline his head as if he do not wholly dispute 
 even that . 
 " Miss Summerson , " he say , " it may be so ; and I freely admit that 
 the young lady who have take Mr. C. 's name upon herself in so ill- 
 advise a manner - you will I am sure not quarrel with I for 
 throw out that remark again , as a duty I owe to Mr. C. 's 
 connexion - be a highly genteel young lady . business have prevent 
 I from mix much with general society in any but a professional 
 character ; still I trust I be competent to perceive that she be a 
 highly genteel young lady . as to beauty , I be not a judge of that 
 myself , and I never do give much attention to it from a boy , but I 
 dare say the young lady be equally eligible in that point of view . 
 she be consider so   I have hear   among the clerk in the Inn , 
 and it be a point more in their way than in mine . in reference to 
 Mr. C. 's pursuit of his interest - " 
 " oh ! his interest , Mr. Vholes ! " 
 " pardon I , " return Mr. Vholes , go on in exactly the same 
 inward and dispassionate manner . " Mr. C. take certain interest 
 under certain will dispute in the suit . it be a term we use . in 
 reference to Mr. C , 's pursuit of his interest , I mention to you , 
 Miss Summerson , the first time I have the pleasure of see you , in 
 my desire that everything should he openly carry on - I use those 
 word , for I happen afterwards to note they in my diary , which be 
 producible at any time - I mention to you that Mr. C. have lay 
 down the principle of watch his own interest , and that when a 
 client of mine lay down a principle which be not of an immoral 
  that be to say , unlawful   nature , it devolve upon I to carry it 
 out . I have carry it out ; I do carry it out . but I will not 
 smooth thing over to any connexion of Mr. C. 's on any account . as 
 open as I be to Mr. Jarndyce , I be to you . I regard it in the 
 light of a professional duty to be so , though it can be charge to 
 no one . I openly say , unpalatable as it may be , that I consider 
 Mr. C. 's affair in a very bad way , that I consider Mr. C. himself 
 in a very bad way , and that I regard this as an exceedingly ill- 
 advise marriage . be I here , sir ? yes , I thank you ; I be here , 
 Mr. C. , and enjoy the pleasure of some agreeable conversation 
 with Miss Summerson , for which I have to thank you very much , sir ! " 
 he break off thus in answer to Richard , who address he as he 
 come into the room . by this time I too well understand Mr. 
 Vholes 's scrupulous way of save himself and his respectability 
 not to feel that our bad fear do but keep pace with his 
 client 's progress . 
 we sit down to dinner , and I have an opportunity of observe 
 Richard , anxiously . I be not disturb by Mr. Vholes   who take 
 off his glove to dine , though he sit opposite to I at the small 
 table , for I doubt if , look up at all , he once remove his eye 
 from his host 's face . I find Richard thin and languid , slovenly 
 in his dress , abstract in his manner , force his spirit now and 
 then , and at other interval relapse into a dull thoughtfulness . 
 about his large bright eye that use to be so merry there be a 
 wanness and a restlessness that change they altogether . I can not 
 use the expression that he look old . there be a ruin of youth 
 which be not like age , and into such a ruin Richard 's youth and 
 youthful beauty have all fall away . 
 he eat little and seem indifferent what it be , show himself to 
 be much more impatient than he use to be , and be quick even with 
 Ada . I think at first that his old light - hearted manner be all 
 go , but it shine out of he sometimes as I have occasionally know 
 little momentary glimpse of my own old face to look out upon I 
 from the glass . his laugh have not quite leave he either , but it 
 be like the echo of a joyful sound , and that be always sorrowful . 
 yet he be as glad as ever , in his old affectionate way , to have I 
 there , and we talk of the old time pleasantly . these do not 
 appear to be interesting to Mr. Vholes , though he occasionally make 
 a gasp which I believe be his smile . he rise shortly after dinner 
 and say that with the permission of the lady he would retire to 
 his office . 
 " always devoted to business , Vholes ! " cry Richard . 
 " yes , Mr. C. , " he return , " the interest of client be never to 
 be neglect , sir . they be paramount in the thought of a 
 professional man like myself , who wish to preserve a good name 
 among his fellow - practitioner and society at large . my deny 
 myself the pleasure of the present agreeable conversation may not 
 be wholly irrespective of your own interest , Mr. C. " 
 Richard express himself quite sure of that and light Mr. Vholes 
 out . on his return he tell we , more than once , that Vholes be a 
 good fellow , a safe fellow , a man who do what he pretend to do , 
 a very good fellow indeed ! he be so defiant about it that it 
 strike I he have begin to doubt Mr. Vholes . 
 then he throw himself on the sofa , tired out ; and Ada and I put 
 thing to right , for they have no other servant than the woman who 
 attend to the chamber . my dear girl have a cottage piano there 
 and quietly sit down to sing some of Richard 's favourite , the lamp 
 be first remove into the next room , as he complain of its 
 hurt his eye . 
 I sit between they , at my dear girl 's side , and feel very 
 melancholy listening to her sweet voice . I think Richard do too ; 
 I think he darken the room for that reason . she have be sing 
 some time , rise between while to bend over he and speak to he , 
 when Mr. Woodcourt come in . then he sit down by Richard and half 
 playfully , half earnestly , quite naturally and easily , find out 
 how he feel and where he have be all day . presently he propose 
 to accompany he in a short walk on one of the bridge , as it be a 
 moonlight airy night ; and Richard readily consent , they go out 
 together . 
 they leave my dear girl still sit at the piano and I still 
 sit beside she . when they be go out , I draw my arm round 
 her waist . she put she left hand in mine   I be sit on that 
 side , but keep she right upon the key , go over and over they 
 without strike any note . 
 " Esther , my dearest , " she say , break silence , " Richard be never 
 so well and I be never so easy about he as when he be with Allan 
 Woodcourt . we have to thank you for that . " 
 I point out to my darling how this could scarcely be , because Mr. 
 Woodcourt have come to her cousin John 's house and have know we all 
 there , and because he have always like Richard , and Richard have 
 always like he , and - and so forth . 
 " all true , " say Ada , " but that he be such a devoted friend to we 
 we owe to you . " 
 I think it well to let my dear girl have her way and to say no 
 more about it . so I say as much . I say it lightly , because I 
 feel her trembling . 
 " Esther , my dearest , I want to be a good wife , a very , very good 
 wife indeed . you shall teach I . " 
 I teach ! I say no more , for I notice the hand that be 
 flutter over the key , and I know that it be not I who ought to 
 speak , that it be she who have something to say to I . 
 " when I marry Richard I be not insensible to what be before 
 he . I have be perfectly happy for a long time with you , and I 
 have never know any trouble or anxiety , so loved and care for , but 
 I understand the danger he be in , dear Esther . " 
 " I know , I know , my darling . " 
 " when we be married I have some little hope that I might be able 
 to convince he of his mistake , that he might come to regard it in 
 a new way as my husband and not pursue it all the more desperately 
 for my sake - as he do . but if I have not have that hope , I would 
 have marry he just the same , Esther . just the same ! " 
 in the momentary firmness of the hand that be never still - a 
 firmness inspire by the utterance of these last word , and die 
 away with they - I see the confirmation of her earnest tone . 
 " you be not to think , my dear Esther , that I fail to see what 
 you see and fear what you fear . no one can understand he well 
 than I do . the great wisdom that ever live in the world could 
 scarcely know Richard well than my love do . " 
 she speak so modestly and softly and her trembling hand express 
 such agitation as it move to and fro upon the silent note ! my 
 dear , dear girl ! 
 " I see he at his bad every day . I watch he in his sleep . I 
 know every change of his face . but when I marry Richard I be 
 quite determine , Esther , if heaven would help I , never to show 
 he that I grieve for what he do and so to make he more unhappy . 
 I want he , when he come home , to find no trouble in my face . I 
 want he , when he look at I , to see what he love in I . I 
 marry he to do this , and this support I . " 
 I feel she tremble more . I wait for what be yet to come , and 
 I now think I begin to know what it be . 
 " and something else support I , Esther . " 
 she stop a minute . stop speak only ; her hand be still in 
 motion . 
 " I look forward a little while , and I do not   know what great aid may 
 come to I . when Richard turn his eye upon I then , there may be 
 something lie on my breast more eloquent than I have be , with 
 great power than mine to show he his true course and win he 
 back . " 
 her hand stop now . she clasp I in her arm , and I clasp 
 she in mine . 
 " if that little creature should fail too , Esther , I still look 
 forward . I look forward a long while , through year and year , and 
 think that then , when I be grow old , or when I be dead perhaps , 
 a beautiful woman , his daughter , happily married , may be proud of 
 he and a blessing to he . or that a generous brave man , as 
 handsome as he use to be , as hopeful , and far more happy , may walk 
 in the sunshine with he , honour his grey head and say to 
 himself , ' I thank God this be my father ! ruin by a fatal 
 inheritance , and restore through I ! ' " 
 oh , my sweet girl , what a heart be that which beat so fast against 
 I ! 
 " these hop uphold I , my dear Esther , and I know they will . 
 though sometimes even they depart from I before a dread that 
 arise when I look at Richard . " 
 I try to cheer my darling , and ask she what it be . sob 
 and weeping , she reply , " that he may not live to see his child . " 
 CHAPTER LXI 
 A Discovery 
 the day when I frequent that miserable corner which my dear girl 
 brighten can never fade in my remembrance . I never see it , and I 
 never wish to see it now ; I have be there only once since , but in 
 my memory there be a mournful glory shin on the place which will 
 shine for ever . 
 not a day pass without my go there , of course . at first I 
 find Mr. Skimpole there , on two or three occasion , idly play 
 the piano and talk in his usual vivacious strain . now , besides 
 my very much mistrust the probability of his be there without 
 make Richard poorer , I feel as if there be something in his 
 careless gaiety too inconsistent with what I know of the depth of 
 Ada 's life . I clearly perceive , too , that Ada share my feeling . 
 I therefore resolve , after much thinking of it , to make a private 
 visit to Mr. Skimpole and try delicately to explain myself . my 
 dear girl be the great consideration that make I bold . 
 I set off one morning , accompany by Charley , for Somers Town . as 
 I approach the house , I be strongly inclined to turn back , for I 
 feel what a desperate attempt it be to make an impression on Mr. 
 Skimpole and how extremely likely it be that he would signally 
 defeat I . however , I think that be there , I would go through 
 with it . I knock with a trembling hand at Mr. Skimpole 's door - 
 literally with a hand , for the knocker be go - and after a long 
 parley gain admission from an Irishwoman , who be in the area 
 when I knock , break up the lid of a water - butt with a poker to 
 light the fire with . 
 Mr. Skimpole , lie on the sofa in his room , play the flute a 
 little , be enchant to see I . now , who should receive I , he 
 ask . who would I prefer for mistress of the ceremony ? would I 
 have his Comedy daughter , his Beauty daughter , or his Sentiment 
 daughter ? or would I have all the daughter at once in a perfect 
 nosegay ? 
 I reply , half defeat already , that I wish to speak to himself 
 only if he would give I leave . 
 " my dear Miss Summerson , most joyfully ! of course , " he say , 
 bring his chair nearer mine and break into his fascinating 
 smile , " of course it be not business . then it be pleasure ! " 
 I say it certainly be not business that I come upon , but it be 
 not quite a pleasant matter . 
 " then , my dear Miss Summerson , " say he with the frank gaiety , 
 " do not   allude to it . why should you allude to anything that be not 
 a pleasant matter ? I never do . and you be a much pleasanter 
 creature , in every point of view , than I. you be perfectly 
 pleasant ; I be imperfectly pleasant ; then , if I never allude to an 
 unpleasant matter , how much less should you ! so that be dispose 
 of , and we will talk of something else . " 
 although I be embarrassed , I take courage to intimate that I still 
 wish to pursue the subject . 
 " I should think it a mistake , " say Mr. Skimpole with his airy 
 laugh , " if I think Miss Summerson capable of make one . but I 
 do not ! " 
 " Mr. Skimpole , " say I , raise my eye to his , " I have so often 
 hear you say that you be unacquainted with the common affair of 
 life - " 
 " mean our three banking - house friend , L , S , and who be the 
 junior partner ? D ? " say Mr. Skimpole , brightly . " not an idea of 
 they ! " 
 " - that perhaps , " I go on , " you will excuse my boldness on that 
 account . I think you ought most seriously to know that Richard be 
 poor than he be . " 
 " dear I ! " say Mr. Skimpole . " so be I , they tell I . " 
 " and in very embarrassed circumstance . " 
 " parallel case , exactly ! " say Mr. Skimpole with a delighted 
 countenance . 
 " this at present naturally cause Ada much secret anxiety , and as I 
 think she be less anxious when no claim be make upon she by 
 visitor , and as Richard have one uneasiness always heavy on his 
 mind , it have occur to I to take the liberty of say that - if 
 you would - not - " 
 I be come to the point with great difficulty when he take I by 
 both hand and with a radiant face and in the lively way 
 anticipate it . 
 " not go there ? certainly not , my dear Miss Summerson , most 
 assuredly not . why should I go there ? when I go anywhere , I go 
 for pleasure . I do not   go anywhere for pain , because I be make for 
 pleasure . pain come to I when it want I . now , I have have very 
 little pleasure at our dear Richard 's lately , and your practical 
 sagacity demonstrate why . our young friend , lose the youthful 
 poetry which be once so captivate in they , begin to think , ' this 
 be a man who want pound . ' so I be ; I always want pound ; not for 
 myself , but because tradespeople always want they of I . next , our 
 young friend begin to think , become mercenary , ' this be the man 
 who had pound , who borrow they , ' which I do . I always borrow 
 pound . so our young friend , reduce to prose   which be much to 
 be regret , degenerate in their power of impart pleasure to 
 I . why should I go to see they , therefore ? Absurd ! " 
 through the beam smile with which he regard I as he reason 
 thus , there now break forth a look of disinterested benevolence 
 quite astonishing . 
 " besides , " he say , pursue his argument in his tone of light- 
 hearted conviction , " if I do not   go anywhere for pain - which would 
 be a perversion of the intention of my being , and a monstrous thing 
 to do - why should I go anywhere to be the cause of pain ? if I go 
 to see our young friend in their present ill - regulate state of 
 mind , I should give they pain . the association with I would be 
 disagreeable . they might say , ' this be the man who have pound and 
 who can not   pay pound , ' which I can not , of course ; nothing could be 
 more out of the question ! then kindness require that I should not 
 go near they - and I will not . " 
 he finish by genially kiss my hand and thank I . nothing 
 but Miss Summerson 's fine tact , he say , would have find this out 
 for he . 
 I be much disconcert , but I reflect that if the main point 
 be gain , it matter little how strangely he pervert 
 everything lead to it . I have determine to mention something 
 else , however , and I think I be not to be put off in that . 
 " Mr. Skimpole , " say I , " I must take the liberty of say before I 
 conclude my visit that I be much surprised to learn , on the good 
 authority , some little time ago , that you know with whom that poor 
 boy leave Bleak House and that you accept a present on that 
 occasion . I have not mention it to my guardian , for I fear it 
 would hurt he unnecessarily ; but I may say to you that I be much 
 surprised . " 
 " no ? really surprised , my dear Miss Summerson ? " he return 
 inquiringly , raise his pleasant eyebrow . 
 " greatly surprised . " 
 he think about it for a little while with a highly agreeable and 
 whimsical expression of face , then quite give it up and say in his 
 most engaging manner , " you know what a child I be . why surprised ? " 
 I be reluctant to enter minutely into that question , but as he 
 beg I would , for he be really curious to know , I give he to 
 understand in the gentle word I could use that his conduct 
 seem to involve a disregard of several moral obligation . he be 
 much amuse and interested when he hear this and say , " no , 
 really ? " with ingenuous simplicity . 
 " you know I do not   intend to be responsible . I never could do it . 
 responsibility be a thing that have always be above I - or below 
 I , " say Mr. Skimpole . " I do not   even know which ; but as I 
 understand the way in which my dear Miss Summerson   always 
 remarkable for her practical good sense and clearness   put this 
 case , I should imagine it be chiefly a question of money , do you 
 know ? " 
 I incautiously give a qualified assent to this . 
 " ah ! then you see , " say Mr. Skimpole , shake his head , " I be 
 hopeless of understand it . " 
 I suggest , as I rise to go , that it be not right to betray my 
 guardian 's confidence for a bribe . 
 " my dear Miss Summerson , " he return with a candid hilarity that 
 be all his own , " I can not   be bribe . " 
 " not by Mr. Bucket ? " say I. 
 " no , " say he . " not by anybody . I do not   attach any value to 
 money . I do not   care about it , I do not   know about it , I do not   want 
 it , I do not   keep it - it go away from I directly . how can I be 
 bribe ? " 
 I show that I be of a different opinion , though I have not the 
 capacity for argue the question . 
 " on the contrary , " say Mr. Skimpole , " I be exactly the man to be 
 place in a superior position in such a case as that . I be above 
 the rest of mankind in such a case as that . I can act with 
 philosophy in such a case as that . I be not warp by prejudice , 
 as an italian baby be by bandage . I be as free as the air . I 
 feel myself as far above suspicion as Caesar 's wife . " 
 anything to equal the lightness of his manner and the playful 
 impartiality with which he seem to convince himself , as he toss 
 the matter about like a ball of feather , be surely never see in 
 anybody else ! 
 " observe the case , my dear Miss Summerson . here be a boy receive 
 into the house and put to bed in a state that I strongly object to . 
 the boy be in bed , a man arrive - like the house that Jack 
 build . here be the man who demand the boy who be receive into 
 the house and put to bed in a state that I strongly object to . 
 here be a bank - note produce by the man who demand the boy who be 
 receive into the house and put to bed in a state that I strongly 
 object to . here be the Skimpole who accept the bank - note produce 
 by the man who demand the boy who be receive into the house and 
 put to bed in a state that I strongly object to . those be the 
 fact . very well . should the Skimpole have refuse the note ? why 
 should the Skimpole have refuse the note ? skimpole protest to 
 Bucket , ' what be this for ? I do not   understand it , it be of no use 
 to I , take it away . ' Bucket still entreat Skimpole to accept it . 
 be there reason why Skimpole , not be warp by prejudice , 
 should accept it ? yes . Skimpole perceive they . what be they ? 
 skimpole reason with himself , this be a tame lynx , an active 
 police - officer , an intelligent man , a person of a peculiarly 
 direct energy and great subtlety both of conception and 
 execution , who discover our friend and enemy for we when they 
 run away , recover our property for we when we be rob , avenge 
 we comfortably when we be murder . this active police - officer 
 and intelligent man have acquire , in the exercise of his art , a 
 strong faith in money ; he find it very useful to he , and he make 
 it very useful to society . shall I shake that faith in Bucket 
 because I want it myself ; shall I deliberately blunt one of 
 Bucket 's weapon ; shall I positively paralyse Bucket in his next 
 detective operation ? and again . if it be blameable in Skimpole to 
 take the note , it be blameable in Bucket to offer the note - much 
 more blameable in Bucket , because he be the know man . now , 
 Skimpole wish to think well of Bucket ; Skimpole deem it 
 essential , in its little place , to the general cohesion of thing , 
 that he should think well of Bucket . the state expressly ask he 
 to trust to Bucket . and he do . and that be all he do ! " 
 I have nothing to offer in reply to this exposition and therefore 
 take my leave . Mr. Skimpole , however , who be in excellent 
 spirit , would not hear of my return home attend only by 
 " Little Coavinses , " and accompany I himself . he entertain I 
 on the way with a variety of delightful conversation and assure 
 I , at part , that he should never forget the fine tact with 
 which I have find that out for he about our young friend . 
 as it so happen that I never see Mr. Skimpole again , I may at 
 once finish what I know of his history . a coolness arise between 
 he and my guardian , base principally on the forego ground and 
 on his have heartlessly disregard my guardian 's entreaty   as 
 we afterwards learn from Ada   in reference to Richard . his being 
 heavily in my guardian 's debt have nothing to do with their 
 separation . he die some five year afterwards and leave a diary 
 behind he , with letter and other material towards his life , 
 which be publish and which show he to have be the victim of 
 a combination on the part of mankind against an amiable child . it 
 be consider very pleasant reading , but I never read more of it 
 myself than the sentence on which I chance to light on open the 
 book . it be this : " Jarndyce , in common with most other man I have 
 know , be the incarnation of selfishness . " 
 and now I come to a part of my story touch myself very nearly 
 indeed , and for which I be quite unprepared when the circumstance 
 occur . whatever little lingering may have now and then revive 
 in my mind associate with my poor old face have only revive as 
 belong to a part of my life that be go - go like my infancy 
 or my childhood . I have suppress none of my many weakness on 
 that subject , but have write they as faithfully as my memory have 
 recall they . and I hope to do , and mean to do , the same down to 
 the last word of these page , which I see now not so very far 
 before I . 
 the month be glide away , and my dear girl , sustain by the 
 hope she have confide in I , be the same beautiful star in the 
 miserable corner . Richard , more worn and haggard , haunt the 
 court day after day , listlessly sit there the whole day long when 
 he know there be no remote chance of the suit be mention , and 
 become one of the stock sight of the place . I wonder whether any 
 of the gentleman remember he as he be when he first go there . 
 so completely be he absorb in his fix idea that he use to 
 avow in his cheerful moment that he should never have breathe the 
 fresh air now " but for Woodcourt . " it be only Mr. Woodcourt who 
 could occasionally divert his attention for a few hour at a time 
 and rouse he , even when he sink into a lethargy of mind and body 
 that alarm we greatly , and the return of which become more 
 frequent as the month go on . my dear girl be right in say 
 that he only pursue his error the more desperately for her sake . 
 I have no doubt that his desire to retrieve what he have lose be 
 render the more intense by his grief for his young wife , and 
 become like the madness of a gamester . 
 I be there , as I have mention , at all hour . when I be there 
 at night , I generally go home with Charley in a coach ; sometimes 
 my guardian would meet I in the neighbourhood , and we would walk 
 home together . one evening he have arrange to meet I at eight 
 o'clock . I could not leave , as I usually do , quite punctually at 
 the time , for I be work for my dear girl and have a few stitch 
 more to do to finish what I be about ; but it be within a few 
 minute of the hour when I bundle up my little work - basket , give 
 my darling my last kiss for the night , and hurry downstair . Mr. 
 Woodcourt go with I , as it be dusk . 
 when we come to the usual place of meeting - it be close by , and 
 Mr. Woodcourt have often accompany I before - my guardian be not 
 there . we wait half an hour , walk up and down , but there be 
 no sign of he . we agree that he be either prevent from 
 come or that he have come and go away , and Mr. Woodcourt 
 propose to walk home with I . 
 it be the first walk we have ever take together , except that very 
 short one to the usual place of meeting . we speak of Richard and 
 Ada the whole way . I do not thank he in word for what he have 
 do - my appreciation of it have rise above all word then - but I 
 hop he might not be without some understanding of what I feel so 
 strongly . 
 arrive at home and go upstairs , we find that my guardian be 
 out and that Mrs. Woodcourt be out too . we be in the very same 
 room into which I have bring my blushing girl when her youthful 
 lover , now her so altered husband , be the choice of her young 
 heart , the very same room from which my guardian and I have watch 
 they go away through the sunlight in the fresh bloom of their 
 hope and promise . 
 we be stand by the open window look down into the street 
 when Mr. Woodcourt speak to I . I learn in a moment that he 
 love I . I learn in a moment that my scarred face be all 
 unchanged to he . I learn in a moment that what I have think 
 be pity and compassion be devoted , generous , faithful love . oh , 
 too late to know it now , too late , too late . that be the first 
 ungrateful thought I have . too late . 
 " when I return , " he tell I , " when I come back , no rich than 
 when I go away , and find you newly rise from a sick bed , yet so 
 inspire by sweet consideration for other and so free from a 
 selfish thought - " 
 " oh , Mr. Woodcourt , forbear , forbear ! " I entreat he . " I do not 
 deserve your high praise . I have many selfish thought at that 
 time , many ! " 
 " Heaven know , belove of my life , " say he , " that my praise be not 
 a lover 's praise , but the truth . you do not know what all around 
 you see in Esther Summerson , how many heart she touch and 
 awaken , what sacred admiration and what love she win . " 
 " oh , Mr. Woodcourt , " cry I , " it be a great thing to win love , it 
 be a great thing to win love ! I be proud of it , and honour by 
 it ; and the hearing of it cause I to shed these tear of mingle 
 joy and sorrow - joy that I have win it , sorrow that I have not 
 deserve it well ; but I be not free to think of your . " 
 I say it with a strong heart , for when he praise I thus and 
 when I hear his voice thrill with his belief that what he say be 
 true , I aspire to be more worthy of it . it be not too late for 
 that . although I close this unforeseen page in my life to - night , 
 I could be worthy of it all through my life . and it be a 
 comfort to I , and an impulse to I , and I feel a dignity rise up 
 within I that be derive from he when I think so . 
 he break the silence . 
 " I should poorly show the trust that I have in the dear one who 
 will evermore be as dear to I as now " - and the deep earnestness 
 with which he say it at once strengthen I and make I weep - 
 " if , after her assurance that she be not free to think of my love , 
 I urge it . Dear Esther , let I only tell you that the fond idea 
 of you which I take abroad be exalt to the heaven when I come 
 home . I have always hop , in the first hour when I seem to 
 stand in any ray of good fortune , to tell you this . I have always 
 fear that I should tell it you in vain . my hope and fear be 
 both fulfil to - night . I distress you . I have say enough . " 
 something seem to pass into my place that be like the angel he 
 think I , and I feel so sorrowful for the loss he have sustain ! 
 I wish to help he in his trouble , as I have wish to do when he 
 show that first commiseration for I . 
 " Dear Mr. Woodcourt , " say I , " before we part to - night , something 
 be leave for I to say . I never could say it as I wish - I never 
 shall - but - " 
 I have to think again of be more deserving of his love and his 
 affliction before I could go on . 
 " - I be deeply sensible of your generosity , and I shall treasure 
 its remembrance to my die hour . I know full well how change I 
 be , I know you be not unacquainted with my history , and I know 
 what a noble love that be which be so faithful . what you have say 
 to I could have affect I so much from no other lip , for there 
 be none that could give it such a value to I . it shall not be 
 lose . it shall make I well . " 
 he cover his eye with his hand and turn away his head . how 
 could I ever be worthy of those tear ? 
 " if , in the unchanged intercourse we shall have together - in 
 tend Richard and Ada , and I hope in many happy scene of life 
  - you ever find anything in I which you can honestly think be 
 well than it use to be , believe that it will have spring up from 
 to - night and that I shall owe it to you . and never believe , dear 
 dear Mr. Woodcourt , never believe that I forget this night or that 
 while my heart beat it can be insensible to the pride and joy of 
 have be belove by you . " 
 he take my hand and kiss it . he be like himself again , and I 
 feel still more encouraged . 
 " I be induce by what you say just now , " say I , " to hope that you 
 have succeed in your endeavour . " 
 " I have , " he answer . " with such help from Mr. Jarndyce as you 
 who know he so well can imagine he to have render I , I have 
 succeed . " 
 " Heaven bless he for it , " say I , give he my hand ; " and heaven 
 bless you in all you do ! " 
 " I shall do it well for the wish , " he answer ; " it will make I 
 enter on these new duty as on another sacred trust from you . " 
 " ah ! Richard ! " I exclaim involuntarily , " what will he do when 
 you be go ! " 
 " I be not require to go yet ; I would not desert he , dear Miss 
 Summerson , even if I be . " 
 one other thing I feel it needful to touch upon before he leave I . 
 I know that I should not be worthy of the love I could not take 
 if I reserve it . 
 " Mr. Woodcourt , " say I , " you will be glad to know from my lip 
 before I say good night that in the future , which be clear and 
 bright before I , I be most happy , most fortunate , have nothing to 
 regret or desire . " 
 it be indeed a glad hearing to he , he reply . 
 " from my childhood I have be , " say I , " the object of the 
 untiring goodness of the good of human being , to whom I be so 
 bind by every tie of attachment , gratitude , and love , that nothing 
 I could do in the compass of a life could express the feeling of a 
 single day . " 
 " I share those feeling , " he return . " you speak of Mr. 
 Jarndyce . " 
 " you know his virtue well , " say I , " but few can know the 
 greatness of his character as I know it . all its high and good 
 quality have be reveal to I in nothing more brightly than in 
 the shaping out of that future in which I be so happy . and if your 
 high homage and respect have not be his already - which I know 
 they be - they would have be his , I think , on this assurance and 
 in the feeling it would have awaken in you towards he for my 
 sake . " 
 he fervently reply that indeed indeed they would have be . I 
 give he my hand again . 
 " good night , " I say , " good - bye . " 
 " the first until we meet to - morrow , the second as a farewell to 
 this theme between we for ever . " 
 " yes . " 
 " good night ; good - bye . " 
 he leave I , and I stand at the dark window watch the street . 
 his love , in all its constancy and generosity , have come so suddenly 
 upon I that he have not leave I a minute when my fortitude give way 
 again and the street be blot out by my rushing tear . 
 but they be not tear of regret and sorrow . no . he have call 
 I the beloved of his life and have say I would be evermore as dear 
 to he as I be then , and I feel as if my heart would not hold the 
 triumph of have hear those word . my first wild thought have 
 die away . it be not too late to hear they , for it be not too 
 late to be animate by they to be good , true , grateful , and 
 content . how easy my path , how much easy than his ! 
 CHAPTER LXII 
 Another Discovery 
 I have not the courage to see any one that night . I have not even 
 the courage to see myself , for I be afraid that my tear might a 
 little reproach I . I go up to my room in the dark , and pray 
 in the dark , and lie down in the dark to sleep . I have no need of 
 any light to read my guardian 's letter by , for I know it by heart . 
 I take it from the place where I keep it , and repeat its content 
 by its own clear light of integrity and love , and go to sleep 
 with it on my pillow . 
 I be up very early in the morning and call Charley to come for a 
 walk . we buy flower for the breakfast - table , and come back and 
 arrange they , and be as busy as possible . we be so early that 
 I have a good time still for Charley 's lesson before breakfast ; 
 Charley   who be not in the least improve in the old defective 
 article of grammar   come through it with great applause ; and we 
 be altogether very notable . when my guardian appear he 
 say , " why , little woman , you look fresher than your flower ! " 
 and Mrs. Woodcourt repeat and translate a passage from the 
 Mewlinnwillinwodd expressive of my be like a mountain with 
 the sun upon it . 
 this be all so pleasant that I hope it make I still more like the 
 mountain than I have be before . after breakfast I wait my 
 opportunity and peep about a little until I see my guardian in 
 his own room - the room of last night - by himself . then I make an 
 excuse to go in with my housekeeping key , shut the door after 
 I . 
 " well , Dame Durden ? " say my guardian ; the post have bring he 
 several letter , and he be write . " you want money ? " 
 " no , indeed , I have plenty in hand . " 
 " there never be such a Dame Durden , " say my guardian , " for make 
 money last . " 
 he have lay down his pen and lean back in his chair look at 
 I . I have often speak of his bright face , but I think I have 
 never see it look so bright and good . there be a high happiness 
 upon it which make I think , " he have be do some great kindness 
 this morning . " 
 " there never be , " say my guardian , muse as he smile upon I , 
 ' such a Dame Durden for make money last . " 
 he have never yet alter his old manner . I love it and he so 
 much that when I now go up to he and take my usual chair , which 
 be always put at his side - for sometimes I read to he , and 
 sometimes I talk to he , and sometimes I silently work by he - 
 I hardly like to disturb it by lay my hand on his breast . but 
 I find I do not disturb it at all . 
 " dear guardian , " say I , " I want to speak to you . have I be 
 remiss in anything ? " 
 " remiss in anything , my dear ! " 
 " have I not be what I have mean to be since - I bring the 
 answer to your letter , guardian ? " 
 " you have be everything I could desire , my love . " 
 " I be very glad indeed to hear that , " I return . " you know , you 
 say to I , be this the mistress of Bleak House . and I say , 
 yes . " 
 " yes , " say my guardian , nod his head . he have put his arm 
 about I as if there be something to protect I from and look 
 in my face , smile . 
 " since then , " say I , " we have never speak on the subject except 
 once . " 
 " and then I say Bleak House be thin fast ; and so it be , my 
 dear . " 
 " and I say , " I timidly remind he , " but its mistress remain . " 
 he still hold I in the same protect manner and with the same 
 bright goodness in his face . 
 " dear guardian , " say I , " I know how you have feel all that have 
 happen , and how considerate you have be . as so much time have 
 pass , and as you speak only this morning of my be so well 
 again , perhaps you expect I to renew the subject . perhaps I ought 
 to do so . I will be the mistress of Bleak House when you please . " 
 " see , " he return gaily , " what a sympathy there must be between 
 we ! I have have nothing else , poor Rick except - it be a large 
 exception - in my mind . when you come in , I be full of it . when 
 shall we give Bleak House its mistress , little woman ? " 
 " when you please . " 
 " next month ? " 
 " next month , dear guardian . " 
 " the day on which I take the happy and good step of my life - the 
 day on which I shall be a man more exult and more enviable than 
 any other man in the world - the day on which I give Bleak House its 
 little mistress - shall be next month then , " say my guardian . 
 I put my arm round his neck and kiss he just as I have do on 
 the day when I bring my answer . 
 a servant come to the door to announce Mr. Bucket , which be quite 
 unnecessary , for Mr. Bucket be already look in over the 
 servant 's shoulder . " Mr. Jarndyce and Miss Summerson , " say he , 
 rather out of breath , " with all apology for intruding , will you 
 allow I to order up a person that be on the stair and that object 
 to be leave there in case of become the subject of observation 
 in his absence ? thank you . be so good as chair that there member 
 in this direction , will you ? " say Mr. Bucket , beckon over the 
 banister . 
 this singular request produce an old man in a black skull - cap , 
 unable to walk , who be carry up by a couple of bearer and 
 deposit in the room near the door . Mr. Bucket immediately get 
 rid of the bearer , mysteriously shut the door , and bolt it . 
 " now you see , Mr. Jarndyce , " he then begin , put down his hat 
 and open his subject with a flourish of his well - remember 
 finger , " you know I , and Miss Summerson know I . this gentleman 
 likewise know I , and his name be Smallweed . the discount line 
 be his line principally , and he be what you may call a dealer in 
 bill . that be about what you be , you know , be not   you ? " say Mr. 
 Bucket , stop a little to address the gentleman in question , who 
 be exceedingly suspicious of he . 
 he seem about to dispute this designation of himself when he be 
 seize with a violent fit of cough . 
 " now , moral , you know ! " say Mr. Bucket , improve the accident . 
 " do not   you contradict when there be not   no occasion , and you will not 
 be take in that way . now , Mr. Jarndyce , I address myself to you . 
 I have   be negotiate with this gentleman on behalf of Sir 
 Leicester Dedlock , Baronet , and one way and another I have   be in 
 and out and about his premise a deal . his premise be the 
 premise formerly occupy by Krook , marine store dealer - a 
 relation of this gentleman 's that you see in his lifetime if I 
 do not   mistake ? " 
 my guardian reply , " yes . " 
 " well ! you be to understand , " say Mr. Bucket , " that this 
 gentleman he come into Krook 's property , and a good deal of magpie 
 property there be . vast lot of waste - paper among the rest . Lord 
 bless you , of no use to nobody ! " 
 the cunning of Mr. Bucket 's eye and the masterly manner in which he 
 contrive , without a look or a word against which his watchful 
 auditor could protest , to let we know that he state the case 
 accord to previous agreement and could say much more of Mr. 
 Smallweed if he think it advisable , deprive we of any merit in 
 quite understand he . his difficulty be increase by Mr. 
 Smallweed 's be deaf as well as suspicious and watch his face 
 with the close attention . 
 " among they odd heap of old paper , this gentleman , when he come 
 into the property , naturally begin to rummage , do not   you see ? " 
 say Mr. Bucket . 
 " to which ? say that again , " cry Mr. Smallweed in a shrill , sharp 
 voice . 
 " to rummage , " repeat Mr. Bucket . " be a prudent man and 
 accustom to take care of your own affair , you begin to rummage 
 among the paper as you have come into ; do not   you ? " 
 " of course I do , " cry Mr. Smallweed . 
 " of course you do , " say Mr. Bucket conversationally , " and much to 
 blame you would be if you do not . and so you chance to find , you 
 know , " Mr. Bucket go on , stoop over he with an air of 
 cheerful raillery which Mr. Smallweed by no mean reciprocate , 
 " and so you chance to find , you know , a paper with the signature of 
 Jarndyce to it . do not   you ? " 
 Mr. Smallweed glance with a troubled eye at we and grudgingly 
 nod assent . 
 " and come to look at that paper at your full leisure and 
 convenience - all in good time , for you be not curious to read it , 
 and why should you be ? - what do you find it to be but a will , you 
 see . that be the drollery of it , " say Mr. Bucket with the same 
 lively air of recall a joke for the enjoyment of Mr. Smallweed , 
 who still have the same crest - fall appearance of not enjoy it 
 at all ; " what do you find it to be but a will ? " 
 " I do not   know that it be good as a will or as anything else , " 
 snarl Mr. Smallweed . 
 Mr. Bucket eye the old man for a moment - he have slip and shrunk 
 down in his chair into a mere bundle - as if he be much dispose 
 to pounce upon he ; nevertheless , he continue to bend over he 
 with the same agreeable air , keep the corner of one of his eye 
 upon we . 
 " Notwithstanding which , " say Mr. Bucket , " you get a little 
 doubtful and uncomfortable in your mind about it , have a very 
 tender mind of your own . " 
 " eh ? what do you say I have get of my own ? " ask Mr. Smallweed 
 with his hand to his ear . 
 " a very tender mind . " 
 " Ho ! well , go on , " say Mr. Smallweed . 
 " and as you have   hear a good deal mention regard a celebrated 
 Chancery will case of the same name , and as you know what a card 
 Krook be for buy all manner of old piece of furniter , and 
 book , and paper , and what not , and never like to part with them , 
 and always a - go to teach himself to read , you begin to think - 
 and you never be more correct in your bear day - ' ecod , if I do not 
 look about I , I may get into trouble regard this will . ' " 
 " now , mind how you put it , Bucket , " cry the old man anxiously 
 with his hand at his ear . " speak up ; none of your brimstone 
 trick . pick I up ; I want to hear well . oh , Lord , I be shake 
 to bit ! " 
 Mr. Bucket have certainly pick he up at a dart . however , as soon 
 as he could be hear through Mr. Smallweed 's coughing and his 
 vicious ejaculation of " oh , my bone ! oh , dear ! I have   no breath 
 in my body ! I be bad than the chattering , clattering , brimstone 
 pig at home ! " Mr. Bucket proceed in the same convivial manner as 
 before . 
 " so , as I happen to be in the habit of come about your premise , 
 you take I into your confidence , do not   you ? " 
 I think it would be impossible to make an admission with more ill 
 will and a bad grace than Mr. Smallweed display when he 
 admit this , render it perfectly evident that Mr. Bucket be 
 the very last person he would have think of take into his 
 confidence if he could by any possibility have keep he out of it . 
 " and I go into the business with you - very pleasant we be over it ; 
 and I confirm you in your well - found fear that you will get 
 yourself into a most precious line if you do not   come out with that 
 there will , " say Mr. Bucket emphatically ; " and accordingly you 
 arrange with I that it shall be deliver up to this present Mr. 
 Jarndyce , on no condition . if it should prove to be valuable , you 
 trust yourself to he for your reward ; that be about where it be , 
 be not   it ? " 
 " that be what be agree , " Mr. Smallweed assent with the same bad 
 grace . 
 " in consequence of which , " say Mr. Bucket , dismiss his 
 agreeable manner all at once and become strictly business - like , 
 " you have   get that will upon your person at the present time , and the 
 only thing that remain for you to do be just to out with it ! " 
 have give we one glance out of the watch corner of his eye , 
 and have give his nose one triumphant rub with his forefinger , 
 Mr. Bucket stand with his eye fasten on his confidential friend 
 and his hand stretch forth ready to take the paper and present it 
 to my guardian . it be not produce without much reluctance and 
 many declaration on the part of Mr. Smallweed that he be a poor 
 industrious man and that he leave it to Mr. Jarndyce 's honour not to 
 let he lose by his honesty . little by little he very slowly take 
 from a breast - pocket a stain , discolour paper which be much 
 sing upon the outside and a little burn at the edge , as if it 
 have long ago be throw upon a fire and hastily snatch off 
 again . Mr. Bucket lose no time in transfer this paper , with 
 the dexterity of a conjuror , from Mr. Smallweed to Mr. Jarndyce . 
 as he give it to my guardian , he whisper behind his finger , 
 " had not   settle how to make their market of it . quarrelled and 
 hint about it . I lay out twenty pound upon it . first the 
 avaricious grandchild split upon he on account of their 
 objection to his living so unreasonably long , and then they split 
 on one another . Lord ! there be not   one of the family that would not 
 sell the other for a pound or two , except the old lady - and she be 
 only out of it because she be too weak in her mind to drive a 
 bargain . " 
 " Mr Bucket , " say my guardian aloud , " whatever the worth of this 
 paper may be to any one , my obligation be great to you ; and if it 
 be of any worth , I hold myself bind to see Mr. Smallweed 
 remunerate accordingly . " 
 " not accord to your merit , you know , " say Mr. Bucket in 
 friendly explanation to Mr. Smallweed . " do not   you be afraid of 
 that . accord to its value . " 
 " that be what I mean , " say my guardian . " you may observe , Mr. 
 Bucket , that I abstain from examine this paper myself . the plain 
 truth be , I have forswear and abjure the whole business these many 
 year , and my soul be sick of it . but Miss Summerson and I will 
 immediately place the paper in the hand of my solicitor in the 
 cause , and its existence shall be make known without delay to all 
 other party interested . " 
 " Mr. Jarndyce can not   say fair than that , you understand , " observe 
 Mr. Bucket to his fellow - visitor . " and it be now make clear to 
 you that nobody be a - go to be wrong - which must be a great 
 relief to your mind - we may proceed with the ceremony of chairing 
 you home again . " 
 he unbolt the door , call in the bearer , wish we good 
 morning , and with a look full of meaning and a crook of his finger 
 at part go his way . 
 we go our way too , which be to Lincoln 's Inn , as quickly as 
 possible . Mr. Kenge be disengage , and we find he at his table 
 in his dusty room with the inexpressive - look book and the pile 
 of paper . chair have be place for we by Mr. Guppy , Mr. 
 Kenge express the surprise and gratification he feel at the 
 unusual sight of Mr. Jarndyce in his office . he turn over his 
 double eye - glass as he speak and be more Conversation Kenge than 
 ever . 
 " I hope , " say Mr. Kenge , " that the genial influence of Miss 
 Summerson , " he bow to I , " may have induce Mr. Jarndyce , " he 
 bow to he , " to forego some little of his animosity towards a 
 cause and towards a court which be - shall I say , which take their 
 place in the stately vista of the pillar of our profession ? " 
 " I be inclined to think , " return my guardian , " that Miss 
 Summerson have see too much of the effect of the court and the 
 cause to exert any influence in their favour . nevertheless , they 
 be a part of the occasion of my be here . Mr. Kenge , before I 
 lie this paper on your desk and have do with it , let I tell you 
 how it have come into my hand . " 
 he do so shortly and distinctly . 
 " it could not , sir , " say Mr. Kenge , " have be state more plainly 
 and to the purpose if it have be a case at law . " 
 " do you ever know english law , or equity either , plain and to the 
 purpose ? " say my guardian . 
 " oh , fie ! " say Mr. Kenge . 
 at first he have not seem to attach much importance to the paper , 
 but when he see it he appear more interested , and when he have 
 open and read a little of it through his eye - glass , he become 
 amazed . " Mr. Jarndyce , " he say , look off it , " you have peruse 
 this ? " 
 " not I ! " return my guardian . 
 " but , my dear sir , " say Mr. Kenge , " it be a will of later date 
 than any in the suit . it appear to be all in the testator 's 
 handwriting . it be duly execute and attest . and even if 
 intend to be cancel , as might possibly be suppose to be 
 denote by these mark of fire , it be not cancel . here it be , a 
 perfect instrument ! " 
 " well ! " say my guardian . " what be that to I ? " 
 " Mr. Guppy ! " cry Mr. Kenge , raise his voice . " I beg your 
 pardon , Mr. Jarndyce . " 
 " Sir . " 
 " Mr. Vholes of Symond 's Inn . my compliment . Jarndyce and 
 Jarndyce . glad to speak with he . " 
 Mr. Guppy disappear . 
 " you ask I what be this to you , Mr. Jarndyce . if you have peruse 
 this document , you would have see that it reduce your interest 
 considerably , though still leave it a very handsome one , still 
 leave it a very handsome one , " say Mr. Kenge , wave his hand 
 persuasively and blandly . " you would far have see that the 
 interest of Mr. Richard Carstone and of Miss Ada Clare , now Mrs. 
 Richard Carstone , be very materially advanced by it . " 
 " Kenge , " say my guardian , " if all the flourish wealth that the 
 suit bring into this vile court of Chancery could fall to my two 
 young cousin , I should be well content . but do you ask I to 
 believe that any good be to come of Jarndyce and Jarndyce ? " 
 " oh , really , Mr. Jarndyce ! Prejudice , prejudice . my dear sir , 
 this be a very great country , a very great country . its system of 
 equity be a very great system , a very great system . really , 
 really ! " 
 my guardian say no more , and Mr. Vholes arrive . he be modestly 
 impress by Mr. Kenge 's professional eminence . 
 " how do you do , Mr. Vholes ? willl you be so good as to take a 
 chair here by I and look over this paper ? " 
 Mr. Vholes do as he be ask and seem to read it every word . 
 he be not excite by it , but he be not excite by anything . when 
 he have well examine it , he retire with Mr. Kenge into a window , 
 and shade his mouth with his black glove , speak to he at some 
 length . I be not surprised to observe Mr. Kenge incline to 
 dispute what he say before he have say much , for I know that no 
 two people ever do agree about anything in Jarndyce and Jarndyce . 
 but he seem to get the well of Mr. Kenge too in a conversation 
 that sound as if it be almost compose of the word " Receiver- 
 General , " " Accountant - General , " " report , " " estate , " and " cost . " 
 when they have finish , they come back to Mr. Kenge 's table and 
 speak aloud . 
 " well ! but this be a very remarkable document , Mr. Vholes , " say 
 Mr. Kenge . 
 Mr. Vholes say , " very much so . " 
 " and a very important document , Mr. Vholes , " say Mr. Kenge . 
 again Mr. Vholes say , " very much so . " 
 " and as you say , Mr. Vholes , when the cause be in the paper next 
 term , this document will be an unexpected and interesting feature 
 in it , " say Mr. Kenge , look loftily at my guardian . 
 Mr. Vholes be gratify , as a small practitioner strive to 
 keep respectable , to be confirm in any opinion of his own by such 
 an authority . 
 " and when , " ask my guardian , rise after a pause , during which 
 Mr. Kenge have rattle his money and Mr. Vholes have pick his 
 pimple , " when be next term ? " 
 " next term , Mr. Jarndyce , will be next month , " say Mr. Kenge . " of 
 course we shall at once proceed to do what be necessary with this 
 document and to collect the necessary evidence concern it ; and 
 of course you will receive our usual notification of the cause 
 be in the paper . " 
 " to which I shall pay , of course , my usual attention . " 
 " still bent , my dear sir , " say Mr. Kenge , show we through the 
 outer office to the door , ' still bent , even with your enlarged 
 mind , on echo a popular prejudice ? we be a prosperous 
 community , Mr. Jarndyce , a very prosperous community . we be a 
 great country , Mr. Jarndyce , we be a very great country . this be 
 a great system , Mr. Jarndyce , and would you wish a great country to 
 have a little system ? now , really , really ! " 
 he say this at the stair - head , gently move his right hand as if 
 it be a silver trowel with which to spread the cement of his 
 word on the structure of the system and consolidate it for a 
 thousand age . 
 CHAPTER LXIII 
 Steel and Iron 
 George 's Shooting Gallery be to let , and the stock be sell off , and 
 George himself be at Chesney Wold attend on Sir Leicester in his 
 ride and rid very near his bridle - rein because of the uncertain 
 hand with which he guide his horse . but not to - day be George so 
 occupy . he be journey to - day into the iron country far 
 north to look about he . 
 as he come into the iron country far north , such fresh green 
 wood as those of Chesney Wold be leave behind ; and coal pit and 
 ash , high chimney and red brick , blighted verdure , scorch 
 fire , and a heavy never - lighten cloud of smoke become the 
 feature of the scenery . among such object rid the trooper , 
 look about he and always look for something he have come to 
 find . 
 at last , on the black canal bridge of a busy town , with a clang of 
 iron in it , and more fire and more smoke than he have see yet , the 
 trooper , swart with the dust of the coal road , check his horse 
 and ask a workman do he know the name of Rouncewell thereabout . 
 " why , master , " quoth the workman , " do I know my own name ? " 
 " ' tis so well know here , be it , comrade ? " ask the trooper . 
 " Rouncewell 's ? ah ! you be right . " 
 " and where might it be now ? " ask the trooper with a glance before 
 he . 
 " the bank , the factory , or the house ? " the workman want to know . 
 " Hum ! Rouncewell 's be so great apparently , " mutter the trooper , 
 stroke his chin , " that I have as good as half a mind to go back 
 again . why , I do not   know which I want . should I find Mr. 
 Rouncewell at the factory , do you think ? " 
 " tain't   easy to say where you would find he - at this time of the day 
 you might find either he or his son there , if he be in town ; but 
 his contract take he away . " 
 and which be the factory ? why , he see those chimney - the tall 
 one ! yes , he see they . well ! let he keep his eye on those 
 chimney , go on as straight as ever he can , and presently he will 
 see them down a turning on the left , shut in by a great brick wall 
 which form one side of the street . that be Rouncewell 's . 
 the trooper thank his informant and rid slowly on , look about 
 he . he do not turn back , but put up his horse   and be much 
 dispose to groom he too   at a public - house where some of 
 Rouncewell 's hand be dining , as the ostler tell he . some of 
 Rouncewell 's hand have just knock off for dinner - time and seem 
 to be invade the whole town . they be very sinewy and strong , 
 be Rouncewell 's hand - a little sooty too . 
 he come to a gateway in the brick wall , look in , and see a great 
 perplexity of iron lie about in every stage and in a vast variety 
 of shape - in bar , in wedge , in sheet ; in tank , in boiler , in 
 axle , in wheel , in cog , in crank , in rail ; twisted and 
 wrench into eccentric and perverse form as separate part of 
 machinery ; mountain of it break up , and rusty in its age ; distant 
 furnace of it glow and bubble in its youth ; bright firework 
 of it shower about under the blow of the steam - hammer ; red - hot 
 iron , white - hot iron , cold - black iron ; an iron taste , an iron 
 smell , and a Babel of iron sound . 
 " this be a place to make a man 's head ache too ! " say the trooper , 
 look about he for a counting - house . " who come here ? this be 
 very like I before I be set up . this ought to be my nephew , if 
 likenesse run in family . your servant , sir . " 
 " your , sir . be you look for any one ? " 
 " excuse I . young Mr. Rouncewell , I believe ? " 
 " yes . " 
 " I be look for your father , sir . I wish to have a word with 
 he . " 
 the young man , tell he he be fortunate in his choice of a time , 
 for his father be there , lead the way to the office where he be to 
 be find . " very like I before I be set up - devilish like I ! " 
 think the trooper as he follow . they come to a building in the 
 yard with an office on an upper floor . at sight of the gentleman 
 in the office , Mr. George turn very red . 
 " what name shall I say to my father ? " ask the young man . 
 George , full of the idea of iron , in desperation answer " Steel , " 
 and be so present . he be leave alone with the gentleman in the 
 office , who sit at a table with account - book before he and some 
 sheet of paper blot with host of figure and drawing of 
 cunning shape . it be a bare office , with bare window , look on 
 the iron view below . tumble together on the table be some piece 
 of iron , purposely break to be test at various period of their 
 service , in various capacity . there be iron - dust on everything ; 
 and the smoke be see through the window roll heavily out of 
 the tall chimney to mingle with the smoke from a vaporous Babylon 
 of other chimney . 
 " I be at your service , Mr. Steel , " say the gentleman when his 
 visitor have take a rusty chair . 
 " well , Mr. Rouncewell , " George reply , lean forward with his 
 left arm on his knee and his hat in his hand , and very chary of 
 meet his brother 's eye , " I be not without my expectation that 
 in the present visit I may prove to be more free than welcome . I 
 have serve as a dragoon in my day , and a comrade of mine that I 
 be once rather partial to be , if I do not   deceive myself , a 
 brother of your . I believe you have a brother who give his family 
 some trouble , and run away , and never do any good but in keep 
 away ? " 
 " be you quite sure , " return the ironmaster in an altered voice , 
 " that your name be Steel ? " 
 the trooper falter and look at he . his brother start up , call 
 he by his name , and grasp he by both hand . 
 " you be too quick for I ! " cry the trooper with the tear 
 spring out of his eye . " how do you do , my dear old fellow ? I 
 never could have think you would have be half so glad to see I 
 as all this . how do you do , my dear old fellow , how do you do ! " 
 they shake hand and embrace each other over and over again , the 
 trooper still couple his " how do you do , my dear old fellow ! " 
 with his protestation that he never think his brother would have 
 be half so glad to see he as all this ! 
 " so far from it , " he declare at the end of a full account of what 
 have precede his arrival there , " I have very little idea of make 
 myself know . I think if you take by any mean forgivingly to my 
 name I might gradually get myself up to the point of write a 
 letter . but I should not have be surprised , brother , if you have 
 consider it anything but welcome news to hear of I . " 
 " we will show you at home what kind of news we think it , George , " 
 return his brother . " this be a great day at home , and you could 
 not have arrive , you bronze old soldier , on a well . I make an 
 agreement with my son Watt to - day that on this day twelvemonth he 
 shall marry as pretty and as good a girl as you have see in all 
 your travel . she go to Germany to - morrow with one of your 
 niece for a little polishing up in her education . we make a feast 
 of the event , and you will be make the hero of it . " 
 Mr. George be so entirely overcome at first by this prospect that 
 he resist the propose honour with great earnestness . be 
 overborne , however , by his brother and his nephew - concern whom 
 he renew his protestation that he never could have think they 
 would have be half so glad to see he - he be take home to an 
 elegant house in all the arrangement of which there be to be 
 observe a pleasant mixture of the originally simple habit of the 
 father and mother with such as be suit to their altered station 
 and the high fortune of their child . here Mr. George be much 
 dismay by the grace and accomplishment of his niece that be 
 and by the beauty of Rosa , his niece that be to be , and by the 
 affectionate salutation of these young lady , which he receive 
 in a sort of dream . he be sorely take aback , too , by the dutiful 
 behaviour of his nephew and have a woeful consciousness upon he of 
 be a scapegrace . however , there be great rejoicing and a very 
 hearty company and infinite enjoyment , and Mr. George come bluff 
 and martial through it all , and his pledge to be present at the 
 marriage and give away the bride be receive with universal favour . 
 a whirling head have Mr. George that night when he lie down in the 
 state - bed of his brother 's house to think of all these thing and 
 to see the image of his niece   awful all the evening in their 
 float muslin   waltzing , after the german manner , over his 
 counterpane . 
 the brother be closet next morning in the ironmaster 's room , 
 where the elder be proceed , in his clear sensible way , to show 
 how he think he may well dispose of George in his business , when 
 George squeeze his hand and stop he . 
 " Brother , I thank you a million time for your more than brotherly 
 welcome , and a million time more to that for your more than 
 brotherly intention . but my plan be make . before I say a word 
 as to they , I wish to consult you upon one family point . how , " 
 say the trooper , fold his arm and look with indomitable 
 firmness at his brother , " how be my mother to be get to scratch 
 I ? " 
 " I be not sure that I understand you , George , " reply the 
 ironmaster . 
 " I say , brother , how be my mother to be get to scratch I ? she 
 must be get to do it somehow . " 
 " scratch you out of her will , I think you mean ? " 
 " of course I do . in short , " say the trooper , fold his arm 
 more resolutely yet , " I mean - to - scratch I ! " 
 " my dear George , " return his brother , " be it so indispensable that 
 you should undergo that process ? " 
 " quite ! absolutely ! I could not   be guilty of the meanness of 
 come back without it . I should never be safe not to be off 
 again . I have not sneak home to rob your child , if not 
 yourself , brother , of your right . I , who forfeit mine long ago ! 
 if I be to remain and hold up my head , I must be scratch . come . 
 you be a man of celebrated penetration and intelligence , and you 
 can tell I how it be to be bring about . " 
 " I can tell you , George , " reply the ironmaster deliberately , " how 
 it be not to be bring about , which I hope may answer the purpose 
 as well . look at our mother , think of she , recall her emotion when 
 she recover you . do you believe there be a consideration in the 
 world that would induce she to take such a step against her 
 favourite son ? do you believe there be any chance of her consent , 
 to balance against the outrage it would be to she   love dear old 
 lady !   to propose it ? if you do , you be wrong . no , George ! you 
 must make up your mind to remain UNscratched , I think . " there be 
 an amused smile on the ironmaster 's face as he watch his brother , 
 who be ponder , deeply disappointed . " I think you may manage 
 almost as well as if the thing be do , though . " 
 " how , brother ? " 
 " be bent upon it , you can dispose by will of anything you have 
 the misfortune to inherit in any way you like , you know . " 
 " that be true ! " say the trooper , ponder again . then he 
 wistfully ask , with his hand on his brother 's , " would you mind 
 mention that , brother , to your wife and family ? " 
 " not at all . " 
 " thank you . you would not   object to say , perhaps , that although an 
 undoubted vagabond , I be a vagabond of the harum - scarum order , and 
 not of the mean sort ? " 
 the ironmaster , repress his amused smile , assent . 
 " thank you . thank you . it be a weight off my mind , " say the 
 trooper with a heave of his chest as he unfold his arm and put a 
 hand on each leg , " though I have set my heart on be scratch , 
 too ! " 
 the brother be very like each other , sit face to face ; but a 
 certain massive simplicity and absence of usage in the way of the 
 world be all on the trooper 's side . 
 " well , " he proceed , throw off his disappointment , " next and 
 last , those plan of mine . you have be so brotherly as to 
 propose to I to fall in here and take my place among the product 
 of your perseverance and sense . I thank you heartily . it be more 
 than brotherly , as I say before , and I thank you heartily for it , " 
 shake he a long time by the hand . " but the truth be , brother , I 
 be a - I be a kind of a weed , and it be too late to plant I in a 
 regular garden . " 
 " my dear George , " return the elder , concentrate his strong 
 steady brow upon he and smile confidently , " leave that to I , 
 and let I try . " 
 George shake his head . " you could do it , I have not a doubt , if 
 anybody could ; but it be not to be do . not to be do , sir ! 
 whereas it so fall out , on the other hand , that I be able to be of 
 some trifle of use to Sir Leicester Dedlock since his illness - 
 bring on by family sorrow - and that he would rather have that 
 help from our mother 's son than from anybody else . " 
 " well , my dear George , " return the other with a very slight shade 
 upon his open face , " if you prefer to serve in Sir Leicester 
 Dedlock 's household brigade - " 
 " there it be , brother , " cry the trooper , check he , with his 
 hand upon his knee again ; " there it be ! you do not   take kindly to 
 that idea ; I do not   mind it . you be not use to be officer ; I 
 be . everything about you be in perfect order and discipline ; 
 everything about I require to be keep so . we be not accustom 
 to carry thing with the same hand or to look at them from the same 
 point . I do not   say much about my garrison manner because I find 
 myself pretty well at my ease last night , and they would not   be 
 notice here , I dare say , once and away . but I shall get on well 
 at Chesney Wold , where there be more room for a weed than there be 
 here ; and the dear old lady will be make happy beside . therefore 
 I accept of Sir Leicester Dedlock 's proposal . when I come over 
 next year to give away the bride , or whenever I come , I shall have 
 the sense to keep the household brigade in ambuscade and not to 
 manoeuvre it on your ground . I thank you heartily again and be 
 proud to think of the Rouncewells as they will be found by you . " 
 " you know yourself , George , " say the eld brother , return the 
 grip of his hand , " and perhaps you know I well than I know 
 myself . take your way . so that we do not   quite lose one another 
 again , take your way . " 
 " no fear of that ! " return the trooper . " now , before I turn my 
 horse 's head homeward , brother , I will ask you - if you will be so 
 good - to look over a letter for I . I bring it with I to send 
 from these part , as Chesney Wold might be a painful name just now 
 to the person it be write to . I be not much accustomed to 
 correspondence myself , and I be particular respect this present 
 letter because I want it to be both straightforward and delicate . " 
 herewith he hand a letter , closely write in somewhat pale ink 
 but in a neat round hand , to the ironmaster , who read as follow : 
 Miss Esther Summerson , 
 a communication have be make to I by Inspector Bucket of a 
 letter to myself be find among the paper of a certain person , 
 I take the liberty to make known to you that it be but a few line 
 of instruction from abroad , when , where , and how to deliver an 
 enclose letter to a young and beautiful lady , then unmarried , in 
 England . I duly observe the same . 
 I far take the liberty to make known to you that it be get 
 from I as a proof of handwriting only and that otherwise I would 
 not have give it up , as appear to be the most harmless in my 
 possession , without be previously shoot through the heart . 
 I far take the liberty to mention that if I could have suppose 
 a certain unfortunate gentleman to have be in existence , I never 
 could and never would have rest until I have discover his 
 retreat and share my last farthing with he , as my duty and my 
 inclination would have equally be . but he be   officially 
 report drown , and assuredly go over the side of a transport- 
 ship at night in an irish harbour within a few hour of her arrival 
 from the West Indies , as I have myself hear both from officer and 
 man on board , and know to have be   officially   confirm . 
 I far take the liberty to state that in my humble quality as 
 one of the rank and file , I be , and shall ever continue to be , your 
 thoroughly devoted and admire servant and that I esteem the 
 quality you possess above all other far beyond the limit of the 
 present dispatch . 
 I have the honour to be , 
 GEORGE 
 " a little formal , " observe the eld brother , refolde it with a 
 puzzled face . 
 " but nothing that might not be send to a pattern young lady ? " ask 
 the young . 
 " nothing at all . " 
 therefore it be seal and deposit for post among the iron 
 correspondence of the day . this do , Mr. George take a hearty 
 farewell of the family party and prepare to saddle and mount . his 
 brother , however , unwilling to part with he so soon , propose to 
 ride with he in a light open carriage to the place where he will 
 bait for the night , and there remain with he until morning , a 
 servant rid for so much of the journey on the thoroughbred old 
 grey from Chesney Wold . the offer , be gladly accept , be 
 follow by a pleasant ride , a pleasant dinner , and a pleasant 
 breakfast , all in brotherly communion . then they once more shake 
 hand long and heartily and part , the ironmaster turn his face 
 to the smoke and fire , and the trooper to the green country . 
 early in the afternoon the subdue sound of his heavy military trot 
 be hear on the turf in the avenue as he rid on with imaginary 
 clank and jingle of accoutrement under the old elm - tree . 
 CHAPTER LXIV 
 Esther 's Narrative 
 soon after I have that convertion with my guardian , he put a seal 
 paper in my hand one morning and say , " this be for next month , my 
 dear . " I find in it two hundred pound . 
 I now begin very quietly to make such preparation as I think 
 be necessary . regulate my purchase by my guardian 's taste , 
 which I know very well of course , I arrange my wardrobe to please 
 he and hop I should be highly successful . I do it all so 
 quietly because I be not quite free from my old apprehension that 
 Ada would be rather sorry and because my guardian be so quiet 
 himself . I have no doubt that under all the circumstance we should 
 be marry in the most private and simple manner . perhaps I should 
 only have to say to Ada , " would you like to come and see I marry 
 to - morrow , my pet ? " perhaps our wedding might even be as 
 unpretending as her own , and I might not find it necessary to say 
 anything about it until it be over . I think that if I be to 
 choose , I would like this good . 
 the only exception I make be Mrs. Woodcourt . I tell she that I 
 be go to be married to my guardian and that we have be engage 
 some time . she highly approve . she could never do enough for I 
 and be remarkably soften now in comparison with what she have 
 be when we first know she . there be no trouble she would not 
 have take to have be of use to I , but I need hardly say that I 
 only allow she to take as little as gratify her kindness 
 without task it . 
 of course this be not a time to neglect my guardian , and of course 
 it be not a time for neglect my darling . so I have plenty of 
 occupation , which I be glad of ; and as to Charley , she be 
 absolutely not to be see for needlework . to surround herself with 
 great heap of it - basket full and table full - and do a little , 
 and spend a great deal of time in star with her round eye at 
 what there be to do , and persuade herself that she be go to do 
 it , be Charley 's great dignity and delight . 
 meanwhile , I must say , I could not agree with my guardian on the 
 subject of the will , and I have some sanguine hope of Jarndyce and 
 Jarndyce . which of we be right will soon appear , but I certainly 
 do encourage expectation . in Richard , the discovery give 
 occasion for a burst of business and agitation that buoy he up 
 for a little time , but he have lose the elasticity even of hope now 
 and seem to I to retain only its feverish anxiety . from 
 something my guardian say one day when we be talk about this , 
 I understand that my marriage would not take place until after the 
 term - time we have be tell to look forward to ; and I think the 
 more , for that , how rejoiced I should be if I could be marry when 
 Richard and Ada be a little more prosperous . 
 the term be very near indeed when my guardian be call out of 
 town and go down into Yorkshire on Mr. Woodcourt 's business . he 
 have tell I beforehand that his presence there would be necessary . 
 I have just come in one night from my dear girl 's and be sit in 
 the midst of all my new clothe , look at they all around I and 
 thinking , when a letter from my guardian be bring to I . it 
 ask I to join he in the country and mention by what stage- 
 coach my place be take and at what time in the morning I should 
 have to leave town . it add in a postscript that I would not be 
 many hour from Ada . 
 I expect few thing less than a journey at that time , but I be 
 ready for it in half an hour and set off as appoint early next 
 morning . I travel all day , wonder all day what I could be 
 want for at such a distance ; now I think it might be for this 
 purpose , and now I think it might be for that purpose , but I be 
 never , never , never near the truth . 
 it be night when I come to my journey 's end and find my guardian 
 wait for I . this be a great relief , for towards evening I have 
 begin to fear   the more so as his letter be a very short one   that 
 he might be ill . however , there he be , as well as it be possible 
 to be ; and when I see his genial face again at its bright and 
 well , I say to myself , he have be do some other great 
 kindness . not that it require much penetration to say that , 
 because I know that his be there at all be an act of kindness . 
 supper be ready at the hotel , and when we be alone at table he 
 say , " full of curiosity , no doubt , little woman , to know why I 
 have bring you here ? " 
 " well , guardian , " say I , " without think myself a Fatima or you 
 a Blue Beard , I be a little curious about it . " 
 " then to ensure your night 's rest , my love , " he return gaily , " I 
 will not   wait until to - morrow to tell you . I have very much wish to 
 express to Woodcourt , somehow , my sense of his humanity to poor 
 unfortunate Jo , his inestimable service to my young cousin , and 
 his value to we all . when it be decide that he should settle 
 here , it come into my head that I might ask his acceptance of some 
 unpretending and suitable little place to lay his own head in . I 
 therefore cause such a place to be look out for , and such a 
 place be find on very easy term , and I have be touch it up 
 for he and make it habitable . however , when I walk over it 
 the day before yesterday and it be report ready , I find that I 
 be not housekeeper enough to know whether thing be all as they 
 ought to be . so I send off for the good little housekeeper that 
 could possibly be get to come and give I her advice and opinion . 
 and here she be , " say my guardian , " laugh and cry both 
 together ! " 
 because he be so dear , so good , so admirable . I try to tell he 
 what I think of he , but I could not articulate a word . 
 " Tut , tut ! " say my guardian . " you make too much of it , little 
 woman . why , how you sob , Dame Durden , how you sob ! " 
 " it be with exquisite pleasure , guardian - with a heart full of 
 thank . " 
 " well , well , " say he . " I be delighted that you approve . I 
 think you would . I mean it as a pleasant surprise for the 
 little mistress of Bleak House . " 
 I kiss he and dry my eye . " I know now ! " say I. " I have 
 see this in your face a long while . " 
 " no ; have you really , my dear ? " say he . " what a Dame Durden it be 
 to read a face ! " 
 he be so quaintly cheerful that I could not long be otherwise , and 
 be almost ashamed of have be otherwise at all . when I go to 
 bed , I cry . I be bind to confess that I cry ; but I hope it 
 be with pleasure , though I be not quite sure it be with pleasure . 
 I repeat every word of the letter twice over . 
 a most beautiful summer morning succeed , and after breakfast we 
 go out arm in arm to see the house of which I be to give my 
 mighty housekeeping opinion . we enter a flower - garden by a gate 
 in a side wall , of which he have the key , and the first thing I see 
 be that the bed and flower be all lay out accord to the 
 manner of my bed and flower at home . 
 " you see , my dear , " observe my guardian , stand still with a 
 delighted face to watch my look , " know there could be no well 
 plan , I borrow your . " 
 we go on by a pretty little orchard , where the cherry be 
 nestling among the green leaf and the shadow of the apple - tree 
 be sport on the grass , to the house itself - a cottage , quite a 
 rustic cottage of doll 's room ; but such a lovely place , so 
 tranquil and so beautiful , with such a rich and smile country 
 spread around it ; with water sparkle away into the distance , here 
 all overhang with summer - growth , there turn a humming mill ; at 
 its near point glance through a meadow by the cheerful town , 
 where cricket - player be assemble in bright group and a flag 
 be fly from a white tent that ripple in the sweet west wind . 
 and still , as we go through the pretty room , out at the little 
 rustic verandah door , and underneath the tiny wooden colonnade 
 garland with woodbine , jasmine , and honey - suckle , I see in the 
 papering on the wall , in the colour of the furniture , in the 
 arrangement of all the pretty object , my little taste and 
 fancy , my little method and invention which they use to laugh 
 at while they praise they , my odd way everywhere . 
 I could not say enough in admiration of what be all so beautiful , 
 but one secret doubt arise in my mind when I see this , I think , 
 oh , would he be the happy for it ! would it not have be well 
 for his peace that I should not have be so bring before he ? 
 because although I be not what he think I , still he love I 
 very dearly , and it might remind he mournfully of what be believe 
 he have lose . I do not wish he to forget I - perhaps he might not 
 have do so , without these aid to his memory - but my way be 
 easy than his , and I could have reconcile myself even to that so 
 that he have be the happy for it . 
 " and now , little woman , " say my guardian , whom I have never see so 
 proud and joyful as in show I these thing and watch my 
 appreciation of they , " now , last of all , for the name of this 
 house . " 
 " what be it call , dear guardian ? " 
 " my child , " say he , " come and see , " 
 he take I to the porch , which he have hitherto avoid , and say , 
 pause before we go out , " my dear child , do not   you guess the 
 name ? " 
 " no ! " say I. 
 we go out of the porch and he show I write over it , Bleak 
 House . 
 he lead I to a seat among the leaf close by , and sit down 
 beside I and take my hand in his , speak to I thus , " my darling 
 girl , in what there have be between we , I have , I hope , be 
 really solicitous for your happiness . when I write you the letter 
 to which you bring the answer , " smile as he refer to it , " I 
 have my own too much in view ; but I have yours too . whether , under 
 different circumstance , I might ever have renew the old dream I 
 sometimes dream when you be very young , of make you my wife 
 one day , I need not ask myself . I do renew it , and I write my 
 letter , and you bring your answer . you be follow what I say , 
 my child ? " 
 I be cold , and I tremble violently , but not a word he utter be 
 lose . as I sit look fixedly at he and the sun 's ray 
 descend , softly shin through the leaf upon his bare head , I 
 feel as if the brightness on he must be like the brightness of the 
 angel . 
 " hear I , my love , but do not speak . it be for I to speak now . 
 when it be that I begin to doubt whether what I have do would 
 really make you happy be no matter . Woodcourt come home , and I 
 soon have no doubt at all . " 
 I clasp he round the neck and hang my head upon his breast and 
 wept . " lie lightly , confidently here , my child , " say he , press 
 I gently to he . " I be your guardian and your father now . rest 
 confidently here . " 
 soothingly , like the gentle rustling of the leaf ; and genially , 
 like the ripen weather ; and radiantly and beneficently , like the 
 sunshine , he go on . 
 " understand I , my dear girl . I have no doubt of your being 
 content and happy with I , be so dutiful and so devoted ; but I 
 see with whom you would be happy . that I penetrate his secret 
 when Dame Durden be blind to it be no wonder , for I know the good 
 that could never change in she well far than she do . well ! I 
 have long be in Allan Woodcourt 's confidence , although he be 
 not , until yesterday , a few hour before you come here , in mine . 
 but I would not have my Esther 's bright example lose ; I would not 
 have a jot of my dear girl 's virtue unobserved and unhonoured ; I 
 would not have she admit on sufferance into the line of Morgan 
 ap - Kerrig , no , not for the weight in gold of all the mountain in 
 Wales ! " 
 he stop to kiss I on the forehead , and I sob and wept 
 afresh . for I feel as if I could not bear the painful delight of 
 his praise . 
 " hush , little woman ! do not   cry ; this be to be a day of joy . I 
 have look forward to it , " he say exultingly , " for month on 
 month ! a few word more , Dame Trot , and I have say my say . 
 determine not to throw away one atom of my Esther 's worth , I take 
 Mrs. Woodcourt into a separate confidence . ' now , madam , ' say I , 
 ' I clearly perceive - and indeed I know , to boot - that your son 
 love my ward . I be far very sure that my ward love your son , 
 but will sacrifice her love to a sense of duty and affection , and 
 will sacrifice it so completely , so entirely , so religiously , that 
 you should never suspect it though you watch her night and day . ' 
 then I tell she all our story - ours - your and mine . ' now , madam , ' 
 say I , ' come you , know this , and live with we . come you , and 
 see my child from hour to hour ; set what you see against she 
 pedigree , which be this , and this ' - for I scorn to mince it - ' and 
 tell I what be the true legitimacy when you shall have quite make 
 up your mind on that subject . ' why , honour to her old Welsh blood , 
 my dear , " cry my guardian with enthusiasm , " I believe the heart 
 it animate beat no less warmly , no less admiringly , no less 
 lovingly , towards Dame Durden than my own ! " 
 he tenderly raise my head , and as I cling to he , kiss I in his 
 old fatherly way again and again . what a light , now , on the 
 protect manner I have think about ! 
 " one more last word . when Allan Woodcourt speak to you , my dear , 
 he speak with my knowledge and consent - but I give he no 
 encouragement , not I , for these surprise be my great reward , and 
 I be too miserly to part with a scrap of it . he be to come and 
 tell I all that pass , and he do . I have no more to say . my 
 dearest , Allan Woodcourt stand beside your father when he lie dead 
  - stand beside your mother . this be Bleak House . this day I give 
 this house its little mistress ; and before God , it be the bright 
 day in all my life ! " 
 he rise and raise I with he . we be no long alone . my 
 husband - I have call he by that name full seven happy year now 
  - stand at my side . 
 " Allan , " say my guardian , " take from I a willing gift , the good 
 wife that ever man have . what more can I say for you than that I 
 know you deserve she ! take with she the little home she bring 
 you . you know what she will make it , Allan ; you know what she have 
 make its namesake . let I share its felicity sometimes , and what 
 do I sacrifice ? nothing , nothing . " 
 he kiss I once again , and now the tear be in his eye as he 
 say more softly , " Esther , my dearest , after so many year , there 
 be a kind of parting in this too . I know that my mistake have 
 cause you some distress . forgive your old guardian , in restore 
 he to his old place in your affection ; and blot it out of your 
 memory . Allan , take my dear . " 
 he move away from under the green roof of leaf , and stop in 
 the sunlight outside and turn cheerfully towards we , say , " I 
 shall be find about here somewhere . it be a west wind , little 
 woman , due west ! let no one thank I any more , for I be go to 
 revert to my bachelor habit , and if anybody disregard this 
 warning , I will run away and never come back ! " 
 what happiness be our that day , what joy , what rest , what hope , 
 what gratitude , what bliss ! we be to be marry before the month 
 be out , but when we be to come and take possession of our own 
 house be to depend on Richard and Ada . 
 we all three go home together next day . as soon as we arrive in 
 town , Allan go straight to see Richard and to carry our joyful 
 news to he and my darling . late as it be , I mean to go to she 
 for a few minute before lie down to sleep , but I go home with 
 my guardian first to make his tea for he and to occupy the old 
 chair by his side , for I do not like to think of its be empty 
 so soon . 
 when we come home we find that a young man have call three time 
 in the course of that one day to see I and that have be tell 
 on the occasion of his third call that I be not expect to return 
 before ten o'clock at night , he have leave word that he would call 
 about then . he have leave his card three time . Mr. Guppy . 
 as I naturally speculate on the object of these visit , and as I 
 always associate something ludicrous with the visitor , it fall out 
 that in laugh about Mr. Guppy I tell my guardian of his old 
 proposal and his subsequent retraction . " after that , " say my 
 guardian , " we will certainly receive this hero . " so instruction 
 be give that Mr. Guppy should be show in when he come again , 
 and they be scarcely give when he do come again . 
 he be embarrassed when he find my guardian with I , but recover 
 himself and say , " how de do , sir ? " 
 " how do you do , sir ? " return my guardian . 
 " thank you , sir , I be tolerable , " return Mr. Guppy . " will you 
 allow I to introduce my mother , Mrs. Guppy of the Old Street Road , 
 and my particular friend , Mr. Weevle . that be to say , my friend 
 have go by the name of Weevle , but his name be really and truly 
 Jobling . " 
 my guardian beg they to be seat , and they all sit down . 
 " Tony , " say Mr. Guppy to his friend after an awkward silence . 
 " will you open the case ? " 
 " do it yourself , " return the friend rather tartly . 
 " well , Mr. Jarndyce , sir , " Mr. Guppy , after a moment 's 
 consideration , begin , to the great diversion of his mother , which 
 she display by nudge Mr. Jobling with her elbow and wink at 
 I in a most remarkable manner , " I have an idea that I should see 
 Miss Summerson by herself and be not quite prepared for your 
 esteemed presence . but Miss Summerson have mention to you , 
 perhaps , that something have pass between we on former occasion ? " 
 " Miss Summerson , " return my guardian , smile , " have make a 
 communication to that effect to I . " 
 " that , " say Mr. Guppy , " make matter easy . Sir , I have come 
 out of my article at Kenge and Carboy 's , and I believe with 
 satisfaction to all party . I be now admit   after undergo 
 an examination that be enough to badger a man blue , touch a pack 
 of nonsense that he do not   want to know   on the roll of attorney 
 and have take out my certificate , if it would be any satisfaction 
 to you to see it . " 
 " thank you , Mr. Guppy , " return my guardian . " I be quite willing 
  - I believe I use a legal phrase - to admit the certificate . " 
 Mr. Guppy therefore desist from take something out of his 
 pocket and proceed without it . 
 " I have no capital myself , but my mother have a little property which 
 take the form of an annuity " - here Mr. Guppy 's mother roll she 
 head as if she never could sufficiently enjoy the observation , and 
 put she handkerchief to her mouth , and again wink at I - " and a 
 few pound for expense out of pocket in conduct business will 
 never be want , free of interest , which be an advantage , you 
 know , " say Mr. Guppy feelingly . 
 " certainly an advantage , " return my guardian . 
 " I have some connexion , " pursue Mr. Guppy , " and it lay in the 
 direction of Walcot Square , Lambeth . I have therefore take a 
 ' ouse in that locality , which , in the opinion of my friend , be a 
 hollow bargain   taxis ridiculous , and use of fixture include in 
 the rent , and intend set up professionally for myself there 
 forthwith . " 
 here Mr. Guppy 's mother fall into an extraordinary passion of 
 roll her head and smile waggishly at anybody who would look at 
 she . 
 " it be a six - roomer , exclusive of kitchen , " say Mr. Guppy , " and in 
 the opinion of my friend , a commodious tenement . when I mention 
 my friend , I refer principally to my friend Jobling , who I believe 
 have know I , " Mr. Guppy look at he with a sentimental air , 
 " from boyhood 's hour . " 
 Mr. Jobling confirm this with a slide movement of his leg . 
 " my friend Jobling will render I his assistance in the capacity of 
 clerk and will live in the ' ouse , " say Mr. Guppy . " my mother will 
 likewise live in the ' ouse when her present quarter in the Old 
 Street Road shall have cease and expire ; and consequently there 
 will be no want of society . my friend Jobling be naturally 
 aristocratic by taste , and besides be acquaint with the 
 movement of the upper circle , fully back I in the intention I 
 be now develop . " 
 Mr. Jobling say " certainly " and withdraw a little from the elbow 
 of Mr Guppy 's mother . 
 " now , I have no occasion to mention to you , sir , you be in the 
 confidence of Miss Summerson , " say Mr. Guppy , " mother , I wish 
 you would be so good as to keep still , that Miss Summerson 's image be 
 formerly imprint on my ' eart and that I make she a proposal of 
 marriage . " 
 " that I have hear , " return my guardian . 
 " circumstance , " pursue Mr. Guppy , " over which I have no control , 
 but quite the contrary , weaken the impression of that image for a 
 time . at which time Miss Summerson 's conduct be highly genteel ; I 
 may even add , magnanimous . " 
 my guardian pat I on the shoulder and seem much amuse . 
 " now , sir , " say Mr. Guppy , " I have get into that state of mind 
 myself that I wish for a reciprocity of magnanimous behaviour . I 
 wish to prove to Miss Summerson that I can rise to a heighth of 
 which perhaps she hardly think I capable . I find that the image 
 which I do suppose have be eradicate from my ' eart be not 
 eradicate . its influence over I be still tremenjous , and 
 yield to it , I be willing to overlook the circumstance over 
 which none of we have have any control and to renew those proposal 
 to Miss Summerson which I have the honour to make at a former 
 period . I beg to lay the ' ouse in Walcot Square , the business , and 
 myself before Miss Summerson for her acceptance . " 
 " very magnanimous indeed , sir , " observe my guardian . 
 " well , sir , " reply Mr. Guppy with candour , " my wish be to be 
 magnanimous . I do not consider that in make this offer to Miss 
 Summerson I be by any mean throw myself away ; neither be that 
 the opinion of my friend . still , there be circumstance which I 
 submit may be take into account as a set off against any little 
 drawback of mine , and so a fair and equitable balance arrive at . " 
 " I take upon myself , sir , " say my guardian , laugh as he ring 
 the bell , " to reply to your proposal on behalf of Miss Summerson . 
 she be very sensible of your handsome intention , and wish you 
 good evening , and wish you well . " 
 " oh ! " say Mr. Guppy with a blank look . " be that tantamount , sir , 
 to acceptance , or rejection , or consideration ? " 
 " to decide rejection , if you please , " return my guardian . 
 Mr. Guppy look incredulously at his friend , and at his mother , 
 who suddenly turn very angry , and at the floor , and at the 
 ceiling . 
 " indeed ? " say he . " then , Jobling , if you be the friend you 
 represent yourself , I should think you might hand my mother out of 
 the gangway instead of allow she to remain where she be not 
 want . " 
 but Mrs. Guppy positively refuse to come out of the gangway . she 
 would not   hear of it . " why , get along with you , " say she to my 
 guardian , " what do you mean ? ai not   my son good enough for you ? 
 you ought to be ashamed of yourself . get out with you ! " 
 " my good lady , " return my guardian , " it be hardly reasonable to 
 ask I to get out of my own room . " 
 " I do not   care for that , " say Mrs. Guppy . " get out with you . if 
 we be not   good enough for you , go and procure somebody that be good 
 enough . go along and find them . " 
 I be quite unprepared for the rapid manner in which Mrs. Guppy 's 
 power of jocularity merge into a power of take the profound 
 offence . 
 " go along and find somebody that be good enough for you , " repeat 
 Mrs. Guppy . " get out ! " nothing seem to astonish Mr. Guppy 's 
 mother so much and to make she so very indignant as our not get 
 out . " why do not   you get out ? " say Mrs. Guppy . " what be you 
 stop here for ? " 
 " Mother , " interpose her son , always get before she and push 
 she back with one shoulder as she sidle at my guardian , " will you 
 hold your tongue ? " 
 " no , William , " she return , " I will not ! not unless he get out , I 
 will not ! " 
 however , Mr. Guppy and Mr. Jobling together close on Mr. Guppy 's 
 mother   who begin to be quite abusive   and take she , very much 
 against her will , downstairs , her voice rise a stair higher every 
 time her figure get a stair low , and insist that we should 
 immediately go and find somebody who be good enough for we , and 
 above all thing that we should get out . 
 CHAPTER LXV 
 begin the World 
 the term have commence , and my guardian find an intimation from 
 Mr. Kenge that the cause would come on in two day . as I have 
 sufficient hope of the will to be in a flutter about it , Allan and 
 I agree to go down to the court that morning . Richard be 
 extremely agitated and be so weak and low , though his illness be 
 still of the mind , that my dear girl indeed have sore occasion to be 
 support . but she look forward - a very little way now - to the 
 help that be to come to she , and never droop . 
 it be at Westminster that the cause be to come on . it have come 
 on there , I dare say , a hundred time before , but I could not 
 divest myself of an idea that it might lead to some result now . we 
 leave home directly after breakfast to be at Westminster Hall in 
 good time and walk down there through the lively street - so 
 happily and strangely it seem ! - together . 
 as we be go along , plan what we should do for Richard and 
 Ada , I hear somebody call " Esther ! my dear Esther ! Esther ! " 
 and there be Caddy Jellyby , with her head out of the window of a 
 little carriage which she hire now to go about in to her pupil 
  she have so many , as if she want to embrace I at a hundred 
 yard ' distance . I have write she a note to tell she of all that 
 my guardian have do , but have not have a moment to go and see she . 
 of course we turn back , and the affectionate girl be in that 
 state of rapture , and be so overjoyed to talk about the night when 
 she bring I the flower , and be so determined to squeeze my 
 face   bonnet and all   between her hand , and go on in a wild manner 
 altogether , call I all kind of precious name , and tell 
 Allan I have do I do not   know what for she , that I be just oblige 
 to get into the little carriage and calm she down by let she 
 say and do exactly what she like . Allan , stand at the window , 
 be as pleased as Caddy ; and I be as pleased as either of they ; 
 and I wonder that I get away as I do , rather than that I come off 
 laughing , and red , and anything but tidy , and look after Caddy , 
 who look after we out of the coach - window as long as she could 
 see we . 
 this make we some quarter of an hour late , and when we come to 
 Westminster Hall we find that the day 's business be begin . bad 
 than that , we find such an unusual crowd in the Court of Chancery 
 that it be full to the door , and we could neither see nor hear 
 what be pass within . it appear to be something droll , for 
 occasionally there be a laugh and a cry of " silence ! " it appear 
 to be something interesting , for every one be push and strive 
 to get near . it appear to be something that make the 
 professional gentleman very merry , for there be several young 
 counsellor in wig and whisker on the outside of the crowd , and 
 when one of they tell the other about it , they put their hand in 
 their pocket , and quite double themselves up with laughter , and 
 go stamp about the pavement of the Hall . 
 we ask a gentleman by we if he know what cause be on . he tell 
 we Jarndyce and Jarndyce . we ask he if he know what be do 
 in it . he say really , no he do not , nobody ever do , but as well 
 as he could make out , it be over . over for the day ? we ask he . 
 no , he say , over for good . 
 over for good ! 
 when we hear this unaccountable answer , we look at one another 
 quite lose in amazement . could it be possible that the will have 
 set thing right at last and that Richard and Ada be go to be 
 rich ? it seem too good to be true . alas it be ! 
 our suspense be short , for a break - up soon take place in the 
 crowd , and the people come stream out look flushed and hot 
 and bring a quantity of bad air with they . still they be all 
 exceedingly amused and be more like people come out from a 
 farce or a juggler than from a court of justice . we stand aside , 
 watch for any countenance we know , and presently great bundle 
 of paper begin to be carry out - bundle in bag , bundle too 
 large to be get into any bag , immense mass of paper of all 
 shape and no shape , which the bearer stagger under , and throw 
 down for the time being , anyhow , on the Hall pavement , while they 
 go back to bring out more . even these clerk be laugh . we 
 glance at the paper , and see Jarndyce and Jarndyce everywhere , 
 ask an official - look person who be stand in the midst of 
 they whether the cause be over . yes , he say , it be all up with 
 it at last , and burst out laugh too . 
 at this juncture we perceive Mr. Kenge come out of court with an 
 affable dignity upon he , listen to Mr. Vholes , who be 
 deferential and carry his own bag . Mr. Vholes be the first to 
 see we . " here be Miss Summerson , sir , " he say . " and Mr. 
 Woodcourt . " 
 " oh , indeed ! yes . truly ! " say Mr. Kenge , raise his hat to I 
 with polished politeness . " how do you do ? glad to see you . Mr. 
 Jarndyce be not here ? " 
 no . he never come there , I remind he . 
 " really , " return Mr. Kenge , " it be as well that he be not here 
 to - day , for his - shall I say , in my good friend 's absence , his 
 indomitable singularity of opinion ? - might have be strengthen , 
 perhaps ; not reasonably , but might have be strengthen . " 
 " pray what have be do to - day ? " ask Allan . 
 " I beg your pardon ? " say Mr. Kenge with excessive urbanity . 
 " what have be do to - day ? " 
 " what have be do , " repeat Mr. Kenge . " quite so . yes . why , 
 not much have be do ; not much . we have be check - bring up 
 suddenly , I would say - upon the - shall I term it threshold ? " 
 " be this will consider a genuine document , sir ? " say Allan . 
 " will you tell we that ? " 
 " most certainly , if I could , " say Mr. Kenge ; " but we have not go 
 into that , we have not go into that . " 
 " we have not go into that , " repeat Mr. Vholes as if his low 
 inward voice be an echo . 
 " you be to reflect , Mr. Woodcourt , " observe Mr. Kenge , use his 
 silver trowel persuasively and smoothingly , " that this have be a 
 great cause , that this have be a protracted cause , that this have 
 be a complex cause . Jarndyce and Jarndyce have be term , not 
 inaptly , a monument of Chancery practice . " 
 " and patience have sit upon it a long time , " say Allan . 
 " very well indeed , sir , " return Mr. Kenge with a certain 
 condeseending laugh he have . " very well ! you be further to 
 reflect , Mr. Woodcourt , " become dignified almost to severity , 
 " that on the numerous difficulty , contingency , masterly 
 fiction , and form of procedure in this great cause , there have 
 be expend study , ability , eloquence , knowledge , intellect , Mr. 
 Woodcourt , high intellect . for many year , the - a - I would say the 
 flower of the bar , and the - a - I would presume to add , the mature 
 autumnal fruit of the woolsack - have be lavish upon Jarndyce 
 and Jarndyce . if the public have the benefit , and if the country 
 have the adornment , of this great grasp , it must be pay for in 
 money or money 's worth , sir . " 
 " Mr. Kenge , " say Allan , appear enlighten all in a moment . 
 " excuse I , our time press . do I understand that the whole 
 estate be find to have be absorb in cost ? " 
 " Hem ! I believe so , " return Mr. Kenge . " Mr. Vholes , what do you 
 say ? " 
 " I believe so , " say Mr. Vholes . 
 " and that thus the suit lapse and melt away ? " 
 " probably , " return Mr. Kenge . " Mr. Vholes ? " 
 " probably , " say Mr. Vholes . 
 " my dearest life , " whisper Allan , " this will break Richard 's 
 heart ! " 
 there be such a shock of apprehension in his face , and he know 
 Richard so perfectly , and I too have see so much of his gradual 
 decay , that what my dear girl have say to I in the fullness of she 
 foreboding love sound like a knell in my ear . 
 " in case you should be want Mr. C. , sir , " say Mr. Vholes , 
 come after we , " you will find he in court . I leave he there 
 rest himself a little . good day , sir ; good day , Miss 
 Summerson . " as he give I that slowly devouring look of his , while 
 twist up the string of his bag before he hasten with it after 
 Mr. Kenge , the benignant shadow of whose conversational presence he 
 seem afraid to leave , he give one gasp as if he have swallow the 
 last morsel of his client , and his black button - up unwholesome 
 figure glide away to the low door at the end of the Hall . 
 " my dear love , " say Allan , " leave to I , for a little while , the 
 charge you give I . go home with this intelligence and come to 
 Ada 's by and by ! " 
 I would not let he take I to a coach , but entreat he to go to 
 Richard without a moment 's delay and leave I to do as he wish . 
 hurry home , I find my guardian and tell he gradually with what 
 news I have return . " little woman , " say he , quite unmoved for 
 himself , " to have do with the suit on any term be a great 
 blessing than I have look for . but my poor young cousin ! " 
 we talk about they all the morning and discuss what it be 
 possible to do . in the afternoon my guardian walk with I to 
 Symond 's Inn and leave I at the door . I go upstairs . when my 
 darling hear my footstep , she come out into the small passage and 
 throw her arm round my neck , but she compose herself directly and 
 say that Richard have ask for I several time . Allan have find 
 he sit in the corner of the court , she tell I , like a stone 
 figure . on be rouse , he have break away and make as if he 
 would have speak in a fierce voice to the judge . he be stop 
 by his mouth be full of blood , and Allan have bring he home . 
 he be lie on a sofa with his eye close when I go in . there 
 be restorative on the table ; the room be make as airy as 
 possible , and be darken , and be very orderly and quiet . Allan 
 stand behind he watch he gravely . his face appear to I to 
 be quite destitute of colour , and now that I see he without his 
 see I , I fully see , for the first time , how wear away he be . 
 but he look handsomer than I have see he look for many a day . 
 I sit down by his side in silence . open his eye by and by , he 
 say in a weak voice , but with his old smile , " Dame Durden , kiss 
 I , my dear ! " 
 it be a great comfort and surprise to I to find he in his low 
 state cheerful and look forward . he be happy , he say , in 
 our intended marriage than he could find word to tell I . my 
 husband have be a guardian angel to he and Ada , and he bless we 
 both and wish we all the joy that life could yield we . I almost 
 feel as if my own heart would have break when I see he take my 
 husband 's hand and hold it to his breast . 
 we speak of the future as much as possible , and he say several 
 time that he must be present at our marriage if he could stand 
 upon his foot . Ada would contrive to take he , somehow , he say . 
 " yes , surely , dearest Richard ! " but as my darling answer he 
 thus hopefully , so serene and beautiful , with the help that be to 
 come to she so near - I know - I know ! 
 it be not good for he to talk too much , and when he be silent , 
 we be silent too . sit beside he , I make a pretence of 
 work for my dear , as he have always be use to joke about my 
 be busy . Ada lean upon his pillow , hold his head upon her 
 arm . he doze often , and whenever he awake without see he , 
 say first of all , " where be Woodcourt ? " 
 Evening have come on when I lift up my eye and see my guardian 
 stand in the little hall . " who be that , Dame Durden ? " Richard 
 ask I . the door be behind he , but he have observe in my face 
 that some one be there . 
 I look to Allan for advice , and as he nod " yes , " bent over 
 Richard and tell he . my guardian see what pass , come softly by 
 I in a moment , and lay his hand on Richard 's . " oh , sir , " say 
 Richard , " you be a good man , you be a good man ! " and burst into 
 tear for the first time . 
 my guardian , the picture of a good man , sit down in my place , 
 keep his hand on Richard 's . 
 " my dear Rick , " say he , " the cloud have clear away , and it be 
 bright now . we can see now . we be all bewilder , Rick , more or 
 less . what matter ! and how be you , my dear boy ? " 
 " I be very weak , sir , but I hope I shall be strong . I have to 
 begin the world . " 
 " Aye , truly ; well say ! " cry my guardian . 
 " I will not begin it in the old way now , " say Richard with a sad 
 smile . " I have learn a lesson now , sir . it be a hard one , but 
 you shall be assure , indeed , that I have learn it . " 
 " well , well , " say my guardian , comfort he ; " well , well , well , 
 dear boy ! " 
 " I be think , sir , " resume Richard , " that there be nothing on 
 earth I should so much like to see as their house - Dame Durden 's 
 and Woodcourt 's house . if I could be remove there when I begin to 
 recover my strength , I feel as if I should get well there soon 
 than anywhere . " 
 " why , so have I be think too , Rick , " say my guardian , " and 
 our little woman likewise ; she and I have be talk of it this 
 very day . I dare say her husband will not   object . what do you 
 think ? " 
 Richard smile and lift up his arm to touch he as he stand 
 behind the head of the couch . 
 " I say nothing of Ada , " say Richard , " but I think of she , and have 
 thought of she very much . look at she ! see she here , sir , bend 
 over this pillow when she have so much need to rest upon it herself , 
 my dear love , my poor girl ! " 
 he clasp she in his arm , and none of we speak . he gradually 
 release she , and she look upon we , and look up to heaven , and 
 move her lip . 
 " when I get down to Bleak House , " say Richard , " I shall have much 
 to tell you , sir , and you will have much to show I . you will go , 
 will not   you ? " 
 " undoubtedly , dear Rick . " 
 " thank you ; like you , like you , " say Richard . " but it be all like 
 you . they have be tell I how you plan it and how you 
 remember all Esther 's familiar taste and way . it will be like 
 come to the old Bleak House again . " 
 " and you will come there too , I hope , Rick . I be a solitary man 
 now , you know , and it will be a charity to come to I . a charity 
 to come to I , my love ! " he repeat to Ada as he gently pass his 
 hand over her golden hair and put a lock of it to his lip .   I 
 think he vow within himself to cherish she if she be leave 
 alone . 
 " it be a troubled dream ? " say Richard , clasp both my 
 guardian 's hand eagerly . 
 " nothing more , Rick ; nothing more . " 
 " and you , be a good man , can pass it as such , and forgive and 
 pity the dreamer , and be lenient and encouraging when he wake ? " 
 " indeed I can . what be I but another dreamer , Rick ? " 
 " I will begin the world ! " say Richard with a light in his eye . 
 my husband draw a little nearer towards Ada , and I see he solemnly 
 lift up his hand to warn my guardian . 
 " when shall I go from this place to that pleasant country where the 
 old time be , where I shall have strength to tell what Ada have 
 be to I , where I shall be able to recall my many fault and 
 blindness , where I shall prepare myself to be a guide to my 
 unborn child ? " say Richard . " when shall I go ? " 
 " Dear Rick , when you be strong enough , " return my guardian . 
 " Ada , my darling ! " 
 he seek to raise himself a little . Allan raise he so that she 
 could hold he on her bosom , which be what he want . 
 " I have do you many wrong , my own . I have fall like a poor 
 stray shadow on your way , I have marry you to poverty and 
 trouble , I have scatter your mean to the wind . you will 
 forgive I all this , my Ada , before I begin the world ? " 
 a smile irradiate his face as she bend to kiss he . he slowly 
 lay his face down upon her bosom , draw his arm close round her 
 neck , and with one parting sob begin the world . not this world , 
 oh , not this ! the world that set this right . 
 when all be still , at a late hour , poor craze Miss Flite come 
 weep to I and tell I she have give her bird their liberty . 
 CHAPTER LXVI 
 down in Lincolnshire 
 there be a hush upon Chesney Wold in these altered day , as there 
 be upon a portion of the family history . the story go that Sir 
 Leicester pay some who could have speak out to hold their peace ; 
 but it be a lame story , feebly whisper and creep about , and 
 any bright spark of life it show soon die away . it be know 
 for certain that the handsome Lady Dedlock lie in the mausoleum in 
 the park , where the tree arch darkly overhead , and the owl be 
 hear at night make the wood ring ; but whence she be bring 
 home to be lay among the echo of that solitary place , or how she 
 die , be all mystery . some of her old friend , principally to be 
 find among the peachy - cheek charmer with the skeleton throat , 
 do once occasionally say , as they toy in a ghastly manner with 
 large fan - like charmer reduce to flirt with grim death , 
 after lose all their other beaux - do once occasionally say , when 
 the world assemble together , that they wonder the ash of the 
 Dedlocks , entomb in the mausoleum , never rise against the 
 profanation of her company . but the dead - and - go dedlock take it 
 very calmly and have never be know to object . 
 up from among the fern in the hollow , and wind by the bridle- 
 road among the tree , come sometimes to this lonely spot the sound 
 of horse ' hoof . then may be see Sir Leicester - invalid , bent , 
 and almost blind , but of worthy presence yet - rid with a 
 stalwart man beside he , constant to his bridle - rein . when they 
 come to a certain spot before the mausoleum - door , Sir Leicester 's 
 accustomed horse stop of his own accord , and Sir Leicester , 
 pull off his hat , be still for a few moment before they ride 
 away . 
 War rage yet with the audacious Boythorn , though at uncertain 
 interval , and now hotly , and now coolly , flicker like an 
 unsteady fire . the truth be say to be that when Sir Leicester 
 come down to Lincolnshire for good , Mr. Boythorn show a manifest 
 desire to abandon his right of way and do whatever Sir Leicester 
 would , which Sir Leicester , conceive to be a condescension to his 
 illness or misfortune , take in such high dudgeon , and be so 
 magnificently aggrieve by , that Mr. Boythorn find himself under 
 the necessity of commit a flagrant trespass to restore his 
 neighbour to himself . similarly , Mr. Boythorn continue to post 
 tremendous placard on the dispute thoroughfare and   with his bird 
 upon his head   to hold forth vehemently against Sir Leicester in 
 the sanctuary of his own home ; similarly , also , he defy he as of 
 old in the little church by testify a bland unconsciousness of 
 his existence . but it be whisper that when he be most ferocious 
 towards his old foe , he be really most considerate , and that Sir 
 Leicester , in the dignity of be implacable , little suppose how 
 much he be humour . as little do he think how near together he 
 and his antagonist have suffer in the fortune of two sister , 
 and his antagonist , who know it now , be not the man to tell he . 
 so the quarrel go on to the satisfaction of both . 
 in one of the lodge of the park - that lodge within sight of the 
 house where , once upon a time , when the water be out down in 
 Lincolnshire , my Lady use to see the keeper 's child - the stalwart 
 man , the trooper formerly , be house . some relic of his old 
 calling hang upon the wall , and these it be the choose recreation 
 of a little lame man about the stable - yard to keep gleam bright . 
 a busy little man he always be , in the polishing at harness - house 
 door , of stirrup - iron , bit , curb - chain , harness boss , 
 anything in the way of a stable - yard that will take a polish , 
 lead a life of friction . a shaggy little damaged man , withal , 
 not unlike an old dog of some mongrel breed , who have be 
 considerably knock about . he answer to the name of Phil . 
 a goodly sight it be to see the grand old housekeeper   hard of 
 hear now   go to church on the arm of her son and to observe - 
 which few do , for the house be scant of company in these time - the 
 relation of both towards Sir Leicester , and his towards they . 
 they have visitor in the high summer weather , when a grey cloak 
 and umbrella , unknown to Chesney Wold at other period , be see 
 among the leaf ; when two young lady be occasionally find 
 gambolling in sequester saw - pit and such nook of the park ; and 
 when the smoke of two pipe wreathe away into the fragrant evening 
 air from the trooper 's door . then be a fife hear troll within 
 the lodge on the inspire topic of the " British Grenadiers " ; and 
 as the evening close in , a gruff inflexible voice be hear to say , 
 while two man pace together up and down , " but I never own to it 
 before the old girl . Discipline must be maintain . " 
 the great part of the house be shut up , and it be a show - house no 
 long ; yet Sir Leicester hold his shrunken state in the long 
 drawing - room for all that , and repose in his old place before my 
 Lady 's picture . close in by night with broad screen , and 
 illumine only in that part , the light of the drawing - room seem 
 gradually contract and dwindle until it shall be no more . a 
 little more , in truth , and it will be all extinguish for Sir 
 Leicester ; and the damp door in the mausoleum which shut so tight , 
 and look so obdurate , will have open and receive he . 
 Volumnia , grow with the flight of time pinker as to the red in 
 her face , and yellower as to the white , read to Sir Leicester in 
 the long evening and be drive to various artifice to conceal her 
 yawn , of which the chief and most efficacious be the insertion of 
 the pearl necklace between her rosy lip . long - wind treatise on 
 the Buffy and boodle question , show how Buffy be immaculate and 
 boodle villainous , and how the country be lose by be all boodle 
 and no Buffy , or save by be all Buffy and no boodle   it must be 
 one of the two , and can not be anything else , be the staple of her 
 reading . Sir Leicester be not particular what it be and do not 
 appear to follow it very closely , far than that he always come 
 broad awake the moment Volumnia venture to leave off , and 
 sonorously repeat her last word , beg with some displeasure to 
 know if she find herself fatigue . however , Volumnia , in the 
 course of her bird - like hopping about and peck at paper , have 
 alight on a memorandum concern herself in the event of 
 " anything happen " to her kinsman , which be handsome compensation 
 for an extensive course of reading and hold even the dragon 
 Boredom at bay . 
 the cousin generally be rather shy of Chesney Wold in its 
 dullness , but take to it a little in the shooting season , when gun 
 be hear in the plantation , and a few scatter beater and 
 keeper wait at the old place of appointment for low - spirited two 
 and three of cousin . the debilitated cousin , more debilitate by 
 the dreariness of the place , get into a fearful state of 
 depression , groan under penitential sofa - pillow in his gunless 
 hour and protest that such fernal old jail 's - nough t'sew fler 
 up - frever . 
 the only great occasion for Volumnia in this change aspect of the 
 place in Lincolnshire be those occasion , rare and widely 
 separate , when something be to be do for the county or the 
 country in the way of grace a public ball . then , indeed , do 
 the tuckered sylph come out in fairy form and proceed with joy 
 under cousinly escort to the exhausted old assembly - room , fourteen 
 heavy mile off , which , during three hundred and sixty - four day 
 and night of every ordinary year , be a kind of antipodean lumber- 
 room full of old chair and table upside down . then , indeed , do 
 she captivate all heart by her condescension , by her girlish 
 vivacity , and by she skip about as in the day when the hideous 
 old general with the mouth too full of tooth have not cut one of 
 they at two guineas each . then do she twirl and twine , a 
 pastoral nymph of good family , through the maze of the dance . 
 then do the swain appear with tea , with lemonade , with sandwich , 
 with homage . then be she kind and cruel , stately and unassuming , 
 various , beautifully wilful . then be there a singular kind of 
 parallel between she and the little glass chandelier of another 
 age embellish that assembly - room , which , with their meagre 
 stem , their spare little drop , their disappointing knob where no 
 drop be , their bare little stalk from which knob and drop have 
 both depart , and their little feeble prismatic twinkling , all 
 seem Volumnias . 
 for the rest , Lincolnshire life to Volumnia be a vast blank of 
 overgrown house look out upon tree , sighing , wring their 
 hand , bow their head , and cast their tear upon the window- 
 pane in monotonous depression . a labyrinth of grandeur , less the 
 property of an old family of human being and their ghostly 
 likeness than of an old family of echoing and thundering which 
 start out of their hundred graf at every sound and go resound 
 through the building . a waste of unused passage and staircase in 
 which to drop a comb upon a bedroom floor at night be to send a 
 stealthy footfall on an errand through the house . a place where 
 few people care to go about alone , where a maid scream if an ash 
 drop from the fire , take to cry at all time and season , 
 become the victim of a low disorder of the spirit , and give 
 warning and depart . 
 Thus Chesney Wold . with so much of itself abandon to darkness 
 and vacancy ; with so little change under the summer shin or the 
 wintry lowering ; so sombre and motionless always - no flag fly 
 now by day , no row of light sparkle by night ; with no family to 
 come and go , no visitor to be the soul of pale cold shape of 
 room , no stir of life about it - passion and pride , even to the 
 stranger 's eye , have die away from the place in Lincolnshire and 
 yield it to dull repose . 
 CHAPTER LXVII 
 the Close of Esther 's Narrative 
 full seven happy year I have be the mistress of Bleak House . 
 the few word that I have to add to what I have write be soon 
 pen ; then I and the unknown friend to whom I write will part for 
 ever . not without much dear remembrance on my side . not without 
 some , I hope , on his or her . 
 they give my darling into my arm , and through many week I never 
 leave she . the little child who be to have do so much be bear 
 before the turf be plant on its father 's grave . it be a boy ; 
 and I , my husband , and my guardian give he his father 's name . 
 the help that my dear count on do come to she , though it come , 
 in the eternal wisdom , for another purpose . though to bless and 
 restore his mother , not his father , be the errand of this baby , 
 its power be mighty to do it . when I see the strength of the weak 
 little hand and how its touch could heal my darling 's heart and 
 raise hope within she , I feel a new sense of the goodness and the 
 tenderness of God . 
 they throve , and by degree I see my dear girl pass into my country 
 garden and walk there with her infant in her arm . I be marry 
 then . I be the happy of the happy . 
 it be at this time that my guardian join we and ask Ada when 
 she would come home . 
 " both house be your home , my dear , " say he , " but the old Bleak 
 House claim priority . when you and my boy be strong enough to do 
 it , come and take possession of your home . " 
 Ada call he " her dear cousin , John . " but he say , no , it 
 must be guardian now . he be her guardian henceforth , and the 
 boy 's ; and he have an old association with the name . so she call 
 him guardian , and have call he guardian ever since . the child 
 know he by no other name . I say the child ; I have two little 
 daughter . 
 it be difficult to believe that Charley   round - eyed still , and not 
 at all grammatical   be married to a miller in our neighbourhood ; 
 yet so it be ; and even now , look up from my desk as I write 
 early in the morning at my summer window , I see the very mill 
 begin to go round . I hope the miller will not spoil Charley ; 
 but he be very fond of she , and Charley be rather vain of such a 
 match , for he be well to do and be in great request . so far as my 
 small maid be concern , I might suppose time to have stand for 
 seven year as still as the mill do half an hour ago , since little 
 Emma , Charley 's sister , be exactly what Charley use to be . as to 
 Tom , Charley 's brother , I be really afraid to say what he do at 
 school in cipher , but I think it be decimal . he be 
 apprentice to the miller , whatever it be , and be a good bashful 
 fellow , always fall in love with somebody and be ashamed of 
 it . 
 Caddy Jellyby pass she very last holiday with we and be a 
 dearer creature than ever , perpetually dance in and out of the 
 house with the child as if she have never give a dancing - lesson 
 in her life . Caddy keep she own little carriage now instead of 
 hire one , and live full two mile far westward than Newman 
 Street . she work very hard , her husband   an excellent one   be 
 lame and able to do very little . still , she be more than content 
 and do all she have to do with all her heart . Mr. Jellyby spend 
 his evening at her new house with his head against the wall as he 
 use to do in her old one . I have hear that Mrs. Jellyby be 
 understand to suffer great mortification from her daughter 's 
 ignoble marriage and pursuit , but I hope she get over it in time . 
 she have be disappoint in Borrioboola - Gha , which turn out a 
 failure in consequence of the king of Borrioboola want to sell 
 everybody - who survive the climate - for rum , but she have take up 
 with the right of woman to sit in Parliament , and Caddy tell I 
 it be a mission involve more correspondence than the old one . I 
 have almost forget Caddy 's poor little girl . she be not such a 
 mite now , but she be deaf and dumb . I believe there never be a 
 well mother than Caddy , who learn , in her scanty interval of 
 leisure , innumerable deaf and dumb art to soften the affliction of 
 her child . 
 as if I be never to have do with Caddy , I be remind here of 
 Peepy and old Mr. Turveydrop . Peepy be in the Custom House , and 
 do extremely well . old Mr. Turveydrop , very apoplectic , still 
 exhibit his deportment about town , still enjoy himself in the old 
 manner , be still believe in in the old way . he be constant in his 
 patronage of Peepy and be understand to have bequeath he a 
 favourite french clock in his dressing - room - which be not his 
 property . 
 with the first money we save at home , we add to our pretty house 
 by throw out a little growlery expressly for my guardian , which 
 we inaugurate with great splendour the next time he come down to 
 see we . I try to write all this lightly , because my heart be full 
 in draw to an end , but when I write of he , my tear will have 
 their way . 
 I never look at he but I hear our poor dear Richard call he a 
 good man . to Ada and her pretty boy , he be the fond father ; to 
 I he be what he have ever be , and what name can I give to that ? 
 he be my husband 's good and dear friend , he be our child 's 
 darling , he be the object of our deep love and veneration . yet 
 while I feel towards he as if he be a superior being , I be so 
 familiar with he and so easy with he that I almost wonder at 
 myself . I have never lose my old name , nor have he lose his ; nor 
 do I ever , when he be with we , sit in any other place than in my 
 old chair at his side , Dame Trot , Dame Durden , Little Woman - all 
 just the same as ever ; and I answer , " yes , dear guardian ! " just the 
 same . 
 I have never know the wind to be in the east for a single moment 
 since the day when he take I to the porch to read the name . I 
 remark to he once that the wind seem never in the east now , 
 and he say , no , truly ; it have finally depart from that quarter 
 on that very day . 
 I think my darling girl be more beautiful than ever . the sorrow 
 that have be in her face - for it be not there now - seem to have 
 purify even its innocent expression and to have give it a 
 diviner quality . sometimes when I raise my eye and see she in the 
 black dress that she still wear , teach my Richard , I feel - it 
 be difficult to express - as if it be so good to know that she 
 remember her dear Esther in her prayer . 
 I call he my Richard ! but he say that he have two mama , and I be 
 one . 
 we be not rich in the bank , but we have always prosper , and we 
 have quite enough . I never walk out with my husband but I hear the 
 people bless he . I never go into a house of any degree but I hear 
 his praise or see they in grateful eye . I never lie down at 
 night but I know that in the course of that day he have alleviate 
 pain and soothe some fellow - creature in the time of need . I know 
 that from the bed of those who be past recovery , thank have 
 often , often go up , in the last hour , for his patient 
 ministration . be not this to be rich ? 
 the people even praise I as the doctor 's wife . the people even 
 like I as I go about , and make so much of I that I be quite 
 abash . I owe it all to he , my love , my pride ! they like I for 
 his sake , as I do everything I do in life for his sake . 
 a night or two ago , after bustle about prepare for my darling 
 and my guardian and little Richard , who be come to - morrow , I be 
 sit out in the porch of all place , that dearly memorable 
 porch , when Allan come home . so he say , " my precious little 
 woman , what be you do here ? " and I say , " the moon be shin 
 so brightly , Allan , and the night be so delicious , that I have be 
 sit here think . " 
 " what have you be think about , my dear ? " say Allan then . 
 " how curious you be ! " say I. " I be almost ashamed to tell you , 
 but I will . I have be think about my old look - such as they 
 be . " 
 " and what have you be think about THEM , my busy bee ? " say 
 Allan . 
 " I have be think that I think it be impossible that you 
 could have love I any well , even if I have retain they . " 
 " ' such as they be ' ? " say Allan , laugh . 
 " such as they be , of course . " 
 " my dear Dame Durden , " say Allan , draw my arm through his , " do 
 you ever look in the glass ? " 
 " you know I do ; you see I do it . " 
 " and do not   you know that you be pretty than you ever be ? " 
 " I do not know that ; I be not certain that I know it now . but I 
 know that my dear little pet be very pretty , and that my 
 darling be very beautiful , and that my husband be very handsome , 
 and that my guardian have the bright and most benevolent face 
 that ever be see , and that they can very well do without much 
 beauty in I - even supposing - . " 
