micah CLARKE 

 his statement as make to his three GRANDCHILDREN JOSEPH , GERVAS , and 
 reuben during the hard winter of 1734 


 by Arthur Conan Doyle 
 Chapter i. of Cornet Joseph Clarke of the Ironsides 

 it may be , my dear grandchild , that at one time or another I 
 have tell you nearly all the incident which have occur during my 
 adventurous life . to your father and to your mother , at least , I know 
 that none of they be unfamiliar . yet when I consider that time wear 
 on , and that a grey head be apt to contain a fail memory , I be 
 prompt to use these long winter evening in put it all before 
 you from the beginning , that you may have it as one clear story in your 
 mind , and pass it on as such to those who come after you . for now that 
 the house of Brunswick be firmly establish upon the throne and that 
 peace prevail in the land , it will become less easy for you every 
 year to understand how man feel when Englishmen be in arm against 
 Englishmen , and when he who should have be the shield and the 
 protector of his subject have no thought but to force upon they what 
 they most abhor and detest . 

 my story be one which you may well treasure up in your memory , and 
 tell again to other , for it be not likely that in this whole county of 
 Hampshire , or even perhaps in all England , there be another left alive 
 who be so well able to speak from his own knowledge of these event , 
 or who have play a more forward part in they . all that I know I shall 
 endeavour soberly and in due order to put before you . I shall try to 
 make these dead man quicken into life for your behoof , and to call back 
 out of the mist of the past those scene which be brisk enough in 
 the acting , though they read so dully and so heavily in the page of the 
 worthy man who have set themselves to record they . perchance my word , 
 too , might , in the ear of stranger , seem to be but an old man 's 
 gossip . to you , however , who know that these eye which be look at 
 you look also at the thing which I describe , and that this hand have 
 strike in for a good cause , it will , I know , be different . Bear in mind 
 as you listen that it be your quarrel as well as our own in which 
 we fight , and that if now you grow up to be free man in a free land , 
 privileged to think or to pray as your conscience shall direct , you may 
 thank God that you be reap the harvest which your father sow in 
 blood and suffering when the Stuarts be on the throne . 

 I be bear then in the year 1664 , at Havant , which be a flourish 
 village a few mile from Portsmouth off the main London road , and there 
 it be that I spend the great part of my youth . it be now as it be 
 then , a pleasant , healthy spot , with a hundred or more brick cottage 
 scatter along in a single irregular street , each with its little 
 garden in front , and maybe a fruit tree or two at the back . in the 
 middle of the village stand the old church with the square tower , and 
 the great sun - dial like a wrinkle upon its grey weather - blotch face . 
 on the outskirt the Presbyterians have their chapel ; but when the Act of 
 Uniformity be pass , their good minister , Master Breckinridge , whose 
 discourse have often crowd his rude bench while the comfortable pew 
 of the church be empty , be cast into gaol , and his flock disperse . 
 as to the Independents , of whom my father be one , they also be under 
 the ban of the law , but they attend conventicle at Emsworth , whither 
 we would trudge , rain or shine , on every Sabbath morning . these meeting 
 be break up more than once , but the congregation be compose of such 
 harmless folk , so well beloved and respect by their neighbour , that 
 the peace officer come after a time to ignore they , and to let they 
 worship in their own fashion . there be Papists , too , amongst we , who 
 be compel to go as far as Portsmouth for their Mass. thus , you see , 
 small as be our village , we be a fair miniature of the whole country , 
 for we have our sect and our faction , which be all the more bitter 
 for be confine in so narrow a compass . 

 my father , Joseph Clarke , be well know over the countryside by the 
 name of Ironside Joe , for he have serve in his youth in the Yaxley 
 troop of Oliver Cromwell 's famous regiment of horse , and have preach 
 so lustily and fight so stoutly that old Noll himself call he out 
 of the rank after the fight at Dunbar , and raise he to a cornetcy . 
 it chance , however , that have some little time later fall into an 
 argument with one of his trooper concern the mystery of the Trinity , 
 the man , who be a half - crazy zealot , smote my father across the face , a 
 favour which he return by a thrust from his broadsword , which send his 
 adversary to test in person the truth of his belief . in most army 
 it would have be concede that my father be within his right 
 in punish promptly so rank an act of mutiny , but the soldier of 
 Cromwell have so high a notion of their own importance and privilege , 
 that they resent this summary justice upon their companion . a 
 court - martial sit upon my father , and it be likely that he would have 
 be offer up as a sacrifice to appease the angry soldiery , have not 
 the Lord Protector interfere , and limit the punishment to dismissal 
 from the army . Cornet Clarke be accordingly strip of his buff 
 coat and steel cap , and wander down to Havant , where he settle into 
 business as a leather merchant and tanner , thereby deprive Parliament 
 of as trusty a soldier as ever draw blade in its service . find 
 that he prosper in trade , he take as wife Mary Shepstone , a young 
 Churchwoman , and I , Micah Clarke , be the first pledge of their union . 

 my father , as I remember he first , be tall and straight , with a great 
 spread of shoulder and a mighty chest . his face be craggy and stern , 
 with large harsh feature , shaggy over - hang brow , high - bridge 
 fleshy nose , and a full - lipped mouth which tighten and set when he 
 be angry . his grey eye be pierce and soldier - like , yet I have see 
 they lighten up into a kindly and merry twinkle . his voice be the most 
 tremendous and awe - inspiring that I have ever listen to . I can well 
 believe what I have hear , that when he chant the Hundredth Psalm as 
 he ride down among the blue bonnet at Dunbar , the sound of he rise 
 above the blare of trumpet and the crash of gun , like the deep roll of 
 a break wave . yet though he possess every quality which be 
 need to raise he to distinction as an officer , he have throw off his 
 military habit when he return to civil life . as he prosper and grow 
 rich he might well have wear a sword , but instead he would ever bear a 
 small copy of the scripture bind to his girdle , where other man hang 
 their weapon . he be sober and measure in his speech , and it be 
 seldom , even in the bosom of his own family , that he would speak of the 
 scene which he have take part in , or of the great man , Fleetwood and 
 Harrison , Blake and Ireton , Desborough and Lambert , some of whom have 
 be simple trooper like himself when the trouble break out . he be 
 frugal in his eating , backward in drinking , and allow himself no 
 pleasure save three pipe a day of Oronooko tobacco , which he keep ever 
 in a brown jar by the great wooden chair on the left - hand side of the 
 mantelshelf . 

 yet for all his self - restraint the old leaven would at time begin to 
 work in he , and bring on fit of what his enemy would call fanaticism 
 and his friend piety , though it must be confess that this piety 
 be prone to take a fierce and fiery shape . as I look back , one or two 
 instance of that stand out so hard and clear in my recollection that 
 they might be scene which I have see of late in the playhouse , instead 
 of memory of my childhood more than threescore year ago , when the 
 second Charles be on the throne . 

 the first of these occur when I be so young that I can remember 
 neither what go before nor what immediately after it . it stick in my 
 infant mind when other thing slip through it . we be all in the 
 house one sultry summer evening , when there come a rattle of kettledrum 
 and a clatter of hoof , which bring my mother and my father to the 
 door , she with I in her arm that I might have the well view . it be 
 a regiment of horse on their way from Chichester to Portsmouth , with 
 colour fly and band playing , make the brave show that ever my 
 youthful eye have rest upon . with what wonder and admiration do I 
 gaze at the sleek prancing steed , the steel morion , the plume hat 
 of the officer , the scarf and bandolier . never , I think , have such 
 a gallant company assemble , and I clap my hand and cry out in my 
 delight . my father smile gravely , and take I from my mother 's arm . 
 ' nay , lad , ' he say , ' thou art a soldier 's son , and should have more 
 judgment than to commend such a rabble as this . Canst thou not , child as 
 thou art , see that their arm be ill - find , their stirrup - iron rust , 
 and their rank without order or cohesion ? neither have they throw out 
 a troop in advance , as should even in time of peace be do , and their 
 rear be straggle from here to Bedhampton . yea , ' he continue , suddenly 
 shake his long arm at the trooper , and call out to they , ' ye be 
 corn ripe for the sickle and wait only for the reaper ! ' several of 
 they rein up at this sudden out - flame . ' hit the crop - eare rascal over 
 the pate , Jack ! ' cry one to another , wheel his horse round ; but 
 there be that in my father 's face which cause he to fall back into 
 the rank again with his purpose unfulfilled . the regiment jingle on 
 down the road , and my mother lay her thin hand upon my father 's arm , 
 and lull with her pretty coax way the sleep devil which have 
 stir within he . 

 on another occasion which I can remember , about my seventh or eighth 
 year , his wrath burst out with more dangerous effect . I be play 
 about he as he work in the tanning - yard one spring afternoon , when 
 in through the open doorway strut two stately gentleman , with 
 gold facing to their coat and smart cockade at the side of their 
 three - cornered hat . they be , as I afterwards understand , officer of 
 the fleet who be pass through Havant , and see we at work in the 
 yard , design to ask we some question as to their route . the young of 
 the pair accost my father and begin his speech by a great clatter of 
 word which be all high Dutch to I , though I now see that they be a 
 string of such oath as be common in the mouth of a sailor ; though why 
 the very man who be in most danger of appear before the Almighty 
 should go out of their way to insult he , hath ever be a mystery to 
 I . my father in a rough stern voice bade he speak with more reverence 
 of sacred thing , on which the pair of they give tongue together , 
 swear tenfold bad than before , and call my father a canting 
 rogue and a smug - faced Presbytery Jack . what more they might have say I 
 know not , for my father pick up the great roller wherewith he smooth 
 the leather , and dash at they he bring it down on the side of one 
 of their head with such a swashing blow , that have it not be for his 
 stiff hat the man would never have utter oath again . as it be , he 
 drop like a log upon the stone of the yard , while his companion 
 whip out his rapi and make a vicious thrust ; but my father , who be 
 as active as he be strong , spring aside , and bring his cudgel down 
 upon the outstretched arm of the officer , crack it like the stem of 
 a tobacco - pipe . this affair make no little stir , for it occur at 
 the time when those arch - liar , Oates , Bedloe , and Carstairs , be 
 disturb the public mind by their rumour of plot , and a rise of 
 some sort be expect throughout the country . within a few day all 
 Hampshire be ring with an account of the malcontent tanner of 
 Havant , who have break the head and the arm of two of his Majesty 's 
 servant . an inquiry show , however , that there be no treasonable 
 meaning in the matter , and the officer have confess that the first 
 word come from they , the Justices content themselves with impose a 
 fine upon my father , and bind he over to keep the peace for a period 
 of six month . 

 I tell you these incident that you may have an idea of the fierce and 
 earnest religion which fill not only your own ancestor , but most of 
 those man who be train in the parliamentary army . in many way 
 they be more like those fanatic Saracens , who believe in conversion by 
 the sword , than the follower of a christian creed . yet they have this 
 great merit , that their own life be for the most part clean and 
 commendable , for they rigidly adhere themselves to those law which 
 they would gladly have force at the sword 's point upon other . it be 
 true that among so many there be some whose piety be a shell for 
 their ambition , and other who practise in secret what they denounce 
 in public , but no cause however good be free from such hypocritical 
 parasite . that the great part of the saint , as they term 
 themselves , be man of sober and God - fear life , may be show by the 
 fact that , after the disbanding of the army of the Commonwealth , the old 
 soldier flock into trade throughout the country , and make their mark 
 wherever they go by their industry and worth . there be many a wealthy 
 business house now in England which can trace its rise to the thrift and 
 honesty of some simple pikeman of Ireton or Cromwell . 

 but that I may help you to understand the character of your 
 great - grandfather , I shall give an incident which show how fervent and 
 real be the emotion which prompt the violent mood which I have 
 describe . I be about twelve at the time , my brother Hosea and Ephraim 
 be respectively nine and seven , while little Ruth could scarce have 
 be more than four . it chance that a few day before a wandering 
 preacher of the independent have put up at our house , and his religious 
 ministration have leave my father moody and excitable . one night I have 
 go to bed as usual , and be sound asleep with my two brother beside 
 I , when we be rouse and order to come downstairs . huddle on our 
 clothe we follow he into the kitchen , where my mother be sit 
 pale and scar with Ruth upon her knee . 

 ' gather round I , my child , ' he say , in a deep reverent voice , ' that 
 we may all appear before the throne together . the kingdom of the Lord be 
 at hand - oh , be ye ready to receive he ! this very night , my loved one , 
 ye shall see he in his splendour , with the angel and the archangel in 
 their might and their glory . at the third hour shall he come - that very 
 third hour which be now draw upon we . ' 

 ' Dear Joe , ' say my mother , in soothe tone , ' thou art scar thyself 
 and the child to no avail . if the Son of Man be indeed come , what 
 matter it whether we be abe or afoot ? ' 

 ' peace , woman , ' he answer sternly ; ' have he not say that he will come 
 like a thief in the night , and that it be for we to await he ? Join 
 with I , then , in prayerful outpouring that we may be find as those in 
 bridal array . let we offer up thank that he have graciously vouchsafe 
 to warn we through the word of his servant . oh , great Lord , look down 
 upon this small flock and lead it to the sheep fold ! mix not the 
 little wheat with the great world of chaff . oh , merciful Father ! look 
 graciously upon my wife , and forgive she the sin of Erastianism , she 
 be but a woman and little fit to cast off the bond of antichrist 
 wherein she be bear . and these too , my little one , Micah and Hosea , 
 Ephraim and Ruth , all name after Thy faithful servant of old , oh let 
 they stand upon Thy right hand this night ! ' thus he pray on in a wild 
 rush of burning , plead word , writhe prostrate upon the floor 
 in the vehemence of his supplication , while we , poor trembling mite , 
 huddle round our mother 's skirt and gaze with terror at the contorted 
 figure see by the dim light of the simple oil lamp . on a sudden the 
 clang of the new church clock tell that the hour have come . my father 
 spring from the floor , and rush to the casement , star up with wild 
 expectant eye at the starry heaven . whether he conjure up some vision 
 in his excited brain , or whether the rush of feeling on find that his 
 expectation be in vain , be too much for he , it be certain that 
 he throw his long arm upwards , utter a hoarse scream , and tumble 
 backwards with foaming lip and twitch limb upon the ground . for an 
 hour or more my poor mother and I do what we could to soothe he , while 
 the child whimper in a corner , until at last he stagger slowly to 
 his foot , and in brief break word order we to our room . from that 
 time I have never hear he allude to the matter , nor do he ever give 
 we any reason why he should so confidently have expect the second 
 come upon that particular night . I have learn since , however , 
 that the preacher who visit we be what be call in those day a 
 fifth - monarchy man , and that this particular sect be very liable to 
 these premonition . I have no doubt that something which he have say have 
 put the thought into my father 's head , and that the fiery nature of the 
 man have do the rest . 

 so much for your great - grandfather , Ironside Joe . I have prefer to 
 put these passage before you , for on the principle that action speak 
 louder than word , I find that in describe a man 's character it be 
 well to give example of his way than to speak in broad and general 
 term . have I say that he be fierce in in religion and subject to 
 strange fit of piety , the word might have make little impression 
 upon you ; but when I tell you of his attack upon the officer in the 
 tanning - yard , and his summon we down in the dead of the night to 
 await the second coming , you can judge for yourself the length to 
 which his belief would carry he . for the rest , he be an excellent man 
 of business , fair and even generous in his dealing , respect by all 
 and love by few , for his nature be too self - contain to admit of much 
 affection . to we he be a stern and rigid father , punish we heavily 
 for whatever he regard as amiss in our conduct . he bad a store of such 
 proverb as ' give a child its will and a whelp its fill , and neither 
 will strive , ' or ' child be certain care and uncertain comfort , ' 
 wherewith he would temper my mother 's more kindly impulse . he could not 
 bear that we should play trick - track upon the green , or dance with the 
 other child upon the Saturday night . 

 as to my mother , dear soul , it be her calm , peaceful influence which 
 keep my father within bound , and soften his austere rule . seldom 
 indeed , even in his dark mood , do the touch of her gentle hand and 
 the sound of her voice fail to soothe his fiery spirit . she come of a 
 Church stock , and hold to her religion with a quiet grip which be proof 
 against every attempt to turn she from it . I imagine that at one time 
 her husband have argue much with she upon Arminianism and the sin of 
 simony , but find his exhortation useless , he have abandon the 
 subject save on very rare occasion . in spite of her episcopacy , 
 however , she remain a staunch Whig , and never allow her loyalty to 
 the throne to cloud her judgment as to the doing of the monarch who sit 
 upon it . 

 woman be good housekeeper fitly year ago , but she be conspicuous 
 among the good . to see her spotless cuff and snowy kirtle one would 
 scarce credit how hard she labour . it be only the well order house 
 and the dustless room which proclaim her constant industry . she 
 make salve and eyewater , powder and confect , cordial and persico , 
 orangeflower water and cherry brandy , each in its due season , and all of 
 the good . she be wise , too , in herb and simple . the villager and the 
 farm labourer would rather any day have her advice upon their ailment 
 than that of Dr. Jackson of Purbrook , who never mix a draught under 
 a silver crown . over the whole countryside there be no woman more 
 deservedly respected and more esteemed both by those above she and by 
 those beneath . 

 such be my parent as I remember they in my childhood . as to myself , I 
 shall let my story explain the growth of my own nature . my brother and 
 my sister be all brownface , sturdy little country child , with no 
 very marked trait save a love of mischief control by the fear of 
 their father . these , with Martha the serve - maid , form our whole 
 household during those boyish year when the pliant soul of the child 
 be harden into the settle character of the man . how these influence 
 affect I I shall leave for a future sitting , and if I weary you by 
 record they , you must remember that I be tell these thing rather 
 for your profit than for your amusement ; that it may assist you in your 
 journey through life to know how another have pick out the path before 
 you . 



 Chapter II . of my go to school and of my come thence . 


 with the home influence which I have describe , it may be readily 
 imagine that my young mind turn very much upon the subject of 
 religion , the more so as my father and mother take different view upon 
 it . the old Puritan soldier hold that the bible alone contain all 
 thing essential to salvation , and that though it might be advisable 
 that those who be gift with wisdom or eloquence should expound the 
 scripture to their brother , it be by no mean necessary , but rather 
 hurtful and degrading , that any organise body of minister or of 
 bishop should claim special prerogative , or take the place of 
 mediator between the creature and the creator . for the wealthy 
 dignitary of the Church , roll in their carriage to their 
 cathedral , in order to preach the doctrine of their Master , who wear 
 his sandal out in tramp over the countryside , he profess the most 
 bitter contempt ; nor be he more lenient to those poor member of the 
 clergy who wink at the vice of their patron that they might secure 
 a seat at their table , and who would sit through a long evening of 
 profanity rather than bid good - bye to the cheesecake and the wine 
 flask . that such man represent religious truth be abhorrent to 
 his mind , nor would he even give his adhesion to that form of church 
 government dear to the Presbyterians , where a general council of the 
 minister direct the affair of their church . every man be , in his 
 opinion , equal in the eye of the Almighty , and none have a right to 
 claim any precedence over his neighbour in matter of religion . the book 
 be write for all , and all be equally able to read it , provide that 
 their mind be enlighten by the Holy Spirit . 

 my mother , on the other hand , hold that the very essence of a church 
 be that it should have a hierarchy and a graduated government within 
 itself , with the king at the apex , the archbishop beneath he , the 
 bishop under their control , and so down through the ministry to the 
 common folk . such be , in her opinion , the Church as establish in the 
 beginning , and no religion without these characteristic could lay any 
 claim to be the true one . ritual be to she of as great importance 
 as morality , and if every tradesman and farmer be allow to invent 
 prayer , and change the service as the fancy seize he , it would be 
 impossible to preserve the purity of the christian creed . she agree 
 that religion be base upon the Bible , but the Bible be a book which 
 contain much that be obscure , and unless that obscurity be 
 clear away by a duly elect and consecrate servant of God , a 
 lineal descendant of the Disciples , all human wisdom might not serve to 
 interpret it aright . that be my mother 's position , and neither argument 
 nor entreaty could move she from it . the only question of belief on 
 which my two parent be equally ardent be their mutual dislike 
 and distrust of the roman catholic form of worship , and in this the 
 Churchwoman be every whit as decide as the fanatical Independent . 

 it may seem strange to you in these day of tolerance , that the 
 adherent of this venerable creed should have meet with such universal 
 ill - will from successive generation of Englishmen . we recognise now 
 that there be no more useful or loyal citizen in the state than our 
 catholic brother , and Mr. Alexander Pope or any other lead Papist be 
 no more look down upon for his religion than be Mr. William Penn 
 for his Quakerism in the reign of King James . we can scarce credit how 
 nobleman like Lord Stafford , ecclesiastic like Archbishop Plunkett , 
 and commoner like Langhorne and Pickering , be drag to death on 
 the testimony of the vilest of the vile , without a voice be raise in 
 their behalf ; or how it could be consider a patriotic act on the part 
 of an English Protestant to carry a flail load with lead beneath his 
 cloak as a menace against his harmless neighbour who differ from 
 he on point of doctrine . it be a long madness which have now happily 
 pass off , or at least show itself in a milder and rarer form . 

 foolish as it appear to we , there be some solid reason to account 
 for it . you have read doubtless how , a century before I be bear , the 
 great kingdom of Spain wax and prosper . her ship cover every 
 sea . her troop be victorious wherever they appear . in letter , in 
 learning , in all the art of war and peace they be the foremost nation 
 in Europe . you have hear also of the ill - blood which exist between 
 this great nation and ourselves ; how our adventurer harry their 
 possession across the Atlantic , while they retort by burn such 
 of our seaman as they could catch by their devilish inquisition , and by 
 threaten our coast both from Cadiz and from their province in the 
 Netherlands . at last so hot become the quarrel that the other nation 
 stand off , as I have see the folk clear a space for the sword - player 
 at Hockley - in - the - Hole , so that the spanish giant and tough little 
 England be leave face to face to fight the matter out . throughout all 
 that business it be as the emissary of the Pope , and as the avenger of 
 the dishonoured Roman Church , that King Philip profess to come . it 
 be true that Lord Howard and many another gentleman of the old religion 
 fight stoutly against the don , but the people could never forget that 
 the reform faith have be the flag under which they have conquer , and 
 that the blessing of the Pontiff have rest with their opponent . then 
 come the cruel and foolish attempt of Mary to force upon they a creed 
 for which they have no sympathy , and at the heel of it another great 
 roman catholic power menace our liberty from the continent . the grow 
 strength of France promote a corresponding distrust of Papistry in 
 England , which reach a head when , at about the time of which I write , 
 Louis XIV . threaten we with invasion at the very moment when , by 
 the revocation of the Edict of Nantes , he show his intolerant spirit 
 towards the faith which we hold dear . the narrow Protestantism of 
 England be less a religious sentiment than a patriotic reply to 
 the aggressive bigotry of her enemy . our catholic countryman be 
 unpopular , not so much because they believe in Transubstantiation , as 
 because they be unjustly suspect of sympathise with the Emperor or 
 with the King of France . now that our military success have secure we 
 against all fear of attack , we have happily lose that bitter religious 
 hatred but for which Oates and Dangerfield would have lie in vain . 

 in the day when I be young , special cause have inflame this dislike 
 and make it all the more bitter because there be a spice of fear 
 mingle with it . as long as the Catholics be only an obscure faction 
 they might be ignore , but when , towards the close of the reign of the 
 second Charles , it appear to be absolutely certain that a Catholic 
 dynasty be about to fill the throne , and that Catholicism be to be the 
 court religion and the stepping - stone to preferment , it be feel that 
 a day of vengeance might be at hand for those who have trample upon 
 it when it be defenceless . there be alarm and uneasiness amongst all 
 class . the Church of England , which depend upon the monarch as an 
 arch depend upon the keystone ; the nobility , whose estate and coffer 
 have be enrich by the plunder of the abbey ; the mob , whose idea of 
 Papistry be mix up with thumbscrew and Fox 's martyrology , be all 
 equally disturbed . nor be the prospect a hopeful one for their cause . 
 Charles be a very lukewarm protestant , and indeed show upon his 
 deathbed that he be no protestant at all . there be no long any 
 chance of his have legitimate offspring . the Duke of York , his young 
 brother , be therefore heir to the throne , and he be know to be an 
 austere and narrow Papist , while his spouse , Mary of Modena , be 
 as bigote as himself . should they have child , there could be 
 no question but that they would be bring up in the faith of their 
 parent , and that a line of catholic monarch would occupy the throne 
 of England . to the Church , as represent by my mother , and to 
 Nonconformity , in the person of my father , this be an equally 
 intolerable prospect . 

 I have be tell you all this old history because you will find , as 
 I go on , that this state of thing cause in the end such a seething and 
 ferment throughout the nation that even I , a simple village lad , be 
 drag into the whirl and have my whole life influence by it . if I do 
 not make the course of event clear to you , you would hardly understand 
 the influence which have such an effect upon my whole history . in the 
 meantime , I wish you to remember that when King James II . ascend the 
 throne he do so amid a sullen silence on the part of a large class of 
 his subject , and that both my father and my mother be among those who 
 be zealous for a protestant succession . 

 my childhood be , as I have already say , a gloomy one . now and again 
 when there chance to be a fair at Portsdown Hill , or when a pass 
 raree showman set up his booth in the village , my dear mother would 
 slip a penny or two from her housekeeping money into my hand , and with 
 a warning finger upon her lip would send I off to see the sight . these 
 treat be , however , rare event , and make such a mark upon my mind , 
 that when I be sixteen year of age I could have check off upon my 
 finger all that I have ever see . there be William Harker the strong 
 man , who lift Farmer Alcott 's roan mare ; and there be Tubby Lawson 
 the dwarf , who could fit himself into a pickle jar -- these two I well 
 remember from the wonder wherewith they strike my youthful soul . then 
 there be the show of the play doll , and that of the enchanted 
 island and Mynheer Munster from the Lowlands , who could turn himself 
 round upon a tight - rope while play most sweetly upon a virginal . 
 last , but far the good in my estimation , be the grand play at the 
 Portsdown Fair , entitle ' the true and ancient story of Maudlin , the 
 merchant 's daughter of Bristol , and of her lover Antonio . how they be 
 cast away on the shore of Barbary , where the mermaid be see float 
 upon the sea and singing in the rock , foretell their danger . ' this 
 little piece give I keener pleasure than ever in after year I receive 
 from the grand comedy of Mr. Congreve and of Mr. Dryden , though 
 act by Kynaston , Betterton , and the whole strength of the King 's own 
 company . at Chichester once I remember that I pay a penny to see the 
 left shoe of the young sister of Potiphar 's wife , but as it look 
 much like any other old shoe , and be just about the size to have fit 
 the show - woman , I have often fear that my penny fall into the hand of 
 rogue . 

 there be other show , however , which I might see for nothing , and yet 
 be more real and every whit as interesting as any for which I 
 pay . now and again upon a holiday I be permit to walk down to 
 Portsmouth -- once I be even take in front of my father upon his pad 
 nag , and there I wander with he through the street with wonder 
 eye , marvel over the strange sight around I . the wall and the 
 moat , the gate and the sentinel , the long High Street with the great 
 government building , and the constant rattle of drum and blare of 
 trumpet ; they make my little heart beat quick beneath my sagathy 
 stuff jacket . here be the house in which some thirty year before the 
 proud Duke of Buckingham have be strike down by the assassin 's dagger . 
 there , too , be the Governor 's dwelling , and I remember that even as I 
 look he come rid up to it , red - faced and choleric , with a nose such 
 as a Governor should have , and his breast all slash with gold . ' be he 
 not a fine man ? ' I say , look up at my father . he laugh and draw 
 his hat down over his brow . ' it be the first time that I have see Sir 
 Ralph Lingard 's face , ' say he , ' but I see his back at Preston fight . 
 ah , lad , proud as he look , if he do but see old Noll come in through 
 the door he would not think it beneath he to climb out through the 
 window ! ' the clank of steel or the sight of a buff - coat would always 
 serve to stir up the old Roundhead bitterness in my father 's breast . 

 but there be other sight in Portsmouth besides the red - coat and 
 their governor . the yard be the second in the kingdom , after Chatham , 
 and there be ever some new war - ship ready upon the slip . then there 
 be a squadron of King 's ship , and sometimes the whole fleet at 
 Spithead , when the street would be full of sailor , with their face as 
 brown as mahogany and pigtail as stiff and hard as their cutlass . to 
 watch their rolling gait , and to hear their strange , quaint talk , 
 and their tale of the dutch war , be a rare treat to I ; and I have 
 sometimes when I be alone fasten myself on to a group of they , and 
 pass the day in wander from tavern to tavern . it chance one day , 
 however , that one of they insist upon my share his glass of Canary 
 wine , and afterwards out of roguishness persuade I to take a second , 
 with the result that I be send home speechless in the carrier 's cart , 
 and be never again allow to go into Portsmouth alone . my father be 
 less shocked at the incident than I should have expect , and remind 
 my mother that Noah have be overtake in a similar manner . he also 
 narrate how a certain field - chaplain Grant , of Desborough 's regiment , 
 have after a hot and dusty day drunk sundry flagon of mum , have 
 thereafter sing certain ungodly song , and dance in a manner unbecoming 
 to his sacred profession . also , how he have afterwards explain that 
 such backsliding be not to be regard we fault of the individual , 
 but rather as actual obsession of the evil one , who contrive in this 
 manner to give scandal to the faithful , and select the most godly for 
 his evil purpose . this ingenious defence of the field - chaplain be the 
 saving of my back , for my father , who be a believer in Solomon 's axiom , 
 have a stout ash stick and a strong arm for whatever seem to he to be 
 a fall away from the true path . 

 from the day that I first learn my letter from the horn - book at my 
 mother 's knee I be always hungry to increase my knowledge , and never a 
 piece of print come in my way that I do not eagerly master . my father 
 push the sectarian hatred of learn to such a length that he be 
 averse to have any worldly book within his door . ( note A , Appendix ) 
 I be dependent therefore for my supply upon one or two of my friend in 
 the village , who lend I a volume at a time from their small library . 
 these I would carry inside my shirt , and would only dare to produce when 
 I could slip away into the field , and lie hide among the long grass , or 
 at night when the rushlight be still burn , and my father 's snoring 
 assure I that there be no danger of his detect I . in this way 
 I work up from Don Bellianis of Greece and the ' Seven Champions , ' 
 through Tarleton 's ' jest ' and other such book , until I could take 
 pleasure in the poetry of Waller and of Herrick , or in the play of 
 Massinger and Shakespeare . how sweet be the hour when I could lay 
 aside all thought of freewill and of predestination , to lie with my 
 heel in the air among the scented clover , and listen to old Chaucer 
 tell the sweet story of Grisel the patient , or to weep for the chaste 
 Desdemona , and mourn over the untimely end of her gallant spouse . there 
 be time as I rise up with my mind full of the noble poetry , and 
 glance over the fair slope of the countryside , with the gleam sea 
 beyond it , and the purple outline of the Isle of Wight upon the horizon ; 
 when it would be bear in upon I that the being who create all this , 
 and who give man the power of pour out these beautiful thought , be 
 not the possession of one sect or another , or of this nation or that , 
 but be the kindly Father of every one of the little child whom 
 he have let loose on this fair playground . it grieve I then , and it 
 grieve I now , that a man of such sincerity and lofty purpose as your 
 great grandfather should have be so tie down by iron doctrine , and 
 should imagine his creator to be so niggard of his mercy as to withhold 
 it from nine - and - ninety in the hundred . well , a man be as he be train , 
 and if my father bear a narrow mind upon his broad shoulder , he have at 
 least the credit that he be ready to do and to suffer all thing 
 for what he conceive to be the truth . if you , my dear , have more 
 enlighten view , take heed that they bring you to lead a more 
 enlightened life . 

 when I be fourteen year of age , a yellow - haired , brown - face lad , I 
 be pack off to a small private school at Petersfield , and there I 
 remain for a year , return home for the last Saturday in each month . 
 I take with I only a scanty outfit of schoolbook , with Lilly 's ' Latin 
 Grammar , ' and Rosse 's ' view of all the religion in the World from the 
 Creation down to our own time , ' which be shove into my hand by my 
 good mother as a parting present . with this small stock of letter I 
 might have fare badly , have it not happen that my master , Mr. Thomas 
 Chillingfoot , have himself a good library , and take a pleasure in 
 lend his book to any of his scholar who show a desire to improve 
 themselves . under this good old man 's care I not only pick up some 
 smattering of Latin and Greek , but I find mean to read good english 
 translation of many of the classic , and to acquire a knowledge of the 
 history of my own and other country . I be rapidly grow in mind as 
 well as in body , when my school career be cut short by no less an event 
 than my summary and ignominious expulsion . how this unlooke - for end 
 to my study come about I must now set before you . 

 Petersfield have always be a great stronghold of the Church , have 
 hardly a Nonconformist within its bound . the reason of this be that 
 most of the house property be own by zealous Churchmen , who refuse 
 to allow any one who differ from the Established Church to settle 
 there . the Vicar , whose name be Pinfold , possess in this manner great 
 power in the town , and as he be a man with a high inflame countenance 
 and a pompous manner , he inspire no little awe among the quiet 
 inhabitant . I can see he now with his beaked nose , his rounded 
 waistcoat , and his bandy leg , which look as if they have give way 
 beneath the load of learning which they be compel to carry . walk 
 slowly with right hand stiffly extend , tap the pavement at every 
 step with his metal - head stick , he would pause as each person pass 
 he , and wait to see that he be give the salute which he think due 
 to his dignity . this courtesy he never dream of return , save in 
 the case of some of his rich parishioner ; but if by chance it be 
 omit , he would hurry after the culprit , and , shake his stick in his 
 face , insist upon his doff his cap to he . we youngster , if we meet 
 he on our walk , would scuttle by he like a brood of chicken pass 
 an old turkey cock , and even our worthy master show a disposition to 
 turn down a side - street when the portly figure of the Vicar be see 
 roll in our direction . this proud priest make a point of know the 
 history of every one within his parish , and have learn that I be the 
 son of an Independent , he speak severely to Mr. Chillingfoot upon the 
 indiscretion which he have show in admit I to his school . indeed , 
 nothing but my mother 's good name for orthodoxy prevent he from 
 insist upon my dismissal . 

 at the other end of the village there be a large day - school . a constant 
 feud prevail between the scholar who attend it and the lad who 
 study under our master . no one could tell how the war break out , but 
 for many year there have be a standing quarrel between the two , which 
 result in skirmish , sally , and ambuscade , with now and then a 
 pitch battle . no great harm be do in these encounter , for the 
 weapon be usually snowball in winter and pine - cone or clod of 
 earth in the summer . even when the contest get close and we come to 
 fisticuff , a few bruise and a little blood be the bad that could 
 come of it . our opponent be more numerous than we , but we have the 
 advantage of be always together and of have a secure asylum upon 
 which to retreat , while they , live in scatter house all over the 
 parish , have no common rallying - point . a stream , cross by two bridge , 
 run through the centre of the town , and this be the boundary which 
 separate our territory from those of our enemy . the boy who cross 
 the bridge find himself in hostile country . 

 it chance that in the first conflict which occur after my arrival at 
 the school I distinguish myself by single out the most redoubtable 
 of our foeman , and smite he such a blow that he be knock helpless 
 and be carry off by our party as a prisoner . this feat of arm 
 establish my good name as a warrior , so I come at last to be regard 
 as the leader of our force , and to be look up to by big boy than 
 myself . this promotion tickle my fancy so much , that I set to work to 
 prove that I deserve it by devise fresh and ingenious scheme for the 
 defeat of our enemy . 

 one winter 's evening news reach we that our rival be about to make 
 a raid upon we under cover of night , and that they propose come by 
 the little use plank bridge , so as to escape our notice . this bridge 
 lie almost out of the town , and consist of a single broad piece of 
 wood without a rail , erect for the good of the town clerk , who live , 
 just opposite to it . we propose to hide ourselves amongst the bush on 
 our side of the stream , and make an unexpected attack upon the invader 
 as they cross . as we start , however , I bethink I of an ingenious 
 stratagem which I have read of as be practise in the german war , and 
 have expound it to the great delight of my companion , we take Mr. 
 Chillingfoot 's saw , and set off for the seat of action . 

 on reach the bridge all be quiet and still . it be quite dark and 
 very cold , for Christmas be approach . there be no sign of our 
 opponent . we exchange a few whisper as to who should do the daring 
 deed , but as the other shrink from it , and as I be too proud to 
 propose what I dare not execute , I grip the saw , and sit 
 astraddle upon the plank set to work upon the very centre of it . 

 my purpose be to weaken it in such a way that , though it would bear the 
 weight of one , it would collapse when the main body of our foeman be 
 upon it , and so precipitate they into the ice - cold stream . the water be 
 but a couple of foot deep at the place , so that there be nothing for 
 they but a fright and a ducking . so cool a reception ought to deter 
 they from ever invade we again , and confirm my reputation as a daring 
 leader . Reuben Lockarby , my lieutenant , son of old John Lockarby of the 
 Wheatsheaf , marshal our force behind the hedgerow , whilst I saw 
 vigorously at the plank until I have nearly sever it across . I have no 
 compunction about the destruction of the bridge , for I know enough of 
 carpentry to see that a skilful joiner could in an hour 's work make 
 it strong than ever by put a prop beneath the point where I have 
 divide it . when at last I feel by the yielding of the plank that I have 
 do enough , and that the least strain would snap it , I crawl quietly 
 off , and take up my position with my schoolfellow , await the coming 
 of the enemy . 

 I have scarce conceal myself when we hear the step of some one 
 approach down the footpath which lead to the bridge . we crouch 
 behind the cover , convince that the sound must come from some scout 
 whom our foeman have send on in front -- a big boy evidently , for his step 
 be heavy and slow , with a clink noise mingle with it , of which we 
 could make nothing . Nearer come the sound and nearer , until a shadowy 
 figure loom out of the darkness upon the other side , and after pausing 
 and peer for a moment , come straight for the bridge . it be only as 
 he be set foot upon the plank and begin gingerly to pick his 
 way across it , that we discern the outline of the familiar form , and 
 realise the dreadful truth that the stranger whom we have take for the 
 advance guard of our enemy be in truth none other than Vicar Pinfold , 
 and that it be the rhythmic pat of his stick which we hear mingle 
 with his footfall . fascinated by the sight , we lay bereft of all power 
 to warn he -- a line of star eyeball . one step , two step , three 
 step do the haughty Churchman take , when there be a rend crack , 
 and he vanish with a mighty splash into the swift - flow stream . he 
 must have fall upon his back , for we could see the curved outline 
 of his portly figure stand out above the surface as he struggle 
 desperately to regain his foot . at last he manage to get erect , and 
 come splutter for the bank with such a mixture of godly ejaculation 
 and of profane oath that , even in our terror , we could not keep from 
 laughter . rise from under his foot like a covey of wild - fowl , we 
 scurry off across the field and so back to the school , where , as you 
 may imagine , we say nothing to our good master of what have occur . 

 the matter be too serious , however , to be hush up . the sudden chill 
 set up some manner of disturbance in the bottle of sack which the Vicar 
 have just be drink with the town clerk , and an attack of gout set in 
 which lay he on his back for a fortnight . meanwhile an examination of 
 the bridge have show that it have be saw across , and an inquiry trace 
 the matter to Mr. Chillingfoot 's boarder . to save a wholesale expulsion 
 of the school from the town , I be force to acknowledge myself as both 
 the inventor and perpetrator of the deed . Chillingfoot be entirely in 
 the power of the Vicar , so he be force to read I a long homily 
 in public -- which he balance by an affectionate leave - taking in 
 private -- and to expel I solemnly from the school . I never see my old 
 master again , for he die not many year afterwards ; but I hear that his 
 second son William be still carry on the business , which be large 
 and more prosperous than of old . his eld son turn Quaker and go 
 out to Penn 's settlement , where he be report to have be slay by the 
 savage . 

 this adventure shock my dear mother , but it find great favour in the 
 eye of my father , who laugh until the whole village resound 
 with his stentorian merriment . it remind he , he say , of a similar 
 stratagem execute at Market Drayton by that God - fear soldier Colonel 
 Pride , whereby a captain and three trooper of Lunsford 's own regiment 
 of horse have be drown , and many other precipitate into a river , to 
 the great glory of the true Church and to the satisfaction of the 
 choose people . even of the Church folk many be secretly glad at the 
 misfortune which have overtake the Vicar , for his pretension and his 
 pride have make he hat throughout the district . 

 by this time I have grow into a sturdy , broad - shoulder lad , and every 
 month add to my strength and my stature . when I be sixteen I could 
 carry a bag of wheat or a cask of beer against any man in the village , 
 and I could throw the fifteen - pound putting - stone to a distance of 
 thirty - six foot , which be four foot far than could Ted Dawson , the 
 blacksmith . once when my father be unable to carry a bale of skin out 
 of the yard , I whip it up and bare it away upon my shoulder . the 
 old man would often look gravely at I from under his heavy thatched 
 eyebrow , and shake his grizzle head as he sit in his arm - chair puffing 
 his pipe . ' you grow too big for the nest , lad , ' he would say . ' I doubt 
 some of these day you will find your wing and away ! ' in my heart I 
 long that the time would come , for I be weary of the quiet life of 
 the village , and be anxious to see the great world of which I have hear 
 and read so much . I could not look southward without my spirit stir 
 within I as my eye fall upon those dark wave , the white crest of 
 which be like a flutter signal ever wave to an english youth and 
 beckon he to some unknown but glorious goal . 



 Chapter III . of two friend of my Youth 


 I fear , my child , that you will think that the prologue be over long 
 for the play ; but the foundation must be lay before the building be 
 erect , and a statement of this sort be a sorry and a barren thing 
 unless you have a knowledge of the folk concern . be patient , then , 
 while I speak to you of the old friend of my youth , some of whom you 
 may hear more of hereafter , while other remain behind in the country 
 hamlet , and yet leave trace of our early intercourse upon my character 
 which might still be discern there . 

 foremost for good amongst all whom I know be Zachary Palmer , the 
 village carpenter , a man whose aged and labour - warp body contain the 
 simple and pure of spirit . yet his simplicity be by no mean the 
 result of ignorance , for from the teaching of Plato to those of Hobbes 
 there be few system ever think out by man which he have not study 
 and weigh . book be far dearer in my boyhood than they be now , 
 and carpenter be less well pay , but old Palmer have neither wife nor 
 child , and spend little on food or raiment . thus it come about that on 
 the shelf over his bed he have a more choice collection of book -- few as 
 they be in number -- than the squire or the parson , and these book he 
 have read until he not only understand they himself , but could impart 
 they to other . 

 this white - bearded and venerable village philosopher would sit by his 
 cabin door upon a summer evening , and be never so pleased as when 
 some of the young fellow would slip away from their bowl and their 
 quoit - playing in order to lie in the grass at his foot , and ask he 
 question about the great man of old , their word and their deed . but 
 of all the youth I and Reuben Lockarby , the innkeeper 's son , be his 
 two favourite , for we would come the early and stop the late to 
 hear the old man talk . no father could have love his child well 
 than he do we , and he would spare no pain to get at our callow 
 thought , and to throw light upon whatever perplex or trouble we . 
 like all grow thing , we have run our head against the problem of 
 the universe . we have peep and pry with our boyish eye into those 
 profound depth in which the keenest - sighted of the human race have see 
 no bottom . yet when we look around we in our own village world , and 
 see the bitterness and rancour which pervade every sect , we could not 
 but think that a tree which bear such fruit must have something amiss 
 with it . this be one of the thought unspeak to our parent which 
 we carry to good old Zachary , and on which he have much to say which 
 cheer and comfort we . 

 ' these jangling and wrangling , ' say he , ' be but on the surface , 
 and spring from the infinite variety of the human mind , which will ever 
 adapt a creed to suit its own turn of thought . it be the solid core that 
 underlie every christian creed which be of importance . could you 
 but live among the Romans or the Greeks , in the day before this new 
 doctrine be preach , you would then know the change that it have 
 work in the world . how this or that text should be construe be a 
 matter of no moment , however warm man may get over it . what be of the 
 very great moment be , that every man should have a good and solid 
 reason for live a simple , cleanly life . this the christian creed have 
 give we . ' 

 ' I would not have you be virtuous out of fear , ' he say upon another 
 occasion . ' the experience of a long life have teach I , however , that 
 sin be always punish in this world , whatever may come in the next . 
 there be always some penalty in health , in comfort , or in peace of 
 mind to be pay for every wrong . it be with nation as it be with 
 individual . a book of history be a book of sermon . see how the 
 luxurious Babylonians be destroy by the frugal Persians , and how 
 these same Persians when they learn the vice of prosperity be put 
 to the sword by the Greeks . read on and mark how the sensual Greeks be 
 trodden down by the more robust and hardy Romans , and finally how the 
 Romans , have lose their manly virtue , be subdue by the nation 
 of the north . Vice and destruction come ever hand in hand . thus do 
 Providence use each in turn as a scourge wherewith to chastise the 
 folly of the other . these thing do not come by chance . they be part 
 of a great system which be at work in your own life . the long you 
 live the more you will see that sin and sadness be never far apart , and 
 that no true prosperity can exist away from virtue . ' 

 a very different teacher be the sea - dog Solomon Sprent , who live in 
 the second last cottage on the left - hand side of the main street of the 
 village . he be one of the old tarpaulin breed , who have fight under 
 the red cross ensign against Frenchman , Don , Dutchman , and Moor , until a 
 round shot carry off his foot and put an end to his battle for ever . 
 in person he be thin , and hard , and brown , as lithe and active as a 
 cat , with a short body and very long arm , each end in a great hand 
 which be ever half close as though shut on a rope . from head to 
 foot he be cover with the most marvellous tattooing , do in blue , 
 red , and green , begin with the Creation upon his neck and wind up 
 with the Ascension upon his left ankle . never have I see such a walking 
 work of art . he be will not to say that have he be own and his body cast 
 up upon some savage land , the native might have learn the whole of 
 the blessed gospel from a contemplation of his carcass . yet with sorrow 
 I must say that the seaman 's religion appear to have all work into 
 his skin , so that very little be leave for inner use . it have break out 
 upon the surface , like the spot fever , but his system be clear of 
 it elsewhere . he could swear in eleven language and three - and - twenty 
 dialect , nor do he ever let his great power rust for want of 
 practice . he would swear when he be happy or when he be sad , when he 
 be angry or when he be love , but this swearing be so mere a trick 
 of speech , without malice or bitterness , that even my father could 
 hardly deal harshly with the sinner . as time pass , however , the old 
 man grow more sober and more thoughtful , until in his latter day he 
 go back to the simple belief of his childhood , and learn to fight 
 the devil with the same steady courage with which he have face the 
 enemy of his country . 

 Old Solomon be a never - fail source of amusement and of interest to 
 my friend Lockarby and myself . on gala day he would have we in to dine 
 with he , when he would regale we with lobscouse and salmagundi , or 
 perhaps with an outland dish , a pillaw or olla podrida , or fish broil 
 after the fashion of the Azores , for he have a famous trick of cooking , 
 and could produce the delicacy of all nation . and all the time that 
 we be with he he would tell we the most marvellous story of Rupert , 
 under whom he serve ; how he would shout from the poop to his squadron 
 to wheel to the right , or to charge , or to halt , as the case might be , 
 as if he be still with his regiment of horse . of Blake , too , he have 
 many story to tell . but even the name of Blake be not so dear to our 
 old sailor as be that of Sir Christopher Mings . Solomon have at one time 
 be his coxswain , and could talk by the hour of those gallant deed 
 which have distinguish he from the day that he enter the navy as a 
 cabin boy until he fall upon his own quarter - deck , a full admiral of the 
 red , and be bear by his weeping ship 's company to his grave in Chatham 
 churchyard . ' if so be as there be a jasper sea up aloft , ' say the old 
 seaman , ' I will wager that Sir Christopher will see that the english flag 
 have proper respect pay to it upon it , and that we be not fool by 
 foreigner . I have serve under he in this world , and I ask nothing 
 well than to be his coxswain in the next -- if so be as he should chance 
 to have a vacancy for such . ' these remembrance would always end in the 
 brewing of an extra bowl of punch , and the drinking of a solemn bumper 
 to the memory of the depart hero . 

 stir as be Solomon Sprent 's account of his old commander , their 
 effect upon we be not so great as when , about his second or third 
 glass , the floodgate of his memory would be open , and he would pour 
 out long tale of the land which he have visit , and the people which 
 he have see . lean forward in our seat with our chin rest upon 
 our hand , we two youngster would sit for hour , with our eye fix 
 upon the old adventurer , drink in his word , while he , please at the 
 interest which he excite , would puff slowly at his pipe and reel off 
 story after story of what he have see or do . in those day , my dear , 
 there be no Defoe to tell we the wonder of the world , no _ spectator _ 
 to lie upon our breakfast table , no Gulliver to satisfy our love of 
 adventure by tell we of such adventure as never be . not once in 
 a month do a common newsletter fall into our hand . personal hazard , 
 therefore , be of more value then than they be now , and the talk of a 
 man like old Solomon be a library in itself . to we it be all real . his 
 husky tone and ill - choose word be as the voice of an angel , and our 
 eager mind fill in the detail and supply all that be want in 
 his narrative . in one evening we have engage a Sallee rover off the 
 Pillars of Hercules ; we have coast down the shore of the african 
 continent , and see the great breaker of the spanish Main foaming upon 
 the yellow sand ; we have pass the black ivory merchant with their 
 human cargoe ; we have face the terrible storm which blow ever around 
 the Cape de Boa Esperanza ; and finally , we have sail away out over the 
 great ocean beyond , amid the palm - clothe coral island , with the knowledge 
 that the realm of Prester John lie somewhere behind the golden haze 
 which shimmer upon the horizon . after such a flight as that we would 
 feel , as we come back to the Hampshire village and the dull reality 
 of country life , like wild bird who have be snare by the fowler and 
 clap into narrow cage . then it be that the word of my father , ' you 
 will find your wing some day and fly away , ' would come back to I , and 
 set up such a restlessness as all the wise word of Zachary Palmer could 
 not allay . 


 Chapter IV . of the strange fish that we catch at Spithead 

 one evening in the month of May 1685 , about the end of the first week 
 of the month , my friend Reuben Lockarby and I borrow Ned Marley 's 
 pleasure boat , and go a - fishing out of Langston Bay . at that time I 
 be close on one - and - twenty year of age , while my companion be one 
 year young . a great intimacy have spring up between we , found on 
 mutual esteem , for he be a little undergrown man be proud of my 
 strength and stature , while my melancholy and somewhat heavy spirit take 
 a pleasure in the energy and joviality which never desert he , and 
 in the wit which gleam as bright and as innocent as summer lightning 
 through all that he say . in person he be short and broad , round - face , 
 ruddy - cheek , and in truth a little inclined to be fat , though he would 
 never confess to more than a pleasing plumpness , which be hold , he 
 say , to be the acme of manly beauty amongst the ancient . the stern 
 test of common danger and mutual hardship entitle I to say that no 
 man could have desire a stauncher or more trusty comrade . as he be 
 destine to be with I in the sequel , it be but fitting that he should 
 have be at my side on that May evening which be the starting - point of 
 our adventure . 

 we pull out beyond the Warner Sands to a place half - way between they 
 and the Nab , where we usually find bass in plenty . there we cast the 
 heavy stone which serve we as an anchor overboard , and proceed to 
 set our line . the sun sink slowly behind a fog - bank have slash the 
 whole western sky with scarlet streak , against which the woode slope 
 of the Isle of Wight stand out vaporous and purple . a fresh breeze be 
 blow from the south - east , fleck the long green wave with crest 
 of foam , and fill our eye and lip with the smack of the salt spray . 
 over near St. Helen 's Point a King 's ship be make her way down the 
 channel , while a single large brig be tack about a quarter of a mile 
 or less from where we lay . so near be we that we could catch a glimpse 
 of the figure upon her deck as she heel over to the breeze , and could 
 bear the creaking of her yard and the flapping of her weather - stain 
 canvas as she prepare to go about . 

 ' look ye , Micah , ' say my companion , look up from his fishing - line . 
 ' that be a most weak - minded ship -- a ship which will make no way in the 
 world . see how she hang in the wind , neither keep on her course nor 
 tacking . she be a trimmer of the sea -- the Lord Halifax of the ocean . ' 

 ' why , there be something amiss with she , ' I reply , star across with 
 hand - shade eye . ' she yaw about as though there be no one at the 
 helm . her main - yard go aback ! now it be forward again ! the folk on her 
 deck seem to I to be either fight or dancing . up with the anchor , 
 Reuben , and let we pull to she . ' 

 ' up with the anchor and let we get out of her way , ' he answer , still 
 gaze at the stranger . ' why will you ever run that meddlesome head of 
 your into danger 's way ? she fly dutch colour , but who can say whence 
 she really come ? a pretty thing if we be snap up by a buccaneer 
 and sell in the Plantations ! ' 

 ' a buccaneer in the Solent ! ' cry I derisively . ' we shall be see the 
 black flag in Emsworth Creek next . but hark ! what be that ? ' 

 the crack of a musket sound from aboard the brig . then come a moment 's 
 silence and another musket shot ring out , follow by a chorus of shout 
 and cry . simultaneously the yard swing round into position , the sail 
 catch the breeze once more , and the vessel dart away on a course 
 which would take she past Bembridge Point out to the English Channel . as 
 she fly along her helm be put hard down , a puff of smoke shoot out 
 from her quarter , and a cannon ball come hop and splash over 
 the wave , pass within a hundred yard of where we lay . with this 
 farewell greeting she come up into the wind again and continue she 
 course to the southward . 

 ' heart o ' grace ! ' ejaculate Reuben in loose lipped astonishment . ' the 
 murder villain ! ' 

 ' I would to the Lord that King 's ship would snap they up ! ' cry I 
 savagely , for the attack be so unprovoked that it stir my bile . 
 ' what could the rogue have mean ? they be surely drunk or mad ! ' 

 ' pull at the anchor , man , pull at the anchor ! ' my companion shout , 
 spring up from the seat . ' I understand it ! pull at the anchor ! ' 

 ' what then ? ' I ask , help he to haul the great stone up , hand over 
 hand , until it come dripping over the side . 

 ' they be not fire at we , lad . they be aim at some one in the 
 water between we and they . pull , Micah ! put your back into it ! some poor 
 fellow may he drown . ' 

 ' why , I declare ! ' say I , look over my shoulder as I row , ' there 
 be his head upon the crest of a wave . easy , or we shall be over he ! two 
 more stroke and be ready to seize he ! keep up , friend ! there 's help at 
 hand ! ' 

 ' take help to those who need help ' say a voice out of the sea . ' zounds , 
 man , keep a guard on your oar ! I fear a pat from it very much more than 
 I do the water . ' 

 these word be deliver in so calm and self - possess a tone that all 
 concern for the swimmer be set at rest . draw in our oar we face 
 round to have a look at he . the drift of the boat have bring we so 
 close that he could have grasp the gunwale have he be so minded . 

 ' sapperment ! ' he cry in a peevish voice ; ' to think of my brother Nonus 
 serve I such a trick ! what would our blessed mother have say could 
 she have see it ? my whole kit go , to say nothing of my venture in 
 the voyage ! and now I have kick off a pair of new jack boot that 
 cost sixteen rix - dollar at Vanseddar 's at Amsterdam . I can not swim in 
 jack - boot , nor can I walk without they . ' 

 ' will not you come in out of the wet , sir ? ' ask Reuben , who could scarce 
 keep serious at the stranger 's appearance and address . a pair of long 
 arm shoot out of the water , and in a moment , with a lithe , snake - like 
 motion , the man wind himself into the boat and coil his great length 
 upon the stern - sheet . very lanky he be and very thin , with a craggy 
 hard face , clean - shaven and sunburned , with a thousand little wrinkle 
 intersect it in every direction . he have lose his hat , and his short 
 wiry hair , slightly fleck with grey , stand up in a bristle all over 
 his head . it be hard to guess at his age , but he could scarce have be 
 under his fiftieth year , though the ease with which he have board our 
 boat prove that his strength and energy be unimpaire . of all his 
 characteristic , however , nothing attract my attention so much as his 
 eye , which be almost cover by their droop lid , and yet look 
 out through the thin slit which remain with marvellous brightness and 
 keenness . a pass glance might give the idea that he be languid and 
 half asleep , but a close one would reveal those glitter , shift 
 line of light , and warn the prudent man not to trust too much to his 
 first impression . 

 ' I could swim to Portsmouth , ' he remark , rummage in the pocket of 
 his sodden jacket ; ' I could swim well - nigh anywhere . I once swam from 
 Gran on the Danube to Buda , while a hundred thousand janissary 
 dance with rage on the nether bank . I do , by the key of St. Peter ! 
 Wessenburg 's pandour would tell you whether Decimus Saxon could 
 swim . take my advice , young man , and always carry your tobacco in a 
 water - tight metal box . ' 

 as he speak he draw a flat box from his pocket , and several wooden 
 tube , which he screw together to form a long pipe . this he stuff 
 with tobacco , and have light it by mean of a flint and steel with a 
 piece of touch - paper from the inside of his box , he curl his leg 
 under he in eastern fashion , and settle down to enjoy a smoke . there 
 be something so peculiar about the whole incident , and so preposterous 
 about the man 's appearance and action , that we both break into a roar 
 of laughter , which last until for very exhaustion we be compel 
 to stop . he neither join in our merriment nor express offence at 
 it , but continue to suck away at his long wooden tube with a perfectly 
 stolid and impassive face , save that the half - cover eye glint 
 rapidly backwards and forwards from one to the other of we . 

 ' you will excuse our laughter , sir , ' I say at last ; ' my friend and I 
 be unused to such adventure , and be merry at the happy ending of it . 
 may we ask whom it be that we have pick up ? ' 

 ' Decimus Saxon be my name , ' the stranger answer ; ' I be the tenth child 
 of a worthy father , as the Latin imply . there be but nine betwixt I 
 and an inheritance . who know ? small - pox might do it , or the plague ! ' 

 ' we hear a shot aboard of the brig , ' say Reuben . 

 ' that be my brother Nonus shoot at I , ' the stranger observe , 
 shake his head sadly . 

 ' but there be a second shot . ' 

 ' ah , that be I shoot at my brother Nonus . ' 

 ' good lack ! ' I cry . ' I trust that thou hast do he no hurt . ' 

 ' but a flesh wound , at the most , ' he answer . ' I think it well to 
 come away , however , lest the affair grow into a quarrel . I be sure that 
 it be he who train the nine - pounder on I when I be in the water . 
 it come near enough to part my hair . he be always a good shot with a 
 falconet or a mortar - piece . he could not have be hurt , however , to get 
 down from the poop to the main - deck in the time . ' 

 there be a pause after this , while the stranger draw a long knife from 
 his belt , and clean out his pipe with it . Reuben and I take up our 
 oar , and have pull up our tangled fishing - line , which have be 
 stream behind the boat , we proceed to pull in towards the land . 

 ' the question now be , ' say the stranger , ' where we be to go to ? ' 

 ' we be go down Langston Bay , ' I answer . 

 ' oh , we be , be we ? ' he cry , in a mocking voice ; ' you be sure of it 
 eh ? you be certain we be not go to France ? we have a mast and sail 
 there , I see , and water in the beaker . all we want be a few fish , 
 which I hear be plentiful in these water , and we might make a push for 
 Barfleur . ' 

 ' we be go down Langston Bay , ' I repeat coldly . 

 ' you see might be right upon the water , ' he explain , with a smile 
 which break his whole face up into crinkle . ' I be an old soldier , a 
 tough fighting man , and you be two raw lad . I have a knife , and you 
 be unarmed . D'ye see the line of argument ? the question now be , where 
 be we to go ? ' 

 I face round upon he with the oar in my hand . ' you boast that you 
 could swim to Portsmouth , ' say I , ' and so you shall . into the water 
 with you , you sea - viper , or I will push you in as sure as my name be Micah 
 Clarke . ' 

 ' throw your knife down , or I will drive the boat hook through you , ' cry 
 Reuben , push it forward to within a few inch of the man 's throat . 

 ' sink I , but this be most commendable ! ' he say , sheathe his weapon , 
 and laugh softly to himself . ' I love to draw spirit out of the young 
 fellow . I be the steel , d'ye see , which knock the valour out of your 
 flint . a notable simile , and one in every way worthy of that most witty 
 of mankind , Samuel Butler . this , ' he continue , tap a protuberance 
 which I have remark over his chest , ' be not a natural deformity , but be 
 a copy of that inestimable " hudibra , " which combine the light touch 
 of Horace with the broad mirth of Catullus . heh ! what think you of the 
 criticism ? ' 

 ' give up that knife , ' say I sternly . 

 ' certainly , ' he reply , hand it over to I with a polite bow . ' be 
 there any other reasonable matter in which I can oblige ye ? I will 
 give up anything to do ye pleasure - save only my good name and soldierly 
 repute , or this same copy of " hudibra , " which , together with a Latin 
 treatise upon the usage of war , write by a fleming and print in 
 Liege in the Lowlands , I do ever bear in my bosom . ' 

 I sit down beside he with the knife in my hand . ' you pull both oar , ' 
 I say to Reuben ; ' I will keep guard over the fellow and see that he play 
 we no trick . I believe that you be right , and that he be nothing well 
 than a pirate . he shall be give over to the justice when we get to 
 Havant . ' 

 I think that our passenger 's coolness desert he for a moment , and 
 that a look of annoyance pass over his face . 

 ' wait a bit ! ' he say ; ' your name , I gather be Clarke , and your home be 
 Havant . be you a kinsman of Joseph Clarke , the old Roundhead of that 
 town ? ' 

 ' he be my father , ' I answer . 

 ' Hark to that , now ! ' he cry , with a throb of laughter ; ' I have a 
 trick of fall on my foot . look at this , lad ! look at this ! ' he draw 
 a packet of letter from his inside pocket , wrap in a bit of tarred 
 cloth , and open it he pick one out and place it upon my knee . 
 ' read ! ' say he , point at it with his long thin finger . 

 it be inscribe in large plain character , ' to Joseph Clarke , leather 
 merchant of Havant , by the hand of Master Decimus Saxon , part - owner of 
 the ship _ Providence _ , from Amsterdam to Portsmouth . ' at each side it 
 be seal with a massive red seal , and be additionally secure with a 
 broad band of silk . 

 ' I have three - and - twenty of they to deliver in the neighbourhood , ' he 
 remark . ' that show what folk think of Decimus Saxon . three - and - twenty 
 life and liberty be in my hand . ah , lad , invoice and bill of 
 lading be not do up in that fashion . it be not a cargo of flemish 
 skin that be come for the old man . the skin have good english heart 
 in they ; ay , and english sword in their fist to strike out for freedom 
 and for conscience . I risk my life in carry this letter to your 
 father ; and you , his son , threaten to hand I over to the justice ! for 
 shame ! for shame ! I blush for you ! ' 

 ' I do not know what you be hint at , ' I answer . ' you must speak 
 plainer if I be to understand you . ' 

 ' can we trust he ? ' he ask , jerk his head in the direction of 
 Reuben . 

 ' as myself . ' 

 ' how very charming ! ' say he , with something between a smile and 
 a sneer . ' David and Jonathan -- or , to be more classical and less 
 scriptural , Damon and Pythias -- eh ? ' these paper , then , be from the 
 faithful abroad , the exile in Holland , ye understand , who be think 
 of make a move and of come over to see King James in his own country 
 with their sword strap on their thigh . the letter be to those 
 from whom they expect sympathy , and notify when and where they will make 
 a landing . now , my dear lad , you will perceive that instead of my being 
 in your power , you be so completely in mine that it need but a word 
 from I to destroy your whole family . Decimus Saxon be staunch , though , 
 and that word shall never be speak . ' 

 ' if all this be true , ' say I , ' and if your mission be indeed as you 
 have say , why do you even now propose to make for France ? ' 

 ' aptly ask , and yet the answer be clear enough , ' he reply ; ' sweet 
 and ingenuous as be your face , I could not read upon they that ye 
 would prove to be whig and friend of the good old cause . Ye might have 
 take I to where exciseman or other would have want to pry and peep , 
 and so endanger my commission . well a voyage to France in an open 
 boat than that . ' 

 ' I will take you to my father , ' say I , after a few moment ' thought . 
 ' you can deliver your letter and make good your story to he . if you 
 be indeed a true man , you will meet with a warm welcome ; but should you 
 prove , as I shrewdly suspect , to be a rogue , you need expect no mercy . ' 

 ' bless the youngster ! he speak like the Lord High Chancellor of 
 England ! what be it the old man say ? 

           " he could not ope 
            his mouth , but out there fall a trope . " 

 but it should be a threat , which be the ware in which you be fond of 
 deal . 

           " he could not let 
            a minute pass without a threat . " 

 how be that , eh ? Waller himself could not have cap the couplet 
 neater . ' 

 all this time Reuben have be swing away at his oar , and we have make 
 our way into Langston Bay , down the sheltered water of which we be 
 rapidly shoot . sit in the sheet , I turn over in my mind 
 all that this waif have say . I have glance over his shoulder at the 
 address of some of the letter -- Steadman of Basingstoke , wintle 
 of Alresford , Fortescue of Bognor , all well - know leader of the 
 Dissenters . if they be what he represent they to be , it be no 
 exaggeration to say that he hold the fortune and fate of these man 
 entirely in his hand . government would be only too glad to have a valid 
 reason for strike hard at the man whom they fear . on the whole it 
 be well to tread carefully in the matter , so I restore our prisoner 's 
 knife to he , and treat he with increase consideration . it be 
 well - nigh dark when we beach the boat , and entirely so before we 
 reach Havant , which be fortunate , as the bootless and hatless state 
 of our dripping companion could not have fail to set tongue wag , 
 and perhaps to excite the inquiry of the authority . as it be , we 
 scarce meet a soul before reach my father 's door . 



 Chapter V. of the Man with the Drooping Lids 

 my mother and my father be sit in their high - back chair on 
 either side of the empty fireplace when we arrive , he smoke his 
 evening pipe of Oronooko , and she work at her embroidery . the moment 
 that I open the door the man whom I have bring step briskly in , 
 and bow to the old people begin to make glib excuse for the lateness 
 of his visit , and to explain the manner in which we have pick he up . I 
 could not help smile at the utter amazement express upon my mother 's 
 face as she gaze at he , for the loss of his jack - boot expose a pair 
 of interminable spindle - shank which be in ludicrous contrast to the 
 baggy low country knee - breech which surmount they . his tunic be 
 make of coarse sad - coloured kersey stuff with flat new gild brass 
 button , beneath which be a whitish callamanca vest edge with silver . 
 round the neck of his coat be a broad white collar after the Dutch 
 fashion , out of which his long scraggy throat shoot upwards with his 
 round head and bristle of hair balance upon the top of it , like the 
 turnip on a stick at which we use to throw at the fair . in this guise 
 he stand blink and wink in the glare of light , and patter out 
 his excuse with as many bow and scrape as Sir Peter Witling in the 
 play . I be in the act of follow he into the room , when Reuben 
 pluck at my sleeve to detain I . 

 ' Nay , I will not come in with you , Micah , ' say he ; ' there be mischief 
 likely to come of all this . my father may grumble over his beer jug , 
 but he be a Churchman and a Tantivy for all that . I would well keep out of 
 it . ' 

 ' you be right , ' I answer . ' there be no need for you to meddle in the 
 business . be mum as to all that you have hear . ' 

 ' Mum as a mouse , ' say he , and press my hand turn away into the 
 darkness . when I return to the sitting - room I find that my mother have 
 hurry into the kitchen , where the crackling of stick show that she 
 be busy in build a fire . Decimus Saxon be seat at the edge of 
 the iron - bind oak chest at the side of my father , and be watch he 
 keenly with his little twinkle eye , while the old man be fix 
 his horn glass and break the seal of the packet which his strange 
 visitor have just hand to he . 

 I see that when my father look at the signature at the end of the 
 long , closely write letter he give a whiff of surprise and sit 
 motionless for a moment or so star at it . then he turn to the 
 commencement and read it very carefully through , after which he turn 
 it over and read it again . clearly it bring no unwelcome news , for his 
 eye sparkle with joy when he look up from his reading , and more than 
 once he laugh aloud . finally he ask the man Saxon how it have come 
 into his possession , and whether he be aware of the content . 

 ' why , as to that , ' say the messenger , ' it be hand to I by no less 
 a person than Dicky Rumbold himself , and in the presence of other whom 
 it be not for I to name . as to the content , your own sense will tell 
 you that I would scarce risk my neck by bear a message without I 
 know what the message be . I be no chicken at the trade , sir . Cartels , 
 _ pronunciamientos _ , challenge , flag of truce , and proposal for 
 waffenstillstand , as the Deutschers call it -- they've all go through 
 my hand , and never one , go awry . ' 

 ' indeed ! ' quoth my father . ' you be yourself one of the faithful ? ' 

 ' I trust that I be one of those who be on the narrow and thorny track , ' 
 say he , speak through his nose , as be the habit of the extreme 
 sectary . 

 ' a track upon which no prelate can guide we , ' say my father . 

 ' where man be nought and the Lord be all , ' rejoin Saxon . 

 ' good ! good ! ' cry my father . ' micah , you shall take this worthy man 
 to my room , and see that he hath dry linen , and my second - good suit of 
 Utrecht velvet . it may serve until his own be dry . my boot , too , 
 may perchance be useful -- my rid one of untanned leather . a hat with 
 silver braid hang above they in the cupboard . see that he lack for 
 nothing which the house can furnish . supper will be ready when he hath 
 change his attire . I beg that you will go at once , good Master Saxon , 
 lest you take a chill . ' 

 ' there be but one thing that we have omit , ' say our visitor , 
 solemnly rise up from his chair and clasp his long nervous hand 
 together . ' let we delay no long to send up a word of praise to the 
 Almighty for his manifold blessing , and for the mercy wherewith he 
 pluck I and my letter out of the deep , even as Jonah be save from 
 the violence of the wicked one who hurl he overboard , and it may be 
 fire falconet at he , though we be not so informed in Holy Writ . let 
 we pray , my friend ! ' then in a high - toned chant voice he offer up 
 a long prayer of thanksgiving , wind up with a petition for grace and 
 enlightenment for the house and all its inmate . have conclude by a 
 sonorous aman , he at last suffer himself to be lead upstairs ; while 
 my mother , who have slip in and listen with much edification to his 
 word , hurry away to prepare he a bumper of green usquebaugh with ten 
 drop of Daffy 's Elixir therein , which be her sovereign recipe against 
 the effect of a soaking . there be no event in life , from a christening 
 to a marriage , but have some appropriate food or drink in my mother 's 
 vocabulary , and no ailment for which she have not some pleasant cure in 
 her well - stock cupboard . 

 Master Decimus Saxon in my father 's black Utrecht velvet and untanne 
 rid boot look a very different man to the bedraggle castaway who 
 have crawl like a conger eel into our fishing - boat . it seem as if he 
 have cast off his manner with his raiment , for he behave to my mother 
 during supper with an air of demure gallantry which sit upon he well 
 than the pert and flippant carriage which he have show towards we in the 
 boat . truth to say , if he be now more reserved , there be a very good 
 reason for it , for he play such havoc amongst the eatable that there 
 be little time for talk . at last , after pass from the round of cold 
 beef to a capon pasty , and top up with a two - pound perch , wash 
 down by a great jug of ale , he smile upon we all and tell we that his 
 fleshly necessity be satisfied for the nonce . ' it be my rule , ' he 
 remark , ' to obey the wise precept which advise a man to rise from 
 table feeling that he could yet eat as much as he have partake of . ' 

 ' I gather from your word , sir , that you have yourself see hard 
 service , ' my father remark when the board have be clear and my 
 mother have retire for the night . 

 ' I be an old fighting man , ' our visitor answer , screw his pipe 
 together , ' a lean old dog of the hold - fast breed . this body of mine 
 bear the mark of many a cut and slash receive for the most part in 
 the service of the protestant faith , though some few be catch for the 
 sake of Christendom in general when war against the Turk . there be 
 blood of mine , sir , spot all over the map of Europe . some of it , I 
 confess , be spill in no public cause , but for the protection of mine 
 own honour in the private duello or holmgang , as it be call among the 
 nation of the north . it be necessary that a cavaliero of fortune , be 
 for the great part a stranger in a strange land , should be somewhat 
 nice in matter of the sort , since he stand , as it be , as the 
 representative of his country , whose good name should be more dear to 
 he than his own . ' 

 ' your weapon on such occasion be , I suppose , the sword ? ' my father 
 ask , shift uneasily in his seat , as he would do when his old 
 instinct be wake up . 

 ' Broadsword , rapier , Toledo , spontoon , battle - axe , pike or half - pike , 
 morgenstiern , and halbert . I speak with all due modesty , but with 
 backsword , sword and dagger , sword and buckler , single falchion , case of 
 falchion , or any other such exercise , I will hold mine own against any 
 man that ever wear neat 's leather , save only my eld brother Quartus . ' 

 ' by my faith , ' say my father with his eye shin , ' be I twenty 
 year young I should have at you ! my backsword play hath be think 
 well of by stout man of war . God forgive I that my heart should still 
 turn to such vanity . ' 

 ' I have hear godly man speak well of it , ' remark Saxon . ' Master 
 Richard Rumbold himself spake of your deed of arm to the Duke of 
 Argyle . be there not a Scotsman , one Storr or Stour ? ' 

 ' ay , ay ! Storr of Drumlithie . I cut he nigh to the saddle - bow in a 
 skirmish on the eve of Dunbar . so Dicky Rumbold have not forget it , 
 eh ? he be a hard one both at pray and at fight . we have ride 
 knee to knee in the field , and we have seek truth together in the 
 chamber . so , Dick will be in harness once again ! he could not be still 
 if a blow be to be strike for the trample faith . if the tide of war 
 set in this direction , I too -- who know ? who know ? ' 

 ' and here be a stout man - at - arm , ' say Saxon , pass his hand down my 
 arm . ' he hath thew and sinew , and can use proud word too upon occasion , 
 as I have good cause to know , even in our short acquaintance . might it 
 not be that he too should strike in this quarrel ? ' 

 ' we shall discuss it , ' my father answer , look thoughtfully at I 
 from under his heavy brow . ' but I pray you , friend Saxon , to give we 
 some further account upon these matter . my son Micah , as I understand , 
 hath pick you out of the wave . how come you there ? ' 

 Decimus Saxon puff at his pipe for a minute or more in silence , as one 
 who be marshal fact each in its due order . 

 ' it come about in this wise , ' he say at last . ' when John of Poland 
 chase the Turk from the gate of Vienna , peace break out in the 
 Principalities , and many a wandering cavaliero like myself find his 
 occupation go . there be no war wag save only some petty italian 
 skirmish , in which a soldier could scarce expect to reap either dollar 
 or repute , so I wander across the continent , much cast down at the 
 strange peace which prevail in every quarter . at last , however , on 
 reach the Lowlands , I chance to hear that the _ Providence _ , own 
 and command by my two brother , Nonus and Quartus , be about to start 
 from Amsterdam for an adventure to the Guinea coast . I propose to they 
 that I should join they , and be accordingly take into partnership on 
 condition that I pay one - third of the cost of the cargo . while wait 
 at the port I chance to come across some of the exile , who , have 
 hear of my devotion to the protestant cause , bring I to the Duke and 
 to Master Rumbold , who commit these letter to my charge . this make 
 it clear how they come into my possession . ' 

 ' but not how you and they come into the water , ' my father suggest . 

 ' why , that be but the veri chance , ' the adventurer answer with 
 some little confusion of manner . ' it be the _ fortuna belli _ , or more 
 properly _ paci _ . I have ask my brother to put into Portsmouth that I 
 might get rid of these letter , on which they reply in a boorish and 
 unmannerly fashion that they be still wait for the thousand guineas 
 which represent my share of the venture . to this I answer with 
 brotherly familiarity that it be a small thing , and should be pay 
 for out of the profit of our enterprise . their reply be I that I have 
 promise to pay the money down , and that money down they must have . I 
 then proceed to prove , both by the Aristotelian and by the platonic 
 or deductive method , that have no guineas in my possession it be 
 impossible for I to produce a thousand of they , at the same time 
 point out that the association of an honest man in the business be 
 in itself an ample return for the money , since their own reputation have 
 be somewhat blow on . I far offer in the same frank and friendly 
 spirit to meet either of they with sword or with pistol , a proposal 
 which should have satisfy any honour - love Cavaliero . their base 
 mercantile soul prompt they , however , to catch up two musket , one of 
 which Nonus discharge at I , and it be likely that Quartus would have 
 follow suit have I not pluck the gun from his hand and unload it to 
 prevent further mischief . in unload it I fear that one of the slug 
 blow a hole in brother Nonus . see that there be a chance of further 
 disagreement aboard the vessel , I at once decide to leave she , in 
 do which I be force to kick off my beautiful jack - boot , which be 
 say by Vanseddars himself to be he fine pair that ever go out of 
 his shop , square - toe , double - sole -- alas ! alas ! ' 

 ' strange that you should have be pick up by the son of the very man 
 to whom you have a letter . ' 

 ' the working of Providence , ' Saxon answer . ' I have two - and - twenty 
 other letter which must all be deliver by hand . if you will permit I 
 to use your house for a while , I shall make it my headquarters . ' 

 ' use it as though it be your own , ' say my father . 

 ' your most grateful servant , sir , ' he cry , jump up and bow 
 with his hand over his heart . ' this be indeed a haven of rest after the 
 ungodly and profane company of my brother . shall we then put up a hymn , 
 and retire from the business of the day ? ' 

 my father willingly agree , and we sing ' oh , happy land ! ' after which 
 our visitor follow I to his room , bear with he the unfinished 
 bottle of usquebaugh which my mother have leave on the table . he take it 
 with he , he explain , as a precaution against persian ague , contract 
 while battle against the Ottoman , and liable to recur at strange 
 moment . I leave he in our good spare bedroom , and return to my 
 father , who be still seat , heavy with thought , in his old corner . 

 ' what think you of my find , Dad ? ' I ask . 

 ' a man of part and of piety , ' he answer ; ' but in truth he have bring 
 I news so much after my heart , that he could not be unwelcome be he 
 the Pope of Rome . ' 

 ' what news , then ? ' 

 ' this , this ! ' he cry joyously , pluck the letter out of his bosom . 
 ' I will read it to you , lad . Nay , perhaps I have good sleep the night 
 upon it , and read it to - morrow when our head be clear . may the Lord 
 guide my path , and confound the tyrant ! pray for light , boy , for my life 
 and yours may be equally at stake . ' 




 Chapter VI . of the Letter that come from the Lowlands 

 in the morning I be up betime , and go forthwith , after the country 
 fashion , to our quest 's room to see if there be aught in which I could 
 serve he . on push at his door , I find that it be fasten , which 
 surprise I the more as I know that there be neither key nor bolt upon 
 the inside . on my press against it , however , it begin to yield , and 
 I could then see that a heavy chest which be use to stand near the 
 window have be pull round in order to shut out any intrusion . this 
 precaution , take under my father 's roof , as though he be in a den of 
 thief , anger I , and I give a butt with my shoulder which clear 
 the box out of the way , and enable I to enter the room . 

 the man Saxon be sit up in bed , star about he as though he 
 be not very certain for the moment where he be . he have tie a white 
 kerchief round his head by way of night bonnet , and his hard - visage , 
 clean - shaven face , look out through this , together with his bony 
 figure , give he some resemblance to a gigantic old woman . the bottle 
 of usquebaugh stand empty by his bedside . clearly his fear have be 
 realise , and he have have an attack of the persian ague . 

 ' ah , my young friend ! ' he say at last . ' be it , then , the custom of this 
 part of the country to carry your visitor 's room by storm or escalado 
 in the early hour of the morning ? ' 

 ' be it the custom , ' I answer sternly , ' to barricade up your door when 
 you be sleep under the roof - tree of an honest man ? what do you 
 fear , that you should take such a precaution ? ' 

 ' Nay , you be indeed a spitfire , ' he reply , sink back upon the 
 pillow , and draw the clothe round he , ' a feuerkopf as the Germans 
 call it , or sometimes tollkopf , which in its literal significance 
 meaneth a fool 's head . your father be , as I have hear , a strong and a 
 fierce man when the blood of youth run in his vein ; but you , I should 
 judge , be in no way behind he . know , then , that the bearer of paper 
 of import , _ documenta preciosa sed periculosa _ , be bind to leave 
 nought to chance , but to guard in every way the charge which hath be 
 commit to he . true it be that I be in the house of an honest man , 
 but I know not who may come or who may go during the hour of the night . 
 indeed , for the matter of that -- but enough be say . I shall be with you 
 anon . ' 

 ' your clothe be dry and be ready for you , ' I remark . 

 ' enough ! enough ! ' he answer . ' I have no quarrel with the suit which 
 your father have lend I . it may be that I have be use to well , but 
 they will serve my turn . the camp be not the court . ' 

 it be evident to I that my father 's suit be infinitely well , both 
 in texture and material , than that which our visitor have bring 
 with he . as he have withdraw his head , however , entirely beneath the 
 bedclothe , there be nothing more to be say , so I descend to the 
 low room , where I find toy father busily engage fasten a new 
 buckle to his sword - belt while my mother and the maid be prepare the 
 morning meal . 

 ' come into the yard with I , Micah , ' quoth my father ; ' I would have 
 a word with you . ' the workman have not yet come to their work , so we 
 stroll out into the sweet morning air , and seat ourselves on the low 
 stone bankment on which the skin be dress . 

 ' I have be out here this morning try my hand at the broadsword 
 exercise , ' say he ; ' I find that I be as quick as ever on a thrust , but 
 my cut be sadly stiff . I might be of use at a pinch , but , alas ! I 
 be not the same swordsman who lead the left troop of the fine horse 
 regiment that ever follow a kettledrum . the Lord hath give , and the 
 Lord hath take away ! yet , if I be old and worn , there be the fruit of 
 my loin to stand in my place and to wield the same sword in the same 
 cause . you shall go in my place , Micah . ' 

 ' go ! go whither ? ' 

 ' hush , lad , and listen ! let not your mother know too much , for the 
 heart of woman be soft . when Abraham offer up his eld bear , I 
 trow that he say little to Sarah on the matter . here be the letter . 
 know you who this Dicky Rumbold be ? ' 

 ' surely I have hear you speak of he as an old companion of your . ' 

 ' the same -- a staunch man and true . so faithful be he -- faithful even to 
 slay -- that when the army of the righteous disperse , he do not lay 
 aside his zeal with his buff - coat . he take to business as a maltster at 
 Hoddesdon , and in his house be plan the famous Rye House Plot , in 
 which so many good man be involve . ' 

 ' be it not a foul assassination plot ? ' I ask . 

 ' Nay , nay , be not lead away by term ! it be a vile invention of the 
 malignant that these man plan assassination . what they would do they 
 purpose do in broad daylight , thirty of they against fifty of the 
 Royal Guard , when Charles and James pass on their way to Newmarket . if 
 the royal brother get pistol - bullet or sword - stab , it would be in open 
 fight , and at the risk of their attacker . it be give and take , and no 
 murder . ' 

 he pause and look inquiringly at I ; but I could not truthfully 
 say that I be satisfied , for an attack upon the life of unarmed and 
 unsuspecting man , even though surround by a bodyguard , could not , to 
 my mind , be justify . 

 ' when the plot fail , ' my father continue , ' Rumbold have to fly for his 
 life , but he succeed in give his pursuer the slip and in make his 
 way to the Lowlands . there he find that many enemy of the Government 
 have gather together . repeat message from England , especially from 
 the western county and from London , assure they that if they would 
 but attempt an invasion they might rely upon help both in man and in 
 money . they be , however , at fault for some time for want of a leader 
 of sufficient weight to carry through so large a project ; but now 
 at last they have one , who be the good that could have be single 
 out -- none other than the well - beloved Protestant chieftain James , Duke 
 of Monnmouth , son of Charles II . ' 

 ' illegitimate son , ' I remark . 

 ' that may or may not be . there be those who say that Lucy Walters be 
 a lawful wife . Bastard or no , he hold the sound principle of the true 
 Church , and he be belove by the people . let he appear in the West , and 
 soldier will rise up like the flower in the spring time . ' 

 he pause , and lead I away to the farth end of the yard , for the 
 workman have begin to arrive and to cluster round the dip trough . 

 ' Monmouth be come over , ' he continue , ' and he expect every brave 
 protestant man to rally to his standard . the Duke of Argyle be to 
 command a separate expedition , which will set the Highlands of Scotland 
 in a blaze . between they they hope to bring the persecutor of the 
 faithful on his knee . but I hear the voice of the man Saxon , and I must 
 not let he say that I have treat he in a churlish fashion . here be 
 the letter , lad . read it with care , and remember that when brave man be 
 strive for their right it be fitting that one of the old rebel house 
 of Clarke should be among they . ' 

 I take the letter , and wander off into the field , I settle myself 
 under a convenient tree , and set myself to read it . this yellow sheet 
 which I now hold in my hand be the very one which be bring by Decimus 
 Saxon , and read by I that bright May morning under the hawthorn shade . 
 I give it to you as it stand ; 


 ' to my friend and companion in the cause of the Lord , Joseph 
 clarke.--know , friend , that aid and delivery be come upon Israel , 
 and that the wicked king and those who uphold he shall be smite and 
 entirely cast down , until their place in the land shall know they no 
 more . Hasten , then , to testify to thy own faith , that in the day of 
 trouble ye be not find want . 

 ' it have chance from time to time that many of the suffering Church , 
 both from our own land and from among the scot , have assemble in this 
 good Lutheran town of Amsterdam , until enough be gather together to 
 take a good work in hand . for amongst our own folk there be my 
 Lord Grey of Wark , Wade , Dare of Taunton , Ayloffe , Holmes , Hollis , 
 Goodenough , and other whom thou shalt know . of the scot there be the 
 Duke of Argyle , who have suffer sorely for the Covenant , Sir Patrick 
 Hume , Fletcher of Saltoun , Sir John Cochrane , Dr. Ferguson , Major 
 Elphinstone , and other . to these we would fain have add Locke and old 
 Hal Ludlow , but they be , as those of the Laodicean Church , neither cold 
 nor warm . 

 ' it have now come to pass , however , that Monmouth , who have long live in 
 dalliance with the midianitish woman know by the name of Wentworth , have 
 at last turn he to high thing , and have consent to make a bid for 
 the crown . it be find that the scot prefer to follow a chieftain 
 of their own , and it have therefore be determine that Argyle -- M'Callum 
 More , as the breechless savage of Inverary call he -- shall command a 
 separate expedition land upon the western coast of Scotland . there 
 he hop to raise five thousand Campbells , and to be join by all the 
 Covenanters and Western Whigs , man who would make troop of the old 
 breed have they but God - fear officer with an experience of the chance 
 of field and the usage of war . with such a following he should be able 
 to hold Glasgow , and to draw away the King 's force to the north . Ayloffe 
 and I go with Argyle . it be likely that our foot may be upon scottish 
 ground before thy eye read these word . 

 ' the strong expedition start with Monmouth , and land at a fitting 
 place in the West , where we be assure that we have many friend . I 
 can not name the spot lest this letter miscarry , but thou shalt hear 
 anon . I have write to all good man along the coast , bid they to 
 be prepare to support the rising . the King be weak , and hat by the 
 great part of his subject . it doth but need one good stroke to bring 
 his crown in the dust . Monmouth will start in a few week , when his 
 equipment be finish and the weather favourable . if thou canst come , 
 mine old comrade , I know well that thou wilt need no bidding of mine to 
 bring thee to our banner . should perchance a peaceful life and waning 
 strength forbid thy attendance , I trust that thou wilt wrestle for we 
 in prayer , even as the holy prophet of old ; and perchance , since I hear 
 that thou hast prosper accord to the thing of this world , thou 
 mayst be able to fit out a pikeman or two , or to send a gift towards the 
 military chest , which will be none too plentifully line . we trust 
 not to gold , but to steel and to our own good cause , yet gold will be 
 welcome none the less . should we fall , we fall like man and Christians . 
 should we succeed , we shall see how the perjured James , the persecutor 
 of the saint with the heart like a nether millstone , the man who smile 
 when the thumb of the faithful be wrench out of their socket at 
 Edinburgh -- we shall see how manfully he can bear adversity when it fall 
 to his lot . may the hand of the Almighty be over we ! 

 ' I know little of the bearer of this , save that he profess to be of 
 the elect . shouldst thou go to Monmouth 's camp , see that thou take he 
 with thee , for I hear that he hath have good experience in the german , 
 Swedish , and Otttoman wars.--yours in the faith of Christ , Richard 
 Rumbold . 

 ' present my service to thy spouse . let she read Timothy chapter two , 
 ninth to fifteenth verse . ' 


 this long letter I read very carefully , and then put it in my pocket 
 return indoor to my breakfast . my father look at I , as I enter , 
 with question eye , but I have no answer to return he , for my own 
 mind be clouded and uncertain . 

 that day Decimus Saxon leave we , intend to make a round of the country 
 and to deliver his letter , but promise to be back again ere long . we 
 have a small mishap ere he go , for as we be talk of his journey 
 my brother Hosea must need start play with my father 's powder - flask , 
 which in some way go off with a sudden fluff , spatter the wall 
 with fragment of metal . so unexpected and loud be the explosion , 
 that both my father and I spring to our foot ; but Saxon , whose back 
 be turn to my brother , sit four - square in his chair without a glance 
 behind he or a shade of change in his rugged face . as luck would have 
 it , no one be injure , not even Hosea , but the incident make I think 
 more highly of our new acquaintance . as he start off down the village 
 street , his long stringy figure and strange gnarl visage , with my 
 father 's silver - braid hat cock over his eye , attract rather 
 more attention than I care to see , consider the importance of the 
 missive which he bear , and the certainty of their discovery should he 
 be arrest as a masterless man . fortunately , however , the curiosity 
 of the country folk do but lead they to cluster round their door and 
 window , star open - eye , while he , please at the attention which 
 he excite , stride along with his head in the air and a cudgel of 
 mine twirl in his hand . he have leave golden opinion behind he . my 
 father 's good wish have be win by his piety and by the sacrifice 
 which he claim to have make for the faith . my mother he have teach how 
 wimple be wear amongst the Serbs , and have also demonstrate to she a 
 new method of cure marigold in use in some part of Lithuania . for 
 myself , I confess that I retain a vague distrust of the man , and 
 be determined to avoid put faith in he more than be needful . at 
 present , however , we have no choice hut to treat he as an ambassador 
 from friend . 

 and I ? what be I to do ? should I follow my father 's wish , and draw 
 my maiden sword on behalf of the insurgent , or should I stand aside and 
 see how event shape themselves ? it be more fitting that I should 
 go than he . but , on the other hand , I be no keen religious zealot . 
 Papistry , Church , Dissent , I believe that there be good in all of 
 they , but that not one be worth the spilling of human blood . James 
 might be a perjurer and a villain , but he be , as far as I could see , 
 the rightful king of England , and no tale of secret marriage or black 
 box could alter the fact that his rival be apparently an illegitimate 
 son , and as such ineligible to the throne . who could say what evil act 
 upon the part of a monarch justify his people in set he aside ? 
 who be the judge in such a case ? yet , on the other hand , the man have 
 notoriously break his own pledge , and that surely should absolve 
 his subject from their allegiance . it be a weighty question for a 
 country - breed lad to have to settle , and yet settle it must be , and that 
 speedily . I take up my hat and wander away down the village street , 
 turn the matter over in my head . 

 but it be no easy thing for I to think seriously of anything in the 
 hamlet ; for I be in some way , my dear child , though I say it myself , 
 a favourite with the young and with the old , so that I could not walk 
 ten pace without some greeting or address . there be my own brother 
 trail behind I , Baker Mitford 's child tug at my skirt , and 
 the millwright 's two little maiden one on either hand . then , when I have 
 persuade these young romper to leave I , out come Dame Fullarton the 
 widow , with a sad tale about how her grindstone have fall out of its 
 frame , and neither she nor her household could lift it in again . that 
 matter I set straight and proceed on my way ; but I could not pass the 
 sign of the Wheatsheaf without John Lockarby , Reuben 's father , plunge 
 out at I and insist upon my come in with he for a morning cup . 

 ' the good glass of mead in the countryside , and brew under my own 
 roof , ' say he proudly , as he pour it into the flagon . ' why , bless 
 you , master Micah , a man with a frame like yours want store o ' good 
 malt to keep it up wi ' . ' 

 ' and malt like this be worthy of a good frame to contain it , ' quoth 
 Reuben , who be at work among the flask . 

 ' what think ye , Micah ? ' say the landlord . ' there be the squire o ' 
 Milton over here yester morning wi ' Johnny Ferneley o ' the Bank side , 
 and they will have it that there be a man in Fareham who could wrestle 
 you , the good of three , and find your own grip , for a good round stake . ' 

 ' tut ! tut ! ' I answer ; ' you would have I like a prize mastiff , show 
 my tooth to the whole countryside . what matter if the man can throw I , 
 or I he ? ' 

 ' what matter ? why , the honour of Havant , ' quoth he . ' be that no matter ? 
 but you be right , ' he continue , drain off his horn . ' what be all 
 this village life with its small success to such as you ? you be as 
 much out of your place as a vintage wine at a harvest supper . the whole 
 of broad England , and not the street of Havant , be the fit stage for 
 a man of your kidney . what have you to do with the beating of skin and 
 the tanning of leather ? ' 

 ' my father would have you go forth as a knight - errant , Micah , ' say 
 Reuben , laugh . ' you might chance to get your own skin beat and your 
 own leather tan . ' 

 ' who ever know so long a tongue in so short a body ? ' cry the 
 innkeeper . ' but in good sooth , Master Micah , I be in sober earnest when 
 I say that you be indeed waste the year of your youth , when life be 
 sparkling and clear , and that you will regret it when you have come to 
 the flat and flavourless dreg of old age . ' 

 ' there speak the brewer , ' say Reuben ; ' but indeed , Micah , my father be 
 right , for all that he hath such a hops - and - water manner of put it . ' 

 ' I will think over it , ' I answer , and with a nod to the kindly couple 
 proceed on my way . 

 Zachariah Palmer be plan a plank as I pass . look up he bid I 
 good - morrow . 

 ' I have a book for you , lad , ' he say . 

 ' I have but now finish the " Comus , " ' I answer , for he have lend I 
 John Milton 's poem . ' but what be this new book , daddy ? ' 

 ' it be by the learn Locke , and treateth of state and statecraft . it 
 be but a small thing , but if wisdom could show in the scale it would 
 weigh down many a library . you shall have it when I have finish it , 
 to - morrow mayhap or the day after . a good man be Master Locke . be he not 
 at this moment a wanderer in the Lowlands , rather than bow his knee to 
 what his conscience approve not of ? ' 

 ' there be many good man among the exile , be there not ? ' say I. 

 ' the pick of the country , ' he answer . ' Ill fare the land that drive 
 the high and brave of its citizen away from it . the day be come , 
 I fear , when every man will have to choose betwixt his belief and his 
 freedom . I be an old man , Micah boy , but I may live long enough to see 
 strange thing in this once protestant kingdom . ' 

 ' but if these exile have their way , ' I object , ' they would place 
 Monmouth upon the throne , and so unjustly alter the succession . ' 

 ' Nay , nay , ' old Zachary answer , lay down his plane . ' if they use 
 Monmouth 's name , it be but to strengthen their cause , and to show that 
 they have a leader of repute . be James drive from the throne , the 
 Commons of England in Parliament assemble would be call upon to 
 name his successor . there be man at Monmouth 's back who would not stir 
 unless this be so . ' 

 ' then , daddy , ' say I , ' since I can trust you , and since you will tell 
 I what you do really think , would it be well , if Monmouth 's standard be 
 raise , that I should join it ? ' 

 the carpenter stroke his white beard and ponder for a while . ' it be a 
 pregnant question , ' he say at last , ' and yet methink that there be but 
 one answer to it , especially for your father 's son . should an end be put 
 to James 's rule , it be not too late to preserve the nation in its old 
 faith ; but if the disease be allow to spread , it may be that even the 
 tyrant 's removal would not prevent his evil seed from sprout . I hold , 
 therefore , that should the exile make such an attempt , it be the duty 
 of every man who value liberty of conscience to rally round they . and 
 you , my son , the pride of the village , what well use could you make 
 of your strength than to devote it to help to relieve your country 
 of this insupportable yoke ? it be treasonable and dangerous 
 counsel -- counsel which might lead to a short shrift and a bloody 
 death -- but , as the Lord liveth , if you be child of mine I should say 
 the same . ' 

 so speak the old carpenter with a voice which tremble with earnestness , 
 and go to work upon his plank once more , while I , with a few word of 
 gratitude , go on my way ponder over what he have say to I . I have 
 not go far , however , before the hoarse voice of Solomon Sprent break 
 in upon my meditation . 

 ' hoy there ! ahoy ! ' he bellow , though his mouth be but a few yard 
 from my ear . ' would ye come across my hawse without slack weigh ? clew 
 up , d'ye see , clew up ! ' 

 ' why , Captain , ' I say , ' I do not see you . I be lose in thought . ' 

 ' all adrift and without look - out , ' quoth he , push his way through 
 the break in the garden hedge . ' Odd 's niggar , man ! friend be not 
 so plentiful , d'ye see , that ye need pass them by without a dip o ' the 
 ensign . so help I , if I have have a barker I would have fire a shot across 
 your bow . ' 

 ' no offence , Captain , ' say I , for the veteran appear to be nettle ; 
 ' I have much to think of this morning . ' 

 ' and so have I , mate , ' he answer , in a soft voice . ' what think ye of 
 my rig , eh ? ' he turn himself slowly round in the sunlight as he speak , 
 and I perceive that he be dress with unusual care . he have a blue 
 suit of broadcloth trim with eight row of button , and breech of 
 the same material with great bunch of ribbon at the knee . his vest 
 be of light blue pick out with anchor in silver , and edge with 
 a finger' - breadth of lace . his boot be so wide that he might have have 
 his foot in a bucket , and he wear a cutlass at his side suspend from a 
 buff belt , which pass over his right shoulder . 

 ' I have have a new coat o ' paint all over , ' say he , with a wink . 
 ' Carramba ! the old ship be water - tight yet . what would ye say , now , be 
 I about to sle my hawser over a little scow , and take she in tow ? ' 

 ' a cow ! ' I cry . 

 ' a cow ! what d'ye take I for ? a wench , man , and as tight a little craft 
 as ever sail into the port of wedlock . ' 

 ' I have hear no well news for many a long day , ' say I ; ' I do not 
 even know that you be betroth . when thou be the wedding to be ? ' 

 ' go slow , friend -- go slow , and heave your lead - line ! you have get out 
 of your channel , and be in shoal water . I never say as how I be 
 betroth . ' 

 ' what then ? ' I ask . 

 ' I be get up anchor now , to run down to she and summon she . look 
 ye , lad , ' he continue , pluck off his cap and scratch his 
 ragged lock ; ' I have have to do wi ' wench enow from the Levant to the 
 Antilles -- wench such as a sailorman meet , who be all paint and 
 pocket . it be but the heaving of a hand grenade , and they strike their 
 colour . this be a craft of another guess build , and unless I steer wi ' 
 care she may put one in between wind and water before I so much as 
 know that I be engaged . what think ye , heh ? should I lay myself boldly 
 alongside , d'ye see , and ply she with small arm , or should I work 
 myself clear and try a long range action ? I be none of your slippery , 
 grease - tongue , long - shore lawyer , but if so be as she be willing for a 
 mate , I will stand by she in wind and weather while my plank hold out . ' 

 ' I can scarce give advice in such a case , ' say I , ' for my experience be 
 less than your . I should say though that you have well speak to she from 
 your heart , in plain sailor language . ' 

 ' aye , aye , she can take it or leave it . Phoebe Dawson it be , the sister 
 of the blacksmith . let we work back and have a drop of the right nant 
 before we go . I have an anker newly come , which never pay the King a 
 groat . ' 

 ' Nay , you have well leave it alone , ' I answer . 

 ' say you so ? well , mayhap you be right . throw off your mooring , then , 
 and clap on sail , for we must go . ' 

 ' but I be not concern , ' say I. 

 ' not concern ! Not-- ' he be too much overcome to go on , and could 
 but look at I with a face full of reproach . ' I think well of you , 
 Micah . would you let this crazy old hulk go into action , and not stand 
 by to fire a broadside ? ' 

 ' what would you have I do then ? ' 

 ' why , I would have you help I as the occasion may arise . if I start 
 to board she , I would have you work across the bow so as to rake 
 she . should I range , up on the larboard quarter , do you lie , on the 
 starboard . if I get cripple , do you draw her fire until I refit . what , 
 man , you would not desert I ! ' 

 the old seaman 's trope and maritime conceit be not always 
 intelligible to I , but it be clear that he have set his heart upon my 
 accompany he , which I be equally determined not to do . at last 
 by much reasoning I make he understand that my presence would be more 
 hindrance than help , and would probably be fatal to his chance of 
 success . 

 ' well , well , ' he grumble at last , ' I have be concern in no such 
 expedition before . an ' it be the custom for single ship to engage , I will 
 stand to it alone . you shall come with I as consort , though , and stand 
 to and fro in the offing , or sink I if I stir a step . ' 

 my mind be full of my father 's plan and of the course which lay 
 before I . there seem to be no choice , however , as old Solomon be 
 in dead earnest , but to lay the matter aside for the moment and see the 
 upshot of this adventure . 

 ' Mind , Solomon , ' say I , ' I do not cross the threshold . ' 

 ' aye , aye , mate . you can please yourself . we have to beat up against the 
 wind all the way . she be on the look - out , for I hail her yesternight , 
 and let she know as how I should bear down on she about seven bell of 
 the morning watch . ' 

 I be think as we trudge down the road that Phoebe would need to be 
 learn in sea term to make out the old man 's meaning , when he pull 
 up short and clap his hand to his pocket . 

 ' Zounds ! ' he cry , ' I have forget to bring a pistol . ' 

 ' in Heaven 's name ! ' I say in amazement , ' what could you want with a 
 pistol ? ' 

 ' why , to make signal with , ' say he . ' odd I that I should have forget 
 it ! how be one 's consort to know what be go forward when the flagship 
 carry no artillery ? have the lass be kind I should have fire one 
 gun , that you might know it . ' 

 ' why , ' I answer , ' if you come not out I shall judge that all be well . 
 if thing go amiss I shall see you soon . ' 

 ' aye -- or stay ! I will hoist a white jack at the port - hole . a white jack 
 mean that she hath haul down her colour . Nombre de Dios , when I 
 be a powder - boy in the old ship _ Lion _ , the day that we engage the 
 _ Spiritus Sanctus _ of two tier o ' gun -- the first time that ever I hear 
 the screech of ball -- my heart never thump as it do now . what say ye 
 if we run back with a fair wind and broach that anker of Nants ? ' 

 ' Nay , stand to it , man , ' say I ; for by this time , we have come to the 
 ivy - clothe cottage behind which be the village smithy . ' what , Solomon ! 
 an english seaman never fear a foe , either with petticoat or without 
 they . ' 

 ' no , curse I if he do ! ' quoth Solomon , square his shoulder , ' never 
 a one , Don , Devil , or Dutchman ; so here go for she ! ' so say he make 
 his way into the cottage , leave I stand by the garden wicket , half 
 amuse and half annoy at this interruption to my musing . 

 as it prove , the sailor have no very great difficulty with his suit , and 
 soon manage to capture his prize , to use his own language . I hear from 
 the garden the growling of his gruff voice , and a good deal of shrill 
 laughter end in a small squeak , which mean , I suppose , that he be 
 come to close quarter . then there be silence for a little while , and 
 at last I see a white kerchief wave from the window , and perceive , 
 moreover , that it be Phoebe herself who be flutter it . well , she 
 be a smart , kindly - hearted lass , and I be glad in my heart that the 
 old seaman should have such a one to look after he . 

 here , then , be one good friend settle down finally for life . another 
 warn I that I be waste my good year in the hamlet . a third , the 
 most respected of all , advise I openly to throw in my lot with the 
 insurgent , should the occasion arise . if I refuse , I should have 
 the shame of see my aged father set off for the war , whilst 
 I linger at home . and why should I refuse ? have it not long be the 
 secret wish of my heart to see something of the great world , and what 
 fair chance could present itself ? my wish , my friend 's advice , and 
 my father 's hope all point in the one direction . 

 ' Father , ' say I , when I return home , ' I be ready to go where you 
 will . ' 

 ' may the Lord be glorify ! ' he cry solemnly . ' may he watch over 
 your young life , and keep your heart steadfast to the cause which be 
 assuredly his ! ' 

 and so , my dear grandson , the great resolution be take , and I find 
 myself commit to one side in the national quarrel . 



 Chapter VII . of the Horseman who ride from the West 

 my father set to work forthwith prepare for our equipment , furnish 
 saxon out as well as myself on the most liberal scale , for he be 
 determined that the wealth of his age should be as devoted to the cause 
 as be the strength of his youth . these arrangement have to be carry 
 out with the most extreme caution , for there be many prelatist in 
 the village , and in the present disturb state of the public mind any 
 activity on the part of so well know a man would have at once attract 
 attention . so carefully do the wary old soldier manage matter , 
 however , that we soon find ourselves in a position to start at an 
 hour 's notice , without any of our neighbour be a whit the wiser . 

 his first move be to purchase through an agent two suitable horse at 
 Chichester fair , which be convey to the stable of a trusty Whig 
 farmer live near Portchester , who be order to keep they until 
 they be call for . of these animal one be a mottled grey , of great 
 mettle and power , stand seventeen and a half hand high , and well up 
 to my weight , for in those day , my dear , I have not lay on flesh , and 
 weigh a little under sixteen stone for all my height and strength . 
 a critic might have say that Covenant , for so I name my steed , be a 
 trifle heavy about the head and neck , but I find he a trusty , willing 
 brute , with great power and endurance . Saxon , who when fully accoutre 
 could scarce have weigh more than twelve stone , have a light bay 
 spanish jennet , of great speed and spirit . this mare he name Chloe , 
 ' after a godly maiden of his acquaintance , ' though , as my father 
 remark , there be a somewhat ungodly and heathenish smack about the 
 appellation . these horse and their harness be buy and hold ready 
 without my father appear in the matter in any way . 

 this important point have be settle , there be the further question 
 of arm to be discuss , which give rise to much weighty controversy 
 between Decimus Saxon and my father , each cite many instance from 
 their own experience where the presence or absence of some taslet 
 or arm - guard have be of the deep import to the wearer . your 
 great - grandfather have set his heart upon my wear the breastplate 
 which still bear the dint of the scottish spear at Dunbar , but on 
 try it on we find it be too small for I . I confess that this be a 
 surprise , for when I look back at the awe with which I have regard 
 my father 's huge proportion , it be marvellous to I to have 
 this convincing proof that I have outgrow he . by rip down the 
 side - leather and pierce hole through which a lace could be pass , my 
 mother manage to arrange it so that I could wear it without discomfort . 
 a pair of taslet or thigh - piece , with guard for the upper arm and 
 gauntlet , be all borrow from the old parliamentary equipment , 
 together with the heavy straight sword and pair of horse pistol which 
 form the usual weapon of a cavalier . my father have choose I a 
 head - piece in Portsmouth , flute , with good barret , pad inside with 
 soft leather , very light and yet very strong . when fully equip , 
 both Saxon and my father agree that I have all that be requisite for 
 a well - appoint soldier . Saxon have purchase a buff - coat , a steel cap , 
 and a pair of jack - boot , so that with the rapi and pistol which my 
 father have present he with , he be ready to take the field at any 
 time . 

 there would , we hop , be no great difficulty in our reach Monmouth 's 
 force when the hour come . in those troublous time the main road be 
 so infest by highwayman and footpad , that it be usual for traveller 
 to carry weapon and even armour for their protection . there be no 
 reason therefore why our appearance should excite suspicion . should 
 question be ask , Saxon have a long story prepare , to the effect that 
 we be travel to join Henry Somerset , Duke of Beaufort , to whose 
 household we belong . this invention he explain to I , with many 
 point of corroboration which I be to furnish , but when I say 
 positively that I should rather be hang as a rebel than speak a 
 falsehood , he look at I open - eye , and shake his head as one much 
 shock . a few week of campaigning , he say , would soon cure I of my 
 squeamishness . for himself , no more truthful child have ever carry a 
 horn - book , but he have learn to lie upon the Danube , and look upon 
 it as a necessary part of the soldier 's upbringing . ' for what be all 
 stratagem , ambuscade , and outfall but lie upon a large scale ? ' he 
 argue . ' what be an adroit commander but one who hath a facility for 
 disguise the truth ? when , at the battle of Senlac , William the Norman 
 order his man to feign flight in order that they might break his 
 enemy 's array , a wile much practise both by the Scythians of old and by 
 the Croats of our own day , pray what be it but the acting of a lie ? or 
 when Hannibal , have tie torch to the horn of great drove of oxen , 
 cause the Roman Consuls to imagine that his army be in retreat , be it 
 not a deception or infraction of the truth?--a point well bring out 
 by a soldier of repute in the treatise " an in bello dolo uti liceat ; 
 an apud hoste falsiloquio uti liceat . " and so if , after these great 
 model , I in order to gain mine end do announce that we be bind to 
 Beaufort when we be in truth make for Monmouth , be it not in accord 
 with the usage of war and the custom of great commander ? ' all which 
 specious argument I make no attempt to answer , beyond repeat that he 
 might avail himself of the usage , but that he must not look to I for 
 corroboration . on the other hand , I promise to hold my speech and to 
 say nothing which might hamper he , with which pledge he be force to 
 be content . 

 and now at last , my patient listener , I shall be able to carry you out 
 of the humble life of the village , and to cease my gossip of the man who 
 be old when I be young , and who be now lie this many a year in 
 the Bedhampton churchyard . you shall come with I now , and you shall see 
 England as it be in those day , and you shall hear of how we set forth 
 to the war , and of all the adventure which overtake we . and if what 
 I tell you should ever chance to differ from what you have read in the 
 book of Mr. Coke or of Mr. Oldmixon , or of any one else who have set 
 these matter down in print , do ye bear in mind that I be tell of 
 what I see with these very eye , and that I have help to make history , 
 which be a high thing than to write it . 

 it be , then , towards nightfall upon the twelfth day of June 1685 that 
 the news reach our part of the country that Monmouth have land the 
 day before at Lyme , a small seaport on the boundary between dorsetshire 
 and Devonshire . a great beacon blaze upon Portsdown Hill be the first 
 news that we have of it , and then come a rattling and a drumming 
 from Portsmouth , where the troop be assemble under arm . mount 
 messenger clatter through the village street with their head low on 
 their horse ' neck , for the great tiding must be carry to London , 
 that the Governor of Portsmouth might know how to act . ( note B , 
 Appendix . ) we be stand at our doorway in the gloaming , watch 
 the coming and the going , and the line of beacon fire which be 
 lengthen away to the eastward , when a little man gallop up to the 
 door and pull his pant horse up . 

 ' be Joseph Clarke here ? ' he ask . 

 ' I be he , ' say my father . 

 ' be these man true ? ' he whisper , point with his whip at Saxon and 
 myself . ' then the trysting - place be Taunton . pass it on to all whom ye 
 know . give my horse a bait and a drink , I beg of ye , for I must get on 
 my way . ' 

 my young brother Hosea look to the tired creature , while we bring 
 the rider inside and draw he a stoup of beer . a wiry , sharp - face man 
 he be , with a birth - mark upon his temple . his face and clothe be 
 cake with dust , and his limb be so stiff from the saddle that he 
 could scarce put one foot before another . 

 ' one horse hath die under I , ' he say , ' and this can scarce last 
 another twenty mile . I must be in London by morning , for we hope that 
 Danvers and Wildman may be able to raise the city . yester - evening I leave 
 Monmouth 's camp . his blue flag float over Lyme . ' 

 ' what force hath he ? ' my father ask anxiously . 

 ' he hath but bring over leader . the force must come from you folk at 
 home . he have with he Lord Grey of Wark , with Wade , the German Buyse , 
 and eighty or a hundred more . alas ! that two who come be already lose 
 to we . it be an evil , evil oman . ' 

 ' what be amiss , then ? ' 

 ' Dare , the goldsmith of Taunton , hath be slay by Fletcher of Saltoun 
 in some child 's quarrel about a horse . the peasant cry out for the 
 blood of the Scot , and he be force to fly aboard the ship . a sad 
 mishap it be , for he be a skilful leader and a veteran soldier . ' 

 ' aye , aye , ' cry Saxon impatiently , ' there will be some more skilful 
 leader and veteran soldier in the West presently to take his place . 
 but if he know the usage of war , how come it that he should fight upon 
 a private quarrel at such a time ? ' he draw a flat brown book from 
 his bosom , and run his long thin finger down the table of content . 
 ' subisectio nona'--'here be the very case set forth , " an in hello 
 publico provocatus ad duellum privatae amicitiae causa declinare 
 possit , " in which the learn Fleming layeth it down that a man 's 
 private honour must give way to the good of the cause . do it not happen 
 in my own case that , on the eve of the raising of the Anlagerung of 
 Vienna , we strange officer have be invite to the tent of the 
 General , it chance that a red - headed Irisher , one O'Daffy , an ancient 
 in the regiment of Pappenheimer , do claim precedence of I on the 
 ground of superiority of blood ? on this I draw my glove across his face , 
 not , mark ye , in anger , but as show that I differ in some degree 
 from his opinion . at which dissent he do at once offer to sustain his 
 contention , but I , have read this subsection to he , do make it clear 
 to he that we could not in honour settle the point until the Turk be 
 chase from the city . so after the onfall-- ' 

 ' Nay , sir , I may hear the narrative some future day , ' say the 
 messenger , stagger to his foot . ' I hope to find a relay at 
 Chichester , and time press . work for the cause now , or be slave for 
 ever . farewell ! ' he clamber into his saddle , and we hear the clatter 
 of his hoof die away down the London road . 

 ' the time hath come for you to go , Micah , ' say my father solemnly . ' 
 Nay , wife , do not weep , but rather hearten the lad on his way by a 
 blithe word and a merry face . I need not tell you to fight manfully 
 and fearlessly in this quarrel . should the tide of war set in this 
 direction , you may find your old father rid by your side . let we now 
 bow down and implore the favour of the Almighty upon this expedition . ' 

 we all knelt down in the low - roof , heavy - rafter room while the old 
 man offer up an earnest , strenuous prayer for our success . even now , 
 as I speak to ye , that group rise up before mine eye . I see once 
 again your ancestor 's stern , rugged face , with his brow knit and 
 his cord hand writhe together in the fervour of his supplication . my 
 mother kneel beside he with the tear trickle down her sweet , placid 
 face , stifle her sob lest the sound of they make my leave - take more 
 bitter . the child be in the sleeping - room upstairs , and we hear the 
 patter of their bare foot upon the floor . the man Saxon sprawl across 
 one of the oaken chair , half kneeling , half recline , with his long 
 leg trail out behind , and his face bury in his hand . all round 
 in the flickering light of the hang lamp I see the object which have 
 be so familiar to I from childhood -- the settle by the fireplace , 
 the high - back stiff - elbow chair , the stuff fox above the door , the 
 picture of Christian view the Promised Land from the summit of the 
 Delectable Mountains -- all small trifle in themselves , but make up 
 among they the marvellous thing we call home , the all - powerful lodestone 
 which draw the wanderer 's heart from the farth end of the earth . 
 should I ever see it again save in my dream -- I , who be leave this 
 sheltered cove to plunge into the heart of the storm ? 

 the prayer finish , we all rise with the exception of Saxon , who 
 remain with his face bury in his hand for a minute or so before 
 start to his foot . I shrewdly suspect that he have be fast asleep , 
 though he explain that he have pause to offer up an additional 
 supplication . my father place his hand upon my head and invoke the 
 blessing of Heaven upon I . he then draw my companion aside , and I 
 hear the jingling of coin , from which I judge that he be give he 
 something wherewith to start upon his travel . my mother clasp I to 
 her heart , and slip a small square of paper into my hand , say that 
 I be to look at it at my leisure , and that I should make she happy if 
 I would but conform to the instruction contain in it . this I promise 
 to do , and tear myself away I set off down the darken village 
 street , with my long - limbe companion stride by my side . 

 it be close upon one in the morning , and all the country folk have be 
 long abe . pass the Wheatsheaf and the house of old Solomon , I could 
 not but wonder what they would think of my martial garb be they afoot . 
 I have scarce time to form the same thought before Zachary Palmer 's 
 cottage when his door fly open , and the carpenter come run out with 
 his white hair stream in the fresh night breeze . 

 ' I have be await you , Micah , ' he cry . ' I have hear that Monmouth 
 be up , and I know that you would not lose a night ere start . God 
 bless you , lad , God bless you ! Strong of arm and soft of heart , tender 
 to the weak and stern to the oppressor , you have the prayer and the 
 love of all who know you . ' I press his extended hand , and the last 
 I see of my native hamlet be the shadowy figure of the carpenter as he 
 wave his good wish to I through the darkness . 

 we make our way across the field to the house of Whittier , the Whig 
 farmer , where Saxon get into his war harness . we find our horse ready 
 saddle and bridle , for my father have at the first alarm send a message 
 across that we should need they . by two in the morning we be breast 
 Portsdown Hill , armed , mount , and fairly start on our journey to the 
 rebel camp . 


 Chapter VIII . of our start for the war 

 all along the ridge of Portsdown Hill we have the light of Portsmouth 
 and of the harbour ship twinkle beneath we on the left , while on 
 the right the Forest of Bere be ablaze with the signal fire which 
 proclaim the landing of the invader . one great beacon throb upon 
 the summit of Butser , while beyond that , as far as eye could reach , 
 twinkle spark of light show how the tiding be be carry 
 north into Berkshire and eastward into Sussex . of these fire , some be 
 compose of faggot pile into heap , and other of tar barrel set upon 
 pole . we pass one of these last just opposite to Portchester , and the 
 watcher around it , hear the tramp of our horse and the clank of 
 our arm , set up a loud huzza , think doubtless that we be King 's 
 officer bind for the West . 

 Master Decimus Saxon have fling to the wind the precise demeanour which 
 he have assume in the presence of my father , and rattle away with many 
 a jest and scrap of rhyme or song as we gallop through the darkness . 

 ' gadzook ! ' say he frankly , ' it be good to be able to speak freely 
 without be expect to tag every sentence with a hallelujah or an 
 amen . ' 

 ' you be ever the leader in those pious exercise , ' I remark drily . 

 ' Aye , indeed . you have nick it there ! if a thing must be do , then 
 take a lead in it , whatever it may be . a plaguy good precept , which have 
 stand I in excellent stead before now . I can not bear in mind whether I 
 tell you how I be at one time take prisoner by the Turks and convey 
 to Stamboul . there be a hundred of we or more , but the other either 
 perish under the bastinado , or be to this day chain to an oar in 
 the Imperial Ottoman galley , where they be like to remain until they 
 die under the lash , or until some venetian or genoese bullet find its 
 way into their wretched carcass . I alone come off with my freedom . ' 

 ' and pray , how do you make your escape ? ' I ask . 

 ' by the use of the wit wherewith Providence hath endow I , ' he 
 answer complacently ; ' for , see that their accursed religion be the 
 blind side of these infidel , I do set myself to work upon it . to this 
 end I observe the fashion in which our guard perform their morning 
 and evening exercise , and have transform my doublet into a pray 
 cloth , I do imitate they , save only that I pray at great length and 
 with more fervour . ' 

 ' what ! ' I cry in horror . ' you do pretend to be a Mussulman ? ' 

 ' Nay , there be no pretence . I become a Mussulman . that , however , 
 betwixt ourselves , as it might not stand I in very good stead with some 
 Reverend Aminadab Fount - of - grace in the rebel camp , who be no admirer of 
 Mahmoud . ' 

 I be so astounded at the impudence of this confession , come from the 
 mouth of one who have be lead the exercise of a pious Christian 
 family , that I be fairly bereft of speech . Decimus Saxon whistle a few 
 bar of a sprightly tune , and then continued-- 

 ' my perseverance in these exercise soon lead to my being single out 
 from among the other prisoner , until I so prevail upon my gaoler 
 that the door be open for I , and I be allow out on condition 
 of present myself at the prison gate once a day . what use , think ye , 
 do I make of my freedom ? ' 

 ' Nay , you be capable of anything , ' say I. 

 ' I set off forthwith to their chief mosque -- that of St. Sophia . when the 
 door open and the muezzin call , I be ever the first to hurry into 
 devotion and the last to leave they . do I see a Mussulman strike his 
 head upon the pavement , I would strike mine twice . do I see he bend 
 and bow , I be ready to prostrate myself . in this way ere long the piety 
 of the converted Giaour become the talk of the city , and I be provide 
 with a hut in which to make my sacred meditation . here I might have 
 do well , and indeed I have well - nigh make up my mind to set up as 
 a prophet and write an extra chapter to the Koran , when some foolish 
 trifle make the faithful suspicious of my honesty . it be but some 
 nonsense of a wench be find in my hut by some who come to consult 
 I upon a point of faith , but it be enough to set their heathen tongue 
 wagging ; so I think it wisest to give they the slip in a Levantine 
 coaster and leave the Koran uncomplete . it be perhaps as well , for it 
 would be a sore trial to have to give up christian woman and pork , for 
 their garlic - breathing houris and accurse kybobs of sheep 's flesh . ' 

 we have pass through Fareham and Botley during this conversation , and 
 be now make our way down the Bishopstoke road . the soil change 
 about here from chalk to sand , so that our horse ' hoof do but make 
 a dull subdue rattle , which be no bar to our talk -- or rather to my 
 companion 's , for I do little more than listen . in truth , my mind be so 
 full of anticipation of what be before we , and of thought of the 
 home behind , that I be in no humour for sprightly chatter . the sky be 
 somewhat clouded , but the moon glint out between the rift , show 
 we the long road which wound away in front of we . on either side be 
 scatter house with garden slop down toward the road . the heavy , 
 sickly scent of strawberry be in the air . 

 ' Hast ever slay a man in anger ? ' ask Saxon , as we gallop along . 

 ' never , ' I answer . 

 ' ha ! you will find that when you hear the clink of steel against steel , 
 and see your foeman 's eye , you will straightway forget all rule , 
 maxim , and precept of the fence which your father or other may have 
 teach you . ' 

 ' I have learn little of the sort , ' say I. my father do but teach 
 I to strike an honest downright blow . this sword can shear through a 
 square inch of iron bar . ' 

 ' Scanderbeg 's sword must have Scanderbeg 's arm , ' he remark . ' I 
 have observe that it be a fine piece of steel . one of the real old 
 text - compeller and psalm - expounder which the faithful draw in the day 
 of yore , when they would : 

           " prove their religion orthodox , 
            by apostolic blow and knock . " 

 you have not fence much , then ? ' 

 ' scarce at all , ' say I. 

 ' it be as well . with an old and tried swordsman like myself , knowledge 
 of the use of his weapon be everything ; but with a young Hotspur of your 
 temper , strength and energy go for much . I have oft remark that those 
 who be most skilled at the shooting of the popinjay , the cleaving of 
 the Turk 's head , and other such sport , be ever laggard in the field . 
 have the popinjay a crossbow as well , and an arrow on the string , or 
 have the Turk a fist as well as a head , our young gallant 's nerve would 
 scarce be as steady over the business . I make no doubt , Master Clarke , 
 that we shall make trusty comrade . what saith old Butler ? 

           " never do trusty squire with knight , 
            or knight with squire ere jump more right . " 

 I have scarce dare to quote " hudibra " for these week past , lest I 
 should set the Covenant ferment in the old man 's vein . ' 

 ' if we be indeed to be comrade , ' say I sternly , ' you must learn to 
 speak with more reverence and less flippancy of my father , who would 
 assuredly never have harbour you have he hear the tale which you have 
 tell I even now . ' 

 ' belike not , ' the adventurer answer , chuckle to himself . ' it be a 
 long stride from a mosque to a conventicle . but be not so hot - headed , 
 my friend . you lack that repose of character which will come to you , 
 no doubt , in your more mature year . what , man ! within five minute of 
 see I you would have smite I on the head with an oar , and ever 
 since you have be like a bandog at my heel , ready to hark if I do but 
 set my foot over what you regard as the straight line . remember that you 
 go now among man who fight on small occasion of quarrel . a word awry may 
 mean a rapi thrust . ' 

 ' do you bear the same in mind , ' I answer hotly ; ' my temper be 
 peaceful , but covert threat and veiled menace I shall not abide . ' 

 ' Odd 's mercy ! ' he cry . ' I see that you will start carve I anon , and 
 take I to Monmouth 's camp in section . Nay , nay , we shall have fight 
 enow without fall out among ourselves . what house be those on the 
 left ? ' 

 ' the village of Swathling , ' I reply . ' the light of Bishopstoke lie to 
 the right , in the hollow . ' 

 ' then we be fifteen mile on our way , and methink there be already 
 some faint flush of dawn in the east . Hullo , what have we here ? bed 
 must be scarce if folk sleep on the highway . ' 

 a dark blur which I have remark upon the roadway in front of we have 
 resolve itself as we approach into the figure of a man , stretch 
 at full length , with his face downward , and his head rest upon his 
 cross arm . 

 ' some reveler , mayhap , from the village inn , ' I remark . 

 ' there be blood in the air , ' say Saxon , raise up his beak - like nose 
 like a vulture which scent carrion . ' methink he sleep the sleep which 
 know no waking . ' 

 he spring down from his saddle , and turn the figure over upon his 
 back . the cold pale light of the early dawn shimmer upon his star 
 eye and colourless face show that the old soldier 's instinct be 
 correct , and that he have indeed draw his last breath . 

 ' here be a pretty piece of work , ' say Saxon , kneeling by the dead man 's 
 side and pass his hand over his pocket . ' footpad , doubtless . not a 
 stiver in his pocket , nor as much as a sleeve - link to help pay for the 
 burial . ' 

 ' how be he slay ! ' I ask in horror , look down at the poor vacant 
 face , the empty house from which the tenant have depart . 

 ' a stab from behind and a tap on the head from the butt of a pistol . 
 he can not have be dead long , and yet every groat be go . a man of 
 position , too , I should judge from his dress -- broadcloth coat by the 
 feel , satin breech , and silver buckle on his shoe . the rogue must 
 have have some plunder with he . could we but run across they , Clarke , it 
 would be a great and grand thing . ' 

 ' it would indeed , ' say I heartily . ' what great privilege than to 
 execute justice upon such cowardly murderer ! ' 

 ' Pooh ! pooh ! ' he cry . ' justice be a slippery dame , and hath a 
 two - edge sword in her hand . we may have enough of justice in our 
 character as rebel to give we a surfeit of it . I would fain overtake 
 these robber that we may relieve they of their _ spolia opima _ , together 
 with any other wealth which they may have unlawfully amass . my learn 
 friend the Fleming layeth it down that it be no robbery to rob a robber . 
 but where shall we conceal this body ? ' 

 ' wherefore should we conceal it ? ' I ask . 

 ' why , man , unused to war or the precaution of a warrior , you must yet 
 see that should this body be find here , there will be a hue and cry 
 through the country , and that stranger like ourselves will be arrest 
 on suspicion . should we clear ourselves , which be no very easy matter , 
 the justice will at least want to know whence we come and whither we 
 go , which may lead to inquiry that may bode we little good . I shall 
 therefore take the liberty , mine unknown and silent friend , of drag 
 you into yon bush , where for a day or two at least you be like to lie 
 unobserve , and so bring no harm upon honest man . ' 

 ' for God 's sake do not treat it so unkindly , ' I cry , spring down 
 from my horse and lay my hand upon my companion 's arm . ' there be no 
 need to trail it in so unseemly a fashion . if it must be move hence , I 
 shall carry it with all due reverence . ' so say , I pick the body up 
 in my arm , and bear it to a wayside clump of yellow gorse bush , I 
 lay it solemnly down and draw the branch over it to conceal it . 

 ' you have the thews of an ox and the heart of a woman , ' mutter my 
 companion . ' by the Mass , that old white - head psalm - singer be right ; 
 for if my memory serve I , he say word to that effect . a few handful 
 of dust will hide the stain . now we may jog upon our way without any 
 fear of be call upon to answer for another man 's sin . let I but 
 get my girth tighten and we may soon be out of danger 's way . ' 

 ' I have have to do , ' say Saxon , as we ride onwards , ' with many gentry 
 of this sort , with albanian brigand , the bandit of Piedmont , the 
 Lanzknechte and Freiritter of the Rhine , algerine picaroon , and other 
 such folk . yet I can not call to mind one who hath ever be able to 
 retire in his old age on a sufficient competence . it be but a precarious 
 trade , and must end soon or later in a dance on nothing in a tight 
 cravat , with some kind friend tug at your leg to ease you of any 
 breath that you might have leave . ' 

 ' nor do that end all , ' I remark . 

 ' no . there be Tophet behind and the flame of hell . so our good friend 
 the parson tell we . well , if a man be to make no money in this world , 
 be hang at the end of it , and finally burn for ever , he hath assuredly 
 wander on to a thorny track . if , on the other hand , one could always 
 lay one 's hand on a well - line purse , as those rogue have do 
 to - night , one might be content to risk something in the world to come . ' 

 ' but what can the well - fill purse do for they ? ' say I. ' what will 
 the few score piece which these bloodthirsty wretch have filch from 
 this poor creature avail they when their own hour of death come round ? ' 

 ' true , ' say Saxon dryly ; ' they may , however , prove useful in the 
 meantime . this you say be Bishopstoke . what be the light over yonder ? ' 

 ' they come , I think , from Bishop 's Waltham , ' I answer . 

 ' we must press on , for I would fain be in Salisbury before it be broad 
 day . there we shall put our horse up until evening and have some rest , 
 for there be nothing gain by man or beast come jade to the war . 
 all this day the western road will be crowd with courier , and mayhap 
 patrol by cavalry as well , so that we can not show our face upon it 
 without a risk of be stop and examine . now if we lie by all day , 
 and push on at dusk , keep off the main road and make our way across 
 Salisbury Plain and the Somersetshire down , we shall be less likely to 
 come to harm . ' 

 ' but what if Monmouth be engage before we come up to he ? ' I ask . 

 ' then we shall have miss a chance of get our throat cut . why , 
 man , suppose that he have be rout and entirely disperse , would 
 it not be a merry conceit for we to appear upon the scene as two loyal 
 yeoman , who have ride all the way from Hampshire to strike in against 
 the King 's enemy ? we might chance to get some reward in money or in 
 land for our zeal . Nay , frown not , for I be but jest . breathe our 
 horse by walk they up this hill . my jennet be as fresh as when we 
 start , but those great limb of thine be tell upon the grey . ' 

 the patch of light in the east have increase and broaden , and the sky 
 be mottle with little pink feather of cloud . as we pass over 
 the low hill by Chandler 's Ford and Romsey we could see the smoke of 
 Southampton to the south - east , and the broad dark expanse of the New 
 Forest with the haze of morning hang over it . a few horseman pass 
 we , prick along , too much engross in their own errand to inquire 
 our . a couple of cart and a long string of pack - horse , laden 
 principally with bale of wool , come straggle along a byroad , and 
 the driver wave their broad hat to we and wish we God - speed . at 
 Dunbridge the folk be just stirring , and pause in take down the 
 cottage shutter to come to the garden railing and watch we pass . as we 
 enter Dean , the great red sun push its rosy rim over the edge of the 
 horizon , and the air be fill with the buzz of insect and the sweet 
 scent of the morning . we dismount at this latter village , and have a 
 cup of ale while rest and water the horse . the landlord could 
 tell we nothing about the insurgent , and indeed seem to care very 
 little about the matter one way or the other . ' as long as brandy pay a 
 duty of six shilling and eightpence a gallon , and freight and leakage 
 come to half a crown , while I be expect to sell it at twelve 
 shilling , it matter little to I who be King of England . give I a 
 king that will prevent the hop - blight and I be his man . ' those be the 
 landlord 's politic , and I dare say a good many more be of his way of 
 think . 

 from Dean to Salisbury be all straight road with moor , morass , and 
 fenland on either side , break only by the single hamlet of Aldersbury , 
 just over the Wiltshire border . our horse , refresh by the short rest , 
 step out gallantly , and the brisk motion , with the sunlight and the 
 beauty of the morning , combine to raise our spirit and cheer we after 
 the depression of the long ride through the darkness , and the incident 
 of the murder traveller . wild duck , widgeon , and snipe flap up from 
 either side of the road at the sound of the horse ' hoof , and once a 
 herd of red deer spring to their foot from among the fern and scamper 
 away in the direction of the forest . once , too , when pass a dense 
 clump of tree , we see a shadowy white creature half hide by the 
 trunk , which must , I fancy , have be one of those wild cattle of 
 which I have hear the peasant speak , who dwell in the recess of 
 the southern wood , and be so fierce and intractable that none dare 
 approach they . the breadth of the view , the keenness of the air , and the 
 novelty of the sense of have great work to do , all combine to send a 
 flush of life through my vein such as the quiet village existence 
 have never be able to give . my more experienced companion feel the 
 influence too , for he lift up a crack voice and break into a droning 
 chant , which he assure I be an eastern ode which have be teach he 
 by the second sister of the Hospodar of Wallachia . 

 ' Anent Monmouth , ' he remark , come back suddenly to the reality of 
 our position . ' it be unlikely that he can take the field for some day , 
 though much depend upon his strike a blow soon , and so raise the 
 courage of his follower before the King 's troop can come down upon 
 he . he have , mark ye , not only his troop to find , but their weapon , 
 which be like to prove a more difficult matter . suppose he can raise 
 five thousand man -- and he can not stir with less -- he will not have one 
 musket in five , so the rest must do as they can with pike and bill , or 
 such other rude arm as they can find . all this take time , and though 
 there may be skirmish , there can scarce be any engagement of import 
 before we arrive . ' 

 ' he will have be land three or four day ere we reach he , ' say I. 

 ' hardly time for he with his small staff of officer to enrol his man 
 and divide they into regiment . I scarce expect to find he at Taunton , 
 though we be so directed . Hast ever hear whether there be any rich 
 Papists in those part ? ' 

 ' I know not , ' I reply . 

 ' if so there might be plate chest and silver charger , to say nothing 
 of my lady 's jewel and other such trifle to reward a faithful soldier . 
 what would war be without plunder ! a bottle without the wine -- a shell 
 without the oyster . see the house yonder that peep through the tree . 
 I warrant there be a store of all good thing under that roof , which you 
 and I might have for the asking , do we but ask with our sword in our 
 grip . you be my witness that your father do give and not lend I this 
 horse . ' 

 ' why say you that , then ? ' 

 ' lest he claim a half of whatever booty I may chance to gain . what saith 
 my learn fleming under the heading " an qui militi equum praebuit , 
 praedae ab eo captae particep esse debeat ? " which signifieth " whether 
 he who lendeth a horse hath a claim on the plunder of he who borroweth 
 it . " in this discourse he cite a case wherein a spanish commander 
 have lend a steed to one of his captain , and the say captain have 
 capture the general of the enemy , the commander do sue he for a 
 half share of the twenty thousand crown which form the ransom of the 
 prisoner . a like case be note by the famous Petrinus Bellus in his book 
 " De re Militari , " much read by leader of repute . ' ( note C. Appendix . ) 

 ' I can promise you , ' I answer , ' that no such claim shall ever be make 
 by my father upon you . see yonder , over the brow of the hill , how the 
 sun shin upon the high cathedral tower , which point upwards with its 
 great stone finger to the road that every man must travel . ' 

 ' there be good store of silver and plate in these same church , ' quoth 
 my companion . ' I remember that at Leipsic , when I be serve my first 
 campaign , I get a candlestick , which I be force to sell to a Jew 
 broker for a fourth of its value ; yet even at his price it suffice to 
 fill my haversack with broad piece . ' 

 it chance that Saxon 's mare have gain a stride or two upon mine whilst 
 he speak , so that I be able to get a good view of he without turn 
 my head . I have scarce have light during our ride to see how his harness 
 sit upon he , but now I be amazed on look at he to mark the change 
 which it have work in the man . in his civil dress his lankiness and 
 length of limb give he an awkward appearance , but on horse - back , with 
 his lean , gaunt face look out from his steel cap , his breastplate 
 and buff jacket fill out his figure , and his high boot of untanned 
 leather reach to the centre of his thigh , he look the veteran 
 man - at - arm which he purport to be . the ease with which he sit his 
 horse , the high , bold expression upon his face , and the great length of 
 his arm , all mark he as one who could give a good account of himself 
 in a fray . in his word alone I could have place little trust , but 
 there be that in his bearing which assure even a novice like myself 
 that he be indeed a train man of war . 

 ' that be the Avon which glitter amongst the tree , ' I remark . ' we be 
 about three mile from Salisbury town . ' 

 ' it be a noble spire , ' say he , glance at the great stone spire in 
 front of we . ' the man of old would seem to have spend all their day in 
 pile stone upon stone . and yet we read of tough battle and shrewd 
 blow strike , show that they have some time for soldierly relaxation , 
 and be not always at this mason work . ' 

 ' the Church be rich in those day , ' I answer , shake my bridle , for 
 Covenant be begin to show sign of laziness . ' but here come one 
 who might perhaps tell we something of the war . ' 

 a horseman who bear trace of have ride long and hard be rapidly 
 approach we . both rider and steed be grey with dust and splash 
 with mire , yet he gallop with loosen rein and bent body , as one to 
 whom every extra stride be of value . 

 ' what ho , friend ! ' cry Saxon , rein his mare across the road so as 
 to bar the man 's passage . ' what news from the West ? ' 

 ' I must not tarry , ' the messenger gasp , slacken his speed for an 
 instant . ' I bear paper of import from Gregory Alford , Mayor of Lyme , to 
 Ins Majesty 's Council . the rebel make great head , and gather together 
 like bee in the swarm time . there be some thousand in arm 
 already , and all Devonshire be on the move . the rebel horse under Lord 
 Grey hath be beat back from Bridport by the red militia of Dorset , 
 but every prickeare Whig from the Channel to the Severn be make his 
 way to Monmouth . ' with this brief summary of the news he push his way 
 past we and clatter on in a cloud of dust upon his mission . 

 ' the broth be fairly on the fire , then , ' quoth Decimus Saxon , as we ride 
 onwards . ' now that skin have be slit the rebel may draw their sword 
 and fle away their scabbard , for it be either victory for they or 
 their quarter will be dangle in every market town of the county . heh , 
 lad ? we throw a main for a brave stake . ' 

 ' mark ye that Lord Grey have meet with a check , ' say I. 

 ' Pshaw ! it be of no import . a cavalry skirmish at the most , for it be 
 impossible that Monmouth could have bring his main force to Bridport ; 
 nor would he if he could , for it be out of his track . it be one of 
 those three - shot - and - a - gallop affray , where each side run away and 
 each claim the victory . but here we be in the street of Salisbury . 
 now leave the talking to I , or your wrong - head truthfulness may lay 
 we by the heel before our time . ' 

 pass down the broad High Street we dismount in front of the Blue 
 Boar inn , and hand our tired horse over to the ostler , to whom 
 Saxon , in a loud voice , and with many rough military oath , give strict 
 injunction as to their treatment . he then clank into the inn parlour , 
 and throw himself into one chair with his foot upon another , he 
 summon the landlord up before he , and explain our need in a tone 
 and manner which should give he a due sense of our quality . 

 ' of your good , and at once , ' quoth he . ' have your large double - couch 
 chamber ready with your soft lavender - scented sheet , for we have have 
 a weary ride and must rest . and hark ye , landlord , no palming off your 
 stale , musty good as fresh , or of your washy french wine for the true 
 Hainault vintage . I would have you to understand that my friend here and 
 I be man who meet with some consideration in the world , though we 
 care not to speak our name to every underling . deserve well of we , 
 therefore , or it may be the bad for you . ' 

 this speech , combine with my companion 's haughty manner and fierce 
 face , have such an effect upon the landlord that he straightway send 
 we in the breakfast which have be prepare for three officer of the 
 Blues , who be wait for it in the next apartment . this keep they 
 fast for another half - hour , and we could hear their oath and 
 complaint through the partition while we be devour their capon and 
 venison pie . have eat a hearty meal and wash it down with a bottle 
 of Burgundy we seek our room , and throw our tired limb upon the 
 bed , be soon in a deep slumber . 



 chapter IX . of a passage of arm at the Blue Boar 

 I have sleep several hour when I be suddenly arouse by a prodigious 
 crash , follow by the clash of arm and shrill cry from the low 
 floor . spring to my foot I find that the bed upon which my comrade 
 have lain be vacant , and that the door of the apartment be open . as 
 the uproar still continue , and as I seem to discern his voice in the 
 midst of it , I catch up my sword , and without wait to put on either 
 head - piece , steel - breast , or arm - plate , I hurry to the scene of the 
 commotion . 

 the hall and passage be fill with silly maid and star drawer , 
 attract , like myself , by the uproar . through these I push my way 
 into the apartment where we have breakfast in the morning , which be 
 a scene of the wild disorder . the round table in the centre have 
 be tilt over upon its side , and three broken bottle of wine , with 
 apple , pear , nut , and the fragment of the dish contain they , 
 be litter over the floor . a couple of pack of card and a dice - box 
 lie amongst the scatter feast . close by the door stand Decimus Saxon , 
 with his draw rapier in his hand and a second one beneath his foot , 
 while face he there be a young officer in a blue uniform , whose face 
 be redden with shame and anger , and who look wildly about the room 
 as though in search of some weapon to replace that of which he have be 
 deprive . he might have serve Cibber or Gibbons as a model for a statue 
 of impotent rage . two other officer dress in the same blue uniform 
 stand by their comrade , and as I observe that they have lay their hand 
 upon the hilt of their sword , I take my place by Saxon 's side , and 
 stand ready to strike in should the occasion arise . 

 ' what would the maitre d'arme say -- the maitre d'escrime ? ' cry my 
 companion . ' methink he should lose his place for not teach you to 
 make a well show . out on he ! be this the way that he teach the 
 officer of his Majesty 's guard to use their weapon ? ' 

 ' this raillery , sir , ' say the elder of the three , a squat , brown , 
 heavy - faced man , ' be not undeserved , and yet might perchance be 
 dispense with . I be free to say that our friend attack you somewhat 
 hastily , and that a little more deference should have be show by so 
 young a soldier to a cavalier of your experience . ' 

 the other officer , who be a fine - look , noble - feature man , express 
 himself in much the same manner . ' if this apology will serve , ' say he , 
 ' I be prepared to join in it . if , however , more be require , I shall be 
 happy to take the quarrel upon myself . ' 

 ' Nay , nay , take your bradawl ! ' Saxon answer good - humouredly , kick 
 the sword towards his youthful opponent . ' but , mark you ! when you would 
 lunge , direct your point upwards rather than down , for otherwise you 
 must throw your wrist open to your antagonist , who can scarce fail to 
 disarm you . in quarte , tierce , or saccoon the same hold good . ' 

 the youth sheathe his sword , but be so overcome by his own easy defeat 
 and the contemptuous way in which his opponent have dismiss he , that 
 he turn and hurry out of the room . meanwhile Decimus Saxon and the 
 two officer set to work get the table upon its leg and restore 
 the room to some sort of order , in which I do what I could to assist 
 they . 

 ' I hold three queen for the first time to - day , ' grumble the soldier of 
 fortune . ' I be about to declare they when this young bantam fly at my 
 throat . he hath likewise be the cause of our lose three flask of 
 most excellent muscadine . when he hath drunk as much bad wine as I have 
 be force to do , he will not be so hasty in waste the good . ' 

 ' he be a hot - headed youngster , ' the old officer reply , ' and a little 
 solitary reflection add to the lesson which you have teach he may 
 bring he profit . as for the muscadine , that loss will soon be repair , 
 the more gladly as your friend here will help we to drink it . ' 

 ' I be rouse by the crash of weapon , ' say I , ' and I scarce know now 
 what have occur . ' 

 ' why , a mere tavern brawl , which your friend 's skill and judgment 
 prevent from become serious . I prythee take the rush - bottom chair , 
 and do you , Jack , order the wine . if our comrade hath spill the last 
 it be for we to furnish this , and the good the cellar contain . we have 
 be have a hand at basset , which Mr. Saxon here playeth as skilfully 
 as he wield the small - sword . it chance that the luck run against young 
 Horsford , which doubtless make he prone to be quick in take offence . 
 your friend in conversation , when discourse of his experience in 
 foreign country , remark that the french household troop be to 
 his mind bring to a high state of discipline than any of our own 
 regiment , on which Horsford fire up , and after a hot word or two they 
 find themselves , as you have see , at draw bilbo . the boy hath see no 
 service , and be therefore over - eager to give proof of his valour . ' 

 ' wherein , ' say the tall officer , ' he show a want of thought towards 
 I , for have the word be offensive it be for I , who be a senior 
 captain and brevet - major , to take it up , and not for a slip of a cornet , 
 who scarce know enough to put his troop through the exercise . ' 

 ' you say right , Ogilvy , ' say the other , resume his seat by the table 
 and wipe the card which have be splash by the wine . ' have the 
 comparison be make by an officer of Louis 's guard for the purpose 
 of contumely and braggadocio , it would then indeed have become we to 
 venture a passado . but when speak by an Englishman of ripe experience 
 it become a matter of instructive criticism , which should profit rather 
 than annoy . ' 

 ' true , Ambrose , ' the other answer . ' without such criticism a force 
 would become stagnant , and could never hope to keep level with those 
 continental army , which be ever strive amongst themselves for 
 increase efficacy . ' 

 so pleased be I at these sensible remark on the part of the stranger , 
 that I be right glad to have the opportunity of make their close 
 acquaintance over a flask of excellent wine . my father 's prejudice 
 have lead I to believe that a King 's officer be ever a compound of the 
 coxcomb and the bully , but I find on test it that this idea , like 
 most other which a man take upon trust , have very little foundation 
 upon truth . as a matter of fact , have they be dress in less warlike 
 garb and deprive of their sword and jack - boot , they would have pass 
 as particularly mild - mannered man , for their conversation run in the 
 learn channel , and they discuss Boyle 's research in chemistry and 
 the ponderation of air with much gravity and show of knowledge . at 
 the same time , their brisk bearing and manly carriage show that in 
 cultivate the scholar they hail not sacrifice the soldier . 

 ' may I ask , sir , ' say one of they , address Saxon , ' whether in 
 your wide experience you have ever meet with any of those sage and 
 philosopher who have confer such honour and fame upon France and 
 Germany ? ' 

 my companion look ill at ease , as one who feel that he have be take 
 off his ground . ' there be indeed one such at Nurnberg , ' he answer , 
 ' one Gervinus or Gervanus , who , the folk say , could turn an ingot of 
 iron into an ingot of gold as easily as I turn this tobacco into ash . 
 Old Pappenheimer shut he up with a ton of metal , and threaten to put 
 the thumbikin upon he unless he change it into gold piece . I can 
 vouch for it that there be not a yellow boy there , for I be captain of 
 the guard and search the whole dungeon through . to my sorrow I say it , 
 for I have myself add a small iron brazier to the heap , think that 
 if there should be any such change it would be as well that I should 
 have some small share in the experiment . ' 

 ' alchemy , transmutation of metal , and the like have be set aside by 
 true science , ' remark the tall officer . ' even old Sir Thomas Browne 
 of Norwich , who be ever ready to plead the cause of the ancient , can 
 find nothing to say in favour of it . from Trismegistus downward through 
 Albertus Magnus , Aquinas , Raymond Lullius , Basil Valentine , Paracelsus , 
 and the rest , there be not one who have leave more than a cloud of word 
 behind he . ' 

 ' nor do the rogue I mention , ' say Saxon . ' there be another , 
 Van Helstatt , who be a man of learning , and cast horoscope in 
 consideration of some small fee or honorarium . I have never meet so wise 
 a man , for he would talk of the planet and constellation as though he 
 keep they all in his own backyard . he make no more of a comet than if it 
 be a mouldy china orange , and he explain their nature to we , say 
 that they be but common star which have have a hole knock in they , so 
 that their inside or viscera protrude . he be indeed a philosopher ! ' 

 ' and do you ever put his skill to the test ? ' ask one of the officer , 
 with a smile . 

 ' not i , forsooth , for I have ever keep myself clear of black magic or 
 diablerie of the sort . my comrade Pierce Scotton , who be an Oberst 
 in the imperial cavalry brigade , do pay he a rise noble to have his 
 future expound . if I remember aright , the star say that he be 
 over - fond of wine and woman -- he have a wicked eye and a nose like a 
 carbuncle . ' they foretold also that he would attain a marshal 's baton 
 and die at a ripe age , which might well have come true have he not be 
 unhorse a month later at Ober - Graustock , and slay by the hoof of his 
 own troop . neither the planet nor even the experienced farrier of 
 the regiment could have tell that the brute would have founder so 
 completely . ' 

 the officer laugh heartily at my companion 's view , and rise from 
 their chair , for the bottle be empty and the evening begin to 
 draw in . ' we have work to do here , ' say the one address as Ogilvy . 
 ' besides , we must find this foolish boy of ours , and tell he that it be 
 no disgrace to be disarm by so expert a swordsman . we have to prepare 
 the quarter for the regiment , who will be up to join Churchill 's 
 force not later than to - night . Ye be yourself bind for the West , I 
 understand ? ' 

 ' we belong to the Duke of Beaufort 's household , ' say Saxon . 

 ' indeed ! I think ye might belong to Portman 's yellow regiment of 
 militia . I trust that the Duke will muster every man he can , and make 
 play until the royal force come up . ' 

 ' how many will churchill bring ? ' ask my companion carelessly . 

 ' eight hundred horse at the most , but my Lord Feversham will follow 
 after with close on four thousand foot . ' 

 ' we may meet on the field of battle , if not before , ' say I , and we bid 
 our friendly enemy a very cordial adieu . 

 ' a skilful equivoque that last of your , Master Micah , ' quoth Decimus 
 Saxon , ' though smacking of double dealing in a truth - lover like 
 yourself . if we meet they in battle I trust that it may be with 
 chevaux - de - frise of pike and morgenstiern before we , and a litter of 
 caltrop in front of they , for Monmouth have no cavalry that could stand 
 for a moment against the Royal Guards . ' 

 ' how come you to make their acquaintance ? ' I ask . 

 ' I sleep a few hour , but I have learn in camp to do with little 
 rest . find you in sound slumber , and hear the rattle of the 
 dice - box below , I come softly down and find mean to join their 
 party -- whereby I be a rich man by fifteen guineas , and might have 
 have more have that young fool not lug out at I , or have the talk not 
 turn afterwards upon such unseemly subject as the law of chemistry 
 and the like . Prythee , what have the Horse Guards Blue to do with the 
 law of chemistry ? Wessenburg of the pandour would , even at his own 
 mess table , suffer much free talk -- more perhaps than fit in with the 
 dignity of a leader . have his officer venture upon such matter as 
 this , however , there would have be a drum - head court - martial , or a 
 cashiering at the least . ' 

 without stop to dispute either Master Saxon 's judgment or that of 
 Wessenburg of the Pandours , I propose that we should order an evening 
 meal , and should employ the remain hour or two of daylight in look 
 over the city . the principal sight be of course the noble cathedral , 
 which be build in such exact proportion that one would fail to 
 understand its great size do one not actually enter it and pace round 
 the long dim aisle . so solemn be its sweeping arch and the long 
 shaft of coloured light which shine through the stain - glass window , 
 throw strange shadow amongst the pillar , that even my companion , 
 albeit not readily impressed , be silent and subdue . it be a great 
 prayer in stone . 

 on our way back to the inn we pass the town lock - up , with a rail 
 space in front of it , in which three great black - muzzled bloodhound 
 be stalk about , with fierce crimsoned eye and red tongue loll 
 out of their mouth . they be use , a bystander tell we , for the 
 hunting down of criminal upon Salisbury Plain , which have be a refuge 
 for rogue and thief , until this mean have be adopt for follow 
 they to their hiding - place . it be well - nigh dark before we return to 
 the hostel , and entirely so by the time that we have eat our supper , 
 pay our reckoning , and get ready for the road . 

 before we set off I bethink I of the paper which my mother have 
 slip into my hand on parting , and draw it from my pouch I read 
 it by the rushlight in our chamber . it still bear the splotch of the 
 tear which she have drop on it , poor soul , and run in this wise:-- 

 ' instruction from Mistress Mary Clarke to her son Micah , on the twelfth 
 day of June in the year of our Lord sixteen hundred and eighty - five . 

 ' on occasion of his go forth , like David of old , to do battle 
 with the Goliath of Papistry , which hath overshadow and throw into 
 disrepute that true and reverent regard for ritual which should exist in 
 the real Church of England , as ordain by law . 

 ' let these point be observe by he , namely , to wit : 

 ' 1 . change your hosen when the occasion serve . you have two pair in 
 your saddle - bag , and can buy more , for the wool work be good in the 
 West . 

 ' 2 . a hare 's foot suspend round the neck driveth away colic . 

 ' 3 . say the Lord 's Prayer night and morning . also read the scripture , 
 especially Job , the Psalms , and the Gospel accord to St. Matthew . 

 ' 4 . Daffy 's elixir possess extraordinary power in purify the blood 
 and work off all phlegm , humour , vapour , or rheum . the dose be 
 five drop . a small phial of it will be find in the barrel of your left 
 pistol , with wad around it lest it come to harm . 

 ' 5 . ten golden piece be sew into the hem of your under doublet . touch 
 they not , save as a last resource . 

 ' 6 . fight stoutly for the Lord , and yet I pray you , Micah , be not too 
 forward in battle , but let other do their turn also . 

 press not into the heart of the fray , and yet flinch not from the 
 standard of the protestant faith . 

 ' and oh , Micah , my own bright boy , come back safe to your mother , or my 
 very heart will break ! 

 ' and the deponent will ever pray . ' 


 the sudden gush of tenderness in the last few line make the tear 
 spring to my eye , and yet I could scarce forbear from smile at the 
 whole composition , for my dear mother have little time to cultivate the 
 grace of style , and it be evidently her think that in order to make 
 her instruction bind it be needful to express they in some sort of 
 legal form . I have little time to think over her advice , however , for I 
 have scarce finish read it before the voice of Decimus Saxon , and 
 the clink of the horse ' hoof upon the cobble - stone of the yard , 
 inform I that all be ready for our departure . 




 chapter X. of our Perilous Adventure on the Plain 

 we be not half a mile from the town before the roll of kettledrum and 
 the blare of bugle swell up musically through the darkness announce 
 the arrival of the regiment of horse which our friend at the inn have 
 be expect . 

 ' it be as well , perhaps , ' say Saxon , ' that we give they the slip , 
 for that young springald might have smell a rat and play we some 
 ill - turn . have you chance to see my silken kerchief ? ' 

 ' not I , ' I answer . 

 ' Nay , then , it must have fall from my bosom during our ruffle . I 
 can ill afford to leave it , for I travel light in such matter . eight 
 hundred man , quoth the major , and three thousand to follow . should I 
 meet this same Oglethorpe or Ogilvy when the little business be over , 
 I shall read he a lesson on think less of chemistry and more of 
 the need of preserve military precaution . it be well always to be 
 courteous to stranger and to give they information , but it be well also 
 that the information should be false . ' 

 ' as his may have be , ' I suggest . 

 ' Nay , nay , the word come too glibly from his tongue . so ho , Chloe , so 
 ho ! she be full of oats and would fain gallop , but it be so plaguy dark 
 that we can scarce see where we be go . ' 

 we have be trot down the broad high - road shimmering vaguely white 
 in the gloom , with the shadowy tree dance past we on either side , 
 scarce outline against the dark background of cloud . we be now come 
 upon the eastern edge of the great plain , which extend forty mile one 
 way and twenty the other , over the great part of Wiltshire and past 
 the boundary of Somersetshire . the main road to the West skirt this 
 wilderness , but we have agree to follow a less important track , 
 which would lead we to our goal , though in a more tedious manner . its 
 insignificance would , we hop , prevent it from be guard by the 
 King 's horse . we have come to the point where this byroad branch off 
 from the main highway when we hear the clatter of horse ' hoof behind 
 we . 

 ' here come some one who be not afraid to gallop , ' I remark . 

 ' halt here in the shadow ! ' cry Saxon , in a short , quick whisper . ' have 
 your blade loose in the scabbard . he must have a set errand who rid so 
 fast o ' night . ' 

 look down the road we could make out through the darkness a shadowy 
 blur which soon resolve itself into man and horse . the rider be 
 well - nigh abreast of we before he be aware of our presence , when he 
 pull up his steed in a strange , awkward fashion , and face round in 
 our direction . 

 ' be Micah Clarke there ? ' he say , in a voice which be strangely 
 familiar to my ear . 

 ' I be Micah Clarke , ' say I. 

 ' and I be Reuben Lockarby , ' cry our pursuer , in a mock heroic voice . 
 ' ah , Micah lad , I would embrace you be it not that I should assuredly fall 
 out of the saddle if I attempt it , and perchance drag you along . that 
 sudden pull up well - nigh land I on the roadway . I have be slide 
 off and clamber on ever since I bade goodbye to Havant . sure , such a 
 horse for slip from under one be never bestride by man . ' 

 ' Good Heavens , Reuben ! ' I cry in amazement , ' what bring you all this 
 way from home ? ' 

 ' the very same cause which bring you , Micah , and also Don Decimo Saxon , 
 late of the Solent , whom methink I see in the shadow behind you . how 
 fare it , oh illustrious one ? ' 

 ' it be you , then , young cock of the wood ! ' growl Saxon , in no very 
 overjoyed voice . 

 ' no less a person , ' say Reuben . ' and now , my gay cavaliero , round with 
 your horse and trot on your way , for there be no time to be lose . we 
 ought all to be at Taunton to - morrow . ' 

 ' but , my dear Reuben , ' say I , ' it can not be that you be come with we 
 to join Monmouth . what would your father say ? this be no holiday jaunt , 
 but one that may have a sad and stern ending . at the good , victory can 
 only come through much bloodshed and danger . at the bad , we be as 
 like to wind up upon a scaffold as not . ' 

 ' Forwards , lad , forwards ! ' cry he , spur on his horse , ' it be all 
 arrange and settle . I be about to offer my august person , together 
 with a sword which I borrow and a horse which I stole , to his most 
 protestant highness , James , Duke of Monmouth . ' 

 ' but how come it all ? ' I ask , as we ride on together . ' it warm my 
 very heart to see you , but you be never concerned either in religion 
 or in politic . whence , then , this sudden resolution ? ' 

 ' well , truth to tell , ' he reply , ' I be neither a king 's man nor a 
 duke 's man , nor would I give a button which sit upon the throne . I do 
 not suppose that either one or the other would increase the custom of 
 the Wheatsheaf , or want Reuben Lockarby for a councillor . I be a Micah 
 Clarke man , though , from the crown of my head to the sol of my foot ; 
 and if he rid to the war , may the plague strike I if I do not stick 
 to his elbow ! ' he raise his hand excitedly as he speak , and instantly 
 lose his balance , he shoot into a dense clump of bush by the roadside 
 whence his leg flap helplessly in the darkness . 

 ' that make the tenth , ' say he , scramble out and clamber into 
 his saddle once more . ' my father use to tell I not to sit a horse too 
 closely . " a gentle rise and fall , " say the old man . egad , there be more 
 fall than rise , and it be anything but gentle . ' 

 ' Odd 's truth ! ' exclaim Saxon . ' how in the name of all the saint in 
 the calendar do you expect to keep your seat in the presence of an enemy 
 if you lose it on a peaceful high - road ? ' 

 ' I can but try , my illustrious , ' he answer , rearrange his ruffle 
 clothing . ' perchance the sudden and unexpected character of my movement 
 may disconcert the said enemy . ' 

 ' well , well , there may be more truth in that than you be aware of , ' 
 quoth Saxon , rid upon Lockarby 's bridle arm , so that there be scarce 
 room for he to fall between we . ' I have soon fight a man like that 
 young fool at the inn , who know a little of the use of his weapon , than 
 one like Micah here , or yourself , who know nothing . you can tell what 
 the one be after , but the other will invent a system of his own which 
 will serve his turn for the nonce . ober - hauptmann Muller be reckon to 
 be the fine player at the small - sword in the Kaiser 's army , and could 
 for a wager snick any button from an opponent 's vest without cut the 
 cloth . yet be he slay in an encounter with Fahnfuhrer Zollner , who be 
 a cornet in our own Pandour corps , and who know as much of the rapi as 
 you do of horsemanship . for the rapier , be it understand , be design 
 to thrust and not to cut , so that no man wield it ever think of 
 guard a side - stroke . but Zollner , be a long - armed man , smite his 
 antagonist across the face with his weapon as though it have be a 
 cane , and then , ere he have time to recover himself , fairly pink he . 
 Doubtless if the matter be to do again , the Oberhauptmann would have 
 get his thrust in soon , but as it be , no explanation or excuse could 
 get over the fact that the man be dead . ' 

 ' if want of knowledge maketh a dangerous swordsman , ' quoth Reuben , ' then 
 be I even more deadly than the unpronounceable gentleman whom you have 
 mention . to continue my story , however , which I break off in order to 
 step down from my horse , I find out early in the morning that ye be 
 go , and Zachary Palmer be able to tell I whither . I make up my mind , 
 therefore , that I would out into the world also . to this end I borrow 
 a sword from Solomon Sprent , and my father have go to Gosport , 
 I help myself to the good nag in his stable -- for I have too much 
 respect for the old man to allow one of his flesh and blood to go 
 ill - provide to the war . all day I have ride , since early morning , 
 be twice stop on suspicion of be ill - affected , but have the 
 good luck to get away each time . I know that I be close at your heel , 
 for I find they search for you at the Salisbury Inn . ' 

 Decimus whistle . ' search for we ? ' say he . 

 ' yes . it seem that they have some notion that ye be not what ye 
 profess to be , so the inn be surround as I pass , but none know 
 which road ye have take . ' 

 ' say I not so ? ' cry Saxon . ' that young viper hath stir up the 
 regiment against we . we must push on , for they may send a party on our 
 track . ' 

 ' we be off the main road now , ' I remark ; ' even should they pursue we , 
 they would be unlikely to follow this side track . ' 

 ' yet it would be wise to show they a clean pair of heel , ' say Saxon , 
 spur his mare into a gallop . Lockarby and I follow his example , 
 and we all three ride swiftly along the rough moorland track . 

 we pass through scatter belt of pinewood , where the wild cat howl 
 and the owl screech , and across broad stretch of fenland and moor , 
 where the silence be only break by the booming cry of the bittern or 
 the fluttering of wild duck far above our head . the road be in part 
 overgrown with bramble , and be so deeply rut and so stud with 
 sharp and dangerous hollow , that our horse come more than once upon 
 their knee . in one place the wooden bridge which lead over a stream have 
 break down , and no attempt have be make to repair it , so that we be 
 compel to ride our horse girth deep through the torrent . at first 
 some scatter light have show that we be in the neighbourhood of 
 human habitation , but these become few as we advance , until the last 
 die away and we find ourselves upon the desolate moor which stretch 
 away in unbroken solitude to the shadowy horizon . the moon have break 
 through the cloud and now shine hazily through wreath of mist , 
 throw a dim light over the wild scene , and enable we to keep to 
 the track , which be not fence in in any way and could scarce be 
 distinguish from the plain around it . 

 we have slacken our pace under the impression that all fear of pursuit 
 be at an end , and Reuben be amazing we by an account of the excitement 
 which have be cause in Havant by our disappearance , when through the 
 stillness of the night a dull , muffled rat - tat - tat strike upon my ear . 
 at the same moment Saxon spring from his horse and listen intently 
 with sidelong head . 

 ' boot and saddle ! ' he cry , spring into his seat again . ' they be 
 after we as sure as fate . a dozen trooper by the sound . we must shake 
 they off , or goodbye to Monmouth . ' 

 ' give they their head , ' I answer , and strike spur into our steed , 
 we thunder on through the darkness . Covenant and Chloe be as fresh 
 as could be wish , and soon settle down into a long springy gallop . 
 our friend 's horse however , have be travel all day , and its 
 long - draw , laboured breathing show that it could not hold out for 
 long . through the clatter of our horse ' hoof I could still from time 
 to time hear the ominous murmur from behind we . 

 ' this will never do , Reuben , ' say I anxiously , as the weary creature 
 stumble , and the rider come perilously near to shoot over its head . 

 ' the old horse be nearly foundered , ' he answer ruefully . ' we be off 
 the road now , and the rough ground be too much for she . ' 

 ' yes , we be off the track , ' cry Saxon over his shoulder -- for he lead 
 we by a few pace . ' bear in mind that the Bluecoats have be on the 
 march all day , so that their horse may also be blow . how in Himmel 
 come they to know which road we take ? ' 

 as if in answer to his ejaculation , there rise out of the still night 
 behind we a single , clear , bell - like note , swell and increase in 
 volume until it seem to fill the whole air with its harmony . 

 ' a bloodhound ! ' cry Saxon . 

 a second sharp , keener note , end in an unmistakable howl , answer 
 the first . 

 ' another of they , ' say he . ' they have loose the brute that we see 
 near the Cathedral . Gad ! we little think when we peer over the rail 
 at they , a few hour ago , that they would so soon be on our own track . 
 keep a firm knee and a steady seat , for a slip now would be your last . ' 

 ' Holy mother ! ' cry Reuben , ' I have steel myself to die in battle -- but 
 to be dogsmeat ! it be something outside the contract . ' 

 ' they hold they in leash , ' say Saxon , between his tooth , ' else they 
 would outstrip the horse and be lose in the darkness . 

 could we but come on run water we might put they off our track . ' 

 ' my horse can not hold on at this pace for more than a very few minute , ' 
 Reuben cry . ' if I break down , do ye go on , for ye must remember 
 that they be upon your track and not mine . they have find cause for 
 suspicion of the two stranger of the inn , but none of I . ' 

 ' Nay , Reuben , we shall stand or fall together , ' say I sadly , for at 
 every step his horse grow more and more feeble . ' in this darkness they 
 will make little distinction between person . ' 

 ' keep a good heart , ' shout the old soldier , who be now lead we by 
 twenty yard or more . ' we can hear they because the wind blow from that 
 way , but it be odd whether they have hear we . methink they slacken in 
 their pursuit . ' 

 ' the sound of their horse have indeed grow fainter , ' say I joyfully . 

 ' so faint that I can hear it no long , ' my companion cry . 

 we rein up our pant steed and strain our ear , but not a 
 sound could we hear save the gentle murmur of the breeze amongst the 
 whin - bush , and the melancholy cry of the night - jar . behind we the 
 broad rolling plain , half light and half shadow , stretch away to 
 the dim horizon without sign of life or movement . ' we have either 
 outstrip they completely , or else they have give up the chase , ' say 
 I. ' what ail the horse that they should tremble and snort ? ' 

 ' my poor beast be nearly do for , ' Reuben remark , lean forward and 
 pass his hand down the creature 's reeking neck . 

 ' for all that we can not rest , ' say Saxon . ' we may not be out of danger 
 yet . another mile or two may shake we clear . but I like it not . ' 

 ' like not what ? ' 

 ' these horse and their terror . the beast can at time both see and 
 hear more than we , as I could show by diver example draw from mine 
 own experience on the Danube and in the Palatinate , be the time and 
 place more fitting . let we on , then , before we rest . ' 

 the weary horse respond bravely to the call , and struggle onwards 
 over the broken ground for a considerable time . at last we be think 
 of pull up in good earnest , and of congratulate ourselves upon 
 have tired out our pursuer , when of a sudden the bell - like baying 
 break upon our ear far louder than it have be before -- so loud , indeed , 
 that it be evident that the dog be close upon our heel . 

 ' the accursed hound ! ' cry Saxon , put spur to his horse and 
 shoot ahead of we ; ' I fear as much . they have free they from the 
 leash . there be no escape from the devil , but we can choose the spot 
 where we shall make our stand . ' 

 ' come on , Reuben , ' I shout . ' we have only to reckon with the dog now . 
 their master have let they loose , and turn back for Salisbury . ' 

 ' pray heaven they break their neck before they get there ! ' he cry . 
 ' they set dog on we as though we be rat in a cock - pit . yet they call 
 England a christian country ! it be no use , Micah . Poor Dido can not stir 
 another step . ' 

 as he speak , the sharp fierce bay of the hound rise again , clear and 
 stern on the night air , swell up from a low hoarse growl to a high 
 angry yelp . there seem to be a ring of exultation in their wild cry , 
 as though they know that their quarry be almost run to earth . 

 ' not another step ! ' say Reuben Lockarby , pull up and draw his 
 sword . ' if I must fight , I shall fight here . ' 

 ' there could be no well place , ' I reply . two great jagged rock rise 
 before we , jut abruptly out of the ground , and leave a space of 
 twelve or fifteen foot between they . through this gap we ride , and 
 I shout loudly for Saxon to join we . his horse , however , have be 
 steadily gain upon ours , and at the renew alarm have dart off 
 again , so that he be already some hundred yard from we . it be useless 
 to summon he , even could he hear our voice , for the hound would be 
 upon we before he could return . 

 ' never heed he , ' I say hurriedly . ' do you rein your steed behind 
 that rock , and I behind this . they will serve to break the force of the 
 attack . Dismount not , but strike down , and strike hard . ' 

 on either side in the shadow of the rock we wait in silence for our 
 terrible pursuer . look back at it , my dear child , I can not but 
 think that it be a great trial on such young soldier as Reuben and 
 myself to be put , on the first occasion of draw our sword , into such 
 a position . for I have find , and other have confirm my opinion , 
 that of all danger that a man be call upon to face , that arise from 
 savage and determined animal be the most unnerving . for with man there 
 be ever the chance that some trait of weakness or of want of courage may 
 give you an advantage over they , but with fierce beast there be no such 
 hope . we know that the creature to whom we be oppose could never 
 be turn from our throat while there be breath in their body . one 
 feel in one 's heart , too , that the combat be an unequal one , for your 
 life be precious at least to your friend , while their life , what be 
 they ? all this and a great deal more pass swiftly through our mind 
 as we sit with draw sword , soothe our trembling horse as well we 
 might , and wait for the coming of the hound . 

 nor have we long to wait . another long , deep , thunderous bay sound 
 in our ear , follow by a profound silence , break only by the quick 
 shivering breathing of the horse . then suddenly , and noiselessly , a 
 great tawny brute , with its black muzzle to the earth , and its overhung 
 cheek nap on either side , spring into the band of moonlight between 
 the rock , and on into the shadow beyond . it never pause or swerve for 
 an instant , but pursue its course straight onwards without a glance 
 to right or to left . close behind it come a second , and behind that a 
 third , all of enormous size , and look even large and more terrible 
 than they be in the dim shift light . like the first , they take no 
 notice of our presence , but bound on along the trail leave by Decimus 
 Saxon . 

 the first and second I let pass , for I hardly realise that they so 
 completely overlook we . when the third , however , spring out into the 
 moonlight , I draw my right - hand pistol from its holster , and rest 
 its long barrel across my left forearm , I fire at it as it pass . the 
 bullet strike the mark , for the brute give a fierce howl of rage and 
 pain , but true to the scent it never turn or swerve . Lockarby fire 
 also as it disappear among the brushwood , but with no apparent effect . 
 so swiftly and so noiselessly do the great hound pass , that they might 
 have be grim silent spirit of the night , the phantom dog of Herne 
 the hunter , but for that one fierce yelp which follow my shot . 

 ' what brute ! ' my companion ejaculate ; ' what shall we do , Micah ? ' 

 ' they have clearly be lay on Saxon 's trail , ' say I. ' we must follow 
 they up , or they will be too many for he . can you hear anything of our 
 pursuer ? ' 

 ' nothing . ' 

 ' they have give up the chase , then , and let the dog loose as a last 
 resource . doubtless the creature be train to return to the town . but 
 we must push on , Reuben , if we be to help our companion . ' 

 ' one more spurt , then , little Dido , ' cry Reuben ; ' can you muster 
 strength for one more ? Nay , I have not the heart to put spur to you . if 
 you can do it , I know you will . ' 

 the brave mare snort , as though she understand her rider word , and 
 stretch her weary limb into a gallop . so stoutly do she answer the 
 appeal that , though I press Covenant to his topmost speed , she be 
 never more than a few stride behind he . 

 ' he take this direction , ' say I , peer anxiously out into the 
 darkness . ' he can scarce have go far , for he speak of make a stand . 
 or , perhaps , find that we be not with he , he may trust to the speed 
 of his horse . ' 

 ' what chance hath a horse of outstrip these brute ? ' Reuben 
 answer . ' they must run he to earth , and he know it . Hullo ! what have 
 we here ? ' 

 a dark dim form lie stretch in the moonlight in front of we . it be 
 the dead body of a hound -- the one evidently at which I have fire . 

 ' there be one of they dispose of , ' I cry joyously ; ' we have but two 
 to settle with now . ' 

 ' as I speak we hear the crack of two pistol - shot some little distance 
 to the left . head our steed in that direction , we press on at the 
 top of our speed . presently out of the darkness in front of we there 
 arise such a roaring and a yelping as send the heart into our mouth . 
 it be not a single cry , such as the hound have utter when they be 
 on the scent , but a continuous deep - mouthed uproar , so fierce and so 
 prolong , that we could not doubt that they have come to the end of 
 their run . 

 ' pray God that they have not get he down ! ' cry Reuben , in a faltering 
 voice . 

 the same thought have cross my own mind , for I have hear a similar 
 though less din come from a pack of otter hound when they have 
 overtake their prey and be tear it to piece . sick at heart , I 
 draw my sword with the determination that , if we be too late to save 
 our companion , we should at least revenge he upon the four - footed 
 fiend . burst through a thick belt of scrub and tangle gorse bush , 
 we come upon a scene so unlike what we have expect that we pull up 
 our horse in astonishment . 

 a circular clearing lie in front of we , brightly illuminate by the 
 silvery moonshine . in the centre of this rise a giant stone , one 
 of those high dark column which be find all over the plain , and 
 especially in the part round Stonehenge . it could not have be less 
 than fifteen foot in height , and have doubtless be originally straight , 
 but wind and weather , or the crumbling of the soil , have gradually 
 suffer it to tilt over until it incline at such an angle that an 
 active man might clamber up to the summit . on the top of this ancient 
 stone , cross - legged and motionless , like some strange carve idol of 
 former day , sit Decimus Saxon , puff sedately at the long pipe which 
 be ever his comfort in moment of difficulty . beneath he , at the base 
 of the monolith , as our learn man call they , the two great bloodhound 
 be rear and springing , clamber over each other 's back in their 
 frenzied and futile eagerness to reach the impassive figure perch 
 above they , while they give vent to their rage and disappointment in the 
 hideous uproar which have suggest such terrible thought to our mind . 

 we have little time , however , to gaze at this strange scene , for upon our 
 appearance the hound abandon their helpless attempt to reach Saxon , 
 and fly , with a fierce snarl of satisfaction , at Reuben and myself . 
 one great brute , with flare eye and yawn mouth , his white fang 
 glistening in the moonlight , spring at my horse 's neck ; but I meet he 
 fair with a single sweeping cut , which shore away his muzzle , and leave 
 he wallow and writhe in a pool of blood . Reuben , meanwhile , have 
 spur his horse forward to meet his assailant ; but the poor tired 
 steed flinch at the sight of the fierce hound , and pull up suddenly , 
 with the result that her rider roll headlong into the very jaw of the 
 animal . it might have go ill with Reuben have he be leave to his own 
 resource . at the most he could only have keep the cruel tooth from 
 his throat for a very few moment ; but see the mischance , I draw my 
 remain pistol , and spring from my horse , discharge it full into 
 the creature 's flank while it struggle with my friend . with a last 
 yell of rage and pain it bring its fierce jaw together in one wild 
 impotent snap , and then sink slowly over upon its side , while Reuben 
 crawl from beneath it , scared and bruise , but none the bad 
 otherwise for his perilous adventure . 

 ' I owe you one for that , Micah , ' he say gratefully . ' I may live to do 
 as much for you . ' 

 ' and I owe ye both one , ' say Saxon , who have scramble down from his 
 place of refuge . ' I pay my debt , too , whether for good or evil . I might 
 have stay up there until I have eat my jack - boot , for all the chance 
 I have of ever get down again . Sancta Maria ! but that be a shrewd 
 blow of your , Clarke ! the brute 's head fly in half like a rotten 
 pumpkin . no wonder that they stick to my track , for I have leave both my 
 spare girth and my kerchief behind I , which would serve to put they on 
 Chloe 's scent as well as mine own . ' 

 ' and where be Chloe ? ' I ask , wipe my sword . 

 ' Chloe have to look out for herself . I find the brute gain on I , 
 you see , and I let drive at they with my barker ; but with a horse 
 fly at twenty mile an hour , what chance be there for a single slug 
 find its way home ? ' thing look black then , for I have no time to 
 reload , and the rapier , though the king of weapon in the duello , be 
 scarce strong enough to rely upon on an occasion like this . as luck 
 would have it , just as I be fairly puzzle , what should I come across 
 but this handy stone , which the good priest of old do erect , as far as 
 I can see , for no other purpose than to provide worthy cavaliero with 
 an escape from such ignoble and scurvy enemy . I have no time to spare 
 in clamber up it , for I have to tear my heel out of the mouth of the 
 foremost of they , and might have be drag down by it have he not 
 find my spur too tough a morsel for his chewing . but surely one of my 
 bullet must have readie its mark . ' light the touch - paper in his 
 tobacco - box , he pass it over the body of the hound which have attack 
 I , and then of the other . 

 ' why , this one be riddle like a sieve , ' he cry . ' what do you load 
 your petronel with , good Master Clarke ? ' 

 ' with two leaden slug . ' 

 ' yet two leaden slug have make a score of hole at the least ! and of 
 all thing in this world , here be the neck of a bottle stick in the 
 brute 's hide ! ' 

 ' Good heaven ! ' I exclaim . ' I remember . my dear mother pack a bottle 
 of Daffy 's elixir in the barrel of my pistol . ' 

 ' and you have shoot it into the bloodhound ! ' roar Reuben . ' Ho ! ho ! when 
 they hear that tale at the tap of the Wheatsheaf , there will be some 
 throat dry with laughter . save my life by shoot a dog with a bottle 
 of Daffy 's elixir ! ' 

 ' and a bullet as well , Reuben , though I dare warrant the gossip will 
 soon contrive to leave that detail out . it be a mercy the pistol do not 
 burst . but what do you propose to do now , Master Saxon ? ' 

 ' why , to recover my mare if it can anywise be do , ' say the 
 adventurer . ' though on this vast moor , in the dark , she will be as 
 difficult to find as a Scotsman 's breech or a flavourless line in 
 " Hudibras . " ' 

 ' and Reuben Lockarby 's steed can go no far , ' I remark . ' but do 
 mine eye deceive I , or be there a glimmer of light over yonder ? ' 

 ' a will - o'-the - wisp , ' say Saxon . 

           " an _ ignis fatuus _ that bewitch , 
            and lead man into pool and ditch . " 

 yet I confess that it burn steady and clear , as though it come from 
 lamp , candle , rushlight , lanthorn , or other human agency . ' 

 ' where there be light there be life , ' cry Reuben . ' let we make for it , 
 and see what chance of shelter we may find there . ' 

 ' it can not come from our dragoon friend , ' remark Decimus . ' a murrain 
 on they ! how come they to guess our true character ; or be it on the 
 score of some insult to the regiment that that young Fahnfuhrer have set 
 they on our track ? if I have he at my sword 's point again , he shall 
 not come off so free . well , do ye lead your horse , and we shall explore 
 this light , since no well course be open to we . ' 

 pick our way across the moor , we direct our course for the bright 
 point which twinkle in the distance ; and as we advance we hazard 
 a thousand conjecture as to whence it could come . if it be a human 
 dwelling , what sort of be could it be who , not content with live in 
 the heart of this wilderness , have choose a spot so far remove from the 
 ordinary track which cross it ? the roadway be mile behind we , and 
 it be probable that no one save those drive by such a necessity as 
 that which have overtake we would ever find themselves in that desolate 
 region . no hermit could have desire an abode more completely isolate 
 from all communion with his kind . 

 as we approach we see that the light do indeed come from a small 
 cottage , which be build in a hollow , so as to be invisible from any 
 quarter save that from which we approach it . in front of this humble 
 dwell a small patch of ground have be clear of shrub , and in the 
 centre of this little piece of sward our miss steed stand graze at 
 her leisure upon the scanty herbage . the same light which have attract 
 we have doubtless catch her eye , and draw she towards it by hope of 
 oats and of water . with a grunt of satisfaction Saxon resume possession 
 of his lost property , and lead she by the bridle , approach the door 
 of the solitary cottage . 



 Chapter XI . of the Lonely Man and the Gold Chest 

 the strong yellow glare which have attract we across the moor find its 
 way out through a single narrow slit alongside the door which serve the 
 purpose of a rude window . as we advance towards it the light change 
 suddenly to red , and that again to green , throw a ghastly pallor over 
 our face , and especially heighten the cadaverous effect of Saxon 's 
 austere feature . at the same time we become aware of a most subtle 
 and noxious odour which poison the air all round the cottage . 
 this combination of portent in so lonely a spot work upon the old 
 man - at - arm ' superstitious feeling to such an extent that he pause 
 and look back at we inquiringly . both Reuben and I be determine , 
 however , to carry the adventure through , so he content himself with 
 fall a little behind we , and pattering to himself some exorcism 
 appropriate to the occasion . walk up to the door , I rap upon it 
 with the hilt of my sword and announce that we be weary traveller 
 who be seek a night 's shelter . 

 the first result of my appeal be a sound as of some one bustle 
 rapidly about , with the clinking of metal and noise of the turning of 
 lock . this die away into a hush , and I be about to knock once more 
 when a crackling voice greet we from the other side of the door . 

 ' there be little shelter here , gentleman , and less provision , ' it say . 
 ' it be but six mile to Amesbury , where at the Cecil Arms ye shall find , 
 I doubt not , all that be needful for man and for beast . ' 

 ' Nay , nay , mine invisible friend , ' quoth Saxon , who be much reassure 
 by the sound of a human voice , ' this be surely but a scurvy reception . 
 one of our horse be completely foundered , and none of they be in 
 very good plight , so that we could no more make for the Cecil Arms at 
 Amesbury than for the Gruner Mann at Lubeck . I prythee , therefore , that 
 you will allow we to pass the remainder of the night under your roof . ' 

 at this appeal there be much creaking of lock and rasping of bolt , 
 which end in the door swing slowly open , and disclose the person 
 who have address we . 

 by the strong light which shine out from behind he we could see that 
 he be a man of venerable aspect , with snow - white hair and a countenance 
 which bespoke a thoughtful and yet fiery nature . the high pensive brow 
 and flow beard smack of the philosopher , but the keen sparkling 
 eye , the curved aquiline nose , and the lithe upright figure which the 
 weight of year have be unable to bend , be all suggestive of the 
 soldier . his lofty bearing , and his rich though severe costume of black 
 velvet , be at strange variance with the humble nature of the abode 
 which he have choose for his dwelling - place . 

 ' Ho ! ' say he , look keenly at we . ' two of ye unused to war , and the 
 other an old soldier . ye have be pursue , I see ! ' 

 ' how do you know that , then ? ' ask Decimus Saxon . 

 ' ah , my friend , I too have serve in my time . my eye be not so old but 
 that they can tell when horse have be spur to the utmost , nor be 
 it difficult to see that this young giant 's sword hath be employ in 
 something less innocent than toast bacon . your story , however , can 
 keep . every true soldier think first of his horse , so I pray that you 
 will tether yours without , since I have neither ostl nor serve man 
 to whom I may entrust they . ' 

 the strange dwelling into which we presently enter have be prolong 
 into the side of the little hill against which it have be build , so 
 as to form a very long narrow hall . the end of this great room , as we 
 enter , be wrap in shadow , but in the centre be a bright glare 
 from a brazier full of coal , over which a brass pipkin be suspend . 
 beside the fire a long wooden table be plentifully cover with curve 
 glass flask , basin , tubing , and other instrument of which I know 
 neither the name nor the purpose . a long row of bottle contain 
 various coloured liquid and powder be arrange along a shelf , whilst 
 above it another shelf bear a goodly array of brown volume . for the 
 rest there be a second rough - hewn table , a pair of cupboard , three or 
 four wooden settle , and several large screen pin to the wall 
 and cover all over with figure and symbol , of which I could make 
 nothing . the vile smell which have greet we outside be very much bad 
 within the chamber , and arise apparently from the fume of the boiling , 
 bubble content of the brazen pot . 

 ' ye behold in I , ' say our host , bow courteously to we , ' the last of 
 an ancient family . I be Sir Jacob Clancing of Snellaby Hall . ' 

 ' Smellaby it should be , methink , ' whisper Reuben , in a voice which 
 fortunately do not reach the ear of the old knight . 

 ' I pray that ye be seat , ' he continue , ' and that ye lie aside your 
 plate and headpiece , and remove your boot . consider this to be your 
 inn , and behave as freely . Ye will hold I excuse if for a moment I 
 turn my attention from you to this operation on which I be engage , 
 which will not brook delay . ' 

 Saxon begin forthwith to undo his buckle and to pull off his harness , 
 while Reuben , throw himself into a chair , appear to be too weary 
 to do more than unfasten his sword - belt . for my own part , I be glad 
 to throw off my gear , but I keep my attention all the while upon the 
 movement of our host , whose graceful manner and learn appearance have 
 arouse my curiosity and admiration . 

 he approach the evil - smell pot , and stir it up with a face 
 which indicate so much anxiety that it be clear that he have push his 
 courtesy to we so far as to risk the ruin of some important experiment . 
 dip his ladle into the compound , he scoop some up , and then pour 
 it slowly back into the vessel , show a yellow turbid fluid . the 
 appearance of it evidently reassure he , for the look of anxiety 
 clear away from his feature , and he utter an exclamation of relief . 
 take a handful of a whitish powder from a trencher at his side he 
 throw it into the pipkin , the content of which begin immediately to 
 seethe and froth over into the fire , cause the flame to assume 
 the strange greenish hue which we have observe before enter . this 
 treatment have the effect of clear the fluid , for the chemist be 
 enable to pour off into a bottle a quantity of perfectly watery 
 transparent liquid , while a brownish sediment remain in the vessel , 
 and be empty out upon a sheet of paper . this do , Sir Jacob Clancing 
 push aside all his bottle , and turn towards we with a smile face 
 and a light air . 

 ' we shall see what my poor larder can furnish forth , ' say he . 
 ' meanwhile , this odour may be offensive to your untrained nostril , so 
 we shall away with it . he throw a few grain of some balsamic resin 
 into the brazier , which at once fill the chamber with a most agreeable 
 perfume . he then lay a white cloth upon the table , and take from a 
 cupboard a dish of cold trout and a large meat pasty , he place they 
 upon it , and invite we to draw up our settle and set to work . 

 ' I would that I have more toothsome fare to offer ye , ' say he . ' be 
 we at Snellaby Hall , ye should not be put off in this scurvy fashion , I 
 promise ye . this may serve , however , for hungry man , and I can still 
 lay my hand upon a brace of bottle of the old Alicant . ' so say , he 
 bring a pair of flask out from a recess , and have see we serve 
 and our glass fill , he seat himself in a high - back oaken chair 
 and preside with old - fashioned courtesy over our feast . as we sup , I 
 explain to he what our errand be , and narrate the adventure of the 
 night , without make mention of our destination . 

 ' you be bind for Monmouth 's camp , ' he say quietly , when I have 
 finish , look I full in the face with his keen dark eye . ' I know 
 it , but ye need not fear lest I betray you , even be it in my power . 
 what chance , think ye , hath the Duke against the King 's force ? ' 

 ' as much chance as a farmyard fowl against a spurred gamecock , do he 
 rely only on those whom he hath with he , ' Saxon answer . ' he hath 
 reason to think , however , that all England be like a powder magazine , 
 and he hop to be the spark to set it alight . ' 

 the old man shake his head sadly . ' the King hath great resource , ' he 
 remark . ' where be Monmouth to get his train soldier ? ' 

 ' there be the militia , ' I suggest . 

 ' and there be many of the old parliamentary breed , who be not too far 
 go to strike a blow for their belief , ' say Saxon . ' do you but get 
 half - a - dozen broad - brim , snuffle - nosed preacher into a camp , and the 
 whole Presbytery tribe will swarm round they like fly on a honey - pot . 
 no recruiting sergeant will ever raise such an army as do Noll 's 
 preacher in the eastern county , where the promise of a seat by the 
 throne be think of more value than a ten - pound bounty . I would I 
 could pay mine own debt with these same promise . ' 

 ' I should judge from your speech , sir , ' our host observe , ' that you be 
 not one of the sectary . how come it , then , that you be throw the 
 weight of your sword and your experience into the weak scale ? ' 

 ' for the very reason that it be the weak scale , ' say the soldier of 
 fortune . ' I should gladly have go with my brother to the Guinea coast 
 and have no say in the matter one way or the other , beyond deliver 
 letter and such trifle . since I must be do something , I choose to 
 fight for Protestantism and Monmouth . it be nothing to I whether James 
 Stuart or James Walters sit upon the throne , but the court and army of 
 the King be already make up . now , since Monmouth hath both courtier 
 and soldier to find , it may well happen that he may be glad of my 
 service and reward they with honourable preferment . ' 

 ' your logic be sound , ' say our host , ' save only that you have omit 
 the very great chance which you will incur of lose your head if the 
 Duke 's party be bear down by the odd against they . ' 

 ' a man can not throw a main without put a stake on the board , ' say 
 Saxon . 

 ' and you , young sir , ' the old man ask , ' what have cause you to take a 
 hand in so dangerous a game ? ' 

 ' I come of a roundhead stock , ' I answer , ' and my folk have always 
 fight for the liberty of the people and the humbling of tyranny . I come 
 in the place of my father . ' 

 ' and you , sir ? ' our questioner continue , look at Reuben . 

 ' I have come to see something of the world , and to be with my friend and 
 companion here , ' he reply . 

 ' and I have strong reason than any of ye , ' Sir Jacob cry , ' for 
 appear in arm against any man who bear the name of Stuart . have I 
 not a mission here which can not be neglect , I might myself be tempt 
 to hie westward with ye , and put these grey hair of mine once more into 
 the rough clasp of a steel headpiece . for where now be the noble castle 
 of Snellaby , and where those glade and wood amidst which the clancing 
 have grow up , and live and die , ere ever Norman William set his 
 foot on english soil ? a man of trade -- a man who , by the sweat of his 
 half - starve worker , have lay by ill - get wealth , be now the owner 
 of all that fair property . should I , the last of the Clancings , show 
 my face upon it , I might be hand over to the village beadle as a 
 trespasser , or scourge off it perhaps by the bowstring of insolent 
 huntsman . ' 

 ' and how come so sudden a reverse of fortune ? ' I ask . 

 ' fill up your glass ! ' cry the old man , suit the action to the 
 word . ' here be a toast for you ! perdition to all faithless prince ! 
 how come it about , ye ask ? why , when the trouble come upon the first 
 Charles , I stand by he as though he have be mine own brother . at 
 Edgehill , at Naseby , in twenty skirmish and battle , I fight stoutly 
 in his cause , maintain a troop of horse at my own expense , form 
 from among my own gardener , groom , and attendant . then the military 
 chest run low , and money must be have to carry on the contest . my silver 
 charger and candlestick be throw into the melting - pot , as be 
 those of many another cavalier . they go in metal and they come out 
 as trooper and pikemen . so we tide over a few month until again the 
 purse be empty , and again we fill it amongst we . this time it be the 
 home farm and the oak tree that go . then come Marston Moor , and every 
 penny and man be need to repair that great disaster . I flinch not , 
 but give everything . this boiler of soap , a prudent , fat - cheek man , 
 have keep himself free from civil broil , and have long have a covetous eye 
 upon the castle . it be his ambition , poor worm , to be a gentleman , as 
 though a gable roof and a crumble house could ever make he that . I 
 let he have his way , however , and throw the sum receive , every guinea 
 of it , into the King 's coffer . and so I hold out until the final ruin 
 of Worcester , when I cover the retreat of the young prince , and may 
 indeed say that save in the Isle of Man I be the last Royalist who 
 uphold the authority of the crown . the Commonwealth have set a price upon 
 my head as a dangerous malignant , so I be force to take my passage in 
 a Harwich ketch , and arrive in the Lowlands with nothing save my sword 
 and a few broad piece in my pocket . ' 

 ' a cavalier might do well even then , ' remark Saxon . ' there be ever 
 war in Germany where a man be worth his hire . when the North Germans 
 be not in arm against the Swedes or French , the South Germans be sure 
 to be have a turn with the janissary . ' 

 ' I do indeed take arm for a time in the employ of the United 
 Provinces , by which mean I come face to face once more with mine old 
 foe , the roundhead . Oliver have lend Reynolds 's brigade to the French , 
 and right glad be Louis to have the service of such seasoned troop . 
 ' Fore God , I stand on the counterscarp at Dunkirk , and I find myself , 
 when I should have be help the defence , actually cheer on the 
 attack . my very heart rise when I see the bull - dog fellow clamber up 
 the breach with their pike at the trail , and never quaver in their 
 psalm - tune , though the bullet sing around they as thick as bee in the 
 hiving time . and when they do come to close hug with the Flemings , I 
 tell you they set up such a rough cry of soldierly joy that my pride 
 in they as Englishmen overtop my hatred of they as foe . however , my 
 soldiering be of no great duration , for peace be soon declare , and 
 I then pursue the study of chemistry , for which I have a strong turn , 
 first with Vorhaager of Leyden , and later with De Huy of Strasburg , 
 though I fear that these weighty name be but sound to your ear . ' 

 ' truly , ' say Saxon , ' there seemeth to be some fatal attraction in this 
 same chemistry , for we meet two officer of the Blue Guards in Salisbury , 
 who , though they be stout soldierly man in other respect , have also a 
 weakness in that direction . ' 

 ' ha ! ' cry Sir Jacob , with interest . ' to what school do they belong ? ' 

 ' Nay , I know nothing of the matter , ' Saxon answer , ' save that they 
 deny that Gervinus of Nurnberg , whom I guard in prison , or any other 
 man , could transmute metal . ' 

 ' for Gervinus I can not answer , ' say our host , ' but for the possibility 
 of it I can pledge my knightly word . however , of that anon . the time 
 come at last when the second Charles be invite back to his throne , 
 and all of we , from Jeffrey Hudson , the court dwarf , up to my Lord 
 Clarendon , be in high feather at the hope of regain our own once 
 more . for my own claim , I let it stand for some time , think that it 
 would be a more graceful act for the King to help a poor cavalier who 
 have ruin himself for the sake of his family without solicitation on 
 his part . I wait and wait , but no word come , so at last I betook 
 myself to the levee and be duly present to he . " ah , " say he , 
 greet I with the cordiality which he could assume so well , " you 
 be , if I mistake not , Sir Jasper Killigrew ? " " Nay , your Majesty , " 
 I answer , " I be Sir Jacob Clancing , formerly of Snellaby Hall , in 
 Staffordshire ; " and with that I remind he of Worcester fight and of 
 many passage which have occur to we in common . " Od 's fish ! " he cry , 
 " how could I be so forgetful ! and how be all at Snellaby ? " I then 
 explain to he that the Hall have pass out of my hand , and tell he 
 in a few word the state to which I have be reduce . his face cloud 
 over and his manner chill to I at once . " they be all on to I for 
 money and for place , " he say , " and truly the Commons be so niggardly 
 to I that I can scarce be generous to other . however , Sir Jacob , we 
 shall see what can be do for thee , " and with that he dismiss I . 
 that same night the secretary of my Lord Clarendon come to I , and 
 announce with much form and show that , in consideration of my long 
 devotion and the loss which I have sustain , the King be graciously 
 pleased to make I a lottery cavalier . ' 

 ' and pray , sir , what be a lottery cavalier ? ' I ask . 

 ' it be nothing else than a licensed keeper of a gambling - house . this 
 be his reward to I . I be to be allow to have a den in the piazza 
 of Covent Garden , and there to decoy the young spark of the town and 
 fleece they at ombre . to restore my own fortune I be to ruin other . 
 my honour , my family , my reputation , they be all to weigh for 
 nothing so long as I have the mean of bubble a few fool out of their 
 guineas . ' 

 ' I have hear that some of the lottery cavalier do well , ' remark 
 Saxon reflectively . 

 ' well or ill , it way no employment for I . I wait upon the King and 
 implore that his bounty would take another form . his only reply be 
 that for one so poor I be strangely fastidious . for week I hang about 
 the court -- I and other poor cavalier like myself , watch the royal 
 brother squander upon their gaming and their harlot sum which 
 would have restore we to our patrimony . I have see Charles put upon 
 one turn of a card as much as would have satisfy the most exacting of 
 we . in the park of St. James , or in the Gallery at Whitehall , I still 
 endeavour to keep myself before his eye , in the hope that some 
 provision would be make for I . at last I receive a second message from 
 he . it be that unless I could dress more in the mode he could dispense 
 with my attendance . that be his message to the old broken soldier who 
 have sacrifice health , wealth , position , everything in the service of 
 his father and himself . ' 

 ' shameful ! ' we cry , all three . 

 ' can you wonder , then , that I curse the whole Stuart race , 
 false - hearted , lecherous , and cruel ? for the Hall , I could buy it back 
 to - morrow if I choose , but why should I do so when I have no heir ? ' 

 ' Ho , you have prosper then ! ' say Decimus Saxon , with one of his 
 shrewd sidelong look . ' perhaps you have yourself find out how to 
 convert pot and pan into gold in the way you have speak of . but that 
 can not be , for I see iron and brass in this room which would hardly 
 remain there could you convert it to gold . ' 

 ' gold have its us , and iron have its us , ' say Sir Jacob oracularly . 
 ' the one can never supplant the other . ' 

 ' yet these officer , ' I remark , ' do declare to we that it be but a 
 superstition of the vulgar . ' 

 ' then these officer do show that their knowledge be less than their 
 prejudice . Alexander Setonius , a Scot , be first of the modern to 
 achieve it . in the month of March 1602 he do change a bar of lead into 
 gold in the house of a certain Hansen , at Rotterdam , who hath testify 
 to it . he then not only repeat the same process before three learn 
 man send by the Kaiser Rudolph , but he teach Johann Wolfgang Dienheim 
 of Freibourg , and Gustenhofer of Strasburg , which latter teach it to my 
 own illustrious master-- ' 

 ' who in turn teach it to you , ' cry Saxon triumphantly . ' I have no 
 great store of metal with I , good sir , but there be my head - piece , 
 back and breast - plate , taslet and thigh - piece , together with my 
 sword , spur , and the buckle of my harness . I pray you to use your most 
 excellent and praiseworthy art upon these , and I will promise within a 
 few day to bring round a mass of metal which shall be more worthy of 
 your skill . ' 

 ' Nay , nay , ' say the alchemist , smile and shake his head . ' it can 
 indeed be do , but only slowly and in order , small piece at a time , 
 and with much expenditure of work and patience . for a man to enrich 
 himself at it he must labour hard and long ; yet in the end I will not 
 deny that he may compass it . and now , since the flask be empty and 
 your young comrade be nod in his chair , it will perhaps be as well 
 for you to spend as much of the night as be leave in repose . ' he draw 
 several blanket and rug from a corner and scatter they over the 
 floor . ' it be a soldier 's couch , ' he remark ; ' but ye may sleep on 
 bad before ye put Monmouth on the english throne . for myself , it be 
 my custom to sleep in an inside chamber , which be hollow out of the 
 hill . ' with a few last word and precaution for our comfort he withdraw 
 with the lamp , pass through a door which have escape our notice at 
 the further end of the apartment . 

 Reuben , have have no rest since he leave Havant , have already drop 
 upon the rug , and be fast asleep , with a saddle for a pillow . Saxon 
 and I sit for a few minute long by the light of the burn brazier . 

 ' one might do bad than take to this same chemical business , ' my 
 companion remark , knock the ash out of his pipe . ' see you yon 
 iron - bind chest in the corner ? ' 

 ' what of it ? ' 

 ' it be two third full of gold , which this worthy gentleman hath 
 manufacture . ' 

 ' how know you that ? ' I ask incredulously . 

 ' when you do strike the door panel with the hilt of your sword , as 
 though you would drive it in , you may have hear some scuttling about , 
 and the turning of a lock . well , thank to my inch , I be able to look 
 through yon slit in the wall , and I see our friend throw something into 
 the chest with a chink , and then lock it . it be but a glance at the 
 content , yet I could swear that that dull yellow light could come from 
 no metal but gold . let we see if it be indeed lock . ' rise from his 
 seat he walk over to the box and pull vigorously at the lid . 

 ' Forbear , Saxon , forbear ! ' I cry angrily . ' what would our host say , 
 should he come upon you ? ' 

 ' Nay , then , he should not keep such thing beneath his roof . with a 
 chisel or a dagger now , this might be prize open . ' 

 ' by Heaven ! ' I whisper , ' if you should attempt it I shall lay you on 
 your back . ' 

 ' well , well , young Anak ! it be but a pass fancy to see the treasure 
 again . now , if he be but well favour to the King , this would be 
 fair prize of war . marked ye not that he claim to have be the last 
 Royalist who draw sword in England ? and he confess that he have be 
 proscribe as a malignant . your father , godly as he be , would have 
 little compunction in despoil such an Amalekite . besides , bethink 
 you , he can make more as easily as your good mother maketh cranberry 
 dumpling . ' 

 ' enough say ! ' I answer sternly . ' it will not bear discussion . get ye 
 to your couch , lest I summon our host and tell he what manner of man he 
 hath entertain . ' 

 with many grumble Saxon consent at last to curl his long limb up 
 upon a mat , whilst I lie by his side and remain awake until the mellow 
 light of morning stream through the chink between the ill - cover 
 rafter . truth to tell , I fear to sleep , lest the freeboote habit 
 of the soldier of fortune should be too strong for he , and he should 
 disgrace we in the eye of our kindly and generous entertainer . at last , 
 however , his long - draw breathing assure I that he be asleep , and I 
 be able to settle down to a few hour of welcome rest . 



 Chapter XII . of certain passage upon the Moor 

 in the morning , after a breakfast furnish by the remain of our 
 supper , we look to our horse and prepare for our departure . Ere we 
 could mount , however , our kindly host come run out to we with a load 
 of armour in his arm . 

 ' come hither , ' say he , beckon to Reuben . ' it be not meet , lad , that 
 you should go bare - breast against the enemy when your comrade be 
 girt with steel . I have here mine own old breastplate and head - piece , 
 which should , methink , fit you , for if you have more flesh than I , I be 
 a large framework of a man . ah , say I not so ! were't measure for you 
 by Silas Thomson , the court armourer , it could not grip well . now 
 on with the head - piece . a close fit again . you be now a cavali whom 
 Monmouth or any other leader might be proud to see ride beneath his 
 banner . ' 

 both helmet and body - plate be of the fine Milan steel , richly 
 inlay with silver and with gold , and carve all over in rare and 
 curious device . so stern and soldierly be the effect , that the 
 ruddy , kindly visage of our friend star out of such a panoply have an 
 ill - match and somewhat ludicrous appearance . 

 ' Nay , nay , ' cry the old cavalier , see a smile upon our feature , 
 ' it be but right that so precious a jewel as a faithful heart should 
 have a fitting casket to protect it . ' 

 ' I be truly beholden to you , sir , ' say Reuben ; ' I can scarce find word 
 to express my thank . holy mother ! I have a mind to ride straight back 
 to Havant , to show they how stout a man - at - arm hath be rear amongst 
 they . ' 

 ' it be steel of proof , ' Sir Jacob remark ; ' a pistol - bullet might 
 glance from it . and you , ' he continue , turn to I , ' here be a small 
 gift by which you shall remember this meeting . I do observe that you 
 do cast a wistful eye upon my bookshelf . it be Plutarch 's life of the 
 ancient worthy , do into English by the ingenious Mr. Latimer . carry 
 this volume with you , and shape your life after the example of the giant 
 man whose deed be here set forth . in your saddle - bag I place a small 
 but weighty packet , which I desire you to hand over to Monmouth upon 
 the day of your arrival in his camp . as to you , sir , ' address Decimus 
 Saxon , ' here be a slug of virgin gold for you , which may fashion into a 
 pin or such like ornament . you may wear it with a quiet conscience , for 
 it be fairly give to you and not filch from your entertainer whilst 
 he sleep . ' 

 Saxon and I shoot a sharp glance of surprise at each other at this 
 speech , which show that our word of the night before be not unknown 
 to he . Sir Jacob , however , show no sign of anger , but proceed to 
 point out our road and to advise we as to our journey . 

 ' you must follow this sheep - track until you come on another and broad 
 pathway which make for the West , ' say he . ' it be little use , and 
 there be small chance of your fall in with any of your enemy upon 
 it . this path will lead you between the village of Fovant and Hindon , 
 and soon to Mere , which be no great distance from Bruton , upon the 
 Somersetshire border . ' 

 thank our venerable host for his great kindness towards we we give 
 rein to our horse , and leave he once more to the strange solitary 
 existence in which we have find he . so artfully have the site of 
 his cottage be choose , that when we look back to give he a last 
 greet both he and his dwelling have disappear already from our view , 
 nor could we , among the many mound and hollow , determine where the 
 cottage lay which have give we such welcome shelter . in front of we and 
 on either side the great uneven dun - colour plain stretch away to the 
 horizon , without a break in its barren gorse - cover surface . over the 
 whole expanse there be no sign of life , save for an occasional rabbit 
 which whisk into its burrow on hear our approach , or a few thin and 
 hungry sheep , who could scarce sustain life by feed on the coarse and 
 wiry grass which spring from the unfruitful soil . 

 the pathway be so narrow that only one of we could ride upon it at a 
 time , but we presently abandon it altogether , use it simply as a 
 guide , and gallop along side by side over the roll plain . we be 
 all silent , Reuben meditate upon his new corslet , as I could see from 
 his frequent glance at it ; while Saxon , with his eye half close , be 
 brood over some matter of his own . for my own part , my thought run 
 upon the ignominy of the old soldier 's design upon the gold chest , and 
 the additional shame which rise from the knowledge that our host have in 
 some way divine his intention . no good could come of an alliance with a 
 man so devoid of all feeling of honour or of gratitude . so strongly do 
 I feel upon it that I at last break the silence by point to a 
 cross path , which turn away from the one which we be pursue , and 
 recommend he to follow it , since he have prove that he be no fit 
 company for honest man . 

 ' by the live rood ! ' he cry , lay his hand upon the hilt of his 
 rapier , ' have you take leave of your sens ? these be word such as no 
 honourable cavaliero can abide . ' 

 ' they be none the less word of truth , ' I answer . 

 his blade flash out in an instant , while his mare bound twice her 
 length under the sharp dig of his spur . 

 ' we have here , ' he cry , rein her round , with his fierce lean face 
 all of a quiver with passion , ' an excellent level stretch on which to 
 discuss the matter . out with your bilbo and maintain your word . ' 

 ' I shall not stir a hair' - breadth to attack you , ' I answer . ' why 
 should I , when I bear you no ill - will ? if you come against I , however , 
 I will assuredly beat you out of your saddle , for all your tricky sword 
 play . ' I draw my broadsword as I speak , and stand upon my guard , for I 
 guess that with so old a soldier the onset would be sharp and sudden . 

 ' by all the saint in heaven ! ' cry Reuben , ' which ever of ye strike 
 first at the other I will snap this pistol at his head . none of your 
 joke , Don Decimo , for by the Lord I will let drive at you if you be my 
 own mother 's son . put up your sword , for the trigger fall easy , and my 
 finger be a twitching . ' 

 ' curse you for a spoil - sport ! ' growl Saxon , sulkily sheathe his 
 weapon . ' Nay , Clarke , ' he add , after a few moment of reflection , 
 ' this be but child 's play , that two camarado with a purpose in view 
 should fall out over such a trifle . I , who be old enough to be your 
 father , should have know well than to have draw upon you , for a 
 boy 's tongue wag on impulse and without due thought . do but say that 
 you have say more than you mean . ' 

 ' my way of say it may have be over plain and rough , ' I answer , 
 for I see that he do but want a little salve where my short word have 
 gall he . ' at the same time , our way differ from your way , and that 
 difference must be mend , or you can be no true comrade of our . ' 

 ' all right , Master Morality , ' quoth he , ' I must e'en unlearn some of the 
 trick of my trade . Od 's foot , man , if ye object to I , what the henker 
 would ye think of some whom I have know ? however , let that pass . it 
 be time that we be at the war , for our good sword will not bide in 
 their scabbard . 

           " the trenchant blade , Toledo trusty , 
            for want of fighting be grow rusty , 
            and eat into itself for lack 
            of somebody to hew and hack . " 

 you can not think a thought but old Samuel hath be before you . ' 

 ' surely we shall be at the end of this dreary plain presently , ' Reuben 
 cry . ' its insipid flatness be enough to set the good of friend by the 
 ear . we might be in the desert of Libya instead of his most graceless 
 Majesty 's county of Wiltshire . ' 

 ' there be smoke over yonder , upon the side of that hill , ' say Saxon , 
 point to the southward . 

 ' Methinks I see one straight line of house there , ' I observe , shade 
 my eye with my hand . ' but it be distant , and the shimmer of the sun 
 disturb the sight . ' 

 ' it must be the hamlet of Hindon , ' say Reuben . ' oh , the heat of this 
 steel coat ! I wonder if it be very un - soldierly to slip it off and tie 
 it about Dido 's neck . I shall be bake alive else , like a crab in its 
 shell . how say you , illustrious , be it contravene by any of those 
 thirty - nine article of war which you bear about in your bosom ? ' 

 ' the bearing of the weight of your harness , young man , ' Saxon answer 
 gravely , ' be one of the exercise of war , and as such only attainable by 
 such practice as you be now undergo . you have many thing to learn , 
 and one of they be not to present petronel too readily at folk 's head 
 when you be on horseback . the jerk of your charger 's movement even now 
 might have draw your trigger , and so deprived Monmouth of an old and 
 try soldier . ' 

 ' there would be much weight in your contention , ' my friend answer , 
 ' be it not that I now bethink I that I have forget to recharge my 
 pistol since discharge it at that great yellow beast yesternight . ' 

 Decimus Saxon shake his head sadly . ' I doubt we shall never make a 
 soldier of you , ' he remark . ' you fall from your horse if the brute 
 do bit change his step , you show a levity which will not jump with the 
 gravity of the true soldado , you present empty petronel as a menace , 
 and finally , you crave permission to tie your armour -- armour which the 
 cid himself might be proud to wear -- around the neck of your horse . yet 
 you have heart and mettle , I believe , else you would not be here . ' 

 ' Gracias , Signor ! ' cry Reuben , with a bow which nearly unhorse he ; 
 ' the last remark make up for all the rest , else have I be force to 
 cross blade with you , to maintain my soldierly repute . ' 

 ' touch that same incident last night , ' say Saxon , ' of the chest 
 fill , as I surmise , with gold , which I be inclined to take as lawful 
 plunder , I be now ready to admit that I may have show an undue haste 
 and precipitance , consider that the old man treat we fairly . ' 

 ' say no more of it , ' I answer , ' if you will but guard against such 
 impulse for the future . ' 

 ' they do not properly come from I , ' he reply , ' but from Will 
 Spotterbridge , who be a man of no character at all . ' 

 ' and how come he to be mix up in the matter ? ' I ask curiously . 

 ' why , marry , in this wise . my father marry the daughter of this same 
 Will Spotterbridge , and so weaken a good old stock by an unhealthy 
 strain . will be a rake - hell of Fleet Street in the day of James , a 
 choose light of Alsatia , the home of bully and of brawler . his blood 
 hath through his daughter be transmit to the ten of we , though I 
 rejoice to say that I , be the tenth , it have by that time lose much 
 of its virulence , and indeed amount to little more than a proper pride , 
 and a laudable desire to prosper . ' 

 ' how , then , have it affect the race ? ' I ask . 

 ' why , ' he answer , ' the Saxons of old be a round - face , content 
 generation , with their ledger in their hand for six day and their 
 bible on the seventh . if my father do but drink a cup of small beer 
 more than his will not , or do break out upon provocation into any fond 
 oath , as " Od 's nigger ! " or " heart alive ! " he would mourn over it as 
 though it be the seven deadly sin . be this a man , think ye , in the 
 ordinary course of nature to beget ten long lanky child , nine of 
 whom might have be first cousin of Lucifer , and foster - brother of 
 Beelzebub ? ' 

 ' it be hard upon he , ' remark Reuben . 

 ' on he ! Nay , the hardship be all with we . if he with his eye 
 open choose to marry the daughter of an incarnate devil like Will 
 Spotterbridge , because she chance to be powder and patch to his 
 liking , what reason hath he for complaint ? it be we , who have the blood 
 of this Hector of the tavern graft upon our own good honest stream , 
 who have most reason to lift up our voice . ' 

 ' faith , by the same chain of reasoning , ' say Reuben , ' one of my 
 ancestor must have marry a woman with a plaguy dry throat , for both 
 my father and I be much troubled with the complaint . ' 

 ' you have assuredly inherit a plaguy pert tongue , ' growl Saxon . 
 ' from what I have tell you , you will see that our whole life be a 
 conflict between our natural Saxon virtue and the ungodly impulse of 
 the Spotterbridge taint . that of which you have have cause to complain 
 yesternight be but an example of the evil to which I be subject . ' 

 ' and your brother and sister ? ' I ask ; ' how hath this circumstance 
 affect they ? ' the road be bleak and long , so that the old soldier 's 
 gossip be a welcome break to the tedium of the journey . 

 ' they have all succumb , ' say Saxon , with a groan . ' alas , alas ! they 
 be a goodly company could they have turn their talent to well 
 us . Prima be our eld bear . she do well until she attain 
 womanhood . Secundus be a stout seaman , and own his own vessel when 
 he be yet a young man . it be remark , however , that he start on a 
 voyage in a schooner and come back in a brig , which give rise to some 
 inquiry . it may be , as he say , that he find it drift about in the 
 North Sea , and abandon his own vessel in favour of it , but they hang 
 he before he could prove it . Tertia run away with a north - country 
 drover , and hath be on the run ever since . Quartus and Nonus have be 
 long engage in busy themselves over the rescue of the black folk 
 from their own benighted and heathen country , convey they over by the 
 shipload to the plantation , where they may learn the beauty of the 
 christian religion . they be , however , man of violent temper and profane 
 speech , who cherish no affection for their young brother . Quintus be 
 a lad of promise , but he find a hogshead of rumbo which be throw up 
 from a wreck , and he die soon afterwards . Sextus might have do well , 
 for he become clerk to Johnny Tranter the attorney ; but he be of an 
 enterprising turn , and he shift the whole business , paper , cash , and 
 all to the Lowlands , to the no small inconvenience of his employer , who 
 hath never be able to lay hand either on one or the other from that 
 day to this . Septimus die young . as to Octavius , will Spotterbridge 
 break out early in he , and he be slay in a quarrel over some dice , 
 which be say by his enemy to be so weight that the six must ever 
 come upwards . let this move recital be a warning to ye , if ye be 
 fool enough to saddle yourself with a wife , to see that she hath 
 no vice in she , for a fair face be a sorry make - weight against a foul 
 mind . ' 

 Reuben and I could not but laugh over this frank family confession , 
 which our companion deliver without a sign of shame or embarrassment . 
 ' ye have pay a heavy price for your father 's want of discretion , ' I 
 remark . ' but what in the name of fate be this upon our left ? ' 

 ' a gibbet , by the look of it , ' say Saxon , peer across at the gaunt 
 framework of wood , which rise up from a little knoll . ' let we ride past 
 it , for it be little out of our way . they be rare thing in England , 
 though by my faith there be more gallow than milestone when Turenne 
 be in the Palatinate . what between the spy and traitor who be breed 
 by the war , the rascally Schwartzritter and Lanzknechte , the Bohemian 
 vagabond , and an occasional countryman who be put out of the way lest 
 he do something amiss , there be never such a brave time for the crow . ' 

 as we approach this lonely gibbet we see that a dry - up wisp of a 
 thing which could hardly be recognise as have once be a human being 
 be dangle from the centre of it . this wretched relic of mortality 
 be secure to the cross - bar by an iron chain , and flap drearily 
 backwards and forwards in the summer breeze . we have pull up our 
 horse , and be gaze in silence at this sign - post of death , when what 
 have seem to we to be a bundle of rag throw down at the foot of the 
 gallow begin suddenly to move , and turn towards we the wizened face 
 of an aged woman , so mark with evil passion and so malignant in its 
 expression that it inspire we with even more horror than the unclean 
 thing which dangle above her head . 

 ' gott in Himmel ! ' cry Saxon , ' it be ever thus ! a gibbet draw witch 
 as a magnet draw needle . all the hexerei of the country side will sit 
 round one , like cat round a milk - pail . beware of she ! she hath the evil 
 eye ! ' 

 ' poor soul ! it be the evil stomach that she hath , ' say Reuben , walk 
 his horse up to she . ' whoever see such a bag of bone ! I warrant that 
 she be pin away for want of a crust of bread . ' 

 the creature whine , and thrust out two skinny claw to grab the piece 
 of silver which our friend have throw down to she . her fierce dark 
 eye and beak - like nose , with the gaunt bone over which the yellow 
 parchment - like skin be stretch tightly , give she a fear - inspire 
 aspect , like some foul bird of prey , or one of those vampire of whom 
 the story - teller write . 

 ' what use be money in the wilderness ? ' I remark ; ' she can not feed 
 herself upon a silver piece . ' 

 she tie the coin hurriedly into the corner of her rag , as though she 
 fear that I might try to wrest it from she . ' it will buy bread , ' she 
 croak . 

 ' but who be there to sell it , good mistress ? ' I ask . 

 ' they sell it at Fovant , and they sell it at Hindon , ' she answer . ' I 
 bide here o ' day , but I travel at night . ' 

 ' I warrant she do , and on a broomstick , ' quoth Saxon ; ' but tell we , 
 mother , who be it who hang above your head ? ' 

 ' it be he who slay my youngest bear , ' cry the old woman , cast a 
 malignant look at the mummy above she , and shake a clenched hand at it 
 which be hardly more fleshy than its own . ' it be he who slay my bonny 
 boy . out here upon the wide moor he meet he , and he take his young life 
 from he when no kind hand be near to stop the blow . on that ground 
 there my lad 's blood be shed , and from that watering hath grow this 
 goodly gallow - tree with its fine ripe fruit upon it . and here , come 
 rain , come shine , shall I , his mother , sit while two bone hang together 
 of the man who slow my heart 's darling . ' she nestle down in her rag 
 as she speak , and lean her chin upon her hand star up with an 
 intensity of hatred at the hideous remnant . 

 ' come away , Reuben , ' I cry , for the sight be enough to make one 
 loathe one 's kind . ' she be a ghoul , not a woman . ' 

 ' pah ! it give one a foul taste in the mouth , ' quoth Saxon . ' who be for 
 a fresh gallop over the down ? away with care and carrion ! 

           " Sir John get on his bonny brown steed , 
            to Monmouth for to ride -- a. 
            a brave buff coat upon his back , 
            a broadsword by his side -- a. 
            ha , ha , young man , we rebel can 
            pull down King James 's pride -- a ! " 

 Hark away , lad , with a loose rein and a bloody heel ! ' 

 we spur our steed and gallop from the unholy spot as fast as our 
 brave beast could carry we . to all of we the air have a purer flavour 
 and the heath a sweet scent by contrast with the grim couple whom we 
 have leave behind we . what a sweet world would this be , my child , be 
 it not for man and his cruel way ! 

 when we at last pull up we have set some three or four mile between 
 the gibbet and ourselves . right over against we , on the side of a gentle 
 slope , stand a bright little village , with a red - roof church rise up 
 from amidst a clump of tree . to our eye , after the dull sward of the 
 plain , it be a glad sight to see the green spread of the branch and 
 the pleasant garden which girt the hamlet round . all morning we have 
 see no sight of a human being , save the old hag upon the moor and a few 
 peat - cutter in the distance . our belt , too , be begin to be loose 
 upon we , and the remembrance of our breakfast more faint . 

 ' this , ' say I , ' must be the village of Mere , which we be to pass 
 before come to Bruton . we shall soon be over the Somersetshire 
 border . ' 

 ' I trust that we shall soon be over a dish of beefsteak , ' groaned 
 Reuben . ' I be well - nigh famish . so fair a village must need have a 
 passable inn , though I have not see one yet upon my travel which would 
 compare with the old Wheatsheaf . ' 

 ' neither inn nor dinner for we just yet , ' say Saxon . ' look yonder to 
 the north , and tell I what you see . ' 

 on the extreme horizon there be visible a long line of gleaming , 
 glittering point , which shine and sparkle like a string of diamond . 
 these brilliant speck be all in rapid motion , and yet keep their 
 position to each other . 

 ' what be it , then ? ' we both cry . 

 ' horse upon the march , ' quoth Saxon . ' it may be our friend of 
 Salisbury , who have make a long day 's journey ; or , as I be incline 
 to think , it may be some other body of the King 's horse . they be far 
 distant , and what we see be but the sun shin on their casque ; yet 
 they be bind for this very village , if I mistake not . it would be 
 wisest to avoid enter it , lest the rustic set they upon our track . 
 let we skirt it and push on for Bruton , where we may spare time for bite 
 and sup . ' 

 ' alas , alas ! for our dinner ! ' cry Reuben ruefully . ' I have fall 
 away until my body rattle about , inside this shell of armour , like a 
 pea in a pod . however , lad , it be all for the protestant faith . ' 

 ' one more good stretch to Bruton , and we may rest in peace , ' say Saxon . 
 ' it be ill dining when a dragoon may be serve up as a grace after meat . 
 our horse be still fresh , and we should be there in little over an 
 hour . ' 

 we push on our way accordingly , pass at a safe distance from Mere , 
 which be the village where the second Charles do conceal himself after 
 the battle of Worcester . the road beyond be much crowded by peasant , 
 who be make their way out of Somersetshire , and by farmer ' waggon , 
 which be take load of food to the West , ready to turn a few guineas 
 either from the King 's man or from the rebel . we question many as to 
 the news from the war , but though we be now on the outskirt of the 
 disturb country , we could gain no clear account of how matter stand , 
 save that all agree that the rise be on the increase . the country 
 through which we ride be a beautiful one , consist of low swell 
 hill , well tilled and water by numerous streamlet . cross over the 
 river Brue by a good stone bridge , we at last reach the small country 
 town for which we have be make , which lie embower in the midst of 
 a broad expanse of fertile meadow , orchard , and sheep - walk . from the 
 rise ground by the town we look back over the plain without see 
 any trace of the trooper . we learn , too , from an old woman of the 
 place , that though a troop of the Wiltshire Yeomanry have pass through 
 the day before , there be no soldier quarter at present in the 
 neighbourhood . thus assure we ride boldly into the town , and soon find 
 our way to the principal inn . I have some dim remembrance of an 
 ancient church upon an eminence , and of a quaint stone cross within the 
 market - place , but assuredly , of all the recollection which I retain of 
 Bruton there be none so pleasing as that of the buxom landlady 's face , 
 and of the steaming dish which she lose no time in set before we . 



 chapter xiii . of Sir Gervas Jerome , Knight Banneret of the County of 
 Surrey 

 the inn be very full of company , be occupy not only by many 
 Government agent and courier on their way to and from the seat of 
 the rise , but also by all the local gossip , who gather there to 
 exchange news and consume Dame Hobson the landlady 's home - brew . in 
 spite , however , of this stress of custom and the consequent uproar , the 
 hostess conduct we into her own private room , where we could consume 
 her excellent cheer in peace and quietness . this favour be due , I 
 think , to a little sly manoeuvring and a few whisper word from Saxon , 
 who amongst other accomplishment which he have pick up during his 
 chequer career have a pleasing knack of establish friendly relation 
 with the fair sex , irrespective of age , size , or character . gentle 
 and simple , Church and Dissent , Whig and Tory , if they do but wear a 
 petticoat our comrade never fail , in spite of his fifty year , to make 
 his way into their good grace by the help of his voluble tongue mid 
 assure manner . 

 ' we be your grateful servant , mistress , ' say he , when the smoking 
 joint and the batter pudding have be place upon the table . ' we have 
 rob you of your room . will you not honour we so far as to sit down 
 with we and share our repast ? ' 

 ' nay , kind sir , ' say the portly dame , much flatter by the proposal ; 
 ' it be not for I to sit with gentle like yourself . ' 

 ' Beauty have a claim which person of quality , and above all cavaliero 
 of the sword , be the first to acknowledge , ' cry Saxon , with his 
 little twinkle eye fix in admiration upon her buxom countenance . 
 ' Nay , by my troth , you shall not leave we . I shall lock the door first . 
 if you will not eat , you shall at least drink a cup of Alicant with I . ' 

 ' Nay , sir , it be too much honour , ' cry Dame Hobson , with a simper . ' I 
 shall go down into the cellar and bring a flask of the good . ' 

 ' Nay , by my manhood , you shall not , ' say Saxon , spring up from his 
 seat . ' what be all these infernal lazy drawer here for if you be to 
 descend to menial office ? ' hand the widow to a chair he clank away 
 into the tap - room , where we hear he swear at the man - servant , and 
 curse they for a droning set of rascal who have take advantage of 
 the angelic goodness of their mistress and her incomparable sweetness of 
 temper . 

 ' here be the wine , fair mistress , ' say he , return presently with a 
 bottle in either hand . ' let I fill your glass . ha ! it flow clear and 
 yellow like a prime vintage . these rogue can stir their limb when they 
 find that there be a man to command they . ' 

 ' would that there be ever such , ' say the widow meaningly , with a 
 languish look at our companion . ' here be to you , sir -- and to ye , too , 
 young sir , ' she add , sip at her wine . ' may there be a speedy end 
 to the insurrection , for I judge , from your gallant equipment , that ye 
 be serve the king . ' 

 ' his business take we to the West , ' say Reuben , ' and we have every 
 reason to hope that there will be a speedy end to the insurrection . ' 

 ' aye , aye , though blood will be shed first , ' she say , shake her head . 
 ' they tell I that the rebel be as many as seven thousand , and that 
 they swear to give an ' take no quarter , the murderous villain ! alas ! 
 how any gentleman can fall to such bloody work when he might have a 
 clean honourable occupation , such as innkeeping or the like , be more 
 than my poor mind can understand . there be a sad difference betwixt the 
 man who lieth on the cold ground , not know how long it may be before 
 he be three foot deep in it , and he who passeth his night upon a warm 
 feather bed , with mayhap a cellar beneath it stock with even such 
 wine as we be now drink . ' she again look hard at Saxon as she 
 speak , while Reuben and I nudge each other beneath the table . 

 ' this business hath doubtless increase your trade , fair mistress , ' 
 quoth Saxon . 

 ' Aye , and in the way that payeth well , ' say she . ' the few kilderkin of 
 beer which be drunk by the common folk make little difference one way 
 or the other . but now , when we have lieutenant of county , officer , 
 mayor , and gentry spur it for very life down the highway , I have 
 sell more of my rare old wine in three day than ever I do before in 
 a calendar month . it be not ale , or strong water , I promise you , that 
 those gentle drink , but Priniac , Languedoc , Tent , Muscadine , Chiante , 
 and Tokay -- never a flask under the half - guinea . ' 

 ' so indeed ! ' quoth Saxon thoughtfully . ' a snug home and a steady 
 income . ' 

 ' would that my poor Peter have live to share it with I , ' say Dame 
 Hobson , lay down her glass , and rub her eye with a corner of 
 her kerchief . ' he be a good man , poor soul , though in very truth and 
 between friend he do at last become as broad and as thick as one of 
 his own puncheon . all well , the heart be the thing ! Marry come up ! if a 
 woman be ever to wait until her own fancy come her way , there would be 
 more maid than mother in the land . ' 

 ' Prythee , good dame , how run your own fancy ? ' ask Reuben 
 mischievously . 

 ' not in the direction of fat , young man , ' she answer smartly , with a 
 merry glance at our plump companion . 

 ' she have hit you there , Reuben , ' say I. 

 ' I would have no pert young springald , ' she continue , ' but one who hath 
 knowledge of the world , and ripe experience . tall he should be , and of 
 sinewy build , free of speech that he might lighten the weary hour , and 
 help entertain the gentle when they crack a flagon of wine . of business 
 habit he must be , too , forsooth , for be there not a busy hostel and two 
 hundred good pound a year to pass through his finger ? if Jane Hobson 
 be to be lead to the altar again it must be by such a man as this . ' 

 Saxon have listen with much attention to the widow 's word , and have 
 just open his mouth to make some reply to she when a clattering and 
 bustle outside announce the arrival of some traveller . our 
 hostess drink off her wine and prick up her ear , but when a loud 
 authoritative voice be hear in the passage , demand a private room 
 and a draught of sack , her call to duty overcome her private concern , 
 and she bustle off with a few word of apology to take the measure of 
 the new - comer . 

 ' body o ' me , lad ! ' quoth Decimus Saxon the moment that she disappear , 
 ' ye can see how the land lie . I have half a mind to let Monmouth carve 
 his own road , and to pitch my tent in this quiet english township . ' 

 ' your tent , indeed ! ' cry Reuben ; ' it be a brave tent that be furnish 
 with cellar of such wine as we be drink . and as to the quiet , my 
 illustrious , if you take up your residence here I will warrant that the 
 quiet soon come to an end . ' 

 ' you have see the woman , ' say Saxon , with his brow all in a wrinkle 
 with thought . ' she hath much to commend she . a man must look to himself . 
 two hundred pound a year be not to be pick off the roadside every 
 June morning . it be not princely , but it be something for an old soldier 
 of fortune who hath be in the war for five - and - thirty year , and 
 foresee the time when his limb will grow stiff in his harness . what 
 sayeth our learn Fleming--"an mulier-- " but what in the name of the 
 devil have we here ? ' 

 our companion 's ejaculation be call forth by a noise as of a slight 
 scuffle outside the door , with a smother ' oh , sir ! ' and ' what will the 
 maid think ? ' the contest be terminate by the door be open , and 
 Dame Hobson re - enter the room with her face in a glow , and a slim 
 young man dress in the height of fashion at her heel . 

 ' I be sure , good gentleman , ' say she , ' that ye will not object to this 
 young nobleman drink his wine in the same room with ye , since all the 
 other be fill with the townsfolk and commonalty . ' 

 ' Faith ! I must need be mine own usher , ' say the stranger , stick his 
 gold - lace cap under his left arm and lay his hand upon his heart , 
 while he bow until his forehead nearly strike the edge of the table . 
 ' your very humble servant , gentleman , Sir Gervas Jerome , knight banneret 
 of his Majesty 's county of Surrey , and at one time custos rotulorum of 
 the district of Beacham Ford . ' 

 ' welcome , sir , ' quoth Reuben , with a merry twinkle in his eye . ' you have 
 before you Don Decimo Saxon of the spanish nobility , together with Sir 
 Micah Clarke and Sir Reuben Lockarby , both of his Majesty 's county of 
 Hampshire . ' 

 ' proud and glad to meet ye , gentleman ! ' cry the newcomer , with a 
 flourish . ' but what be this upon the table ? alicant ? Fie , fie , it be a 
 drink for boy . let we have some good sack with plenty of body in it . 
 Claret for youth , say I , sack for maturity , and strong water in old 
 age . Fly , my sweetest , move those dainty foot of thine , for egad ! my 
 throat be like leather . Od 's ' oon , I drink deep last night , and yet 
 it be clear that I could not have drunk enough , for I be as dry as a 
 concordance when I awake . ' 

 Saxon sit silently at the table , look so viciously at the stranger 
 out of his half - close glitter eye that I fear that we should 
 have another such brawl as occur at Salisbury , with perhaps a more 
 unpleasant end . finally , however , his ill - humour at the gallant 's 
 free and easy attention to our hostess spend itself in a few muttered 
 oath , and he light his long pipe , the never - fail remedy of a ruffled 
 spirit . as to Reuben and myself , we watch our new companion half in 
 wonder and half in amusement , for his appearance and manner be novel 
 enough to raise the interest of inexperienced youngster like ourselves . 

 I have say that he be dress in the height of fashion , and such 
 indeed be the impression which a glance would give . his face be thin 
 and aristocratic , with a well - mark nose , delicate feature , and gay 
 careless expression . some little paleness of the cheek and darkness 
 under the eye , the result of hard travel or dissipation , do but add a 
 chasten grace to his appearance . his white periwig , velvet and silver 
 riding coat , lavender vest and red satin knee - breech be all of the 
 good style and cut , but when look at closely , each and all of these 
 article of attire bore evidence of have see well day . beside the 
 dust and stain of travel , there be a shininess or a fading of colour 
 here and there which scarce accord with the costliness of their 
 material or the bearing of their wearer . his long riding - boot have a 
 gap seam in the side of one of they , whilst his toe be push 
 its way through the end of the other . for the rest , he wear a handsome 
 silver - hilte rapi at his side , and have a frille cambric shirt 
 somewhat the bad for wear and open at the front , as be the mode with 
 the gallant of those day . all the time he be speak he mumble a 
 toothpick , which together with his constant habit of pronounce his 
 o 's as a 's make his conversation sound strange to our ear . ( note D 
 Appendix ) whilst we be note these peculiarity he be recline 
 upon Dame Hobson 's good taffatta - cover settee , tranquilly comb his 
 wig with a delicate ivory comb which he have take from a small satin bag 
 which hang upon the right of his sword - belt . 

 ' Lard preserve we from country inn ! ' he remark . ' what with the boor 
 that swarm in every chamber , and the want of mirror , and jasmine water , 
 and other necessary , blister I if one have not to do one 's toilet 
 in the common room . ' oon ! I would as soon travel in the land of the Great 
 Mogul ! ' 

 ' when you shall come to be my age , young sir , ' Saxon answer , ' you may 
 know well than to decry a comfortable country hostel . ' 

 ' very like , sir , very like ! ' the gallant answer , with a careless 
 laugh . ' for all that , be mine own age , I feel the wild of Wiltshire 
 and the inn of Bruton to be a sorry change after the Mall , and the fare 
 of Pontack 's or the Coca Tree . ah , Lud ! here come the sack ! open it , my 
 pretty Hebe , and send a drawer with fresh glass , for these gentleman 
 must do I the honour of drink with I . a pinch of snuff , sir ? aye , 
 ye may well look hard at the box . a pretty little thing , sir , from a 
 certain lady of title , who shall be nameless ; though , if I be to say 
 that her title begin with a d and her name with a C , a gentleman of the 
 Court might hazard a guess . ' 

 our hostess , have bring fresh glass , withdraw , and Decimus 
 Saxon soon find an opportunity for follow she . Sir Gervas Jerome 
 continue , however , to chatter freely to Reuben and myself over 
 the wine , rattle along as gaily and airily as though we be old 
 acquaintance . 

 ' sink I , if I have not fright your comrade away ! ' he remark , ' or be 
 it possible that he hath go on the slot of the plump widow ? methought 
 he look in no very good temper when I kiss she at the door . yet it 
 be a civility which I seldom refuse to anything which wear a cap . your 
 friend 's appearance smack more of Mars than of Venus , though , indeed , 
 those who worship the god be will not to be on good term with the goddess . 
 a hardy old soldier , I should judge , from his feature and attire . ' 

 ' one who hath see much service abroad , ' I answer . 

 ' ha ! ye be lucky to ride to the war in the company of so accomplish 
 a cavalier . for I presume that it be to the war that ye be rid , 
 since ye be all so armed and accoutred . ' 

 ' we be indeed bind for the West , ' I reply , with some reserve , for in 
 Saxon 's absence I do not care to be too loose - tongue . 

 ' and in what capacity ? ' he persist . ' will ye risk your crown in 
 defence of King James 's one , or will ye strike in , hit or miss , with 
 these rogue of Devon and Somerset ? stop my vital breath , if I would not 
 as soon side with the clown as with the crown , with all due respect to 
 your own principle ! ' 

 ' you be a daring man , ' say I , ' if you air your opinion thus in every 
 inn parlour . dost not know that a word of what you have say , whisper 
 to the near justice of the peace , might mean your liberty , if not 
 your life ? ' 

 ' I do not care the rind of a rotten orange for life or liberty either , ' 
 cry our acquaintance , snap his finger and thumb . ' burn I if 
 it would not be a new sensation to bandy word with some heavy - chop 
 country justice , with the popish plot still stick in his gizzard , and 
 be thereafter consign to a dungeon , like the hero in John Dryden 's 
 late . I have be round - house many a time by the watch in the old 
 Hawkubite day ; but this would be a more dramatic matter , with high 
 treason , block , and axe all loom in the background . ' 

 ' and rack and pincer for a prologue , ' say Reuben . ' this ambition be 
 the strange that I have ever hear tell of . ' 

 ' anything for a change , ' cry Sir Gervas , fill up a bumper . ' here be 
 to the maid that be next our heart , and here be to the heart that love 
 the maid ! war , wine , and woman , ' twould be a dull world without they . 
 but you have not answer my question . ' 

 ' why truly , sir , ' say I , ' frank as you have be with we , I can scarce 
 be equally so with you , without the permission of the gentleman who have 
 just leave the room . he be the leader of our party . pleasant as our short 
 intercourse have be , these be parlous time , and hasty confidence be 
 apt to lead to repentance . ' 

 ' a Daniel come to judgment ! ' cry our new acquaintance . ' what ancient , 
 ancient word from so young a head ! you be , I will warrant , five year 
 young than a scatterbrain like myself , and yet you talk like the seven 
 wise man of Greece . Wilt take I as a valet ? ' 

 ' a valet ! ' I exclaim . 

 ' Aye , a valet , a man - servant . I have be wait upon so long that it be 
 my turn to wait now , and I would not wish a more likely master . by the 
 Lard ! I must , in apply for a place , give an account of my character 
 and a list of my accomplishment . so my rascal ever do with I , though 
 in good truth I seldom listen to their recital . Honesty -- there I 
 score a trick . sober -- Ananias himself could scarce say that I be 
 that . Trustworthy -- indifferently so . steady -- hum ! about as much so 
 as Garraway 's weathercock . hang it , man , I be choke full of good 
 resolution , but a sparkling glass or a roguish eye will deflect I , as 
 the mariner say of the compass . so much for my weakness . now let I 
 see what qualification I can produce . a steady nerve , save only when I 
 have my morning qualm , and a cheerful heart ; I score two on that . I 
 can dance saraband , minuet , or corranto ; fence , ride , and sing french 
 chanson . Good Lard ! who ever hear a valet urge such accomplishment ? I 
 can play the good game of piquet in London . so say Sir George Etherege 
 when I win a cool thousand off he at the Groom Parter . but that will not 
 advance I much , either . what be there , then , to commend I ? why , marry , 
 I can brew a bowl of punch , and I can broil a devil fowl . it be not 
 much , but I can do it well . ' 

 ' truly , good sir , ' I say , with a smile , ' neither of these 
 accomplishment be like to prove of much use to we on our present 
 errand . you do , however , but jest , no doubt , when you talk of descend 
 to such a position . ' 

 ' not a whit ! not a whit ! ' he reply earnestly . ' " to such base us do 
 we come , " as Will Shakespeare have it . if you would be able to say that 
 you have in your service Sir Gervas Jerome , knight banneret , and sole 
 owner of Beacham Ford Park , with a rent - roll of four thousand good 
 pound a year , he be now up for sale , and will be knock down to the 
 bidder who please he well . say but the word , and we will have another 
 flagon of sack to clinch the bargain . ' 

 ' but , ' say I , ' if you be indeed owner of this fair property , why 
 should you descend to so menial an occupation ? ' 

 ' the Jews , the Jews , oh most astute and yet most slow - witted master ! the 
 ten tribe have be upon I , and I have be harry and waste , bind , 
 ravish , and despoil . never be Agag , king of Amalek , more completely 
 in the hand of the choose , and the sole difference be that they have 
 hew into piece mine estate instead of myself . ' 

 ' have you lose all , then ? ' Reuben ask , open - eyed . 

 ' why no -- not all -- by no means all ! ' he answer , with a merry laugh ; ' I 
 have a gold Jacobus and a guinea or two in my purse . ' twill serve for 
 a flask or so yet . there be my silver - hilte rapier , my ring , my gold 
 snuff - box , and my watch by tompion at the sign of the Three Crowns . 
 it be never buy under a hundred , I will warrant . then there be such 
 relic of grandeur as you see upon my person , though they begin to 
 look as frail and wear as a waiting - woman 's virtue . in this bag , too , 
 I retain the mean for preserve that niceness and elegance of person 
 which make I , though I say it , as well groom a man as ever set foot 
 in St. James 's Park . here be french scissor , eyebrow brush , toothpick 
 case , patch - box , powder - bag , comb , puff , and my pair of red - heeled 
 shoe . what could a man wish for more ? these , with a dry throat , a 
 cheerful heart , and a ready hand , be my whole stock in trade . ' 

 Reuben and I could not forbear from laugh at the curious inventory of 
 article which Sir Gervas have save from the wreck of his fortune . he 
 upon see our mirth be so tickled at his own misfortune , that he 
 laugh in a high treble key until the whole house resound with his 
 merriment . ' by the Mass , ' he cry at last , ' I have never have so much 
 honest amusement out of my prosperity as hath be cause in I by my 
 downfall . fill up your glass ! ' 

 ' we have still some distance to travel this evening , and must not drink 
 more , ' I observe , for prudence tell I that it be dangerous work for 
 two sober country lad to keep pace with an experienced toper . 

 ' so ! ' say he in surprise . ' I should have think that would be a 
 " raison de plus , " as the French say . but I wish your long - legged friend 
 would come back , even if he be intent upon slit my weazand for my 
 attention to the widow . he be not a man to flinch from his liquor , I will 
 warrant . curse this Wiltshire dust that cling to my periwig ! ' 

 ' until my comrade return , Sir Gervas , ' say I , ' you might , since the 
 subject do not appear to be a painful one to you , let we know how 
 these evil time , which you bear with such philosophy , come upon you . ' 

 ' the old story ! ' he answer , flick away a few grain of snuff with 
 his deeply - laced cambric handkerchief . ' the old , old story ! my father , a 
 good , easy country baronet , find the family purse somewhat full , must 
 need carry I up to town to make a man of I . there as a young lad I 
 be present at Court , and be a slim active youngster with a pert 
 tongue and assure manner , I catch the notice of the Queen , who make 
 I one of her page of honour . this post I hold until I grow out of 
 it , when I withdraw from town , but egad ! I find I must get back to it 
 again , for Beacham Ford Park be as dull as a monastery after the life 
 which I have be live . in town I stay then with such boon companion 
 as Tommy Lawson , my Lord Halifax , Sir Jasper Lemarck , little Geordie 
 Chichester , aye , and old Sidney Godolphin of the Treasury ; for with all 
 his staid way and long - wind budget he could drain a cup with the 
 good of we , and be as keen on a main of cock as on a committee of way 
 and mean . well , it be rare sport while it last , and sink I if 
 I would not do the same again if I have my time once more . it be like 
 slide down a greased plank though , for at first a man go slow 
 enough , and think he can pull himself up , but presently he go fast 
 and fast , until he come with a crash on to the rock of ruin at the 
 bottom . ' 

 ' and do you run through four thousand pound a year ? ' I exclaim . 

 ' Od 's bodikin , man , you speak as if this paltry sum be all the 
 wealth of the Indies . why , from Ormonde or Buckingham , with their twenty 
 thousand , down to rant Dicky Talbot , there be not one of my set who 
 could not have buy I out . yet I must have my coach and four , my town 
 house , my liveried servant , and my stable full of horse . to be in the 
 mode I must have my poet , and throw he a handful of guineas for his 
 dedication . well , poor devil , he be one who will miss I . I warrant his 
 heart be as heavy as his verse when he find I go , though perchance 
 he have turn a few guineas by this time by write a satire upon I . 
 it would have a ready sale among my friend . Gad 's life ! I wonder how 
 my levee get on , and whom all my suitor have fasten on to now . there 
 they be morning after morning , the french pimp , the English bully , the 
 needy man o ' letter , the neglect inventor -- I never think to have 
 get rid of they , but indeed I have shake they off very effectually now . 
 when the honey - pot be break it be farewell to the fly . ' 

 ' and your noble friend ? ' I ask . ' do none of they stand by you in 
 your adversity ? ' 

 ' well , well , I have nought to complain of ! ' exclaim Sir Gervas . ' they 
 be brave - hearted boy for the most part . I might have have their name 
 on my bill as long as their finger could hold a pen , but slit I if I 
 like bleed my own companion . they might have find a place for I , 
 too , have I consent to play second - fiddle where I have be use to lead 
 the band . I ' faith , I care not what I turn my hand to amongst stranger , 
 but I would fain leave my memory sweet in town . ' 

 ' as to what you propose , of serve we as a valet , ' say I , ' it be not 
 to be think of . we be , in spite of my friend 's waggishness , but two 
 plain blunt countryman , and have no more need of a valet than one of 
 those poet which you have speak of . on the other hand , if you should 
 care to attach yourself to our party , we shall take you where you 
 will see service which shall be more to your taste than the curling of 
 periwig or the brushing of eyebrow . ' 

 ' Nay , nay , my friend . speak not with unseemly levity of the mystery 
 of the toilet , ' he cry . ' ye would yourself be none the bad for 
 a touch of mine ivory comb , and a close acquaintance with the famous 
 skin - purify wash of Murphy which I be myself in the habit of use . ' 

 ' I be beholden to you , sir , ' say Reuben , ' but the famous spring water 
 wash by Providence be quite good enough for the purpose . ' 

 ' and Dame Nature hath place a wig of her own upon I , ' I add , ' which 
 I should be very loth to change . ' 

 ' goth ! Perfect Goths ! ' cry the exquisite , throw up his white 
 hand . ' but here come a heavy tread and the clink of armour in the 
 passage . ' tis our friend the knight of the wrathful countenance , if I 
 mistake not . ' 

 it be indeed Saxon , who stride into the room to tell we that our horse 
 be at the door , and that all be ready for our departure . take 
 he aside I explain to he in a whisper what have pass between the 
 stranger and ourselves , with the circumstance which have lead I to 
 suggest that he should join our party . the old soldier frown at the 
 news . 

 ' what have we to do with such a coxcomb ? ' he say . ' we have hard fare 
 and hard blow before we . he be not fit for the work . ' 

 ' you say yourself that Monmouth will be weak in horse , ' I answer . 
 ' here be a well - appoint cavalier , who be to all appearance a desperate 
 man and ready for anything . why should we not enrol he ? ' 

 ' I fear , ' say Saxon , ' that his body may prove to be like the bran of 
 a fine cushion , of value only for what it have around it . however , it be 
 perhaps for the good . the handle to his name may make he welcome in the 
 camp , for from what I hear there be some dissatisfaction at the way in 
 which the gentry stand aloof from the enterprise . ' 

 ' I have fear , ' I remark , still speak in a whisper , ' that we be 
 about to lose one of our party instead of gain one in this Bruton 
 inn . ' 

 ' I have think well of it , ' he answer , with a smile . ' Nay , I will 
 tell you of it anon . well , Sir Gervas Jerome , ' he add aloud , turn 
 to our new associate , ' I hear that you be come with we . for a day you 
 must be content to follow without question or remark . be that agree ! ' 

 ' with all my heart , ' cry Sir Gervas . 

 ' then here be a bumper to our well acquaintance , ' cry Saxon , raise 
 his glass . 

 ' I pledge ye all , ' quoth the gallant . ' here be to a fair fight , and may 
 the good man win . ' 

 ' Donnerblitz , man ! ' say Saxon . ' I believe there be mettle in you for all 
 your gay plume . I do conceive a liking for you . give I your hand ! ' 

 the soldier of fortune 's great brown grip enclose the delicate hand 
 of our new friend in a pledge of comradeship . then , have pay our 
 reckoning and bade a cordial adieu to Dame Hobson , who glance methought 
 somewhat reproachfully or expectantly at Saxon , we spring on our steed 
 and continue our journey amidst a crowd of star villager , who 
 huzzae lustily as we ride out from amongst they . 



 Chapter XIV . of the Stiff - legged Parson and his Flock 

 our road lie through Castle Carey and Somerton , which be small town 
 lie in the midst of a most beautiful pastoral country , well woode and 
 water by many stream . the valley along the centre of which the road 
 lie be rich and luxuriant , shelter from the wind by long roll 
 hill , which be themselves highly cultivate . here and there we pass 
 the ivy - clothe turret of an old castle or the peaked gable of a ramble 
 country house , protrude from amongst the tree and mark the country 
 seat of some family of repute . More than once , when these mansion be 
 not far from the road , we be able to perceive the unrepaire dint and 
 fracture on the wall receive during the stormy period of the civil 
 trouble . fairfax it seem have be down that way , and have leave abundant 
 trace of his visit . I have no doubt that my father would have have much 
 to say of these sign of Puritan wrath have he be rid at our side . 

 the road be crowd with peasant who be travel in two strong 
 current , the one set from east to west , and the other from west to 
 east . the latter consist principally of aged people and of child , 
 who be be send out of harm 's way to reside in the less disturbed 
 county until the trouble should be over . many of these poor folk be 
 push barrow in front of they , in which a few bedclothe and some 
 crack utensil represent the whole of their worldly good . other 
 more prosperous have small cart , draw by the wild shaggy colt which 
 be breed on the Somerset moor . what with the spirit of the half - tame 
 beast and the feebleness of the driver , accident be not uncommon , 
 and we pass several unhappy group who have be tumble with their 
 property into a ditch , or who be stand in anxious debate round a 
 crack shaft or a broken axle . 

 the countryman who be make for the West be upon the other hand 
 man in the prime of life , with little or no baggage . their brown face , 
 heavy boot , and smockfrock proclaim most of they to be mere hind , 
 though here and there we overtook man who , by their top - boot and 
 corduroy , may have be small farmer or yeoman . these fellow walk 
 in gang , and be arm for the most part with stout oak cudgel , 
 which be carry as an aid to their journey , but which in the hand of 
 powerful man might become formidable weapon . from time to time one 
 of these traveller would strike up a psalm tune , when all the other 
 within earshot would join in , until the melody ripple away down the 
 road . as we pass some scowl angrily at we , while other whisper 
 together and shake their head , in evident doubt as to our character and 
 aim . now and again among the people we mark the tall broad - brim 
 hat and Geneva mantle which be the badge of the Puritan clergy . 

 ' we be in Monmouth 's country at last , ' say Saxon to I , for Reuben 
 Lockarby and Sir Gervas Jerome have ride on ahead . ' this be the raw 
 material which we shall have to lick into soldiership . ' 

 ' and no bad material either , ' I reply , take note of the sturdy 
 figure and bold hearty face of the man . ' think ye that they be bind 
 for Monmouth 's camp , then ? ' 

 ' aye , be they . see you yon long - limbe parson on the left -- he with the 
 pen - house hat . markest thou not the stiffness wherewith he move his 
 left leg ! ' 

 ' why , yes ; he be travel - wear doubtless . ' 

 ' Ho ! ho ! ' laugh my companion . ' I have see such a stiffness before 
 now . the man hath a straight sword within he leg of his breech . a 
 regular parliamentary tuck , I will warrant . when he be on safe ground he 
 will produce it , aye , and use it too , but until he be out of all danger 
 of fall in with the King 's horse he be shy of strap it to his 
 belt . he be one of the old breed by his cut , who : 

           " call fire and sword and desolation , 
            a godly thorough reformation . " 

 Old Samuel hath they to a penstroke ! there be another ahead of he 
 there , with the head of a scythe inside his smock . can you not see the 
 outline ? I warrant there be not one of the rascal but hath a pike - head 
 or sickle - blade conceal somewhere about he . I begin to feel the 
 breath of war once more , and to grow young with it . Hark ye , lad ! I be 
 glad that I do not tarry at the inn . ' 

 ' you seem to be in two mind about it , ' say I. 

 ' aye , aye . she be a fine woman , and the quarter be comfortable . I do 
 not gainsay it . but marriage , d'ye see , be a citadel that it be plaguy 
 easy to find one 's way into , but once in old Tilly himself could not 
 bring one out again with credit , I have know such a device on the 
 Danube , where at the first onfall the Mamelukes have abandon the 
 breach for the very purpose of ensnare the imperial troop in the 
 narrow street beyond , from which few ever return . old bird be not 
 catch with such wile . I do succeed in gain the ear of one of the 
 gossip , and ask he what he could tell I of the good dame and her 
 inn . it seemeth that she be somewhat of a shrew upon occasion , and that 
 her tongue have more to do with her husband 's death than the dropsy which 
 the leech put it down to . again , a new inn hath be start in the 
 village , which be well - manage , and be like to draw the custom from 
 she . it be , too , as you have say , a dull sleepy spot . all these reason 
 weigh with I , and I decide that it would be good to raise my siege 
 of the widow , and to retreat whilst I could yet do so with the credit 
 and honour of war . ' 

 '' tis good so , ' say I ; ' you could not have settle down to a life of 
 toping and ease . but our new comrade , what think you of he ? ' 

 ' faith ! ' Saxon answer , ' we shall extend into a troop of horse if we 
 add to our number every gallant who be in want of a job . as to this Sir 
 Gervas , however , I think , as I say at the inn , that he hath more mettle 
 in he than one would judge at first sight . these young sprig of the 
 gentry will always fight , but I doubt if he be harden enough or 
 hath constancy enough for such a campaign as this be like to be . his 
 appearance , too , will be against he in the eye of the saint ; and 
 though Monmouth be a man of easy virtue , the saint be like to have the 
 chief voice in his council . now do but look at he as he rein up that 
 showy grey stallion and gaze back at we . mark his riding - hat tilt 
 over his eye , his open bosom , his whip dangle from his button - hole , 
 his hand on his hip , and as many oath in his mouth as there be ribbon 
 to his doublet . above all , mark the air with which he look down upon 
 the peasant beside he . he will have to change his style if he be to 
 fight by the side of the fanatic . but hark ! I be much mistaken if they 
 have not already get themselves into trouble . ' 

 our friend have pull up their horse to await our coming . they have 
 scarce halt , however , before the stream of peasant who have be 
 move along abreast of they slacken their pace , and gather round 
 they with a deep ominous murmur and threaten gesture . other 
 rustic , see that there be something afoot , hurry up to help their 
 companion . Saxon and I put spur to our horse , and push through the 
 throng , which be become every instant large and more menacing , make 
 our way to the aid of our friend , who be hem in on every side by 
 the rabble . Reuben have lay his hand upon the hilt of his sword , while 
 Sir Gervas be placidly chew his toothpick and look down at the 
 angry mob with an air of amuse contempt . 

 ' a flask or two of scent amongst they would not be amiss , ' he remark ; 
 ' I would I have a cast bottle . ' 

 ' stand on your guard , but do not draw , ' cry Saxon . ' what the henker 
 hath come over the chaw - bacon ? they mean mischief . how now , friend , 
 why this uproar ? ' 

 this question instead of allay the tumult appear to make it tenfold 
 bad . all round we twenty deep be savage face and angry eye , 
 with the glint here and there of a weapon half draw from its place of 
 concealment . the uproar , which have be a mere hoarse growl , begin to 
 take shape and form . ' down with the Papists ! ' be the cry . ' down with 
 the Prelatists ! ' ' smite the erastian butcher ! ' ' smite the Philistine 
 horseman ! ' ' down with they ! ' 

 a stone or two have already whistle past our ear , and we have be 
 force in self - defence to draw our sword , when the tall minister whom 
 we have already observe shove his way through the crowd , and by dint of 
 his lofty stature and command voice prevail upon they to be silent . 

 ' how say ye , ' he ask , turn upon we , ' fight ye for Baal or for the 
 Lord ? he who be not with we be against we . ' 

 ' which be the side of Baal , most reverend sir , and which of the Lord ? ' 
 ask Sir Gervas Jerome . ' methink if you be to speak plain English 
 instead of Hebrew we might come to an understanding soon . ' 

 ' this be no time for light word , ' the minister cry , with a flush of 
 anger upon his face . ' if ye would keep your skin whole , tell I , be ye 
 for the bloody usurper James Stuart , or be ye for his most protestant 
 Majesty King Monmouth ? ' 

 ' what ! he hath come to the title already ! ' exclaim Saxon . ' know then 
 that we be four unworthy vessel upon our way to offer our service to 
 the protestant cause . ' 

 ' he lie , good Master Pettigrue , he lie most foully , ' shout a burly 
 fellow from the edge of the crowd . ' who ever see a good protestant in 
 such a Punchinello dress as yonder ? be not Amalekite write upon his 
 raiment ? be he not attire as becometh the bridegroom of the harlot of 
 Rome ? why then should we not smite he ? ' 

 ' I thank you , my worthy friend , ' say Sir Gervas , whose attire have move 
 this champion 's wrath . ' if I be near I should give you some return 
 for the notice which you have take of I . ' 

 ' what proof have we that ye be not in the pay of the usurper , and on 
 your way to oppress the faithful ? ' ask the Puritan divine . 

 ' I tell you , man , ' say Saxon impatiently , ' that we have travel all 
 the way from Hampshire to fight against James Stuart . we will ride with 
 ye to Monmouth 's camp , and what well proof could ye desire than that ? ' 

 ' it may be that ye do but seek an opportunity of escape from our 
 bondage , ' the minister observe , after confer with one or two of the 
 lead peasant . ' it be our opinion , therefore , that before come 
 with we ye must deliver unto we your sword , pistol , and other carnal 
 weapon . ' 

 ' nay , good sir , that can not be , ' our leader answer . ' a cavalier may 
 not with honour surrender his blade or his liberty in the manner ye 
 demand . keep close to my bridle - arm , Clarke , and strike home at any 
 rogue who lay hand on you . ' 

 a hum of anger rise from the crowd , and a score of stick and 
 scythe - blade be raise against we , when the minister again interpose 
 and silence his noisy following . 

 ' do I hear aright ? ' he ask . ' be your name Clarke ? ' 

 ' it be , ' I answer . 

 ' your christian name ? ' 

 ' Micah . ' 

 ' live at ? ' 

 ' Havant . ' 

 the clergyman confer for a few moment with a grizzly - beard , 
 harsh - faced man dress in black buckram who stand at his elbow . 

 ' if you be really Micah Clarke of Havant , ' quoth he , ' you will be able 
 to tell we the name of an old soldier , skilled in the german war , who 
 be to have come with ye to the camp of the faithful . ' 

 ' why , this be he , ' I answer ; ' Decimus Saxon be his name . ' 

 ' aye , aye , Master Pettigrue , ' cry the old man . ' the very name give by 
 Dicky Rumbold . he say that either the old Roundhead Clarke or his son 
 would go with he . but who be these ? ' 

 ' this be Master Reuben Lockarby , also of Havant , and Sir Gervas Jerome 
 of Surrey , ' I reply . ' they be both here as volunteer desire to 
 serve under the Duke of Monmouth . ' 

 ' right glad I be to see ye , then , ' say the stalwart minister heartily . 
 ' friend , I can answer for these gentleman that they favour the honest 
 folk and the old cause . ' 

 at these word the rage of the mob turn in an instant into the most 
 extravagant adulation and delight . they crowd round we , pat our 
 riding - boot , pull at the skirt of our dress , press our hand and 
 call down blessing upon our head , until their pastor succeed 
 at last in rescue we from their attention and in persuade they to 
 resume their journey . we walk our horse in the midst of they whilst 
 the clergyman strode along betwixt Saxon and myself . he be , as Reuben 
 remark , well fit to be an intermediary between we , for he be 
 tall though not so broad as I be , and broad though not so tall as 
 the adventurer . his face be long , thin , and hollow - cheek , with a pair 
 of great thatched eyebrow and deep sink melancholy eye , which light up 
 upon occasion with a sudden quick flash of fiery enthusiasm . 

 ' Joshua Pettigrue be my name , gentleman , ' say he ; ' I be an unworthy 
 worker in the Lord 's vineyard , testify with voice and with arm to his 
 holy covenant . these be my faithful flock , whom I be bring westward 
 that they may be ready for the reaping when it please the Almighty to 
 gather they in . ' 

 ' and why have you not bring they into some show of order or 
 formation ? ' ask Saxon . ' they be straggle along the road like a line 
 of geese upon a common when Michaelmas be nigh . have you no fear ? be 
 it not write that your calamity cometh suddenly -- suddenly shall you be 
 break down without remedy ? ' 

 ' aye , friend , but be it not also write , " trust in the Lord with all 
 thine heart , and lean not unto thine own understanding ! " Mark ye , if I 
 be to draw up my man in military fashion it would invite attention and 
 attack from any of James Stuart 's horse who may come our way . it be my 
 desire to bring my flock to the camp and obtain piece for they before 
 expose they to so unequal a contest . ' 

 ' truly , sir , it be a wise resolution , ' say Saxon grimly , ' for if a 
 troop of horse come down upon these good people the pastor would find 
 himself without his flock . ' 

 ' Nay , that could never be ! ' cry Master Pettigrue with fervour . ' say 
 rather that pastor , flock , and all would find their way along the thorny 
 track of martyrdom to the new Jerusalem . know , friend , that I have come 
 from Monmouth in order to conduct these man to his standard . I receive 
 from he , or rather from Master Ferguson , instruction to be on the 
 lookout for ye and for several other of the faithful we expect to join 
 we from the East . by what route come ye ? ' 

 ' over Salisbury Plain and so through Bruton . ' 

 ' and see ye or meet ye any of our people upon the way ? ' 

 ' none , ' Saxon answer . ' we leave the Blue Guards at Salisbury , however , 
 and we see either they or some other horse regiment near this side of 
 the Plain at the village of Mere . ' 

 ' ah , there be a gathering of the eagle , ' cry Master Joshua Pettigrue , 
 shake his head . ' they be man of fine raiment , with war - horse and 
 chariot and trapping , like the Assyrians of old , yet shall the angel 
 of the Lord breathe upon they in the night . yea , he shall cut they off 
 utterly in his wrath , and they shall be destroy . ' 

 ' amen ! amen ! ' cry as many of the peasant as be within earshot . 

 ' they have elevate their horn , Master Pettigrue , ' say the 
 grizzly - haired Puritan . ' they have set up their candlestick on high -- the 
 candlestick of a perverse ritual and of an idolatrous service . shall it 
 not be dash down by the hand of the righteous ? ' 

 ' Lo , this same candle wax big and burn sooty , even as an offence to 
 the nostril , in the day of our father , ' cry a burly red - faced man , 
 whose dress proclaim he to be one of the yeoman class . ' so be it 
 when Old Noll do get his snuff shear to work upon it . it be a wick 
 which can only be trim by the sword of the faithful . ' a grim laugh 
 from the whole party proclaim their appreciation of the pious waggery 
 of their companion . 

 ' ah , Brother Sandcroft , ' cry the pastor , ' there be much sweetness and 
 manna hide in thy conversation . but the way be long and dreary . shall 
 we not lighten it by a song of praise ? where be Brother Thistlethwaite , 
 whose voice be as the cymbal , the tabor , and the dulcimer ? ' 

 ' Lo , most pious Master Pettigrue , ' say Saxon , ' I have myself at time 
 venture to lift up my voice before the Lord . ' without any further 
 apology he break out in stentorian tone into the follow hymn , the 
 refrain of which be catch up by pastor and congregation . 

           the Lord he be a morion 
            that guard I from all wound ; 
           the Lord he be a coat of mail 
            that circle I all round . 
           who then fear to draw the sword , 
            and fight the battle of the Lord ? 

           the Lord he be the buckler true 
            that swing on my left arm ; 
           the Lord he be the plate of proof 
            that shieldeth I from harm . 
           who then fear to draw the sword , 
            and fight the battle of the Lord ? 

           who then dread the violent , 
            or fear the man of pride ? 
           or shall I flee from two or three 
            if he be by my side ? 
           who then fear to draw the sword , 
            and fight the battle of the Lord ! 

           my faith be like a citadel 
            Girt round with moat and wall , 
           no mine , or sap , or breach , or gap 
            can ere prevail at all . 
           who then fear to draw the sword , 
            and fight the battle of the Lord ? 

 Saxon cease , but the Reverend Joshua Pettigrue wave his long arm and 
 repeat the refrain , which be take up again and again by the long 
 column of march peasant . 

 ' it be a godly hymn , ' say our companion , who have , to my disgust and 
 to the evident astonishment of Reuben and Sir Gervas , resume the 
 snuffling , whine voice which he have use in the presence of my father . 
 ' it hath avail much on the field of battle . ' 

 ' truly , ' return the clergyman , ' if your comrade be of as sweet 
 a savour as yourself , ye will be worth a brigade of pike to the 
 faithful , ' a sentiment which raise a murmur of assent from the Puritans 
 around . ' since , sir , ' he continue , ' you have have much experience in the 
 wile of war , I shall be glad to hand over to you the command of this 
 small body of the faithful , until such time as we reach the army . ' 

 ' it be time , too , in good faith , that ye have a soldier at your head , ' 
 Decimus Saxon answer quietly . ' my eye deceive I strangely if I 
 do not see the gleam of sword and cuirass upon the brow of yonder 
 declivity . methink our pious exercise have bring the enemy upon we . ' 



 Chapter XV . of our Brush with the King 's dragoon 

 some little distance from we a branch road run into that along which we 
 and our motley assemblage of companion - in - arm be travel . this 
 road curve down the side of a well - woode hill , and then over the level 
 for a quarter of a mile or so before opening on the other . just at the 
 brow of the rise ground there stand a thick bristle of tree , amid the 
 trunk of which there come and go a bright shimmer of sparkle steel , 
 which proclaim the presence of armed man . far back , where the road 
 take a sudden turn and run along the ridge of the hill , several horseman 
 could be plainly see outline against the evening sky . so peaceful , 
 however , be the long sweep of countryside , mellow by the golden light 
 of the set sun , with a score of village steeple and manor - house 
 peep out from amongst the wood , that it be hard to think that the 
 thundercloud of war be really lower over that fair valley , and that 
 at any instant the lightning might break from it . 

 the country folk , however , appear to have no difficulty at all in 
 understand the danger to which they be expose . the fugitive from 
 the West give a yell of consternation , and run wildly down the road or 
 whip up their beast of burden in the endeavour to place as safe a 
 distance as possible between themselves and the threaten attack . the 
 chorus of shrill cry and shout , with the cracking of whip , creak 
 of wheel , and the occasional crash when some cart load of good come to 
 grief , make up a most deafening uproar , above which our leader 's voice 
 resound in sharp , eager exhortation and command . when , however , the 
 loud brazen shriek from a bugle break from the wood , and the head of 
 a troop of horse begin to descend the slope , the panic become great 
 still , and it be difficult for we to preserve any order at all amidst 
 the wild rush of the terrify fugitive . 

 ' stop that cart , Clarke , ' cry Saxon vehemently , point with his 
 sword to an old waggon , pile high with furniture and bedding , which be 
 lumber along draw by two raw - boned colt . at the same moment I see 
 he drive his horse into the crowd and catch at the rein of another 
 similar one . 

 give Covenant 's bridle a shake I be soon abreast of the cart which 
 he have indicate , and manage to bring the furious young horse to a 
 stand - still . 

 ' bring it up ! ' cry our leader , work with the coolness which only a 
 long apprenticeship to war can give . ' now , friend , cut the trace ! ' 
 a dozen knife be at work in a moment , and the kicking , struggle 
 animal scamper off , leave their burden behind they . Saxon sprang 
 off his horse and set the example in drag the waggon across the 
 roadway , while some of the peasant , under the direction of Reuben 
 Lockarby and of Master Joshua Pettigrue , arrange a couple of other 
 cart to block the way fifty yard far down . the latter precaution 
 be to guard against the chance of the royal horse rid through 
 the field and attack we from behind . so speedily be the scheme 
 conceive and carry out , that within a very few minute of the first 
 alarm we find ourselves protect front and rear by a lofty barricade , 
 while within this improvise fortress be a garrison of a hundred and 
 fifty man . 

 ' what firearm have we amongst we ? ' ask Saxon hurriedly . 

 ' a dozen pistol at the most , ' reply the elderly Puritan , who be 
 address by his companion as Hope - above Williams . ' John Rodway , 
 the coachman , hath his blunderbuss . there be also two godly man from 
 Hungerford , who be keeper of game , and who have bring their piece 
 with they . ' 

 ' they be here , sir , ' cry another , point to two stout , bearded 
 fellow , who be ram charge into their long - barrel musket . 
 ' their name be Wat and Nat Millman . ' 

 ' two who can hit their mark be worth a battalion who shoot wide , ' our 
 leader remark , ' get under the waggon , my friend , and rest your piece 
 upon the spoke . never draw trigger until the son of Belial be within 
 three pike ' length of ye . ' 

 ' my brother and I , ' quoth one of they , ' can hit a running doe at two 
 hundred pace . our life be in the hand of the Lord , but two , at 
 least , of these hire butcher we shall send before we . ' 

 ' as gladly as ever we slew stoat or wild - cat , ' cry the other , slip 
 under the waggon . ' we be keep the Lord 's preserve now , brother Wat , 
 and truly these be some of the vermin that infest they . ' 

 ' let all who have pistol line the waggon , ' say Saxon , tie his mare 
 to the hedge -- an example which we all follow . ' Clarke , do you take 
 charge upon the right with Sir Gervas , while Lockarby assist Master 
 Pettigrue upon the left . ye other shall stand behind with stone . 
 should they break through our barricade , slash at the horse with your 
 scythe . once down , the rider be no match for ye . ' 

 a low sullen murmur of determine resolution rise from the peasant , 
 mingle with pious ejaculation and little scrap of hymn or of prayer . 
 they have all produce from under their smock rustic weapon of some 
 sort . ten or twelve have petronel , which , from their antique look and 
 rusty condition , threaten to be more dangerous to their possessor 
 than to the enemy . other have sickle , scythe - blade , flail , 
 half - pike , or hammer , while the remainder carry long knife and 
 oaken club . simple as be these weapon , history have prove that in 
 the hand of man who be deeply stir by religious fanaticism they be 
 by no mean to be despise . one have but to look at the stern , set face 
 of our follower , and the gleam of exultation and expectancy which shine 
 from their eye , to see that they be not the man to quail , either from 
 superior number or equipment . 

 ' by the Mass ! ' whisper Sir Gervas , ' it be magnificent ! an hour of this 
 be worth a year in the Mall . the old Puritan bull be fairly at bay . let 
 we see what sort of sport the bull - pup make in the baiting of he ! I will 
 lay five piece to four on the chaw - bacon ! ' 

 ' Nay , it be no matter for idle betting , ' say I shortly , for his 
 light - hearted chatter annoy I at so solemn a moment . 

 ' five to four on the soldier , then ! ' he persist . ' it be too good a 
 match not to have a stake on it one way or the other . ' 

 ' our life be the stake , ' say I. 

 ' faith , I have forget it ! ' he reply , still mumble his toothpick . ' " to 
 be or not to be ? " as Will of Stratford say . Kynaston be great on the 
 passage . but here be the bell that ring the curtain up . ' 

 whilst we have be make our disposition the troop of horse -- for there 
 appear to be but one -- have trot down the cross - road , and have draw 
 up across the main highway . they number , as far as I could judge , 
 about ninety trooper , and it be evident from their three - cornered 
 hat , steel plate , red sleeve , and bandolier , that they be dragoon 
 of the regular army . the main body halt a quarter of a mile from we , 
 while three officer ride to the front and hold a short consultation , 
 which end in one of they set spur to his horse and canter down 
 in our direction . a bugler follow a few pace behind he , wave a 
 white kerchief and blow an occasional blast upon his trumpet . 

 ' here come an envoy , ' cry Saxon , who be stand up in the waggon . 
 ' now , my brother , we have neither kettle - drum nor tinkling brass , but 
 we have the instrument wherewith Providence hath endow we . let we show 
 the redcoat that we know how to use it . 

           " who then dread the violent , 
            or fear the man of pride ? 
            or shall I flee from two or three 
            if he be by my side ? " ' 

 seven score voice break in , in a hoarse roar , upon the chorus-- 

           ' who then fear to draw the sword , 
            and fight the battle of the Lord ? ' 

 I could well believe at that moment that the Spartans have find the lame 
 singer Tyrtaeus the most successful of their general , for the sound of 
 their own voice increase the confidence of the country folk , while the 
 martial word of the old hymn rouse the dogged spirit in their breast . 
 so high do their courage run that they break off their song with a 
 loud warlike shout , wave their weapon above their head , and ready I 
 verily believe to march out from their barricade and make straight for 
 the horseman . in the midst of this clamour and turmoil the young dragoon 
 officer , a handsome , olive - face lad , ride fearlessly up to the barrier , 
 and pull up his beautiful roan steed , hold up his hand with an 
 imperious gesture which demand silence . 

 ' who be the leader of this conventicle ? ' he ask . 

 ' address your message to I , sir , ' say our leader from the top of 
 the waggon , ' but understand that your white flag will only protect you 
 whilst you use such language as may come from one courteous adversary to 
 another . say your say or retire . ' 

 ' courtesy and honour , ' say the officer , with a sneer , ' be not extend 
 to rebel who be in arm against their lawful sovereign . if you be the 
 leader of this rabble , I warn you if they be not disperse within five 
 minute by this watch'--he pull out an elegant gold time - piece--'we 
 shall ride down upon they and cut they to piece . ' 

 ' the Lord can protect his own , ' Saxon answer , amid a fierce hum of 
 approval from the crowd . ' be this all thy message ? ' 

 ' it be all , and you will find it enough , you presbyterian traitor , ' 
 cry the dragoon cornet . ' listen to I , misguided fool , ' he continue , 
 stand up upon his stirrup and speak to the peasant at the 
 other side of the waggon . ' what chance have ye with your whittle and 
 cheese - scraper ? Ye may yet save your skin if ye will but deliver up 
 your leader , throw down what ye be pleased to call your arm , and 
 trust to the King 's mercy . ' 

 ' this exceedeth the limitation of your privilege , ' say Saxon , draw 
 a pistol from his belt and cock it . ' if you say another word to 
 seduce these people from their allegiance , I fire . ' 

 ' hope not to benefit Monmouth , ' cry the young officer , disregard 
 the threat , and still address his word to the peasant . ' the whole 
 royal army be draw round he and-- ' 

 ' have a care ! ' shout our leader , in a deep harsh voice . 

 ' his head within a month shall roll upon the scaffold . ' 

 ' but you shall never live to see it , ' say Saxon , and stoop over 
 he fire straight at the cornet 's head . at the flash of the pistol the 
 trumpeter wheel round and gallop for his life , while the roan horse 
 turn and follow with its master still seat firmly in the saddle . 

 ' verily you have miss the Midianite ! ' cry Hope - above Williams . 

 ' he be dead , ' say our leader , pour a fresh charge into his pistol . 
 ' it be the law of war , Clarke , ' he add , look round at I . ' he hath 
 choose to break it , and must pay forfeit . ' 

 as he speak I see the young officer lean gradually over in his saddle , 
 until , when about half - way back to his friend , he lose his balance and 
 fall heavily in the roadway , turn over two or three time with 
 the force of his fall , and lie at last still and motionless , a 
 dust - colour heap . a loud yell of rage break from the trooper at 
 the sight , which be answer by a shout of defiance from the Puritan 
 peasantry . 

 ' down on your face ! ' cry Saxon ; ' they be about to fire . ' 

 the crackle of musketry and a storm of bullet , ping on the hard 
 ground , or cut twig from the hedge on either side of we , lent 
 emphasis to our leader 's order . many of the peasant crouch behind the 
 feather bed and table which have be pull out of the cart . some lay 
 in the waggon itself , and some shelter themselves behind or underneath 
 it . other again line the ditch on either side or lie flat upon the 
 roadway , while a few show their belief in the working of Providence 
 by stand upright without flinch from the bullet . amongst these 
 latter be Saxon and Sir Gervas , the former to set an example to his 
 raw troop , and the latter out of pure laziness and indifference . 
 Reuben and I sit together in the ditch , and I can assure you , my dear 
 grandchild , that we feel very much inclined to bob our head when we 
 hear the bullet pip all around they . if any soldier ever tell you 
 that he do not the first time that he be under fire , then that soldier 
 be not a man to trust . after sit rigid and silent , however , as if 
 we have both stiff neck , for a very few minute , the feeling pass 
 completely away , and from that day to this it have never return to I . 
 you see familiarity breed contempt with bullet as with other thing , 
 and though it be no easy matter to come to like they , like the King of 
 Sweden or my Lord Cutts , it be not so very hard to become indifferent to 
 they . 

 the cornet 's death do not remain long unavenged . a little old man with 
 a sickle , who have be stand near Sir Gervas , give a sudden sharp 
 cry , and spring up into the air with a loud ' glory to God ! ' fall flat 
 upon his face dead . a bullet have strike he just over the right eye . 
 almost at the same moment one of the peasant in the waggon be shoot 
 through the chest , and sit up cough blood all over the wheel . I see 
 Master Joshua Pettigrue catch he in his long arm , and settle some 
 bed under his head , so that he lie breathe heavily and pattering 
 forth prayer . the minister show himself a man that day , for amid the 
 fierce carbine fire he walk boldly up and down , with a drawn rapier in 
 his left hand -- for he be a left - handed man -- and his Bible in the other . 
 ' this be what you be die for , dear brother , ' he cry continually , 
 hold the brown volume up in the air ; ' be ye not ready to die for 
 this ? ' and every time he ask the question a low eager murmur of assent 
 rise from the ditch , the waggon , and the road . 

 ' they aim like yokel at a Wappenschaw , ' say Saxon , seat himself 
 on the side of the waggon . ' like all young soldier they fire too high . 
 when I be an adjutant it be my custom to press down the barrel of the 
 musket until my eye tell I that they be level . these rogue think 
 that they have do their part if they do but let the gun off , though 
 they be as like to hit the plover above we as ourselves . ' 

 ' five of the faithful have fall , ' say Hope - above Williams . ' shall we 
 not sally forth and do battle with the child of antichrist ? be we to 
 lie here like so many popinjay at a fair for the trooper to practise 
 upon ? ' 

 ' there be a stone barn over yonder on the hill - side , ' I remark . ' if 
 we who have horse , and a few other , be to keep the dragoon in 
 play , the people might be able to reach it , and so be shelter from the 
 fire . ' 

 ' at least let my brother and I have a shot or two back at they , ' cry 
 one of the marksman beside the wheel . 

 to all our entreaty and suggestion , however , our leader only reply 
 by a shake of the head , and continue to swing his long leg over the 
 side of the waggon with his eye fix intently upon the horseman , many 
 of whom have dismount and be lean their carbine over the crupper 
 of their charger . 

 ' this can not go on , sir , ' say the pastor , in a low earnest voice ; ' two 
 more man have just be hit . ' 

 ' if fifty more man be hit we must wait until they charge , ' Saxon 
 answer . ' what would you do , man ? if you leave this shelter you will 
 be cut off and utterly destroy . when you have see as much of war as 
 I have do , you will learn to put up quietly with what be not to be 
 avoid . I remember on such another occasion when the rearguard or 
 nachhut of the imperial troop be follow by Croats , who be in 
 the pay of the Grand Turk , I lose half my company before the mercenary 
 renegade come to close fighting . ha , my brave boy , they be mount ! 
 we shall not have to wait long now . ' 

 the dragoon be indeed climb into their saddle again , and form 
 across the road , with the evident intention of charge down upon we . 
 at the same time about thirty man detach themselves from the main body 
 and trot away into the field upon our right . Saxon growl a hearty 
 oath under his breath as he observe they . 

 ' they have some knowledge of warfare after all , ' say he . ' they mean to 
 charge we flank and front . Master Joshua , see that your scythesman 
 line the quickset hedge upon the right . stand well up , my brother , and 
 flinch not from the horse . you man with the sickle , lie in the ditch 
 there , and cut at the leg of the brute . a line of stone thrower 
 behind that . a heavy stone be as sure as a bullet at close quarter . if 
 ye would see your wife and child again , make that hedge good against 
 the horseman . now for the front attack . let the man who carry petronel 
 come into the waggon . two of your , Clarke , and two of your , Lockarby . 
 I can spare one also . that make five . now here be ten other of a sort 
 and three musket . twenty shot in all . have you no pistol , Sir Gervas ? 

 ' no , but I can get a pair , ' say our companion , and spring upon his 
 horse he force his way through the ditch , past the barrier , and so down 
 the road in the direction of the dragoon . 

 the movement be so sudden and so unexpected that there be a dead 
 silence for a few second , which be break by a general howl of hatred 
 and execration from the peasant . ' shoot upon he ! shoot down the false 
 Amalekite ! ' they shriek . ' he hath go to join his kind ! he hath 
 deliver we up into the hand of the enemy ! Judas ! Judas ! ' as to the 
 horseman , who be still form up for a charge and wait for the 
 flank party to get into position , they sit still and silent , not 
 know what to make of the gaily - dress cavalier who be speed 
 towards they . 

 we be not leave long in doubt , however . he have no soon reach the 
 spot where the cornet have fall than he spring from his horse and 
 help himself to the dead man 's pistol , and to the belt which 
 contain his powder and ball . mount at his leisure , amid a shower of 
 bullet which puff up the white dust all around he , he ride onwards 
 towards the dragoon and discharge one of his pistol at they . wheeling 
 round he politely raise his cap , and gallop back to we , none the 
 bad for his adventure , though a ball have graze his horse 's fetlock 
 and another have leave a hole in the skirt of his riding - coat . the 
 peasant raise a shout of jubilation as he ride in , and from that day 
 forward our friend be permit to wear his gay trapping and to bear 
 himself as he would , without be suspect of have mount the 
 livery of Satan or of be want in zeal for the cause of the saint . 

 ' they be come , ' cry Saxon . ' let no man draw trigger until he see 
 I shoot . if any do , I shall send a bullet through he , though it be 
 my last shot and the trooper be amongst we . ' 

 as our leader utter this threat and look grimly round upon we with 
 an evident intention of execute it , a shrill blare of a bugle burst 
 from the horseman in front of we , and be answer by those upon our 
 flank . at the signal both body set spur to their horse and dash 
 down upon we at the top of their speed . those in the field be delay 
 for a few moment , and throw into some disorder , by find that the 
 ground immediately in front of they be soft and boggy , but have 
 make their way through it they re - form upon the other side and ride 
 gallantly at the hedge . our own opponent , have a clear course before 
 they , never slacken for an instant , but come thunder down with a 
 jingling of harness and a tempest of oath upon our rude barricade . 

 ah , my child ! when a man in his age try to describe such thing as 
 these , and to make other see what he have see , it be only then that he 
 understand what a small stock of language a plain man keep by he for 
 his ordinary use in the world , and how unfit it be to meet any call 
 upon it . for though at this very moment I can myself see that white 
 Somersetshire road , with the wild whirling charge of the horseman , the 
 red angry face of the man , and the gap nostril of the horse all 
 wreathe and frame in cloud of dust , I can not hope to make it clear 
 to your young eye , which never have look , and , I trust , never shall 
 look , upon such a scene . when , too , I think of the sound , a mere rattle 
 and jingle at first , but grow in strength and volume with every step , 
 until it come upon we with a thunderous rush and roar which give the 
 impression of irresistible power , I feel that that too be beyond the 
 power of my feeble word to express . to inexperienced soldier like 
 ourselves it seem impossible that our frail defence and our feeble 
 weapon could check for an instant the impetus and weight of the 
 dragoon . to right and leave I see white set face , open - eyed and rigid , 
 unflinche , with a stubbornness which rise less from hope than from 
 despair . all round rise exclamation and prayer . ' Lord , save Thy 
 people ! ' ' Mercy , Lord , mercy ! ' ' be with we this day ! ' ' receive our 
 soul , o merciful Father ! ' Saxon lie across the waggon with his eye 
 glinting like diamond and his petronel present at the full length 
 of his rigid arm . follow his example we all take aim as steadily as 
 possible at the first rank of the enemy . our only hope of safety lay 
 in make that one discharge so deadly that our opponent should be too 
 much shake to continue their attack . 

 would the man never fire ? they could not be more than ten pace from we . 
 I could see the buckle of the man 's plate and the powder charge in 
 their bandolier . one more stride yet , and at last our leader 's pistol 
 flash and we pour in a close volley , support by a shower of heavy 
 stone from the sturdy peasant behind . I could hear they splinter 
 against casque and cuirass like hail upon a casement . the cloud of smoke 
 veil for an instant the line of gallop steed and gallant rider 
 drift slowly aside to show a very different scene . a dozen man and 
 horse be roll in one wild blood - spurt heap , the unwounde 
 fall over those whom our ball and stone have bring down . 
 struggle , snort charger , iron - shod foot , staggering figure rise 
 and fall , wild , hatless , bewildered man half stun by a fall , and 
 not know which way to turn -- that be the foreground of the picture , 
 while behind they the remainder of the troop be rid furiously back , 
 wound and hale , all drive by the one desire of get to a place of 
 safety where they might rally their shattered formation . a great shout 
 of praise and thanksgiving rise from the delighted peasant , and 
 surge over the barricade they strike down or secure the few uninjured 
 trooper who have boon unable or unwilling to join their companion in 
 their flight . the carbine , sword , and bandolier be eagerly pounce 
 upon by the victor , some of whom have serve in the militia , and know 
 well how to handle the weapon which they have win . 

 the victory , however , be by no mean complete . the flanking squadron 
 have ride boldly at the hedge , and a dozen or more have force their way 
 through , in spite of the shower of stone and the desperate thrust of 
 the pikeman and scytheman . once amongst the peasant , the long sword 
 and the armour of the dragoon give they a great advantage , and though 
 the sickle bring several of the horse to the ground the soldier 
 continue to lay about they freely , and to beat back the fierce but 
 ill - armed resistance of their opponent . a dragoon sergeant , a man of 
 great resolution and of prodigious strength , appear to be the leader 
 of the party , and encourage his follower both by word and example . 
 a stab from a half - pike bring his horse to the ground , but he 
 spring from the saddle as it fall , and avenge its death by a sweeping 
 back - handed cut from his broadsword . wave his hat in his left hand he 
 continue to rally his man , and to strike down every Puritan who come 
 against he , until a blow from a hatchet bring he on his knee and 
 a flail stroke break his sword close by the hilt . at the fall of their 
 leader his comrade turn and flee through the hedge , but the gallant 
 fellow , wound and bleeding , still show fight , and would assuredly 
 have be knock upon the head for his pain have I not pick he up 
 and throw he into the waggon , where he have the good sense to lie quiet 
 until the skirmish be at an end . of the dozen who break through , not 
 more than four escape , and several other lay dead or wound upon the 
 other side of the hedge , impale by scythe - blade or knock off 
 their horse by stone . altogether nine of the dragoon be slay 
 and fourteen wound , while we retain seven unscathed prisoner , ten 
 horse fit for service , and a score or so of carbine , with good store 
 of match , powder , and ball . the remainder of the troop fire a 
 single , straggling , irregular volley , and then gallop away down the 
 cross - road , disappear amongst the tree from which they have emerge . 

 all this , however , have not be accomplish without severe loss upon 
 our side . three man have be kill and six wound , one of they 
 very seriously , by the musketry fire . five have be cut down when 
 the flank party break their way in , and only one of these could be 
 expect to recover . in addition to this , one man have lose his life 
 through the bursting of an ancient petronel , and another have his arm 
 break by the kick of a horse . our total loss , therefore , be eight 
 kill and the same wound , which could not but be regard as a very 
 moderate number when we consider the fierceness of the skirmish , and the 
 superiority of our enemy both in discipline and in equipment . 

 so elated be the peasant by their victory , that those who have secure 
 horse be clamorous to be allow to follow the dragoon , the more so 
 as Sir Gervas Jerome and Reuben be both eager to lead they . Decimus 
 Saxon refuse , however , to listen to any such scheme , nor do he show 
 more favour to the Reverend Joshua Pettigrue 's proposal , that he should 
 in his capacity as pastor mount immediately upon the waggon , and improve 
 the occasion by a few word of healing and unction . 

 ' it be true , good Master Pettigrue , that we owe much praise and much 
 outpouring , and much sweet and holy contending , for this blessing which 
 hath come upon Israel , ' say he , ' but the time hath not yet arrive . 
 there be an hour for prayer and an hour for labour . Hark ye , friend'--to 
 one of the prisoners--'to what regiment do you belong ? ' 

 ' it be not for I to reply to your question , ' the man answer sulkily . 

 Nay , then , we will try if a string round your scalp and a few twist of a 
 drumstick will make you find your tongue , ' say Saxon , push his face 
 up to that of the prisoner , and star into his eye with so savage an 
 expression that the man shrink away affrighted . 

 ' it be a troop of the second dragoon regiment , ' he say . 

 ' where be the regiment itself ? ' 

 ' we leave it on the Ilchester and Langport road . ' 

 ' you hear , ' say our leader . ' we have not a moment to spare , or we may 
 have the whole crew about our ear . put our dead and wound in the 
 cart , and we can harness two of these charger to they . we shall not be 
 in safety until we be in Taunton town . ' 

 even Master Joshua see that the matter be too press to permit of 
 any spiritual exercise . the wounded man be lift into the waggon and 
 lay upon the bedding , while our dead be place in the cart which have 
 defend our rear . the peasant who own these , far from make any 
 objection to this disposal of their property , assist we in every way , 
 tighten girth and buckling trace . within an hour of the ending of 
 the skirmish we find ourselves pursue our way once more , and look 
 back through the twilight at the scatter black dot upon the white 
 road , where the body of the dragoon mark the scene of our victory . 




 Chapter XVI . of our come to Taunton 

 the purple shadow of evening have fall over the countryside , and the 
 sun have sink behind the distant Quantock and Brendon Hills , as our rude 
 column of rustic infantry plod through Curry Rivell , Wrantage , and 
 Henlade . at every wayside cottage and red - tile farmhouse the people 
 swarm out we we pass , with jug full of milk or beer , shake hand 
 with our yokel , and press food and drink upon they . in the little 
 village old and young come buzz to greet we , and cheer long and 
 loud for King Monmouth and the protestant cause . the stay - at - home be 
 mostly elderly folk and child , but here and there a young labourer , 
 whom hesitation or duty have keep back , be so carry away by our 
 martial appearance , and by the visible trophy of our victory , that he 
 snatch up a weapon and join our rank . 

 the skirmish have reduce our number , but it have do much to turn our 
 rabble of peasant into a real military force . the leadership of Saxon , 
 and his stern , short word of praise or of censure have do even more . 
 the man keep some sort of formation , and step together briskly in a 
 compact body . the old soldier and I ride at the head of the column , with 
 Master Pettigrue still walk between we . then come the cartful of 
 our dead , whom we be carry with we to insure their decent burial . 
 behind this walk two score of scythe and sickle man , with their rude 
 weapon over their shoulder , precede the waggon in which the wound 
 be carry . this be follow by the main body of the peasant , 
 and the rear be bring up by ten or twelve man under the command of 
 Lockarby and Sir Gervas , mount upon capture charger , and wear the 
 breastplate , sword , and carbine of the dragoon . 

 I observe that Saxon ride with his chin upon his shoulder , cast 
 continual uneasy glance behind he , and halt at every piece of 
 rise ground to make sure that there be no pursuer at our heel . it 
 be not until , after many weary mile of marching , the light of Taunton 
 could be see twinkle far off in the valley beneath we that he at last 
 heave a deep sigh of relief , and express his belief that all danger 
 be over . 

 ' I be not prone to be fearful upon small occasion , ' he remark , ' but 
 hamper as we be with wounded man and prisoner , it might have puzzle 
 Petrinus himself to know what we should have do have the cavalry 
 overtake we . I can now , Master Pettigrue , smoke my pipe in peace , 
 without prick up my ear at every chance rumble of a wheel or shout 
 of a village roisterer . ' 

 ' even have they pursue we , ' say the minister stoutly , ' as long as the 
 hand of the Lord shall shield we , why should we fear they ? ' 

 ' aye , aye ! ' Saxon answer impatiently , ' but the devil prevaileth at 
 time . be not the choose people themselves overthrow and lead into 
 captivity ? how say you , Clarke ? ' 

 ' one such skirmish be enough for a day , ' I remark . ' faith ! if instead 
 of charge we they have continue that carbine fire , we must either have 
 come forth or be shoot where we lay . ' 

 ' for that reason I forbid our friend with the musket to answer it , ' 
 say Saxon . ' our silence lead they to think that we have but a pistol or 
 two among we , and so bring they to charge we . thus our volley become 
 the more terrifying since it be unexpected . I will wager there be not a 
 man amongst they who do not feel that he have be lead into a trap . Mark 
 you how the rogue wheel and flee with one accord , as though it have 
 be part of their daily drill ! ' 

 ' the peasant stand to it like man , ' I remark . 

 ' there be nothing like a tincture of Calvinism for stiffen a line of 
 battle , ' say Saxon . ' look at the swede when he be at home . what more 
 honest , simple - hearted fellow could you find , with no single soldierly 
 virtue , save that he could put away more spruce beer than you would care 
 to pay for . yet if you do but cram he with a few strong , homely text , 
 place a pike in his hand , and give he a Gustavus to lead he , there be 
 no infantry in the world that can stand against he . on the other hand , 
 I have see young Turks , untraine to arm , strike in on behalf of the 
 Koran as lustily as these brave fellow behind we do for the Bible 
 which Master Pettigrue hold up in front of they . ' 

 ' I trust , sir , ' say the minister gravely , ' that you do not , by 
 these remark , intend to institute any comparison between our sacred 
 scripture and the writing of the impostor Mahomet , or to infer that 
 there be any similarity between the devil - inspire fury of the infidel 
 Saracens and the christian fortitude of the struggle faithful ! ' 

 ' by no mean , ' Saxon answer , grin at I over the minister 's head . 
 ' I be but show how closely the Evil One can imitate the working of 
 the Spirit . ' 

 ' too true , Master Saxon , too true ! ' the clergyman answer sadly . ' amid 
 the conflict and discord it be hard to pick out the true path . but 
 I marvel much that amidst the snare and temptation that beset a 
 soldier 's life you have keep yourself unsullied , with your heart still 
 set upon the true faith . ' 

 ' it be through no strength of mine own , ' say Saxon piously . 

 ' in very truth , such man as you be much need in Monmouth 's army , ' 
 Master Joshua exclaim . ' they have there several , as I understand , from 
 Holland , Brandenburg , and Scotland , who have be train in arm , but 
 who care so little for the cause which we uphold that they curse and 
 swear in a manner that affright the peasant , and threaten to call 
 down a judgment upon the army . other there be who cle close to the 
 true faith , and have be bear again among the righteous ; but alas ! they 
 have have no experience of camp and field . our blessed Master can work 
 by mean of weak instrument , yet the fact remain that a man may be 
 a choose light in a pulpit , and yet be of little avail in an onslaught 
 such as we have see this day . I can myself arrange my discourse to the 
 satisfaction of my flock , so that they grieve when the sand be run out ; 
 ( Note E. Appendix ) but I be aware that this power would stand I in 
 little stead when it come to the raising of barricade and the use of 
 carnal weapon . in this way it come about , in the army of the faithful , 
 that those who be fit to lead be hateful to the people , while those to 
 whose word the people will hearken know little of war . now we have this 
 day see that you be ready of head and of hand , of much experience of 
 battle , and yet of demure and sober life , full of yearning after the 
 word , and striving against Apollyon . I therefore repeat that you shall 
 be as a very Joshua amongst they , or as a Samson , destine to tear 
 down the twin pillar of Prelacy and Popery , so as to bury this corrupt 
 government in its fall . ' 

 Decimus Saxon 's only reply to this eulogy be one of those groan which 
 be suppose , among the zealot , to be the symbol of intense inner 
 conflict and emotion . so austere and holy be his expression , so solemn 
 his demeanour , and so frequent the upturning of his eye , clasp 
 of his hand , and other sign which mark the extreme sectary , that 
 I could not but marvel at the depth and completeness of the hypocrisy 
 which have cast so complete a cloak over his rapacious self . for very 
 mischief 's sake I could not refrain from remind he that there be 
 one at least who value his profession at their real value . 

 ' have you tell the worthy minister , ' say I , ' of your captivity amongst 
 the Mussulmans , and of the noble way in which you do uphold the 
 christian faith at Stamboul ? ' 

 ' Nay , ' cry our companion , ' I would fain hear the tale . I marvel much 
 that one so faithful and unbending as thyself be ever let loose by the 
 unclean and bloodthirsty follower of Mahomet . ' 

 ' it do not become I to tell the tale , ' Saxon answer with great 
 presence of mind , cast at the same time a most venomous sidelong 
 glance at I . ' it be for my comrade in misfortune and not for I to 
 describe what I endure for the faith . I have little doubt , Master 
 Pettigrue , that you would have do as much have you be there . the town 
 of Taunton lie very quiet beneath we , and there be few light for so 
 early an hour , see that it have not yet go ten . it be clear that 
 Monmouth 's force have not reach it yet , else have there be some show 
 of camp - fire in the valley ; for though it be warm enough to lie out in 
 the open , the man must have fire to cook their victual . ' 

 ' the army could scarce have come so far , ' say the pastor . ' they have , 
 I hear , be much delay by the want of arm and by the need of 
 discipline . bethink ye , it be on the eleventh day of the month that 
 Monmouth land at Lyme , and it be now but the night of the fourteenth . 
 there be much to be do in the time . ' 

 ' four whole day ! ' growl the old soldier . ' yet I expect no well , 
 see that they have , so far as I can hear , no try soldier amongst 
 they . by my sword , Tilly or Wallenstein would not have take four day 
 to come from Lyme to Taunton , though all James Stuart 's cavalry bar 
 the way . great enterprise be not push through in this halting 
 fashion . the blow should be sharp and sudden . but tell I , worthy sir , 
 all that you know about the matter , for we have hear little upon the 
 road save rumour and surmise . be there not some fashion of onfall at 
 Bridport ? ' 

 ' there be indeed some shedding of blood at that place . the first two 
 day be consume , as I understand , in the enrolling of the faithful 
 and the search for arm wherewith to equip they . you may well shake your 
 head , for the hour be precious . at last five hundred man be break 
 into some sort of order , and march along the coast under command of 
 Lord Grey of Wark and Wade the lawyer . at Bridport they be oppose 
 by the red Dorset militia and part of Portman 's yellow coat . if all 
 be true that be say , neither side have much to boast of . Grey and his 
 cavalry never tighten bridle until they be back in Lyme once more , 
 though it be say their flight have more to do with the hard mouth 
 of their horse than with the soft heart of the rider . Wade and his 
 footman do bravely , and have the good of it against the king 's troop . 
 there be much outcry against Grey in the camp , but Monmouth can 
 scarce afford to be severe upon the only nobleman who hath join his 
 standard . ' 

 ' Pshaw ! ' cry Saxon peevishly . ' there be no great stock of nobleman in 
 Cromwell 's army , I trow , and yet they hold their own against the king , 
 who have as many lord by he as there be haw in a thicket . if ye have 
 the people on your side , why should ye crave for these bewigge fine 
 gentleman , whose white hand and delicate rapier be of as much service 
 as so many lady ' bodkin ? ' 

 ' faith ! ' say I , ' if all the fop be as careless for their life as our 
 friend Sir Gervas , I could wish no well comrade in the field . ' 

 ' in good sooth , yes ! ' cry Master Pettigrue heartily . ' what though he 
 be clothe in a Joseph 's coat of many colour , and hath strange turn 
 of speech ! no man could have fight more stoutly or show a bold front 
 against the enemy of Israel . surely the youth hath good in his heart , 
 and will become a seat of grace and a vessel of the Spirit , though 
 at present he be entangle in the net of worldly folly and carnal 
 vanity . ' 

 ' it be to be hop so , ' quoth Saxon devoutly . ' and what else can you 
 tell we of the revolt , worthy sir ? ' 

 ' very little , save that the peasant have flock in in such number 
 that many have have to be turn away for want of arm . every tithing - man 
 in Somersetshire be search for axis and scythe . there be not 
 a blacksmith but be at his forge from morn to night at work upon 
 pike - head . there be six thousand man of a sort in the camp , but 
 not one in five carry a musket . they have advance , I hear , upon 
 Axminster , where they must meet the Duke of Albemarle , who hath set out 
 from Exeter with four thousand of the train band . ' 

 ' then we shall be too late , after all , ' I exclaim . 

 ' you will have enough of battle before Monmouth exchange his 
 riding - hat for a crown , and his laced roquelaure for the royal purple , ' 
 quoth Saxon . ' should our worthy friend here be correctly inform and 
 such an engagement take place , it will but be the prologue to the play . 
 when Feversham and Churchill come up with the King 's own troop , it be 
 then that Monmouth take the last spring , that land he either on the 
 throne or the scaffold . ' 

 whilst this conversation have be proceed we have be walk our 
 horse down the winding track which lead along the eastern slope of 
 Taunton Deane . for some time past we have be able to see in the valley 
 beneath we the light of Taunton town and the long silver strip of 
 the river Tone . the moon be shin brightly in a cloudless heaven , 
 throw a still and peaceful radiance over the fairest and rich of 
 english valley . lordly manorial house , pinnacle tower , cluster of 
 nestle thatch - roof cottage , broad silent stretch of cornland , 
 dark grove with the glint of lamp - light window shin from their 
 recess -- it all lay around we like the shadowy , voiceless landscape 
 which stretch before we in our dream . so calm and so beautiful be the 
 scene that we rein up our horse at the bend of the pathway , the tired 
 and footsore peasant come to a halt , while even the wound raise 
 themselves in the waggon in order to feast their eye upon this land of 
 promise . suddenly , in the stillness , a strong fervent voice be hear 
 call upon the source of all life to guard and preserve that which 
 he have create . it be Joshua Pettigrue , who have fling himself upon his 
 knee , and who , while ask for future guidance , be return thank 
 for the safe deliverance which his flock have experience from the many 
 peril which have beset they upon their journey . I would , my child , 
 that I have one of those magic crystal of which we have read , that I 
 might show you that scene . the dark figure of the horseman , the grave , 
 earnest bearing of the rustic as they kneel in prayer or lean upon 
 their rude weapon , the half - cow , half - sneer expression of the 
 captive dragoon , the line of white pain - draw face that peep 
 over the side of the waggon , and the chorus of groan , cry , and 
 ejaculation which break in upon the steady earnest voice of the pastor . 
 above we the brilliant heaven , beneath we the beautiful slop valley , 
 stretch away in the white moonlight as far as the eye could reach . 
 could I but paint such a scene with the brush of a Verrio or Laguerre , I 
 should have no need to describe it in these halting and feeble word . 

 Master Pettigrue have conclude his thanksgiving , and be in the act of 
 rise to his foot , when the musical peal of a bell rise up from the 
 sleeping town before we . for a minute or more it rise and fall in its 
 sweet clear cadence . then a second with a deep , harsh note join 
 in , and then a third , until he air be fill with the merry jangling . 
 at the same time a buzz of shout or huzzaing could be hear , which 
 increase and spread until it swell into a mighty uproar . light 
 flash in the window , drum beat , and the whole place be astir . these 
 sudden sign of rejoice come at the heel of the minister 's prayer 
 be seize upon as a happy omen by the superstitious peasant , who set 
 up a glad cry , and push onwards be soon within the outskirt of the 
 town . 

 the footpath and causeway be black with throng of the townsfolk , 
 man , woman , and child , many of whom be bear torch and 
 lanthorn , all flock in the same direction . follow they we find 
 ourselves in the market - place , where crowd of apprentice lad be 
 pile up faggot for a bonfire , while other be broach two or 
 three great puncheon of ale . the cause of this sudden outbreak of 
 rejoicing be , we learn , that news have just come in that Albemarle 's 
 Devonshire militia have partly desert and partly be defeat at 
 Axminster that very morning . on hearing of our own successful skirmish 
 the joy of the people become more tumultuous than ever . they rush in 
 amongst we , pour blessing on our head , in their strange burring 
 west - country speech , and embrace our horse as well as ourselves . 
 preparation be soon make for our weary companion . a long empty wool 
 warehouse , thickly litter with straw , be put at their disposal , with 
 a tub of ale and a plentiful supply of cold meat and wheaten bread . 
 for our own part we make our way down East Street through the clamorous 
 hand - shake crowd to the White Hart Inn , where after a hasty meal we 
 be right glad to seek our couch . late into the night , however , our 
 slumber be disturb by the rejoicing of the mob , who , have burn 
 the effigy of Lord Sunderland and of Gregory Alford , Mayor of Lyme , 
 continue to sing west - country song and puritan hymn into the small 
 hour of the morning . 



 chapter XVII . of the Gathering in the market - square 

 the fair town in which we now find ourselves be , although Monmouth 
 have not yet reach it , the real centre of the rebellion . it be a 
 prosperous place , with a great woollen and kersey trade , which give 
 occupation to as many as seven thousand inhabitant . it stand high , 
 therefore , amongst english borough , be inferior only to Bristol , 
 Norwich , Bath , Exeter , York , Worcester , and Nottingham amongst the 
 country town . Taunton have long be famous not only for its own 
 resource and for the spirit of its inhabitant , but also for the 
 beautiful and highly cultivate country which spread around it , and give 
 rise to a gallant breed of yeoman . from time immemorial the town have 
 be a rallying - point for the party of liberty , and for many year it 
 have lean to the side of Republicanism in politic and of Puritanism 
 in religion . no place in the kingdom have fight more stoutly for 
 the Parliament , and though it have be twice besiege by Goring , the 
 burgher , head by the brave Robert Blake , have fight so desperately , 
 that the Royalists have be compel each time to retire discomfited . 
 on the second occasion the garrison have be reduce to dog's - flesh and 
 horse - flesh , but no word of surrender have come either from they or 
 their heroic commander , who be the same Blake under whom the old seaman 
 Solomon Sprent have fight against the Dutch . after the Restoration the 
 Privy Council have show their recollection of the part play by the 
 Somersetshire town , by issue a special order that the battlement 
 which fence round the maiden stronghold should be destroy . thus , 
 at the time of which I speak , nothing but a line of ruin and a few 
 unsightly mound represent the massive line of wall which have be 
 so bravely defend by the last generation of townsman . there be not 
 want , however , many other relic of those stormy time . the house on 
 the outskirt be still scarred and splinter from the effect of 
 the bomb and grenade of the Cavaliers . indeed , the whole town bear a 
 grimly martial appearance , as though she be a veteran among borough 
 who have serve in the past , and be not averse to see the flash of 
 gun and hear the screech of shot once more . 

 Charles 's Council might destroy the battlement which his soldier have 
 be unable to take , but no royal edict could do away with the resolute 
 spirit and strong opinion of the burgher . many of they , bear and breed 
 amidst the clash of civil strife , have be fire from their infancy by 
 the tale of the old war , and by reminiscence of the great assault when 
 Lunsford 's babe - eater be hurl down the main breach by the strong 
 arm of their father . in this way there be breed in Taunton a fiercer 
 and more soldierly spirit than be usual in an english country town , and 
 this flame be fan by the unwearied ministering of a choose band 
 of Nonconformist clergyman , amongst whom Joseph Alleine be the most 
 conspicuous . no well focus for a revolt could have be choose , for 
 no city value so highly those liberty and that creed which be in 
 jeopardy . 

 a large body of the burgher have already set out to join the rebel army , 
 but a good number have remain behind to guard the city , and these be 
 reinforce by gang of peasant , like the one to which we have attach 
 ourselves , who have troop in from the surround country , and now 
 divide their time between listen to their favourite preacher and 
 learn to step in line and to handle their weapon . in yard , street , 
 and market - square there be marching and drilling , night , morning , and 
 noon . as we ride out after breakfast the whole town be ring with the 
 shouting of order and the clatter of arm . our own friend of yesterday 
 march into the market - place at the moment we enter it , and no soon 
 do they catch sight of we than they pluck off their hat and cheer 
 lustily , nor would they desist until we canter over to they and take 
 our place at their head . 

 ' they have vow that none other should lead they , ' say the minister , 
 stand by Saxon 's stirrup . 

 ' I could not wish to lead stouter fellow , ' say he . ' let they deploy 
 into double line in front of the town - hall . so , so , smartly there , rear 
 rank ! ' he shout , face his horse towards they . ' now swing round into 
 position . keep your ground , leave flank , and let the other pivot upon 
 you . so -- as hard and as straight as an Andrea Ferrara . I prythee , 
 friend , do not carry your pike as though it be a hoe , though I trust 
 you will do some weed in the Lord 's vineyard with it . and you , sir , 
 your musquetoon should be slop upon your shoulder , and not bear under 
 your arm like a dandy 's cane . do ever an unhappy soldier find himself 
 call upon to make order among so motley a crew ! even my good friend 
 the fleming can not so avail here , nor do Petrinus , in his " De re 
 militari , " lie down any injunction as to the method of drill a man 
 who be arm with a sickle or a scythe . ' 

 ' Shoulder scythe , port scythe , present scythe -- mow ! ' whisper Reuben to 
 Sir Gervas , and the pair begin to laugh , heedless of the angry frown of 
 Saxon . 

 ' let we divide they , ' he say , ' into three company of eighty man . or 
 stay -- how many musketeer have we in all ? five - and - fifty . let they stand 
 forward , and form the first line or company . Sir Gervas Jerome , you have 
 officer the militia of your county , and have doubtless some knowledge 
 of the manual exercise . if I be commandant of this force I hand over the 
 captaincy of this company to you . it shall be the first line in battle , 
 a position which I know you will not be averse to . ' 

 ' Gad , they will have to powder their head , ' say Sir Gervas , with 
 decision . 

 ' you shall have the entire ordering of they , ' Saxon answer . ' let the 
 first company take six pace to the front -- so ! now let the pikeman stand 
 out . eighty - seven , a serviceable company ! Lockarby , do you take these 
 man in hand , and never forget that the german war have prove that the 
 good of horse have no more chance against steady pikeman than the wave 
 against a crag . take the captaincy of the second company , and ride at 
 their head . ' 

 ' Faith ! if they do not fight well than their captain rid , ' whisper 
 Reuben , ' it will be an evil business . I trust they will be firm in the 
 field than I be in the saddle . ' 

 ' the third company of scythesman I commit to your charge , Captain Micah 
 Clarke , ' continue Saxon . ' Good Master Joshua Pettigrue will be our 
 field - chaplain . shall not his voice and his presence be to we as 
 manna in the wilderness , and as spring of water in dry place ? the 
 under - officer I see that you have yourself choose , and your captain 
 shall have power to add to the number from those who smite boldly and 
 spare not . now one thing I have to say to you , and I speak it that all 
 may hear , and that none may hereafter complain that the rule he serve 
 under be not make clear to he . for I tell you now that when the 
 evening bugle call , and the helm and pike be lay aside , I be as you 
 and you as I , fellow - worker in the same field , and drinker from the 
 same well of life . Lo , I will pray with you , or preach with you , or 
 hearken with you , or expound to you , or do aught that may become a 
 brother pilgrim upon the weary road . but hark you , friend ! when we be 
 in arm and the good work be to be do , on the march , in the field , or 
 on parade , then let your bearing be strict , soldierly , and scrupulous , 
 quick to hear and alert to obey , for I shall have no sluggard or 
 laggard , and if there be any such my hand shall be heavy upon they , 
 yea , even to the cutting of they off . I say there shall be no mercy for 
 such , ' here he pause and survey his force with a set face and his 
 eyelid draw low over his glinting , shift eye . ' if , then , ' he 
 continue , ' there be any man among you who fear to serve under a hard 
 discipline , let he stand forth now , and let he betake he to some 
 easy leader , for I say to you that whilst I command this corps , 
 Saxon 's regiment of Wiltshire foot shall be worthy to testify in this 
 great and soul - raise cause . ' 

 the Colonel stop and sit silent upon his mare . the long line of 
 rustic face look up , some stolidly , some admiringly , some with an 
 expression of fear at his stern , gaunt face and baneful eye . none 
 move , however , so he continue . 

 ' Worthy Master Timewell , the Mayor of this fair town of Taunton , who 
 have be a tower of strength to the faithful during these long and 
 spirit - try time , be about to inspect we when the other shall have 
 assemble . captain , to your company then ! close up there on the 
 musqueteer , with three pace between each line . scythesman , take ground 
 to your left . let the under - officer stand on the flank and rear . so ! 
 ' tis smartly do for a first venture , though a good adjutant with a 
 prugel after the imperial fashion might find work to do . ' 

 whilst we be thus rapidly and effectively organise ourselves into a 
 regiment , other body of peasantry more or less disciplined have march 
 into the market - square , and have take up their position there . those 
 on our right have come from Frome and Radstock , in the north of 
 Somersetshire , and be a mere rabble armed with flail , hammer , and 
 other such weapon , with no common sign of order or cohesion save the 
 green bough which wave in their hat - band . the body upon our left , who 
 bear a banner amongst they announce that they be man of Dorset , be 
 few in number but well equip , have a front rank , like our own , 
 entirely armed with musket . 

 the good townsman of Taunton , with their wife and their daughter , 
 have meanwhile be assemble on the balcony and at the window which 
 overlook the square , whence they might have a view of the pageant . the 
 grave , square - bearded , broadclothed burgher , and their portly dame in 
 velvet and three - pile taffeta , look down from every post of vantage , 
 while here and there a pretty , timid face peep out from a Puritan 
 coif make good the old claim , that Taunton excel in beautiful woman 
 as well as in gallant man . the side - walk be crowd with the commoner 
 folk -- old white - bearded wool - worker , stern - face matron , country 
 lass with their shawl over their head , and swarm of child , who 
 cry out with their treble voice for King Monmouth and the protestant 
 succession . 

 ' by my faith ! ' say Sir Gervas , rein back his steed until he be 
 abreast of I , ' our square - toed friend need not be in such post - haste 
 to get to heaven when they have so many angel among they on earth . 
 Gad 's wound , be they not beautiful ? never a patch or a diamond amongst 
 they , and yet what would not our fade belle of the Mall or the Piazza 
 give for their innocence and freshness ? ' 

 ' Nay , for Heaven 's sake do not smile and bow at they , ' say I. ' these 
 courtesy may pass in London , but they may be misunderstood among 
 simple Somerset maiden and their hot - headed , hard - handed kinsfolk . ' 

 I have hardly speak before the folding - door of the town - hall be 
 throw open , and a procession of the city father emerge into the 
 market - place . two trumpeter in parti - colour jerkin precede they , 
 who blow a flourish upon their instrument as they advance . behind come 
 the alderman and councilman , grave and reverend elder , clothe in their 
 sweeping gown of black silk , trim and tippete with costly fur . 
 in rear of these walk a pursy little red - faced man , the town clerk , 
 bear a staff of office in his hand , while the line of dignitary 
 be close by the tall and stately figure of Stephen Timewell , Mayor of 
 Taunton . 

 there be much in this magistrate 's appearance to attract attention , for 
 all the characteristic of the Puritan party to which he belong be 
 embody and exaggerate in his person . of great height he be and very 
 thin , with a long - draw , heavy eyelidde expression , which speak of 
 fast and vigil . the bent shoulder and the head sink upon the breast 
 proclaim the advance of age , but his bright steel - grey eye and the 
 animation of his eager face show how the enthusiasm of religion 
 could rise superior to bodily weakness . a peaked , straggle grey beard 
 descend half - way to his waist , and his long snow - white hair flutter 
 out from under a velvet skull - cap . the latter be draw tightly down 
 upon his head , so as to make his ear protrude in an unnatural manner 
 on either side , a custom which have earn for his party the title of 
 ' prickeare , ' so often apply to they by their opponent . his attire 
 be of studious plainness and sombre in colour , consist of his black 
 mantle , dark velvet breech , and silk hosen , with velvet bow upon his 
 shoe instead of the silver buckle then in vogue . a broad chain of gold 
 around his neck form the badge of his office . in front of he strut 
 the fat red - vested town clerk , one hand upon his hip , the other extend 
 and bear his wand of office , look pompously to right and leave , 
 and occasionally bow as though the plaudit be entirely on his own 
 behalf . this little man have tie a huge broadsword to his girdle , which 
 clank along the cobble stone when he walk and occasionally insert 
 itself between his leg , when he would gravely cock his foot over it 
 again and walk on without any abatement of his dignity . at last , find 
 these interruption become rather too frequent , he depress the hilt of 
 his great sword in order to elevate the point , and so strut onwards 
 like a bantam cock with a tingle straight feather in its tail . 

 have pass round the front and rear of the various body , and 
 inspect they with a minuteness and attention which show that his 
 year have not dull his soldier 's faculty , the Mayor face round with 
 the evident intention of address we . his clerk instantly dart in 
 front of he , and wave his arm begin to shout ' silence , good people ! 
 silence for his most worshipful the Mayor of Taunton ! silence for 
 the worthy Master Stephen Timewell ! ' until in the midst of his 
 gesticulation and cry he get entangle once more with his overgrown 
 weapon , and go sprawl on his hand and knee in the kennel . 

 ' silence yourself , Master Tetheridge , ' say the chief magistrate 
 severely . ' if your sword and your tongue be both clip , it would be 
 as well for yourself and we . shall I not speak a few word in season 
 to these good people but you must interrupt with your discordant 
 bellowing ? ' 

 the busybody gather himself together and slunk behind the group of 
 councilman , while the Mayor slowly ascend the step of the market 
 cross . from this position he address we , speak in a high piping 
 voice which gather strength as he proceed , until it be audible at 
 the remotest corner of the square . 

 ' friend in the faith , ' he say , ' I thank the Lord that I have be 
 spar in my old age to look down upon this goodly assembly . for we of 
 Taunton have ever keep the flame of the Covenant burn amongst we , 
 obscure it may be at time by time - server and Laodiceans , but none the 
 less burn in the heart of our people . all round we , however , 
 there be a bad than egyptian darkness , where Popery and Prelacy , 
 Arminianism , Erastianism , and Simony might rage and riot unchecked and 
 unconfined . but what do I see now ? do I see the faithful cowering 
 in their hiding - place and strain their ear for the sound of the 
 horsehoof 's of their oppressor ? do I see a time - serve generation , 
 with lie on their lip and truth bury in their heart ? no ! I see 
 before I godly man , not from this fair city only , but from the broad 
 country round , and from Dorset , and from Wiltshire , and some even as I 
 hear from Hampshire , all ready and eager to do mighty work in the cause 
 of the Lord . and when I see these faithful man , and when I think that 
 every broad piece in the strong box of my townsman be ready to support 
 they , and when I know that the persecute remnant throughout the country 
 be wrestle hard in prayer for we , then a voice speak within I and 
 tell I that we shall tear down the idol of Dagon , and build up in 
 this England of our such a temple of the true faith that not Popery , 
 nor Prelacy , nor idolatry , nor any other device of the Evil One shall 
 ever prevail against it . ' 

 a deep irrepressible hum of approval burst from the close rank of 
 the insurgent infantry , with a clang of arm as musquetoon or pike be 
 ground upon the stone pavement . 

 Saxon half - turn his fierce face , raise an impatient hand , and the 
 hoarse murmur die away among our man , though our less - discipline 
 companion to right and leave continue to wave their green bough and to 
 clatter their arm . the Taunton man opposite stand grim and silent , but 
 their set face and bent brow show that their townsman 's oratory have 
 stir the deep fanatic spirit which distinguish they . 

 ' in my hand , ' continue the Mayor , draw a roll of paper from his 
 bosom , ' be the proclamation which our royal leader hath send in advance 
 of he . in his great goodness and self - abnegation he have , in his early 
 declaration give forth at Lyme , declare that he should leave the 
 choice of a monarch to the Commons of England , but have find that 
 his enemy do most scandalously and basely make use of this his 
 self - denial , and do assert that he have so little confidence in his own 
 cause that he dare not take publicly the title which be due to he , he 
 hath determine that this should have an end . know , therefore , that it 
 be hereby proclaim that James , Duke of Monmouth , be now and henceforth 
 rightful King of England ; that James Stuart , the Papist and fratricide , 
 be a wicked usurper , upon whose head , dead or alive , a price of five 
 thousand guineas be affix ; and that the assembly now sit at 
 Westminster , and call itself the Commons of England , be an illegal 
 assembly , and its act be null and void in the sight of the law . God 
 bless King Monmouth and the protestant religion ! ' 

 the trumpeter strike up a flourish and the people huzzae , but the 
 Mayor raise his thin white hand as a signal for silence . ' a messenger 
 hath reach I this morning from the king , ' he continue . ' he send a 
 greeting to all his faithful protestant subject , and have halt at 
 Axminster to rest after his victory , he will advance presently and be 
 with ye in two day at the late . 

 ' Ye will grieve to hear that good Alderman Rider be strike down in the 
 thick of the fray . he hath die like a man and a Christian , leave all 
 his worldly good , together with his cloth - work and household property , 
 to the carrying on of the war . of the other slain there be not more 
 than ten of Taunton birth . two gallant young brother have be cut off , 
 Oliver and Ephraim Hollis , whose poor mother-- ' 

 ' grieve not for I , good Master Timewell , ' cry a female voice from the 
 crowd . ' I have three other as stout , who shall all be offer in the 
 same quarrel . ' 

 ' you be a worthy woman , Mistress Hollis , ' the Mayor answer , ' and your 
 child shall not be lose to you . the next name upon my list be Jesse 
 Trefail , then come Joseph Millar , and Aminadab holt-- ' 

 an elderly musqueteer in the first line of the Taunton foot pull his 
 hat down over his brow and cry out in a loud steady voice , ' the Lord 
 hath give and the Lord hath take away . blessed be the name of the 
 Lord . ' 

 ' it be your only son , Master Holt , ' say the Mayor , ' but the Lord also 
 sacrifice his only Son that you and I might drink the water of eternal 
 life . the other be Path of Light Regan , James Fletcher , Salvation 
 Smith , and Robert Johnstone . ' 

 the old Puritan gravely roll up his paper , and have stand for a 
 few moment with his hand fold across his breast in silent prayer , he 
 descend from the market cross , and move off , follow by the aldermen 
 and councilman . the crowd begin likewise to disperse in sedate and sober 
 fashion , with grave earnest face and downcast eye . a large number of 
 the countryfolk , however , more curious or less devout than the citizen , 
 gather round our regiment to see the man who have beat off the 
 dragoon . 

 ' see the mon wi ' a face like a gerfalcon , ' cry one , point to Saxon ; 
 '' tis he that slay the philistine officer yestreen , an ' bring the 
 faithful off victorious . ' 

 ' Mark ye yon other one , ' cry an old dame , ' he wi ' the white face an ' 
 the clothe like a prince . he be one o ' the Quality , what be come a ' the 
 way froe Lunnon to testify to the protestant creed . he be a main pious 
 gentleman , he be , an ' if he have bid in the wicked city they would ha ' have 
 his head off , like they do the good Lord Roossell , or put he in chain 
 wi ' the worthy Maister Baxter . ' 

 ' Marry come up , gossip , ' cry a third . ' the girt mun on the grey horse 
 be the soldier for I . he have the smooth cheek o ' a wench , an ' limb 
 like Goliath o ' Gath . I will war'nt he could pick up my old gaffer Jones 
 an ' awa ' wi ' he at his saddle - bow , as easy as Towser do a rotten ! but 
 here be good Maister Tetheridge , the clerk , and on great business too , 
 for he be a mun that spar ne time ne trooble in the great cause . ' 

 ' room , good people , room ! ' cry the little clerk , bustle up with an 
 air of authority . ' hinder not the high official of the Corporation in 
 the discharge of their function . neither should ye hamper the flank 
 of fight man , see that you thereby prevent that deploy and 
 extending of the line which be now advocate by many high commander . 
 I prythee , who command this cohort , or legion rather , see that you 
 have auxiliary horse attach to it ? ' 

 '' tis a regiment , sirrah , ' say Saxon sternly . ' Colonel Saxon 's regiment 
 of Wiltshire foot , which I have the honour to command . ' 

 ' I beg your colonelship 's pardon , ' cry the clerk nervously , edge 
 away from the swarthy - faced soldier . ' I have hear speak of your 
 colonelship , and of your doing in the german war . I have myself 
 trail a pike in my youth and have break a head or two , aye , and a 
 heart or two also , when I wear buff and bandolier . ' 

 ' discharge your message , ' say our Colonel shortly . 

 '' tis from his most worshipful the Mayor , and be address to yourself 
 and to your captain , who be doubtless these tall cavalier whom I see 
 on either side of I . Pretty fellow , by my faith ! but you and I know 
 well , Colonel , that a little trick of fence will set the small of we 
 on a level with the brawniest . now I warrant that you and I , be 
 old soldier , could , back to back , make it good against these three 
 gallant . ' 

 ' speak , fellow , ' snarl Saxon , and reach out a long sinewy arm he 
 seize the loquacious clerk by the lappet of his gown , and shake he 
 until his long sword clatter again . 

 ' how , Colonel , how ? ' cry Master Tetheridge , while his vest seem to 
 acquire a deep tint from the sudden pallor of his face . ' would you 
 lay an angry hand upon the Mayor 's representative ? I wear a bilbo by my 
 side , as you can see . I be also somewhat quick and choleric , and warn 
 you therefore not to do aught which I might perchance construe into a 
 personal slight . as to my message , it be that his most worshipful 
 the Mayor do desire to have word with you and your captain in the 
 town - hall . ' 

 ' we shall be there anon , ' say Saxon , and turn to the regiment he set 
 himself to explain some of the simple movement and exercise , teach 
 his officer as well as his man , for though Sir Gervas know something of 
 the manual , Lockarby and I bring little but our good - will to the task . 
 when the order to dismiss be at last give , our company march back 
 to their barrack in the wool warehouse , while we hand over our horse 
 to the groom from the White Hart , and set off to pay our respect to 
 the Mayor . 



 Chapter XVIII . of Master Stephen Timewell , Mayor of Taunton 

 within the town - hall all be bustle and turmoil . at one side behind a 
 low table cover with green baize sit two scrivener with great roll 
 of paper in front of they . a long line of citizen pass slowly before 
 they , each in turn put down a roll or bag of coin which be duly 
 note by the receiver . a square iron - bind chest stand by their side , 
 into which the money be throw , and we note as we pass that it be 
 half full of gold piece . we could not but mark that many of the giver 
 be man whose threadbare doublet and pinch face show that the 
 wealth which they be dash down so readily must have be hoard up 
 for such a purpose , at the cost of scanty fare and hard living . Most of 
 they accompany their gift by a few word of prayer , or by some pithy 
 text anent the treasure which rusteth not , or the lending to the Lord . 
 the town clerk stand by the table give forth the voucher for each 
 sum , and the constant clack of his tongue fill the hall , as he read 
 aloud the name and amount , with his own remark between . 

 ' Abraham Willis , ' he shout as we enter ; ' put he down twenty - six 
 pound and ten shilling . you shall receive ten per centum upon this 
 earth , Master Willis , and I warrant that it shall not be forget 
 hereafter . John Standish , two pound . William Simons , two guineas . 
 stand - fast healing , forty - five pound . that be a rare blow which you 
 have strike into the rib of Prelacy , good Master Healing . Solomon 
 Warren , five guineas . James White , five shilling -- the widow 's mite , 
 James ! Thomas Bakewell , ten pound . Nay , Master Bakewell , surely out of 
 three farm on the bank of Tone , and graze land in the fat part 
 of Athelney , you can spare more than this for the good cause . we shall 
 doubtless see you again . Alderman Smithson , ninety pound . aha ! there be 
 a slap for the scarlet woman ! a few more such and her throne shall be a 
 ducking - stool . we shall break she down , worthy Master Smithson , even as 
 Jehu , the son of Nimshi , break down the house of Baal . ' so he babble on 
 with praise , precept , and rebuke , though the grave and solemn burgher 
 take little notice of his empty clamour . 

 at the other side of the hall be several long wooden drinking - trough , 
 which be use for the storing of pike and scythe . special messenger 
 and tithing - man have be send out to scour the country for arm , who , 
 as they return , place their prize here under the care of the 
 armourer - general . besides the common weapon of the peasant there be a 
 puncheon half full of pistol and petronel , together with a good number 
 of musket , screw - gun , snaphance , birding - piece , and carbine , with 
 a dozen bell - mouthed brass blunderbuss , and a few old - fashion 
 wall - piece , such as saker and culverin take from the manor - house of 
 the county . from the wall and the lumber - room of these old dwelling 
 many other arm have be bring to light which be doubtless esteem 
 as thing of price by our forefather , but which would seem strange to 
 your eye in these day , when a musket may be fire once in every two 
 minute , and will carry a ball to a distance of four hundred pace . 
 there be halberd , battle - axis , morning star , brown bill , mace , and 
 ancient coat of chain mail , which might even now save a man from sword 
 stroke or pike thrust . 

 in the midst of the coming and the going stand Master Timewell , the 
 Mayor , order all thing like a skilful and provident commander . I 
 could understand the trust and love which his townsman have for he , as 
 I watch he labour with all the wisdom of an old man and the 
 blithesomeness of a young one . he be hard at work as we approach in 
 try the lock of a falconet ; but perceive we , he come forward and 
 salute we with much kindliness . 

 ' I have hear much of ye , ' say he ; ' how ye cause the faithful to 
 gather to a head , and so beat off the horseman of the usurper . it will 
 not be the last time , I trust , that ye shall see their back . I hear , 
 Colonel Saxon , that ye have see much service abroad . ' 

 ' I have be the humble tool of Providence in much good work , ' 
 say Saxon , with a bow . ' I have fight with the swede against the 
 Brandenburgers , and again with the Brandenburgers against the Swedes , my 
 time and condition with the latter have be duly carry out . I 
 have afterwards in the bavarian service fight against Swedes and 
 Brandenburgers combine , besides have undergo the great war on the 
 Danube against the Turk , and two campaign with the Messieurs in the 
 Palatinate , which latter might be well term holiday - making than 
 fight . ' 

 ' a soldierly record in very truth , ' cry the Mayor , stroke his white 
 beard . ' I hear that you be also powerfully bear onwards in prayer and 
 song . you be , I perceive , one of the old breed of ' 44 , Colonel -- the man 
 who be in the saddle all day , and on their knee half the night . when 
 shall we see the like of they again ? a few such break wreck as I be 
 leave , with the fire of our youth all burn out and nought leave but the 
 ash of lethargy and lukewarmness . ' 

 ' Nay , nay , ' say Saxon , ' your position and present business will scarce 
 jump with the modesty of your word . but here be young man who will 
 find the fire if their elder bring the brain . this be Captain Micah 
 Clarke , and Captain Lockarby , and Captain the Honourable Sir Gervas 
 Jerome , who have all come far to draw their sword for the downtrodden 
 faith . ' 

 ' Taunton welcome ye , young sir , ' say the Mayor , look a 
 trifle askance , as I think , at the baronet , who have draw out his 
 pocket - mirror , and be engage in the brushing of his eyebrow . ' I trust 
 that during your stay in this town ye will all four take up your abode 
 with I . ' tis a homely roof and simple fare , but a soldier 's want be 
 few . and now , Colonel , I would fain have your advice as to these three 
 drake , whether if rehoope they may be deem fit for service ; and also 
 as to these demi - cannon , which be use in the old parliamentary day , 
 and may yet have a word to say in the people 's cause . ' 

 the old soldier and the Puritan instantly plunge into a deep 
 and learn disquisition upon the merit of wall - piece , drake , 
 demi - culverin , saker , minion , mortar - piece , falcon , and 
 pattereroe , concern all which piece of ordnance Saxon have strong 
 opinion to offer , fortify by many personal hazard and experience . 
 he then dwelt upon the merit of fire - arrow and fire - pike in the 
 attack or defence of place of strength , and have finally begin to 
 descant upon sconce , ' directis lateribus , ' and upon work , semilunar , 
 rectilineal , horizontal , or orbicular , with so many reference to his 
 Imperial Majesty 's line at Gran , that it seem that his discourse 
 would never find an end . we slip away at last , leave he still 
 discuss the effect produce by the austrian grenadoe upon a 
 bavarian brigade of pike at the battle of Ober - Graustock . 

 ' curse I if I like accept this old fellow 's offer , ' say Sir Gervas , 
 in an undertone . ' I have hear of these Puritan household . much grace 
 to little sack , and text fly about as hard and as jagged as flint 
 stone . to bed at sundown , and a sermon ready if ye do but look kindly 
 at the waiting - wench or hum the refrain of a ditty . ' 

 ' his home may be large , but it could scarce be strict than that of my 
 own father , ' I remark . 

 ' I will warrant that , ' cry Reuben . ' when we have be a morris - dancing , 
 or have a Saturday night game of " kiss - in - the - ring , " or 
 " parson - have - lose - his - coat , " I have see Ironside Joe stride past we , and 
 cast a glance at we which hath freeze the smile upon our lip . I warrant 
 that he would have aid Colonel Pride to shoot the bear and hack down 
 the maypole . ' 

 '' twere fratricide for such a man to shoot a bear , ' quoth Sir Gervas , 
 ' with all respect , friend Clarke , for your honoured progenitor . ' 

 ' no more than for you to shoot at a popinjay , ' I answer , laugh ; 
 ' but as to the Mayor 's offer , we can but go to meat with he now , and 
 should it prove irksome it will be easy for you to plead some excuse , 
 and so get honourably quit of it . but bear in mind , Sir Gervas , that 
 such household be in very truth different to any with which you be 
 acquaint , so curb your tongue or offence may come of it . should I cry 
 " hem ! " or cough , it will be a sign to you that you have good beware . ' 

 ' agree , young Solomon ! ' cry he . ' it be , indeed , well to have a pilot 
 like yourself who know these godly water . for my own part , I should 
 never know how near I be to the shoal . but our friend have finish 
 the battle of Ober what be its name , and be come towards we . I trust , 
 worthy Mr. Mayor , that your difficulty have be resolve ? ' 

 ' they be , sir , ' reply the Puritan . ' I have be much edify by your 
 Colonel 's discourse , and I have little doubt that by serve under he 
 ye will profit much by his ripe experience . ' 

 ' very like , sir , very like , ' say Sir Gervas carelessly . 

 ' but it be nigh one o'clock , ' the Mayor continue , ' our frail flesh 
 cry aloud for meat and drink . I beg that ye will do I the favour to 
 accompany I to my humble dwelling , where we shall find the household 
 board already dress . ' 

 with these word he lead the way out of the hall and pace slowly down 
 Fore Street , the people fall back to right and to leave as he pass , 
 and raise their cap to do he reverence . here and there , as he 
 point out to we , arrangement have be make for bar the road with 
 strong chain to prevent any sudden rush of cavalry . in place , too , at 
 the corner of a house , a hole have be knock in the masonry through 
 which peep the dark muzzle of a carronade or wall - piece . these 
 precaution be the more necessary as several body of the Royal 
 horse , besides the one which we have repulse , be know to be within 
 the Deane , and the town , deprive of its rampart , be open to an 
 incursion from any daring commander . 

 the chief magistrate 's house be a squat square - faced stone building 
 within a court which open on to East Street . the peaked oak door , 
 spangle with broad iron nail , have a gloomy and surly aspect , but 
 the hall within be lightful and airy , with a bright polished cedar 
 planking , and high panelling of some dark - grain wood which give forth 
 a pleasant smell as of violet . a broad night of step rise up from the 
 farther end of the hall , down which as we enter a young sweet - faced 
 maid come tripping , with an old dame behind she , who bear in her hand a 
 pile of fresh napery . at the sight of we the eld one retreat up the 
 stair again , whilst the young come fly down three step at a 
 time , throw her arm round the old Mayor 's neck , and kiss he fondly , 
 look hard into his face the while , as a mother gaze into that of a 
 child with whom she fear that aught may have go amiss . 

 ' weary again , daddy , weary again , ' she say , shake her head anxiously , 
 with a small white hand upon each of his shoulder . ' indeed , and indeed , 
 thy spirit be great than thy strength . ' 

 ' Nay , nay , lass , ' say he , pass his hand fondly over her rich brown 
 hair . the workman must toil until the hour of rest be rung . this , 
 gentleman , be my granddaughter Ruth , the sole relic of my family and the 
 light of mine old age . the whole grove hath be cut down , and only the 
 old oak and the young sapling leave . these cavalier , little one , 
 have come from afar to serve the cause , and they have do we the honour 
 to accept of our poor hospitality . ' 

 ' Ye be come in good time , gentleman , ' she answer , look we straight 
 in the eye with a kindly smile as a sister might greet her brother . 
 ' the household be gather round the table and the meal be ready . ' 

 ' but not more ready than we , ' cry the stout old burgher . ' do thou 
 conduct our guest to their place , whilst I seek my room and doff these 
 robe of office , with my chain and tippet , ere I break my fast . ' 

 follow our fair guide we pass into a very large and lofty room , the 
 wall of which be wainscote with carve oak , and hang at either end 
 with tapestry . the floor be tesselate after the french fashion , and 
 plentifully strew with skin and rug . at one end of the apartment 
 stand a great white marble fireplace , like a small room in itself , 
 fit up , as be the ancient custom , with an iron stand in the centre , 
 and with broad stone bench in the recess on either side . line of 
 hook above the chimneypiece have be use , as I surmise , to support 
 arm , for the wealthy merchant of England be will not to keep enough in 
 their house to at least equip their apprentice and craftsman . they 
 have now , however , be remove , nor be there any token of the troublous 
 time save a single heap of pike and halberd pile together in a 
 corner . 

 down the centre of this room there run a long and massive table , which 
 be surround by thirty or forty people , the great part of whom be 
 man . they be on their foot as we enter , and a grave - faced man at the 
 farther end be drawl forth an interminable grace , which begin as a 
 thanksgiving for food , but wander away into question of Church and 
 State , and finally end in a supplication for Israel now in arm to do 
 battle for the Lord . while this be proceed we stand in a group 
 by the door with our cap doff , and spend our time in observe the 
 company more closely than we could have do with courtesy have their 
 eye not be cast down and their thought elsewhere . 

 they be of all age , from greybeard down to lad scarce out of their 
 teen , all with the same solemn and austere expression of countenance , 
 and clothe in the same homely and sombre garb . save their wide white 
 collar and cuff , not a string of any colour lessen the sad severity 
 of their attire . their black coat and doublet be cut straight and 
 close , and their cordovan leather shoe , which in the day of our youth 
 be usually the seat of some little ornament , be uniformly square 
 toed and tie with sad - coloured ribbon . Most of they wear plain 
 sword - belt of untanned hide , but the weapon themselves , with their 
 broad feel hat and black cloak , be lay under the bench or place 
 upon the settle which line the wall . they stand with their hand 
 clasped and their head bent , listen to the untimely address , and 
 occasionally by some groan or exclamation testify that the preacher 's 
 word have move they . 

 the overgrown grace come at last to an end , when the company sit 
 silently down , and proceed without pause or ceremony to attack the 
 great joint which smoke before they . our young hostess lead we to the 
 end of the table , where a high card chair with a black cushion upon it 
 mark the position of the master of the house . Mistress Timewell seat 
 herself upon the right of the Mayor 's place , with Sir Gervas beside she , 
 while the post of honour upon the left be assign to Saxon . on my left 
 sit Lockarby , whose eye I observe have be fix in undisguise and 
 all - absorb admiration upon the Puritan maiden from the first moment 
 that he have see she . the table be of no great breadth , so that we 
 could talk across in spite of the clatter of plate and dish , the 
 bustle of servant , and the deep murmur of voice . 

 ' this be my father 's household , ' say our hostess , address herself to 
 Saxon . ' there be not one of they who be not in his employ . he hath many 
 apprentice in the wool trade . we sit down forty to meat every day in 
 the year . ' 

 ' and to right good fare , too , ' quoth Saxon , glance down the table . 
 ' Salmon , rib of beef , loin of mutton , veal , pasty -- what could man 
 wish for more ? plenty of good home - brew , too , to wash it down . if 
 worthy Master Timewell can arrange that the army be victual after the 
 same fashion , I for one shell be beholden to he . a cup of dirty water 
 and a charred morsel cook on a ramrod over the camp fire be like to 
 take the place of these toothsome dainty . ' 

 ' be it not good to have faith ? ' say the Puritan maiden . ' shall not the 
 Almighty feed his soldier even as Elisha be feed in the wilderness and 
 Hagar in the desert ? ' 

 ' aye , ' exclaim a lanky - haired , swarthy young man who sit upon the 
 right of Sir Gervas , ' he will provide for we , even as the stream of 
 water gush forth out of dry place , even as the quail and the manna 
 lie thick upon barren soil . ' 

 ' so I trust , young sir , ' quoth Saxon , ' but we must none the less arrange 
 a victual - train , with a staff of wain , duly number , and an intendant 
 over each , after the german fashion . such thing should not be leave to 
 chance . ' 

 Pretty Mistress Timewell glance up with a half startled look at this 
 remark , as though shock at the want of faith imply in it . her 
 thought might have take the form of word have not her father enter 
 the room at the moment , the whole company rise and bow to he as he 
 advance to his seat . 

 ' be seat , friend , ' say he , with a wave of his hand ; ' we be a homely 
 folk , Colonel Saxon , and the old - time virtue of respect for our elder 
 have not entirely forsake we . I trust , Ruth , ' he continue , ' that thou 
 hast see to the want of our guest . ' 

 we all protest that we have never receive such attention and 
 hospitality . 

 '' tis well , ' tis well , ' say the good wool - worker . ' but your plate be 
 clear and your glass empty . William , look to it ! a good workman 
 be ever a good trencherman . if a ' prentice of mine can not clean his 
 platter , I know that I shall get little from he with carder and teazel . 
 Thew and sinew need build up . a slice from that round of beef , 
 William ! touch that same battle of Ober - Graustock , Colonel , what part 
 be play in the fray by that regiment of Pandour horse , in which , as I 
 understand , thou didst hold a commission ? ' 

 this be a question on which , as may be imagine , Saxon have much to say , 
 and the pair be soon involve in a heated discussion , in which the 
 experience of Roundway Down and Marston Moor be balance against the 
 result of a score of unpronounceable fight in the Styrian Alps and 
 along the Danube . Stephen Timewell in his lusty youth have lead first 
 a troop and then a regiment through the war of the Parliament , from 
 Chalgrove Field to the final battle at Worcester , so that his warlike 
 passage , though less varied and extensive than those of our companion , 
 be enough to enable he to form and hold strong opinion . these be 
 in the main the same as those of the soldier of fortune , but when their 
 idea differ upon any point , there arise forthwith such a cross - fire 
 of military jargon , such speech of estacado and palisado , such 
 comparison of light horse and heavy , of pikeman and musqueteer , 
 of Lanzknechte , Leaguers , and on - falls , that the unused ear become 
 bewilder with the babble . at last , on some question of fortification , 
 the Mayor draw his outwork with the spoon and knife , on which Saxon 
 open his parallel with line of bread , and push they rapidly 
 up with traverse and cover way , he establish himself upon the 
 re - enter angle of the Mayor 's redoubt . this open up a fresh 
 question as to counter - mine , with the result that the dispute rag 
 with renew vigour . 

 whilst this friendly strife be proceed between the elder , Sir 
 Gervas Jerome and Mistress Ruth have fall into conversation at the 
 other side of the table . I have seldom see , my dear child , so 
 beautiful a face as that of this Puritan damsel ; and it be beautiful 
 with that sort of modest and maidenly comeliness where the feature 
 derive their sweetness from the sweet soul which shin through they . 
 the perfectly - mould body appear to be but the outer expression of 
 the perfect spirit within . her dark - brown hair sweep back from a broad 
 and white forehead , which surmount a pair of well - mark eyebrow and 
 large blue thoughtful eye . the whole cast of her feature be gentle 
 and dove - like , yet there be a firmness in the mouth and delicate 
 prominence of the chin which might indicate that in time of trouble and 
 danger the little maid would prove to be no unworthy descendant of the 
 Roundhead soldier and Puritan magistrate . I doubt not that where more 
 loud - tongue and assertive dame might be cow , the Mayor 's soft - voice 
 daughter would begin to cast off her gentler disposition , and to show 
 the strong nature which underlay it . it amuse I much to listen to 
 the effort which Sir Gervas make to converse with she , for the damsel 
 and he live so entirely in two different world , that it take all his 
 gallantry and ready wit to keep on ground which would be intelligible to 
 she . 

 ' no doubt you spend much of your time in reading , Mistress Ruth , ' he 
 remark . ' it puzzle I to think what else you can do so far from 
 town ? ' 

 ' Town ! ' say she in surprise . ' what be Taunton but a town ? ' 

 ' Heaven forbid that I should deny it , ' reply Sir Gervas , ' more 
 especially in the presence of so many worthy burgher , who have the name 
 of be somewhat jealous of the honour of their native city . yet the 
 fact remain , fair mistress , that the town of London so far transcend 
 all other town that it be call , even as I call it just now , _ the _ 
 town . ' 

 ' be it so very large , then ? ' she cry , with pretty wonder . ' but new 
 louse be build in Taunton , outside the old wall , and beyond 
 Shuttern , and some even at the other side of the river . perhaps in time 
 it may be as large . ' 

 ' if all the folk in Taunton be to be add to London , ' say Sir 
 Gervas , ' no one there would observe that there have be any increase . ' 

 ' Nay , there you be laugh at I . that be against all reason , ' cry 
 the country maiden . 

 ' your grandfather will bear out my word , ' say Sir Gervas . ' but to 
 return to your reading , I will warrant that there be not a page of 
 Scudery and her " Grand Cyrus " which you have not read . you be familiar , 
 doubtless , with every sentiment in Cowley , or Waller , or Dryden ? ' 

 ' who be these ? ' she ask . ' at what church do they preach ? ' 

 ' faith ! ' cry the baronet , with a laugh , ' honest John preache at the 
 church of Will Unwin , commonly know as Will 's , where many a time it 
 be two in the morning before he come to the end of his sermon . but why 
 this question ? do you think that no one may put pen to paper unless they 
 have also a right to wear a gown and climb up to a pulpit ? I have think 
 that all of your sex have read Dryden . pray , what be your own favourite 
 book ? ' 

 ' there be Alleine 's " Alarm to the Unconverted , " ' say she . ' it be a 
 stir work , and one which hath work much good . hast thou not find 
 it to fructify within thee ? ' 

 ' I have not read the book you name , ' Sir Gervas confess . 

 ' not read it ? ' she cry , with raise eyebrow . ' truly I have think 
 that every one have read the " Alarm . " what dost thou think , then , of 
 " faithful Contendings " ? ' 

 ' I have not read it . ' 

 ' or of Baxter 's sermon ? ' she ask . 

 ' I have not read they . ' 

 ' of Bull 's " Spirit Cordial , " then ? ' 

 ' I have not read it . ' 

 Mistress Ruth Timewell star at he in undisguised wonder . ' you may 
 think I ill - breed to say it , sir , ' she remark , ' but I can not but 
 marvel where you have be , or what you have do all your life . why , 
 the very child in the street have read these book . ' 

 ' in truth , such work come little in our way in London , ' Sir Gervas 
 answer . ' a play of George Etherege 's , or a jingle of Sir John 
 Suckling 's be light , though mayhap less wholesome food for the mind . 
 a man in London may keep pace with the world of letter without 
 much reading , for what with the gossip of the coffee - house and the 
 news - letter that fall in his way , and the babble of poet or wit 
 at the assembly , with mayhap an evening or two in the week at the 
 playhouse , with Vanbrugh or Farquhar , one can never part company for 
 long with the mus . then , after the play , if a man be in no humour for 
 a turn of luck at the green table at the Groom Porter 's , he may stroll 
 down to the Coca Tree if he be a tory , or to St. James 's if he be a 
 Whig , and it be ten to one if the talk turn not upon the turning of 
 alcaic , or the contest between blank verse or rhyme . then one may , 
 after an arriere supper , drop into Will 's or Slaughter 's and find Old 
 John , with Tickell and Congreve and the rest of they , hard at work 
 on the dramatic unity , or poetical justice , or some such matter . I 
 confes that my own taste lie little in that line , for about that hour 
 I be likely to be worse employ with wine - flask , dice - box , or-- ' 

 ' Hem ! hem ! ' cry I warningly , for several of the Puritans be 
 listen with face which express anything but approval . 

 ' what you say of London be of much interest to I , ' say the Puritan 
 maiden , ' though these name and place have little meaning to my 
 ignorant ear . you do speak , however , of the playhouse . surely no 
 worthy man go near those sink of iniquity , the bait trap of the 
 Evil One ? have not the good and sanctify Master Bull declare from 
 the pulpit that they be the gathering - place of the froward , the choose 
 haunt of the perverse Assyrians , as dangerous to the soul as any 
 of those Papal steeple - house wherein the creature be sacrilegiously 
 confound with the creator ? ' 

 ' well and truly speak , Mistress Timewell , ' cry the lean young 
 Puritan upon the right , who have be an attentive listener to the whole 
 conversation . ' there be more evil in such house than even in the city 
 of the plain . I doubt not that the wrath of the Lord will descend 
 upon they , and destroy they , and wreck they utterly , together with the 
 dissolute man and abandon woman who frequent they . ' 

 ' your strong opinion , friend , ' say Sir Gervas quietly , ' be bear out 
 doubtless by your full knowledge of the subject . how often , prythee , 
 have you be in these playhouse which you be so ready to decry ? ' 

 ' I thank the Lord that I have never be so far tempt from the 
 straight path as to set foot within one , ' the Puritan answer , ' nor 
 have I ever be in that great sewer which be call London . I trust , 
 however , that I with other of the faithful may find our way thither 
 with our tuck at our side ere this business be finish , when we shall 
 not be content , I will warrant , with shut these home of vice , as 
 Cromwell do , but we shall not leave one stone upon another , and shall 
 sow the spot with salt , that it may be a hissing and a byword amongst 
 the people . ' 

 ' you be right , John Derrick , ' say the Mayor , who have overhear the 
 latter part of his remark . ' yet methink that a low tone and a more 
 backward manner would become you well when you be speak with your 
 master 's guest . touch these same playhouse , Colonel , when we have 
 carry the upper hand this time , we shall not allow the old tare to 
 check the new wheat . we know what fruit these place have bear in the 
 day of Charles , the Gwynnes , the Palmers , and the whole base crew of 
 foul lecherous parasite . have you ever be in London , Captain Clarke ? ' 

 ' Nay , sir ; I be country bear and breed . ' 

 ' the well man you , ' say our host . ' I have be there twice . the first 
 time be in the day of the Rump , when Lambert bring in his division 
 to overawe the Commons . I be then quarter at the sign of the Four 
 Crosses in Southwark , then keep by a worthy man , one John Dolman , with 
 whom I have much edify speech concern predestination . all be 
 quiet and sober then , I promise you , and you might have walk from 
 Westminster to the Tower in the dead of the night without hear aught 
 save the murmur of prayer and the chanting of hymn . not a ruffler or 
 a wench be in the street after dark , nor any one save staid citizen 
 upon their business , or the halberdier of the watch . the second visit 
 which I make be over this business of the levelling of the rampart , 
 when I and neighbour Foster , the glover , be send at the head of a 
 deputation from this town to the Privy Council of Charles . who could 
 have credit that a few year would have make such a change ? every evil 
 thing that have be stamp underground have spawn and fester until 
 its vermin brood flood the street , and the godly wear themselves 
 drive to shun the light of day . Apollyon have indeed triumph for a 
 while . a quiet man could not walk the highway without be elbow 
 into the kennel by swagger swashbuckler , or accost by paint 
 hussy . padder and micher , laced cloak , jingle spur , slash 
 boot , tall plume , bully and pimp , oath and blasphemy -- I promise 
 you hell be wax fat . even in the solitude of one 's coach one be not 
 free from the robber . ' 

 ' how that , sir ? ' ask Reuben . 

 ' why marry , in this wise . as I be the sufferer I have the good right 
 to tell the tale . Ye must know that after our reception -- which be 
 cold enough , for we be about as welcome to the Privy Council as the 
 hearth - tax man be to the village housewife -- we be ask , more as 
 I guess from derision than from courtesy , to the evening levee at 
 Buckingham Palace . we would both fain have be excuse from go but 
 we fear that our refusal might give undue offence , and so hinder the 
 success of our mission . my homespun garment ware somewhat rough for 
 such an occasion , yet I determine to appear in they , with the addition 
 of a new black baize waistcoat face with silk , and a good periwig , for 
 which I give three pound ten shilling in the haymarket . ' 

 the young Puritan opposite turn up his eye and murmur something 
 about ' sacrifice to Dagon , ' which fortunately for he be inaudible to 
 the high - spirited old man . 

 ' it be but a worldly vanity , ' quoth the Mayor ; ' for , with all 
 deference , Sir Gervas Jerome , a man 's own hair arrange with some taste , 
 and with perhaps a sprinkling of powder , be to my mind the fit 
 ornament to his head . it be the content and not the case which 
 availeth . have don this frippery , good Master Foster and I hire 
 a calash and drive to the Palace . we be deep in grave and , I trust , 
 profitable converse speeding through the endless street , when of a 
 sudden I feel a sharp tug at my head , and my hat flutter down on to my 
 knee . I raise my hand , and lo ! they come upon my bare pate . the wig 
 have vanish . we be roll down Fleet Street at the moment , and there 
 be no one in the calash save neighbour Foster , who sit as astounded as 
 I. we look high and low , on the seat and beneath they , but not a sign 
 of the periwig be there . it be go utterly and without a trace . ' 

 ' Whither then ? ' we ask with one voice . 

 ' that be the question which we set ourselves to solve . for a moment I 
 do assure ye that we bethink we that it might be a judgment upon we 
 for our attention to such carnal folly . then it cross my mind 
 that it might be the doing of some malicious sprite , as the Drummer of 
 Tedworth , or those who occasion the disturbance no very long time 
 since at the old Gast House at Little Burton here in Somersetshire . 
 ( Note F. Appendix . ) with this thought we halloo to the coachman , and 
 tell he what have occur to we . the fellow come down from his 
 perch , and have hear our story , he burst straightway into much foul 
 language , and walk round to the back of his calash , show we that 
 a slit have be make in the leather wherewith it be fashion . through 
 this the thief have thrust his hand and have draw my wig through the 
 hole , rest the while on the crossbar of the coach . it be no uncommon 
 thing , he say , and the wig - snatcher be a numerous body who wait 
 beside the peruke - maker 's shop , and when they see a customer come forth 
 with a purchase which be worth their pain they would follow he , and , 
 should he chance to drive , deprive he of it in this fashion . be that as 
 it may , I never see my wig again , and have to purchase another before I 
 could venture into the royal presence . ' 

 ' a strange adventure truly , ' exclaim Saxon . ' how fare it with you for 
 the remainder of the evening ? ' 

 ' but scurvily , for Charles 's face , which be black enough at all 
 time , be black of all to we ; nor be his brother the Papist more 
 complaisant . they have but bring we there that they might dazzle we 
 with their glitter and gee - gaw , in order that we might bear a fine 
 report of they back to the West with we . there be supple - back 
 courtier , and strut noble , and hussie with their shoulder bare , 
 who should for all their high birth have be send to Bridewell as 
 readily as any poor girl who ever walk at the cart 's tail . then there 
 be the gentleman of the chamber , with cinnamon and plum - colour 
 coat , and a brave show of gold lace and silk and ostrich feather . 
 Neighbour Foster and I feel as two crow might do who have wander 
 among the peacock . yet we bare in mind in whose image we be 
 fashion , and we carry ourselves , I trust , as independent English 
 burgher . his Grace of Buckingham have his flout at we , and Rochester 
 sneer , and the woman simper ; but we stand four square , my friend 
 and I , discuss , as I well remember , the most precious doctrine of 
 election and reprobation , without give much heed either to those who 
 mock we , or to the gamester upon our left , or to the dancer upon 
 our right . so we stand throughout the evening , until , find that they 
 could get little sport from we , my Lord Clarendon , the Chancellor , give 
 we the word to retire , which we do at our leisure after salute the 
 King and the company . ' 

 ' Nay , that I should never have do ! ' cry the young Puritan , who have 
 listen intently to his elder 's narrative . ' would it not have be 
 more fitting to have raise up your hand and call down vengeance upon 
 they , as the holy man of old do upon the wicked city ? ' 

 ' more fitting , quotha ! ' say the Mayor impatiently . ' it be most fitting 
 that youth should be silent until his opinion be ask on such matter . 
 God 's wrath come with leaden foot , but it strike with iron hand . in 
 his own good time he have judge when the cup of these man 's iniquity 
 be overflow . it be not for we to instruct he . curse have , as the 
 wise man say , a habit of come home to roost . bear that in mind , 
 Master John Derrick , and be not too liberal with they . ' 

 the young apprentice , for such he be , bow his head sullenly to the 
 rebuke , whilst the Mayor , after a short pause , resume his story . 

 ' be a fine night , ' say he , ' we choose to walk back to our lodging ; 
 but never shall I forget the wicked scene wherewith we be encounter 
 on the way . Good Master Bunyan , of Elstow , might have add some 
 page to his account of Vanity Fair have he be with we . the woman , 
 be - patch , be - ruddle , and brazen ; the man swaggering , roister , 
 cursing -- the brawling , the drabbing , and the drunkenness ! it be a fit 
 kingdom to be rule over by such a court . at last we have make our way to 
 more quiet street , and be hop that our adventure be at an end , 
 when of a sudden there come a rush of half - drunken cavalier from a side 
 street , who set upon the passer - by with their sword , as though we have 
 fall into an ambuscade of savage in some Paynim country . they be , 
 as I surmise , of the same breed as those of whom the excellent John 
 Milton write : " the son of Belial , fly with insolence and wine . " alas ! 
 my memory be not what it be , for at one time I could say by rote whole 
 book of that noble and godly poem . ' 

 ' and , pray , how fare ye with these ruffler , sir ? ' I ask . 

 ' they beset we , and some few other honest citizen who be wend 
 their way homeward , and wave their naked sword they call upon we 
 to lay down our arm and pay homage . " to whom ? " I ask . they point 
 to one of their number who be more gaudily dress and somewhat 
 drunker than the rest . " this be our most sovereign liege , " they cry . 
 " Sovereign over whom ? " I ask . " over the Tityre Tus , " they answer . 
 " oh , most barbarous and cuckoldy citizen , do you not recognise that you 
 have fall into the hand of that most noble order ? " " this be not your 
 real monarch , " say I , " for he be down beneath we chain in the pit , 
 where some day he will gather his dutiful subject around he . " " Lo , he 
 hath speak treason ! " they cry , on which , without much more ado , they 
 set upon we with sword and dagger . Neighbour Foster and I place our 
 back against a wall , and with our cloak round our left arm we make 
 play with our tuck , and manage to put in one or two of the old Wigan 
 Lane rasper . in particular , friend Foster pink the King in such wise 
 that his Majesty run howl down the street like a gore bull - pup . we 
 be beset by number , however , and might have end our mission then 
 and there have not the watch appear upon the scene , strike up our 
 weapon with their halberd , and so arrest the whole party . whilst the 
 fray last the burgher from the adjoining house be pour water 
 upon we , as though we be cat on the tile , which , though it do 
 not cool our ardour in the fight , leave we in a scurvy and unsavoury 
 condition . in this guise we be drag to the round - house , where we 
 spend the night amidst bully , thief , and orange wench , to whom I 
 be proud to say that both neighbour Foster and myself speak some word 
 of joy and comfort . in the morning we be release , and forthwith shake 
 the dust of London from our foot ; nor do I ever wish to return thither , 
 unless it be at the head of our Somersetshire regiment , to see King 
 Monmouth don the crown which he have wrest in fair fight from the 
 popish perverter . ' 

 as Master Stephen Timewell end his tale a general shuffling and rise 
 announce the conclusion of the meal . the company file slowly out in 
 order of seniority , all wear the same gloomy and earnest expression , 
 with grave gait and downcast eye . these Puritan way be , it be true , 
 familiar to I from childhood , yet I have never before see a large 
 household conform to they , or mark their effect upon so many young 
 man . 

 ' you shall bide behind for a while , ' say the Mayor , as we be about 
 to follow the other . ' William , do you bring a flask of the old green 
 seal sack . these creature comfort I do not produce before my lad , 
 for beef and honest malt be the fit food for such . on occasion , 
 however , I be of Paul 's opinion , that a flagon of wine among friend be 
 no bad thing for mind or for body . you can away now , sweetheart , if you 
 have aught to engage you . ' 

 ' do you go out again ? ' ask Mistress Ruth . 

 ' presently , to the town - hall . the survey of arm be not yet complete . ' 

 ' I shall have your robe ready , and also the room of our guest , ' she 
 answer , and so , with a bright smile to we , trip away upon her duty . 

 ' I would that I could order our town as that maiden order this house , ' 
 say the Mayor . ' there be not a want that be not supply before it be 
 feel . she read my thought and act upon they ere my lip have time to 
 form they . if I have still strength to spend in the public service , it 
 be because my private life be full of restful peace . do not fear the 
 sack , sir . it cometh from Brooke and Hellier 's of Abchurch Lane , and 
 may be rely upon . ' 

 ' which showeth that one good thing cometh out of London , ' remark Sir 
 Gervas . 

 ' Aye , truly , ' say the old man , smile . ' but what think ye of my young 
 man , sir ? they must need be of a very different class to any with 
 whom you be acquaint , if , as I understand , you have frequent court 
 circle . ' 

 ' why , marry , they be good enough young man , no doubt , ' Sir Gervas 
 answer lightly . ' methink , however , that there be a want of sap about 
 they . it be not blood , but sour buttermilk that flow in their vein . ' 

 ' Nay , nay , ' the Mayor respond warmly . ' there you do they an injustice . 
 their passion and feeling be under control , as the skilful rider 
 keep his horse in hand ; but they be as surely there as be the speed 
 and endurance of the animal . do you observe the godly youth who sit 
 upon your right , whom I have occasion to reprove more than once for 
 over - zeal ? he be a fit example of how a man may take the upper hand of 
 his feeling , and keep they in control . ' 

 ' and how have he do so ? ' I ask . 

 ' why , between friend , ' quoth the Mayor , ' it be but last Lady - day that 
 he ask the hand of my granddaughter Ruth in marriage . his time be 
 nearly serve , and his father , Sam Derrick , be an honourable craftsman , 
 so that the match would have be no unfit one . the maiden turn 
 against he , however -- young girl will have their fancy -- and the 
 matter come to an end . yet here he dwell under the same roof - tree , at 
 her elbow from morn to night , with never a sign of that passion which 
 can scarce have die out so soon . twice my wool warehouse hath be 
 nigh burn to the ground since then , and twice he hath head those who 
 fight the flame . there be not many whose suit hath be reject who 
 would bear themselves in so resign and patient a fashion . ' 

 ' I be prepared to find that your judgment be the correct one , ' say Sir 
 Gervas Jerome . ' I have learn to distrust too hasty dislike , and bear 
 in mind that couplet of John Dryden-- 

           " error , like straw , upon the surface flow . 
            he who would search for pearl must dive below . " ' 

 ' or worthy Dr. Samuel Butler , ' say Saxon , ' who , in his immortal poem of 
 " Hudibras , " says-- 

           " the fool can only see the skin : 
            the wise man try to peep within . " ' 

 ' I wonder , Colonel Saxon , ' say our host severely , ' that you should 
 speak favourably of that licentious poem , which be compose , as I have 
 hear , for the sole purpose of cast ridicule upon the godly . I should 
 as soon have expect to hear you praise the wicked and foolish work of 
 Hobbes , with his mischievous thesis , " a Deo rex , a rege lex . " ' 

 ' it be true that I contemn and despise the use which Butler hath make of 
 his satire , ' say Saxon adroitly ; ' yet I may admire the satire itself , 
 just as one may admire a damascened blade without approve of the 
 quarrel in which it be draw . ' 

 ' these distinction be , I fear , too subtle for my old brain , ' say the 
 stout old Puritan . ' this England of our be divide into two camp , that 
 of God and that of antichrist . he who be not with we be against we , nor 
 shall any who serve under the devil 's banner have anything from I save 
 my scorn and the sharp edge of my sword . ' 

 ' well , well , ' say Saxon , fill up his glass , ' I be no Laodicean or 
 time - server . the cause shall not find I want with tongue or with 
 sword . ' 

 ' of that I be well convinced , my worthy friend , ' the Mayor answer , 
 ' and if I have speak over sharply you will hold I excuse . but I 
 regret to have evil tiding to announce to you . I have not tell the 
 commonalty lest it cast they down , but I know that adversity will be 
 but the whetstone to give your ardour a fine edge . Argyle 's rise have 
 fail , and he and his companion be prisoner in the hand of the man 
 who never know what pity be . ' 

 we all start in our chair at this , and look at one another aghast , 
 save only Sir Gervas Jerome , whose natural serenity be , I be well 
 convinced , proof against any disturbance . for you may remember , my 
 child , that I state when I first take it in hand to narrate to you 
 these passage of my life , that the hope of Monmouth 's party rest 
 very much upon the raid which Argyle and the scottish exile have 
 make upon Ayrshire , where it be hop that they would create such a 
 disturbance as would divert a good share of King James 's force , and so 
 make our march to London less difficult . this be the more confidently 
 expect since Argyle 's own estate lie upon that side of Scotland , 
 where he could raise five thousand swordsman among his own clansmen . 
 the western county abound , too , in fierce zealot who be ready to 
 assert the cause of the Covenant , and who have prove themselves in many 
 a skirmish to be valiant warrior . with the help of the Highlanders and 
 of the Covenanters it seem certain that Argyle would be able to hold 
 his own , the more so since he take with he to Scotland the English 
 Puritan Rumbold , and many other skilled in warfare . this sudden news 
 of his total defeat and downfall be therefore a heavy blow , since it 
 turn the whole force of the Government upon ourselves . 

 ' have you the news from a trusty source ? ' ask Decimus Saxon , after a 
 long silence . 

 ' it be beyond all doubt or question , ' Master Stephen Timewell answer . 
 ' yet I can well understand your surprise , for the Duke have trusty 
 councillor with he . there be Sir Patrick Hume of polwarth-- ' 

 ' all talk and no fight , ' say Saxon . 

 ' and Richard Rumbold . ' 

 ' all fight and no talk , ' quoth our companion . ' he should , methink , have 
 render a well account of himself . ' 

 ' then there be Major Elphinstone . ' 

 ' a bragging fool ! ' cry Saxon . ' 

 ' and Sir John Cochrane . ' 

 ' a captious , long - tongue , short - witted sluggard , ' say the soldier of 
 fortune . ' the expedition be doom from the first with such man at 
 its head . yet I have think that could they have do nought else , they 
 might at least have fling themselves into the mountain country , where 
 these bare - legged cateran could have hold their own amid their native 
 cloud and mist . all take , you say ! it be a lesson and a warning 
 to we . I tell you that unless Monmouth infuse more energy into his 
 council , and thrust straight for the heart instead of fencing and 
 foine at the extremity , we shall find ourselves as Argyle and 
 Rumbold . what mean these two day waste at Axminster at a time when 
 every hour be of import ? be he , every time that he brush a party 
 of militia aside , to stop forty - eight hour and chant " Te deum " when 
 Churchill and Feversham be , as I know , push for the West with every 
 available man , and the dutch grenadier be swarm over like rat into 
 a granary ? ' 

 ' you be very right , Colonel Saxon , ' the Mayor answer . ' and I trust 
 that when the King come here we may stir he up to more prompt action . 
 he have much need of more soldierly adviser , for since Fletcher hath 
 go there be hardly a man about he who hath be train to arm . ' 

 ' well , ' say Saxon moodily , ' now that Argyle hath go under we be face 
 to face with James , with nothing but our own good sword to trust to . ' 

 ' to they and to the justice of our cause . how like ye the news , young 
 sir ? have the wine lose its smack on account of it ? be ye disposed to 
 flinch from the standard of the Lord ? ' 

 ' for my own part I shall see the matter through , ' say I. 

 ' and I shall bide where Micah Clarke bide , ' quoth Reuben Lockarby . 

 ' and to I , ' say Sir Gervas , ' it be a matter of indifference , so long 
 as I be in good company and there be something stir . ' 

 ' in that case , ' say the Mayor , ' we have good each turn to his own work , 
 and have all ready for the King 's arrival . until then I trust that ye 
 will honour my humble roof . ' 

 ' I fear that I can not accept your kindness , ' Saxon answer . ' when I be 
 in harness I come and go early and late . I shall therefore take up my 
 quarter in the inn , which be not very well furnish with victual , 
 and yet can supply I with the simple fare , which with a black Jack of 
 October and a pipe of Trinidado be all I require . ' 

 as Saxon be firm in this resolution the Mayor forbore to press it upon 
 he , but my two friend gladly join with I in accept the worthy 
 wool - worker 's offer , and take up our quarter for the time under his 
 hospitable roof . 



 Chapter XIX . of a Brawl in the Night 

 Decimus Saxon refuse to avail himself of Master Timewell 's house and 
 table for the reason , as I afterwards learn , that , the Mayor be a 
 firm Presbyterian , he think it might stand he in ill stead with the 
 Independents and other zealot be he to allow too great an intimacy 
 to spring up between they . indeed , my dear , from this time onward this 
 cunning man frame his whole life and action in such a way as to make 
 friend of the sectary , and to cause they to look upon he as their 
 leader . for he have a firm belief that in all such outbreak as that in 
 which we be engage , the most extreme party be sure in the end to gain 
 the upper hand . ' Fanatics , ' he say to I one day , ' mean fervour , and 
 fervour mean hard work , and hard work mean power . ' that be the centre 
 point of all his plotting and scheming . 

 and first of all he set himself to show how excellent a soldier he be , 
 and he spar neither time nor work to make this apparent . from morn 
 till midday , and from afternoon till night , we drill and drill until 
 in very truth the shouting of the order and the clatter of the arm 
 become wearisome to our ear . the good burgher may well have 
 think that Colonel Saxon 's Wiltshire foot be as much part of the 
 market - place as the town cross or the parish stock . there be much to 
 be do in very little time , so much that many would have think it 
 hopeless to attempt it . not only be there the general muster of the 
 regiment , but we have each to practise our own company in their several 
 drill , and to learn as good we could the name and the want of the 
 man . yet our work be make easy to we by the assurance that it be not 
 throw away , for at every gathering our bumpkin stand more erect , 
 and handle their weapon more deftly . from cock - crow to sun - down the 
 street resound with ' poise your musket ! order your musket ! rest 
 your musket ! handle your primer ! ' and all the other order of the old 
 manual exercise . 

 as we become more soldierly we increase in number , for our smart 
 appearance draw the pick of the new - comer into our rank . my own 
 company swell until it have to be divide , and other enlarge in 
 proportion . the baronet 's musqueteer muster a full hundred , skilled 
 for the most part in the use of the gun . altogether we spring from 
 three hundred to four hundred and fifty , and our drill improve until we 
 receive praise from all side on the state of our man . 

 late in the evening I be rid slowly back to the house of Master 
 Timewell when Reuben clatter after I , and besought I to turn back 
 with he to see a noteworthy sight . though feel little in the mood 
 for such thing , I turn Covenant and ride with he down the length of 
 High Street , and into the suburb which be know as Shuttern , where my 
 companion pull up at a bare barn - like building , and bid I look in 
 through the window . 

 the interior , which consist of a single great hall , the empty 
 warehouse in which wool have use to be store , be all alight with lamp 
 and candle . a great throng of man , whom I recognise as belong to 
 my own company , or that of my companion , lie about on either side , some 
 smoking , some pray , and some burnish their arm . down the middle a 
 line of bench have be draw up , on which there be seat astraddle 
 the whole hundred of the baronet 's musqueteer , each engage in plait 
 into a queue the hair of the man who sit in front of he . a boy walk 
 up and down with a pot of grease , by the aid of which with some whipcord 
 the work be go forward merrily . Sir Gervas himself with a great 
 flour dredger sit perch upon a bale of wool at the head of the line , 
 and as quickly as any queue be finish he examine it through his 
 quizzing glass , and if it find favour in his eye , daintily powder it 
 from his dredger , with as much care and reverence as though it be some 
 service of the Church . no cook season a dish could have add 
 his spice with more nicety of judgment than our friend display in 
 whiten the pate of his company . glance up from his labour he see 
 our two smile face look in at he through the window , but his work 
 be too engross to allow he to leave it , and we ride off at last 
 without have speech with he . 

 by this time the town be very quiet and still , for the folk in those 
 part be early bed - goer , save when some special occasion keep they 
 afoot . we ride slowly together through the silent street , our horse ' 
 hoof ring out sharp against the cobble stone , talk about such 
 light matter as engage the mind of youth . the moon be shin very 
 brightly above we , silver the broad street , and cast a fretwork 
 of shadow from the peak and pinnacle of the church . at Master 
 Timewell 's courtyard I spring from my saddle , but Reuben , attract by 
 the peace and beauty of the scene , ride onwards with the intention of 
 go as far as the town gate . 

 I be still at work upon my girth buckle , undo my harness , when of 
 a sudden there come from the street a shouting and a rushing , with the 
 clinking of blade , and my comrade 's voice call upon I for help . 
 draw my sword I run out . some little way down there be a clear 
 space , white with the moonshine , in the centre of which I catch a 
 glimpse of the sturdy figure of my friend spring about with an 
 activity for which I have never give he credit , and exchange sword 
 thrust with three or four man who be press he closely . on the 
 ground there lie a dark figure , and behind the struggle group Reuben 's 
 mare rear and plunge in sympathy with her master 's peril . as I rush 
 down , shout and wave my sword , the assailant take flight down 
 a side street , save one , a tall sinewy swordsman , who rush in upon 
 Reuben , stab furiously at he , and curse he the while for a 
 spoil - sport . to my horror I see , as I run , the fellow 's blade slip 
 inside my friend 's guard , who throw up his arm and fall prostrate , 
 while the other with a final thrust dash off down one of the narrow 
 winding lane which lead from East Street to the bank of the Tone . 

 ' for Heaven 's sake where be you hurt ? ' I cry , throw myself upon my 
 knee beside his prostrate body . ' where be your injury , Reuben ? ' 

 ' in the wind , mostly , ' quoth he , blow like a smithy bellow ; 
 ' likewise on the back of my pate . give I your hand , I pray . ' 

 ' and be you indeed scathless ? ' I cry , with a great lightening of 
 the heart as I help he to his foot . ' I think that the villain have 
 stab you . ' 

 ' as well stab a Warsash crab with a bodkin , ' say he . ' thank to good 
 Sir Jacob Clancing , once of Snellaby Hall and now of Salisbury Plain , 
 their rapier do no more than scratch my plate of proof . but how be it 
 with the maid ? ' 

 ' the maid ? ' say I. 

 ' aye , it be to save she that I draw . she be beset by these night 
 walker . see , she rise ! they throw she down when I set upon they . ' 

 ' how be it with you , Mistress ? ' I ask ; for the prostrate figure 
 have arise and take the form of a woman , young and graceful to all 
 appearance , with her face muffle in a mantle . ' I trust that you have 
 meet with no hurt . ' 

 ' none , sir , ' she answer , in a low , sweet voice , ' but that I have 
 escape be due to the ready valour of your friend , and the guide 
 wisdom of he who confute the plot of the wicked . doubtless a true man 
 would have render this help to any damsel in distress , and yet it may 
 add to your satisfaction to know that she whom you have serve be no 
 stranger to you . ' with these word she drop her mantle and turn she 
 face towards we in the moonlight . 

 ' good lack ! it be Mistress Timewell ! ' I cry , in amazement . 

 ' let we homeward , ' she say , in firm , quick tone . ' the neighbour be 
 alarm , and there will be a rabble collect anon . let we escape from 
 the babblement . ' 

 Windows have indeed begin to clatter up in every direction , and loud 
 voice to demand what be amiss . far away down the street we could 
 see the glint of lanthorn swing to and fro as the watch hurry 
 thitherward . we slip along in the shadow , however , and find 
 ourselves safe within the Mayor 's courtyard without let or hindrance . 

 ' I trust , sir , that you have really meet with no hurt , ' say the maiden 
 to my companion . 

 Reuben have say not a word since she have uncover her face , and bore 
 the face of a man who find himself in some pleasant dream and be vex 
 only by the fear lest he wake up from it . ' Nay , I be not hurt , ' he 
 answer , ' but I would that you could tell we who these roving blade 
 may be , and where they may be find . ' 

 ' Nay , nay , ' say she , with uplifted finger , ' you shall not follow the 
 matter far . as to the man , I can not say with certainty who they 
 may have be . I have go forth to visit Dame Clatworthy , who hath the 
 tertian ague , and they do beset I on my return . perchance they be 
 some who be not of my grandfather 's way of thinking in affair of 
 State , and who strike at he through I . but ye have both be so kind 
 that ye will not refuse I one other favour which I shall ask ye ? ' 

 we protest that we could not , with our hand upon our sword - hilt . 

 ' Nay , keep they for the Lord 's quarrel , ' say she , smile at the 
 action . ' all that I ask be that ye will say nothing if this matter to my 
 grandsire . he be choleric , and a little matter doth set he in a flame , 
 so old as he be . I would not have his mind turn from the public need 
 to a private trifle of this sort . have I your promise ? ' 

 ' mine , ' say I , bow . 

 ' and mine , ' say Lockarby . 

 ' thank , good friend . alack ! I have drop my gauntlet in the street . 
 but it be of no import . I thank God that no harm have come to any one . my 
 thank once more , and may pleasant dream await ye . ' she spring up the 
 step and be go in an instant . 

 Reuben and I unharness our horse and see they care for in silence . 
 we then enter the house and ascend to our chamber , still without a 
 word . outside his room door my friend pause . 

 ' I have hear that long man 's voice before , Micah , ' say he . 

 ' and so have I , ' I answer . ' the old man must beware of his ' prentice . 
 I have half a mind to go back for the little maiden 's gauntlet . ' 

 a merry twinkle shoot through the cloud which hide gather on Reuben 's 
 brow . he open his left hand and show I the doe - skin glove crumple 
 up in his palm . 

 ' I would not barter it for all the gold in her grandsire 's coffer , ' 
 say he , with a sudden outflame , and then half - laugh , half - blushing 
 at his own heat , he whisk in and leave I to my thought . 

 and so I learn for the first time , my dear , that my good comrade have 
 be strike by the little god 's arrow . when a man 's year number one 
 score , love spring up in he , as the gourd grow in the scripture , in a 
 single night . I have tell my story ill if I have not make you understand 
 that my friend be a frank , warm - hearted lad of impulse , whose reason 
 seldom stand sentry over his inclination . such a man can no more draw 
 away from a winning maid than the needle can shun the magnet . he love 
 as the mavis sing or the kitten play . now , a slow - witte , heavy fellow 
 like myself , in whose vein the blood have always flow somewhat coolly 
 and temperately , may go into love as a horse go into a shelving 
 stream , step by step , but a man like Reuben be kick his heel upon 
 the bank one moment , and be over ear in the deep pool the nest . 

 Heaven only know what match it be that have set the tow alight . I can 
 but say that from that day on my comrade be sad and cloudy one hour , 
 gay and blithesome the next . his even flow of good spirit have desert 
 he , and he become as dismal as a moulting chicken , which have ever 
 seem to I to be one of the strange outcome of what poet have 
 call the joyous state of love . but , indeed , pain and pleasure be so 
 very nearly akin in this world , that it be as if they be tether 
 in neighbouring stall , and a kick would at any time bring down the 
 partition . here be a man who be as full of sigh as a grenade be of 
 powder , his face be sad , his brow be downcast , his wit be wander ; 
 yet if you remark to he that it be an ill thing that he should be 
 in this state , he will answer you , as like as not , that he would not 
 exchange it for all the power and principality . tear to he be 
 golden , and laughter be but base coin . well , my dear , it be useless 
 for I to expound to you that which I can not myself understand . if , as I 
 have hear , it be impossible to get the thumb - mark of any two man to 
 be alike , how can we expect their inmost thought and feeling to tally ? 
 yet this I can say with all truth , that when I ask your grandmother 's 
 hand I do not demean myself as if I be chief mourner at a funeral . 
 she will bear I out that I walk up to she with a smile upon my face , 
 though mayhap there be a little flutter at my heart , and I take she 
 hand and I say -- but , lack - a - day , whither have I wander ? what have all 
 this to do with Taunton town and the rise of 1685 ? 

 on the night of Wednesday , June 17 , we learn that the king , as 
 Monmouth be call throughout the West , be lie less than ten mile 
 off with his force , and that he would make his entry into the loyal 
 town of Taunton the next morning . every effort be make , as ye may well 
 guess , to give he a welcome which should be worthy of the most whiggish 
 and protestant town in England . an arch of evergreen have already 
 be build up at the western gate , bear the motto , ' welcome to King 
 Monmouth ! ' and another span the entrance to the market - place from the 
 upper window of the White Hart Inn , with ' hail to the Protestant Chief ! ' 
 in great scarlet letter . a third , if I remember right , bridge the 
 entrance to the Castle yard , but the motto on it have escape I . the 
 cloth and wool industry be , as I have tell you , the staple trade of 
 the town , and the merchant have no mercy on their ware , but use they 
 freely to beautify the street . rich tapestry , glossy velvet , and 
 costly brocade flutter from the window or line the balcony . East 
 Street , High Street , and Fore Street be drape from garret to basement 
 with rare and beautiful fabric , while gay flag hang from the roof 
 on either side , or flutter in long festoon from house to house . 
 the royal banner of England float from the lofty tower of St. Mary 
 Magdalene , while the blue ensign of Monmouth wave from the sister 
 turret of St. James . late into the night there be plan and 
 hammering , work and devising , until when the sun rise upon Thursday , 
 June 18 , it shine on as brave a show of bunting and evergreen as ever 
 grace a town . Taunton have change as by magic from a city into a flower 
 garden . 

 Master Stephen Timewell have busy himself in these preparation , but he 
 have bear in mind at the same time that the most welcome sight which 
 he could present to Monmouth 's eye be the large body of armed man who 
 be prepared to follow his fortune . there be sixteen hundred in the 
 town , two hundred of which be horse , mostly well armed and equip . 
 these be dispose in such a way that the King should pass they in his 
 progress . the townsman line the market - place three deep from the 
 Castle gate to the entrance to the High Street ; from thence to Shuttern , 
 dorsetshire , and Frome peasant be draw up on either side of the 
 street ; while our own regiment be station at the western gate . with 
 arm well burnish , serrie rank , and fresh sprig of green in every 
 bonnet , no leader could desire a well addition to his army . when 
 all be in their place , and the burgher and their wife have array 
 themselves in their holiday gear , with gladsome face and basket of 
 new - cut flower , all be ready for the royal visitor 's reception . 

 ' my order be , ' say Saxon , rid up to we as we sit our horse reside 
 our companion , ' that I and my captain should fall in with the King 's 
 escort as he pass , and so accompany he to the market - place . your man 
 shall present arm , and shall then stand their ground until we return . ' 

 we all three draw our sword and salute . 

 ' if ye will come with I , gentleman , and take position to the right of 
 the gate here , ' say he , ' I may be able to tell ye something of these 
 folk as they pass . thirty year of war in many clime should give I the 
 master craftsman 's right to expound to his apprentice . ' 

 we all very gladly follow his advice , and pass out through the gate , 
 which be now nothing more than a broad gap amongst the mound which 
 mark the line of the old wall . ' there be no sign of they yet , ' I 
 remark , as we pull up upon a convenient hillock . ' I suppose that 
 they must come by this road which wind through the valley before we . ' 

 ' there be two sort of bad general , ' quoth Saxon , ' the man who be too 
 fast and the man who be too slow . his Majesty 's adviser will never be 
 accuse of the former failing , whatever other mistake they may fall 
 into . there be old Marshal Grunberg , with whom I do twenty - six month ' 
 soldiering in Bohemia . he would fly through the country pell - mell , 
 horse , foot , and artillery , as if the devil be at his heel . he might 
 make fifty blunder , but the enemy have never time to take advantage . I 
 call to mind a raid which we make into Silesia , when , after two day or 
 so of mountain road , his Oberhauptmann of the staff tell he that it 
 be impossible for the artillery to keep up . " lass es hinter ! " say he . 
 so the gun be leave , and by the evening of the next day the foot be 
 dead - beat . " they can not walk another mile ! " say the Oberhauptmann . 
 " Lassen Sie hinter ! " say he . so on we go with the horse -- I be in his 
 Pandour regiment , bad luck ! but after a skirmish or two , what with the 
 road and what with the enemy , our horse be foundered and useless . 
 " the horse be use up ! " say the Oberhauptmann . " Lassen Sie hinter ! " 
 he cry ; and I warrant that he would have push on to Prague with his 
 staff , have they allow he . " General Hinterlassen " we call he after 
 that . ' 

 ' a dash commander , too , ' cry Sir Gervas . ' I would fain have serve 
 under he . ' 

 ' Aye , and he have a way of knock his recruit into shape which would 
 scarce be relish by our good friend here in the west country , ' say 
 Saxon . ' I remember that after the leaguer of Salzburg , when we have take 
 the castle or fortalice of that name , we be join by some thousand 
 untrained foot , which have be raise in Dalmatia in the Emperor 's 
 employ . as they approach our line with wave of hand and blow of 
 bugle , old Marshal Hinterlassen discharge a volley of all the cannon 
 upon the wall at they , kill three score and strike great panic 
 into the other . " the rogue must get use to stand fire soon 
 or later , " say he , " so they may as well commence their education at 
 once . " ' 

 ' he be a rough schoolmaster , ' I remark . ' he might have leave that part 
 of the drill to the enemy . ' 

 ' yet his soldier love he , ' say Saxon . ' he be not a man , when a city 
 have be force , to inquire into every squawk of a woman , or give ear to 
 every burgess who chance to find his strong - box a trifle the light . 
 but as to the slow commander , I have know none to equal Brigadier 
 Baumgarten , also of the imperial service . he would break up his 
 winter - quarter and sit down before some place of strength , where he 
 would raise a sconce here , and sink a sap there , until his soldier be 
 sick of the very sight of the place . so he would play with it , as a cat 
 with a mouse , until at last it be about to open its gate , when , 
 as like as not , he would raise the leaguer and march back into his 
 winter - quarter . I serve two campaign under he without honour , sack , 
 plunder , or emolument , save a beggarly stipend of three gulden a day , 
 pay in clipped money , six month in arrear . but mark ye the folk upon 
 yonder tower ! they be wave their kerchief as though something be 
 visible to they . ' 

 ' I can see nothing , ' I answer , shade my eye and gaze down the 
 tree - sprinkle valley which rise slowly in green upland to the grassy 
 Blackdown hill . 

 ' those on the housetop be wave and point , ' say Reuben . ' methink 
 I can myself see the flash of steel among yonder wood . ' 

 ' there it be , ' cry Saxon , extend his gauntlete hand , ' on the 
 western bank of the Tone , hard by the wooden bridge . follow my finger , 
 Clarke , and see if you can not distinguish it . ' 

 ' yes , truly , ' I exclaim , ' I see a bright shimmer come and go . and 
 there to the left , where the road curve over the hill , mark you that 
 dense mass of man ! ha ! the head of the column begin to emerge from the 
 tree . ' 

 there be not a cloud in the sky , but the great heat have cause a haze 
 to overlie the valley , gather thickly along the winding course of 
 the river , and hang in little spray and feather over the woodland 
 which clothe its bank . through this filmy vapour there break from time 
 to time fierce sparkle of brilliant light as the sun 's ray fall upon 
 breastplate or headpiece . now and again the gentle summer breeze 
 waft up sudden pulse of martial music to our ear , with the blare of 
 trumpet and the long deep snarl of the drum . as we gaze , the van of 
 the army begin to roll out from the cover of the tree and to darken the 
 white dusty road . the long line slowly extend itself , writhe out of 
 the forest land like a dark snake with sparkling scale , until the whole 
 rebel army -- horse , foot , and ordnance -- be visible beneath we . the 
 gleam of the weapon , the waving of numerous banner , the plume of the 
 leader , and the deep column of march man , make up a picture which 
 stir the very heart of the citizen , who , from the housetop and 
 from the ruinous summit of the dismantled wall , be enable to gaze 
 down upon the champion of their faith . if the mere sight of a pass 
 regiment will cause a thrill in your bosom , you can fancy how it be 
 when the soldier upon whom you look be in actual arm for your own 
 dearest and most cherished interest , and have just come out victorious 
 from a bloody struggle . if every other man 's hand be against we , these 
 at least be on our side , and our heart go out to they as to friend 
 and brother . of all the tie that unite man in this world , that of a 
 common danger be the strong . 

 it all appear to be most warlike and most impose to my inexperienced 
 eye , and I think as I look at the long array that our cause be as 
 good as win . to my surprise , however , Saxon pishe and pshawe under his 
 breath , until at last , unable to contain his impatience , he break out in 
 hot discontent . 

 ' do but look at that vanguard as they breast the slope , ' he cry . 
 ' where be the advance party , or Vorreiter , as the Germans call they ? 
 where , too , be the space which should be leave between the fore - guard and 
 the main battle ? by the sword of Scanderbeg , they remind I more of a 
 drove of pilgrim , as I have see they approach the shrine of St. 
 Sebaldus of Nurnberg with their banner and streamer . there in 
 the centre , amid that cavalcade of cavalier , rid our new monarch 
 doubtless . pity he hath not a man by he who can put this swarm of 
 peasant into something like campaign order . now do but look at those 
 four piece of ordnance trail along like lame sheep behind the flock . 
 Caracco , I would that I be a young king 's officer with a troop of 
 light horse on the ridge yonder ! my faith , how I should sweep down yon 
 cross road like a kestrel on a brood of young plover ! then heh for cut 
 and thrust , down with the skulk cannonier , a carbine fire to cover 
 we , round with the horse , and away go the rebel gun in a cloud of 
 dust ! how be that , Sir Gervas ? ' 

 ' good sport , Colonel , ' say the baronet , with a touch of colour in his 
 white cheek . ' I warrant that you do keep your pandour on the trot . ' 

 ' Aye , the rogue have to work or hang -- one or t'other . but methink our 
 friend here be scarce as numerous as report . I reckon they to be a 
 thousand horse , and mayhap five thousand two hundred foot . I have be 
 think a good tally - man on such occasion . with fifteen hundred in the 
 town that would bring we to close on eight thousand man , which be no 
 great force to invade a kingdom and dispute a crown . ' 

 ' if the West can give eight thousand , how many can all the county of 
 England afford ? ' I ask . ' be not that the fair way to look at it ? ' 

 ' Monmouth 's popularity lie mostly in the West , ' Saxon answer . ' it 
 be the memory of that which prompt he to raise his standard in these 
 county . ' 

 ' his standard , rather , ' quoth Reuben . ' why , it look as though they have 
 hang their linen up to dry all down the line . ' 

 ' true ! they have more ensign than ever I see with so small a force , ' 
 Saxon answer , rise in his stirrup . ' one or two be blue , and the 
 rest , as far as I can see for the sun shin upon they , be white , with 
 some motto or device . ' 

 whilst we have be converse , the body of horse which form the 
 vanguard of the protestant army have approach within a quarter of a 
 mile or less of the town , when a loud , clear bugle - call bring they to 
 a halt . in each successive regiment or squadron the signal be repeat , 
 so that the sound pass swiftly down the long array until it die away 
 in the distance . as the coil of man form up upon the white road , with 
 just a tremulous shift motion along the curved and undulate line , 
 its likeness to a giant serpent occur again to my mind . 

 ' I could fancy it a great boa , ' I remark , ' which be draw its coil 
 round the town . ' 

 ' a rattlesnake , rather , ' say Reuben , point to the gun in the rear . 
 ' it keep all its noise in its tail . ' 

 ' here come its head , if I mistake not , ' quoth Saxon . ' it be good 
 perhaps that we stand at the side of the gate . ' 

 as he speak a group of gaily dress cavalier break away from the main 
 body and ride straight for the town . their leader be a tall , slim , 
 elegant young man , who sit his horse with the grace of a skilled rider , 
 and who be remarkable amongst those around he for the gallantry of his 
 bearing and the richness of his trapping . as he gallop towards the 
 gate a roar of welcome burst from the assemble multitude , which be 
 take up and prolong by the crowd behind , who , though unable to see 
 what be go forward , gather from the shouting that the King be 
 approach . 



 Chapter XX . of the Muster of the Men of the West 

 Monmouth be at that time in his thirty - sixth year , and be remarkable 
 for those superficial grace which please the multitude and fit a man to 
 lead in a popular cause . he be young , well - speak , witty , and skille 
 in all martial and manly exercise . on his progress in the West he have 
 not think it beneath he to kiss the village maiden , to offer prize 
 at the rural sport , and to run race in his boot against the fleet 
 of the barefooted countryman . ( note G. , Appendix ) his nature be vain 
 and prodigal , but he excel in that showy magnificence and careless 
 generosity which win the heart of the people . both on the continent 
 and at Bothwell Bridge , in Scotland , he have lead army with success , and 
 his kindness and mercy to the Covenanters after his victory have cause 
 he to be as much esteem amongst the whig as Dalzell and Claverhouse 
 be hat . as he rein up his beautiful black horse at the gate of the 
 city , and raise his plume montero cap to the shouting crowd , the grace 
 and dignity of his bearing be such as might befit the knight - errant 
 in a Romance who be fight at long odd for a crown which a tyrant have 
 filch from he . 

 he be reckon well - favour , but I can not say that I find he so . his 
 face be , I think , too long and white for comeliness , yet his feature 
 be high and noble , with well - mark nose and clear , search eye . in 
 his mouth might perchance be notice some trace of that weakness which 
 mar his character , though the expression be sweet and amiable . he 
 wear a dark purple roquelaure riding - jacket , face and lapelle with 
 gold lace , through the open front of which shine a silver breastplate . 
 a velvet suit of a light shade than the jacket , a pair of high yellow 
 Cordovan boot , with a gold - hilte rapier on one side , and a poniard 
 of Parma on the other , each hang from the morocco - leather sword - belt , 
 complete his attire . a broad collar of Mechlin lace flow over his 
 shoulder , while wristband of the same costly material dangle from his 
 sleeve . again and again he raise his cap and bent to the saddle - bow in 
 response to the storm of cheer . ' a Monmouth ! a Monmouth ! ' cry 
 the people ; ' hail to the protestant chief ! ' ' long live the noble King 
 Monmouth ! ' while from every window , and roof , and balcony flutter 
 kerchief or wave hat brighten the joyous scene . the rebel van catch 
 fire at the sight and raise a great deep - cheste shout , which be take 
 up again and again by the rest of the army , until the whole countryside 
 be sonorous . 

 in the meanwhile the city elder , head by our friend the Mayor , 
 advanced from the gate in all the dignity of silk and fur to pay homage 
 to the king . sink upon one knee by Monmouth 's stirrup , he kiss the 
 hand which be graciously extend to he . 

 ' nay , good Master Mayor , ' say the King , in a clear , strong voice , ' it 
 be for my enemy to sink before I , and not for my friend . Prythee , 
 what be this scroll which you do unroll ? ' 

 ' it be an address of welcome and of allegiance , your Majesty , from your 
 loyal town of Taunton . ' 

 ' I need no such address , ' say King Monmouth , look round . ' it be 
 write all around I in fairer character than ever find themselves 
 upon parchment . my good friend have make I feel that I be welcome 
 without the aid of clerk or scrivener . your name , good Master Mayor , be 
 Stephen Timewell , as I understand ? ' 

 ' the same , your Majesty . ' 

 ' too curt a name for so trusty a man , ' say the King , draw his sword 
 and touch he upon the shoulder with it . ' I shall make it long by 
 three letter . rise up , Sir Stephen , and may I find that there be many 
 other knight in my dominion as loyal and as stout . ' 

 amidst the huzzah which break out afresh at this honour do to the 
 town , the Mayor withdraw with the councilman to the left side of the 
 gate , whilst Monmouth with his staff gather upon the right . at a 
 signal a trumpeter blow a fanfare , the drum strike up a point of war , 
 and the insurgent army , with serried rank and wave banner , resume 
 its advance upon the town . as it approach , Saxon point out to we the 
 various leader and man of note who surround the king , give we their 
 name and some few word as to their character . 

 ' that be Lord Grey of Wark , ' say he ; ' the little middle - aged lean man 
 at the King 's bridle arm . he hath be in the Tower once for treason . 
 ' twas he who flee with the Lady Henrietta Berkeley , his wife 's sister . a 
 fine leader truly for a godly cause ! the man upon his left , with the 
 red swollen face and the white feather in his cap , be Colonel Holmes . 
 I trust that he will never show the white feather save on his head . the 
 other upon the high chestnut horse be a lawyer , though , by my soul , he 
 be a well man at order a battalion than at draw a bill of cost . 
 he be the republican Wade who lead the foot at the skirmish at Bridport , 
 and bring they off with safety . the tall heavy - faced soldier in the 
 steel bonnet be Anthony Buyse , the Brandenburger , a soldado of fortune , 
 and a man of high heart , as be most of his countryman . I have fight 
 both with he and against he ere now . ' 

 ' Mark ye the long thin man behind he ? ' cry Reuben . ' he hath draw his 
 sword , and wave it over his head . ' tis a strange time and place for the 
 broadsword exercise . he be surely mad . ' 

 ' perhaps you be not far amiss , ' say Saxon . ' yet , by my hilt , be it 
 not for that man there would be no protestant army advance upon we 
 down yonder road . ' tis he who by dangle the crown before Monmouth 's 
 eye beguile he away from his snug retreat in Brabant . there be not 
 one of these man whom he hath not tempt into this affair by some bait 
 or other . with Grey it be a dukedom , with Wade the woolsack , with Buyse 
 the plunder of Cheapside . every one hath his own motive , but the clue 
 to they all be in the hand of yonder crazy fanatic , who make the 
 puppet dance as he will . he hath plot more , lie more , and suffer 
 less than any Whig in the party . ' 

 ' it must be that Dr. Robert Ferguson of whom I have hear my father 
 speak , ' say I. 

 ' you be right . ' tis he . I have but see he once in Amsterdam , and yet 
 I know he by his shock wig and crooked shoulder . it be whisper 
 that of late his overweene conceit hath unseat his reason . see , the 
 german place his hand upon his shoulder and persuade he to sheathe 
 his weapon . King Monmouth glance round too , and smile as though he 
 be the Court buffoon with a Geneva cloak instead of the motley . but 
 the van be upon we . to your company , and mind that ye raise your 
 sword to the salute while the colour of each troop go by . ' 

 whilst our companion have be talk , the whole protestant army have 
 be stream towards the town , and the head of the fore - guard be 
 abreast with the gateway . four troop of horse lead the way , badly 
 equip and mount , with rope instead of bridle , and in some case 
 square of sack in place of saddle . the man be armed for the most 
 part with sword and pistol , while a few have the buff - coat , plate , and 
 headpiece take at Axminster , still stain sometimes with the blood of 
 the last wearer . in the midst of they ride a banner - bearer , who carry 
 a great square ensign hang upon a pole , which be support upon a 
 socket let into the side of the girth . upon it be print in golden 
 letter the legend , ' Pro libertate et religione nostra . ' these 
 horse - soldier be make up of yeoman 's and farmer ' son , unused to 
 discipline , and have a high regard for themselves as volunteer , which 
 cause they to cavil and argue over every order . for this cause , though 
 not want in natural courage , they do little service during the war , 
 and be a hindrance rather than a help to the army . 

 behind the horse come the foot , walk six abreast , divide into 
 company of vary size , each company bear a banner which give the 
 name of the town or village from which it have be raise . this manner 
 of arrange the troop have be choose because it have be find to be 
 impossible to separate man who be akin and neighbour to each other . 
 they would fight , they say , side by side , or they would not fight at 
 all . for my own part , I think that it be no bad plan , for when it come 
 to push of pike , a man stand all the fast when he know that he 
 hath old and try friend on either side of he . many of these country 
 place I come to know afterwards from the talk of the man , and many 
 other I have travel through , so that the name upon the banner have 
 come to have a real meaning with I . Homer hath , I remember , a chapter 
 or book wherein he record the name of all the grecian chief and 
 whence they come , and how many man they bring to the common muster . it 
 be pity that there be not some Western Homer who could record the name 
 of these brave peasant and artisan , and recount what each do or 
 suffer in uphold a noble though disastrous cause . their place of 
 birth at least shall not be lose as far as mine own feeble memory can 
 carry I . 

 the first foot regiment , if so rudely form a band could be so call , 
 consist of man of the sea , fisher and coastman , clothe in the 
 heavy blue jerkin and rude garb of their class . they be bronze , 
 weather - beat tarpaulin , with hard mahogany face , variously arm 
 with birding piece , cutlass , or pistol . I have a notion that it 
 be not the first time that those weapon have be turn against 
 King James 's servant , for the Somerset and Devon coast be famous 
 breeding - place for smuggler , and many a saucy lugger be doubtless 
 lie up in creek or in bay whilst her crew have go a - soldiering to 
 Taunton . as to discipline , they have no notion of it , but roll along in 
 true blue - water style , with many a shout and halloo to each other or to 
 the crowd . from Star Point to Portland Roads there would be few net 
 for many week to come , and fish would swim the narrow sea which should 
 have be heap on Lyme Cobb or expose for sale in Plymouth market . 
 each group , or band , of these man of the sea bore with it its own 
 banner , that of Lyme in the front , follow by Topsham , Colyford , 
 Bridport , Sidmouth , Otterton , Abbotsbury , and Charmouth , all southern 
 town , which be on or near the coast . so they troop past we , rough 
 and careless , with cap cock , and the reek of their tobacco rise 
 up from they like the steam from a tired horse . in number they may have 
 be four hundred or thereabout . 

 the peasant of Rockbere , with flail and scythe , lead the next column , 
 follow by the banner of Honiton , which be support by two hundred 
 stout lacemaker from the bank of the Otter . these man show by the 
 colour of their face that their work keep they within four wall , yet 
 they excel their peasant companion in their alert and soldierly 
 bear . indeed , with all the troop , we observe that , though the 
 countryman be the stouter and hearty , the craftsman be the most 
 ready to catch the air and spirit of the camp . behind the man of Honiton 
 come the Puritan clothworker of Wellington , with their mayor upon 
 a white horse beside their standard - bearer , and a band of twenty 
 instrument before he . Grim - visage , thoughtful , sober man , they be 
 for the most part clothe in grey suit and wear broad - brim hat . 
 ' for God and faith ' be the motto of a streamer which float from 
 amongst they . the clothworker form three strong company , and the 
 whole regiment may have number close on six hundred man . 

 the third regiment be head by five hundred foot from Taunton , man 
 of peaceful and industrious life , but deeply imbue with those great 
 principle of civil and religious liberty which be three year later 
 to carry all before they in England . as they pass the gate they be 
 greet by a thunderous welcome from their townsman upon the wall and 
 at the window . their steady , solid rank , and broad , honest burgher 
 face , seem to I to smack of discipline and of work well do . behind 
 they come the muster of Winterbourne , Ilminster , Chard , Yeovil , and 
 Collumpton , a hundred or more pikesman to each , bring the tally of 
 the regiment to a thousand man . 

 a squadron of horse trot by , closely follow by the fourth regiment , 
 bear in its van the standard of Beaminster , Crewkerne , Langport , 
 and Chidiock , all quiet Somersetshire village , which have send out their 
 manhood to strike a blow for the old cause . puritan minister , with 
 their steeple hat and Geneva gown , once black , but now white with 
 dust , march sturdily along beside their flock . then come a strong 
 company of wild half - arm shepherd from the great plain which extend 
 from the Blackdowns on the south to the Mendips on the north -- very 
 different fellow , I promise you , from the Corydons and Strephons of 
 Master Waller or Master Dryden , who have depict the shepherd as ever 
 shed tear of love , and tootle upon a plaintive pipe . I fear that 
 Chloe or Phyllis would have meet with rough wooing at the hand of these 
 western savage . behind they be musqueteer from Dorchester , pikemen 
 from Newton Poppleford , and a body of stout infantry from among the 
 serge worker of Ottery St. Mary . this fourth regiment number rather 
 well than eight hundred , but be inferior in arm and in discipline to 
 that which precede it . 

 the fifth regiment be head by a column of fen man from the dreary 
 march which stretch round Athelney . these man , in their sad and sordid 
 dwelling , have retain the same free and bold spirit which have make 
 they in past day the last resource of the good King Alfred and the 
 protector of the western shire from the inroad of the Danes , who 
 be never able to force their way into their watery stronghold . two 
 company of they , towsy - head and bare - legged , but loud in hymn and 
 prayer , have come out from their fastness to help the protestant cause . 
 at their heel come the woodman and lumberer of Bishop 's Lidiard , big , 
 sturdy man in green jerkin , and the white - smock villager of Huish 
 Champflower . the rear of the regiment be form by four hundred man in 
 scarlet coat , with white cross - belt and well - burnish musket . 
 these be deserter from the Devonshire Militia , who have march with 
 Albemarle from Exeter , and who have come over to Monmouth on the field 
 at Axminster . these keep together in a body , but there be many other 
 militiaman , both in red and in yellow coat , amongst the various body 
 which I have set forth . this regiment may have number seven hundred 
 man . 

 the sixth and last column of foot be head by a body of peasant 
 bear ' Minehead ' upon their banner , and the ensign of the three 
 wool - bale and the sailing ship , which be the sign of that ancient 
 borough . they have come for the most part from the wild country which 
 lie to the north of Dunster Castle and skirt the shore of the Bristol 
 Channel . behind they be the poacher and huntsman of Porlock Quay , who 
 have leave the red deer of Exmoor to graze in peace whilst they follow 
 a nobler quarry . they be follow by man from Dulverton , man from 
 Milverton , man from Wiveliscombe and the sunny slope of the Quantocks , 
 swart , fierce man from the bleak moor of Dunkerry Beacon , and tall , 
 stalwart pony rearer and grazier from Bampton . the banner of 
 Bridgewater , of Shepton Mallet , and of Nether Stowey sweep past we , with 
 that of the fisher of Clovelly and the quarryman of the Blackdowns . in 
 the rear be three company of strange man , giant in stature , though 
 somewhat bow with labour , with long tangle beard , and unkempt hair 
 hang over their eye . these be the miner from the Mendip hill and 
 from the Oare and Bagworthy valley , rough , half - savage man , whose eye 
 roll up at the velvet and brocade of the shout citizen , or fix 
 themselves upon their smile dame with a fierce intensity which scar 
 the peaceful burgher . so the long line roll in until three squadron 
 of horse and four small cannon , with the blue - coat dutch cannonier as 
 stiff as their own ramrod , bring up the rear . a long train of cart 
 and of waggon which have follow the army be lead into the field 
 outside the wall and there quarter . 

 when the last soldier have pass through the Shuttern Gate , Monmouth and 
 his leader ride slowly in , the Mayor walk by the King 's charger . 
 as we salute they all face round to we , and I see a quick flush of 
 surprise and pleasure come over Monmouth 's pale face as he note our 
 close line and soldierly bear . 

 ' by my faith , gentleman , ' he say , glance round at his staff , ' our 
 worthy friend the Mayor must have inherit Cadmus 's dragon tooth . where 
 raise ye this pretty crop , Sir Stephen ? how come ye to bring they 
 to such perfection too , even , I declare , to the hair powder of the 
 grenadier ? ' 

 ' I have fifteen hundred in the town , ' the old wool - worker answer 
 proudly ; ' though some be scarce as discipline . 

 these man come from Wiltshire , and the officer from Hampshire . as to 
 their order , the credit be due not to I , but to the old soldier Colonel 
 Decimus Saxon , whom they have choose as their commander , as well as to 
 the captain who serve under he . ' 

 ' my thank be due to you , Colonel , ' say the King , turn to Saxon , 
 who bow and sink the point of his sword to the earth , ' and to you 
 also , gentleman . I shall not forget the warm loyalty which bring you 
 from Hampshire in so short a time . would that I could find the same 
 virtue in high place ! but , Colonel Saxon , you have , I gather , see 
 much service abroad . what think you of the army which hath just pass 
 before you ? ' 

 ' if it please your Majesty , ' Saxon answer , ' it be like so much 
 uncarde wool , which be rough enough in itself , and yet may in time come 
 to be weave into a noble garment . ' 

 ' Hem ! there be not much leisure for the weaving , ' say Monmouth . ' but 
 they fight well . you should have see they fall on at Axminster ! we hope 
 to see you and to hear your view at the council table . but how be this ? 
 have I not see this gentleman 's face before ? ' 

 ' it be the Honourable Sir Gervas Jerome of the county of Surrey , ' quoth 
 Saxon . 

 ' your Majesty may have see I at St. James 's , ' say the baronet , 
 raise his hat , ' or in the balcony at Whitehall . I be much at Court 
 during the latter year of the late king . ' 

 ' yes , yes . I remember the name as well as the face , ' cry Monmouth . 
 ' you see , gentleman , ' he continue , turn to his staff , ' the courtier 
 begin to come in at last . be you not the man who do fight Sir Thomas 
 Killigrew behind Dunkirk House ? I think as much . will you not attach 
 yourself to my personal attendant ? ' 

 ' if it please your Majesty , ' Sir Gervas answer , ' I be of opinion 
 that I could do your royal cause well service at the head of my 
 musqueteer . ' 

 ' so be it ! so be it ! ' say King Monmouth . set spur to his horse , he 
 raise his hat in response to the cheer of the troop and canter down 
 the High Street under a rain of flower , which shower from roof and 
 window upon he , his staff , and his escort . we have join in his train , 
 as command , so that we come in for our share of this merry crossfire . 
 one rise as it flutter down be catch by Reuben , who , I observe , 
 press it to his lip , and then push it inside his breastplate . 
 glance up , I catch sight , of the smile face of our host 's daughter 
 peep down at we from a casement . 

 ' well catch , Reuben ! ' I whisper . ' at trick - track or trap and ball you 
 be ever our good player . ' 

 ' ah , Micah , ' say he , ' I bless the day that ever I follow you to the 
 war . I would not change place with Monmouth this day . ' 

 ' has it go so far then ! ' I exclaim . ' why , lad , I think that you 
 be but open your trench , and you speak as though you have carry 
 the city . ' 

 ' perhaps I be over - hopeful , ' he cry , turn from hot to cold , as a 
 man doth when he be in love , or hath the tertian ague , or other bodily 
 trouble . ' God know that I be little worthy of she , and yet-- ' 

 ' set not your heart too firmly upon that which may prove to be beyond 
 your reach , ' say I. ' the old man be rich , and will look high . ' 

 ' I would he be poor ! ' sigh Reuben , with all the selfishness of a 
 lover . ' if this war last I may win myself some honour or title . who 
 know ? other have do it , and why not I ! ' 

 ' of our three from Havant , ' I remark , ' one be spur onwards by 
 ambition , and one by love . now , what be I to do who care neither for 
 high office nor for the face of a maid ? what be to carry I into the 
 fight ? ' 

 ' our motif come and go , but yours be ever with you , ' say Reuben . 
 ' honour and duty be the two star , Micah , by which you have ever 
 steer your course . ' 

 ' faith , Mistress Ruth have teach you to make pretty speech , ' say I , 
 ' but methink she ought to be here amid the beauty of Taunton . ' 

 as I speak we be rid into the market - place , which be now crowd 
 with our troop . round the cross be group a score of maiden clothe in 
 white muslin dress with blue scarf around their waist . as the king 
 approach , these little maid , with much pretty nervousness , advance 
 to meet he , and hand he a banner which they have work for he , and 
 also a dainty gold - clasp Bible . Monmouth hand the flag to one of his 
 captain , but he raise the book above his head , exclaim that he 
 have come there to defend the truth contain within it , at which the 
 cheering and acclamation break forth with redoubled vigour . it have 
 be expect that he might address the people from the cross , but he 
 content himself with wait while the herald proclaim his title 
 to the Crown , when he give the word to disperse , and the troop march 
 off to the different centre where food have be provide for they . the 
 King and his chief officer take up their quarter in the Castle , while 
 the Mayor and rich burgess find bed and board for the rest . as to 
 the common soldier , many be billet among the townsfolk , many other 
 encamp in the street and castle ground , while the remainder take up 
 their dwelling among the waggon in the field outside the city , where 
 they light up great fire , and have sheep roasting and beer flow as 
 merrily as though a march on London be but a holiday outing . 



 Chapter XXI . of my hand - grip with the Brandenburger 

 King Monmouth have call a council meeting for the evening , and summon 
 Colonel Decimus Saxon to attend it , with whom I go , bear with I 
 the small package which Sir Jacob Clancing have give over to my keeping . 
 on arrive at the Castle we find that the King have not yet come out 
 from his chamber , but we be show into the great hall to await he , a 
 fine room with lofty window and a noble ceiling of carved woodwork . at 
 the further end the royal arm have be erect without the bar sinister 
 which Monmouth have formerly wear . here be assemble the principal 
 chief of the army , with many of the inferior commander , town officer , 
 and other who have petition to offer . Lord Grey of Wark stand silently 
 by the window , look out over the countryside with a gloomy face . Wade 
 and Holmes shake their head and whisper in a corner . Ferguson strode 
 about with his wig awry , shout out exhortation and prayer in a 
 broad scottish accent . a few of the more gaily dress gather round 
 the empty fireplace , and listen to a tale from one of their number 
 which appear to be shroud in many oath , and which be greet with 
 shout of laughter . in another corner a numerous group of zealot , clothe 
 in black or russet gown , with broad white band and hang mantle , 
 stand round some favourite preacher , and discuss in an undertone 
 calvinistic philosophy and its relation to statecraft . a few plain 
 homely soldier , who be neither sectary nor courtier , wander up 
 and down , or star out through the window at the busy encampment upon 
 the Castle Green . to one of these , remarkable for his great size and 
 breadth of shoulder , Saxon lead I , and touch he on the sleeve , he 
 hold out his hand as to an old friend . ' Mein Gott ! ' cry the german 
 soldier of fortune , for it be the same man whom my companion have 
 point out in the morning , ' I think it be you , Saxon , when I see you 
 by the gate , though you be even thin than of old . how a man could 
 suck up so much good bavarian beer as you have do , and yet make so 
 little flesh upon it , be more than I can verstehen . how have all thing 
 go with you ? ' 

 ' as of old , ' say Saxon . ' More blow than thaler , and great need of 
 a surgeon than of a strong - box . when do I see you last , friend ? be 
 it not at the onfall at Nurnberg , when I lead the right and you the left 
 wing of the heavy horse ? ' 

 ' Nay , ' say Buyse . ' I have meet you in the way of business since then . 
 have you forget the skirmish on the Rhine bank , when you do flash your 
 snapphahn at I ? sapperment ! have some rascally schelm not stab my 
 horse I should have sweep your head off as a boy cut thistle mit a 
 stick . ' 

 ' aye , aye , ' Saxon answer composedly , ' I have forget it . you be take , 
 if I remember aright , but do afterwards brain the sentry with your 
 fetter , and swam the Rhine under the fire of a regiment . yet , I think 
 that we do offer you the same term that you be have with the 
 other . ' 

 ' some such base offer be indeed make I , ' say the German sternly . ' to 
 which I answer that , though I sell my sword , I do not sell my honour . 
 it be well that cavalier of fortune should show that an engagement be 
 with they -- how do ye say it?--unbreakable until the war be over . then by 
 all mean let he change his paymaster . warum nicht ? ' 

 ' true , friend , true ! ' reply Saxon . ' these beggarly Italians and Swiss 
 have make such a trade of the matter , and sell themselves so freely , 
 body and soul , to the long purse , that it be well that we should be 
 nice upon point of honour . but you remember the old hand - grip which no 
 man in the Palatinate could exchange with you ? here be my captain , Micah 
 Clarke . let he see how warm a north german welcome may be . ' 

 the Brandenburger show his white tooth in a grin as he hold out his 
 broad brown hand to I . the instant that mine be enclose in it he 
 suddenly bent his whole strength upon it , and squeeze my finger 
 together until the blood tingle in the nail , and the whole hand be 
 limp and powerless . 

 ' Donnerwetter ! ' he cry , laugh heartily at my start of pain and 
 surprise . ' it be a rough prussian game , and the english lad have not 
 much stomach for it . ' 

 ' truly , sir , ' say I , ' it be the first time that I have see the 
 pastime , and I would fain practise it under so able a master . ' 

 ' what , another ! ' he cry . ' why , you must be still pringle from the 
 first . Nay , if you will I shall not refuse you , though I fear it may 
 weaken your hold upon your sword - hilt . ' 

 he hold out his hand as he speak , and I grasp it firmly , thumb to 
 thumb , keep my elbow high so as to bear all my force upon it . his own 
 trick be , as I observe , to gain command of the other hand by a great 
 output of strength at the onset . this I prevent by myself put out 
 all my power . for a minute or more we stand motionless , gaze into each 
 other 's face . then I see a bead of sweat trickle down his forehead , and 
 I know that he be beat . slowly his grip relax , and his hand grow 
 limp and slack while my own tighten ever upon it , until he be force 
 in a surly , mutter voice to request that I should unhand he . 

 ' Teufel und hexerei ! ' he cry , wipe away the blood which ooze from 
 under his nail , ' I might as well put my finger in a rat - trap . you 
 be the first man that ever yet exchange fair hand - grip with Anthony 
 Buyse . ' 

 ' we breed brawn in England as well as in Brandenburg , ' say Saxon , who 
 be shake with laughter over the german soldier 's discomfiture . ' why , 
 I have see that lad pick up a full - size sergeant of dragoon and throw 
 he into a cart as though he have be a clod of earth . ' 

 ' strong he be , ' grumble Buyse , still wring his injure hand , ' strong 
 as old Gotz mit de iron grip . but what good be strength alone in the 
 handling of a weapon ? it be not the force of a blow , but the way in 
 which it be geschlagen , that make the effect . your sword now be heavy 
 than mine , by the look of it , and yet my blade would bite deeply . eh ? be 
 not that a more soldierly sport than kinderspiel such as hand - grasping 
 and the like ? ' 

 ' he be a modest youth , ' say Saxon . ' yet I would match his stroke 
 against your . ' 

 ' for what ? ' snarl the German . 

 ' for as much wine as we can take at a sitting . 

 ' no small amount , either , ' say Buyse ; ' a brace of gallon at the least . 
 well , be it so . do you accept the contest ? ' 

 ' I shall do what I may , ' I answer , ' though I can scarce hope to strike 
 as heavy a blow as so old and try a soldier . ' 

 ' Henker take your compliment , ' he cry gruffly . ' it be with sweet 
 word that you do coax my finger into that fool - catcher of your . now , 
 here be my old headpiece of spanish steel . it have , as you can see , one 
 or two dint of blow , and a fresh one will not hurt it . I place it here 
 upon this oaken stool high enough to be within fair sword - sweep . have at 
 it , Junker , and let we see if you can leave your mark upon it ! ' 

 ' do you strike first , sir , ' say I , ' since the challenge be yours . ' 

 ' I must bruise my own headpiece to regain my soldierly credit , ' he 
 grumble . ' well , well , it have stand a cut or two in its day . ' draw 
 his broadsword , he wave back the crowd who have gather around we , 
 while he swing the great weapon with tremendous force round his head , 
 and bring it down with a full , clean sweep on to the smooth cap of 
 steel . the headpiece spring high into the air and then clatter down 
 upon the oaken floor with a long , deep line bite into the solid metal . 

 ' well strike ! ' ' a brave stroke ! ' cry the spectator . ' it be proof 
 steel thrice weld , and warrant to turn a sword - blade , ' one remark , 
 raise up the helmet to examine it , and then replace it upon the 
 stool . 

 ' I have see my father cut through proof steel with this very sword , ' 
 say I , draw the fifty - year - old weapon . ' he put rather more of his 
 weight into it than you have do . I have hear he say that a good 
 stroke should come from the back and loin rather than from the mere 
 muscle of the arm . ' 

 ' it be not a lecture we want , but a beispiel or example , ' sneer the 
 German . ' it be with your stroke that we have to do , and not with the 
 teaching of your father . ' 

 ' my stroke , ' say I , ' be in accordance with his teaching ; ' and , 
 whistle round the sword , I bring it down with all my might and 
 strength upon the German 's helmet . the good old Commonwealth blade shore 
 through the plate of steel , cut the stool asunder , and bury its point 
 two inch deep in the oaken floor . ' it be but a trick , ' I explain . ' I 
 have practise it in the winter evening at home . ' 

 ' it be not a trick that I should care to have play upon I , ' say Lord 
 Grey , amid a general murmur of applause and surprise . ' Od 's bud , man , 
 you have live two century too late . what would not your thew have 
 be worth before gunpowder put all man upon a level ! ' 

 ' Wunderbar ! ' growl Buyse , ' wunderbar ! I be past my prime , young sir , 
 and may well resign the palm of strength to you . it be a right noble 
 stroke . it hath cost I a runlet or two of canary , and a good old 
 helmet ; but I grudge it not , for it be fairly do . I be thankful 
 that my head be not darin . Saxon , here , use to show we some brave 
 schwertspielerei , but he hath not the weight for such smashing blow as 
 this . ' 

 ' my eye be still true and my hand firm , though both be perhaps a trifle 
 the bad for want of use , ' say Saxon , only too glad at the chance 
 of draw the eye of the chief upon he . ' at backsword , sword and 
 dagger , sword and buckler , single falchion and case of falchion , mine 
 old challenge still hold good against any comer , save only my brother 
 Quartus , who play as well as I do , but hath an extra half - inch in reach 
 which give he the vantage . ' 

 ' I study sword - play under Signor Contarini of Paris , ' say Lord Grey . 
 ' who be your master ? ' 

 ' I have study , my lord , under Signer Stern Necessity of Europe , ' quoth 
 Saxon . ' for five - and - thirty year my life have depend from day to day 
 upon be able to cover myself with this slip of steel . here be a 
 small trick which showeth some nicety of eye : to throw this ring to the 
 ceiling and catch it upon a rapi point . it seem simple , perchance , 
 and yet be only to be attain by some practice . ' 

 ' simple ! ' cry Wade the lawyer , a square - faced , bold - eyed man . ' why , 
 the ring be but the girth of your little finger . a man might do it once 
 by good luck , but none could ensure it . ' 

 ' I will lay a guinea a thrust on it , ' say Saxon ; and toss the little 
 gold circlet up into the air , he flash out his rapi and make a pass 
 at it . the ring rasp down the steel blade and tinkle against the 
 hilt , fairly impale . by a sharp motion of the wrist he shoot it up 
 to the ceiling again , where it strike a carve rafter and alter its 
 course ; but again , with a quick step forward , he get beneath it and 
 receive it on his sword - point . ' surely there be some cavalier present 
 who be as apt at the trick as I be , ' he say , replace the ring upon 
 his finger . 

 ' I think , Colonel , that I could venture upon it , ' say a voice ; and 
 look round , we find that Monmouth have enter the room and be 
 stand quietly on the outskirt of the throng , unperceive in 
 the general interest which our contention have excite . ' nay , nay , 
 gentleman , ' he continue pleasantly , as we uncover and bow with 
 some little embarrassment ; ' how could my faithful follower be well 
 employ than by breathe themselves in a little sword - play ? I prythee 
 lend I your rapier , Colonel . ' he draw a diamond ring from his finger , 
 and spin it up into the air , he transfix it as deftly as Saxon 
 have do . ' I practise the trick at the Hague , where , by my faith , I have 
 only too many hour to devote to such trifle . but how come these steel 
 link and splinter of wood to be litter over the floor ? ' 

 ' a son of Anak hath appaire amang we , ' say Ferguson , turn his 
 face , all scarred and redden with the king 's evil , in my direction . ' a 
 Goliath o ' Gath , wha hath a stroke like untae a weaver 's beam . hath he 
 no the smooth face o ' a bairn and the thews ' o ' Behemoth ? ' 

 ' a shrewd blow indeed , ' King Monmouth remark , pick up half the 
 stool . ' how be our champion name ? ' 

 ' he be my captain , your Majesty , ' Saxon answer , resheathe the sword 
 which the King have hand to he ; ' Micah Clarke , a man of Hampshire 
 birth . ' 

 ' they breed a good old english stock in those part , ' say Monmouth ; 
 ' but how come it that you be here , sir ? I summon this meeting for my 
 own immediate household , and for the colonel of the regiment . if every 
 captain be to be admit into our council , we must hold our meeting 
 on the Castle Green , for no apartment could contain we . ' 

 ' I venture to come here , your Majesty , ' I reply , ' because on my way 
 hither I receive a commission , which be that I should deliver this 
 small but weighty package into your hand . I therefore think it my 
 duty to lose no time in fulfil my errand . ' 

 ' what be in it ? ' he ask . 

 ' I know not , ' I answer . 

 Doctor Ferguson whisper a few word into the King 's ear , who laugh 
 and hold out his hand for the packet . 

 ' tut ! tut ! ' say he . ' the day of the Borgias and the Medicis be over , 
 Doctor . besides , the lad be no italian conspirator , but hath honest blue 
 eye and flaxen hair as Nature 's certificate to his character . this 
 be pass heavy -- an ingot of lead , by the feel . lend I your dagger , 
 Colonel Holmes . it be stitch round with packthread . ha ! it be a bar 
 of gold -- solid virgin gold by all that be wonderful . take charge of it , 
 Wade , and see that it be add to the common fund . this little piece 
 of metal may furnish ten pikemen . what have we here ? a letter and an 
 enclosure . " to James , Duke of Monmouth"--hum ! it be write before we 
 assume our royal state . " Sir Jacob Glancing , late of Snellaby Hall , 
 send greeting and a pledge of affection . carry out the good work . 
 a hundred more such ingot await you when you have cross Salisbury 
 Plain . " bravely promise , Sir Jacob ! I would that you have send they . 
 well , gentleman , ye see how support and token of goodwill come pour 
 in upon we . be not the tide upon the turn ? can the usurper hope to hold 
 his own ? will his man stand by he ? within a month or less I shall see 
 ye all gather round I at Westminster , and no duty will then be 
 so pleasing to I as to see that ye be all , from the high to the 
 low , reward for your loyalty to your monarch in this the hour of 
 his darkness and his danger . ' 

 a murmur of thank rise up from the courtier at this gracious speech , 
 but the german pluck at Saxon 's sleeve and whisper , ' he hath his 
 warm fit upon he . you shall see he cold anon . ' 

 ' fifteen hundred man have join I here where I do but expect a 
 thousand at the most , ' the King continue . ' if we have high hope when 
 we land at Lyme Cobb with eighty at our back , what should we think now 
 when we find ourselves in the chief city of Somerset with eight thousand 
 brave man around we ? ' tis but one other affair like that at Axminster , 
 and my uncle 's power will go down like a house of card . but gather 
 round the table , gentleman , and we shall discuss matter in due form . ' 

 ' there be yet a scrap of paper which you have not read , sire , ' say 
 Wade , pick up a little slip which have be enclose in the note . 

 ' it be a rhyme catch or the posy of a ring , ' say Monmouth , glance 
 at it . ' what be we to make of this ? 

           " when thy star be in trine , 
            between darkness and shine , 
            Duke Monmouth , Duke Monmouth , 
            beware of the Rhine ! " 

 Thy star in trine ! what tomfoolery be this ? ' 

 ' if it please your Majesty , ' say I , ' I have reason to believe that the 
 man who send you this message be one of those who be deeply skilled 
 in the art of divination , and who pretend from the motion of the 
 celestial body to foretell the fate of man . ' 

 ' this gentleman be right , sir , ' remark Lord Grey . ' " Thy star in trine " 
 be an astrological term , which signifieth when your natal planet shall 
 be in a certain quarter of the heaven . the verse be of the nature of a 
 prophecy . the Chaldeans and Egyptians of old be say to have attain 
 much skill in the art , but I confess that I have no great opinion of 
 those latter - day prophet who busy themselves in answer the foolish 
 question of every housewife . ' 

           ' and tell by Venus and the moon , 
            who steal a thimble or a spoon . ' 
 mutter Saxon , quote from his favourite poem . 

 ' why , here be our colonel catch the rhyme complaint , ' say the 
 King , laugh . ' we shall be drop the sword and take to the harp 
 anon , as Alfred do in these very part . or I shall become a king of 
 bard and trouveur , like good King Rene of Provence . but , gentleman , 
 if this be indeed a prophecy , it should , methink , bode well for our 
 enterprise . it be true that I be warn against the Rhine , but there be 
 little prospect of our fight this quarrel upon its bank . ' 

 ' bad luck ! ' murmur the German , under his breath . 

 ' we may , therefore , thank this Sir Jacob and his giant messenger for 
 his forecast as well as for his gold . but here come the worthy Mayor of 
 Taunton , the old of our councillor and the young of our knight . 
 Captain Clarke , I desire you to stand at the inside of the door and to 
 prevent intrusion . what pass amongst we will , I be well convinced , be 
 safe in your keeping . ' 

 I bow and take up my post as order , while the council - man and 
 commander gather round the great oaken table which run down the 
 centre of the hall . the mellow evening light be stream through the 
 three western window , while the distant babble of the soldier upon the 
 Castle Green sound like the sleepy drone of insect . Monmouth pace 
 with quick uneasy step up and down the further end of the room until 
 all be seat , when he turn towards they and address they . 

 ' you will have surmise , gentleman , ' he say , ' that I have call you 
 together to - day that I might have the benefit of your collective wisdom 
 in determine what our next step should be . we have now march some 
 forty mile into our kingdom , and we have meet wherever we have go with 
 the warm welcome which we expect . close upon eight thousand man follow 
 our standard , and as many more have be turn away for want of 
 arm . we have twice meet the enemy , with the effect that we have arm 
 ourselves with their musket and field - piece . from first to last there 
 hath be nothing which have not prosper with we . we must look to it 
 that the future be as successful as the past . to insure this I have 
 call ye together , and I now ask ye to give I your opinion of our 
 situation , leave I after I have listen to your view to form our 
 plan of action . there be statesman among ye , and there be soldier 
 among ye , and there be godly man among ye who may chance to get a flash 
 of light when statesman and soldier be in the dark . speak fearlessly , 
 then , and let I know what be in your mind . ' 

 from my central post by the door I could see the line of face on 
 either side of the board , the solemn close - shaven Puritans , sunburned 
 soldier , and white - wig moustachioed courtier . my eye rest 
 particularly upon Ferguson 's scorbutic feature , Saxon 's hard aquiline 
 profile , the German 's burly face , and the peaky thoughtful countenance 
 of the Lord of Wark . 

 ' if naebody else will gie an opeenion , ' cry the fanatical doctor , 
 ' I will een speak mysel ' as lead by the inward voice . for have I no work 
 in the cause and slave in it , much endure and suffer mony thing 
 at the hond o ' the froward , whereby my ain speerit hath plentifully 
 fructify ? have I no be bruise as in a wine - press , and cast oot wi ' 
 hiss and scorn into waste place ? ' 

 ' we know your merit and your suffering , Doctor , ' say the King . ' the 
 question before we be as to our course of action . ' 

 ' be there no a voice hear in the East ? ' cry the old Whig . ' be there 
 no a soond as o ' a great crying , the crying for a broken covenant and a 
 sinful generation ? whence come the cry ? Wha 's be the voice ? be it no 
 that o ' the man Robert Ferguson , wha raise himsel ' up against the great 
 one in the land , and wouldna be appease ? ' 

 ' aye , aye , Doctor , ' say Monmouth impatiently . ' speak to the point , or 
 give place to another . ' 

 ' I shall mak ' mysel ' clear , your Majesty . have we no hear that Argyle 
 be cutten off ? and why be he cutten off ? because he hadna due faith 
 in the working o ' the Almighty , and must need reject the help o ' the 
 child o ' light in favour o ' the bare - legged spawn o ' Prelacy , wha be 
 half Pagan , half Popish . have he walk in the path o ' the Lord he wudna 
 be lie in the Tolbooth o ' Edinburgh wi ' the tow or the axe before 
 he . why do he no gird up his loin and march straight onwards wi ' 
 the banner o ' light , instead o ' dally here and bid there like a 
 half - hairte didymus ? and the same or waur will fa ' upon we if we dinna 
 march on intae the land and plant our ensign afore the wicked toun o ' 
 London -- the toun where the Lord 's wark be tae be do , and the tare tae 
 be separate frae the wheat , and pile up for the burning . ' 

 ' your advice , in short , be that we march on ! ' say Monmouth . 

 ' that we march on , your Majesty , and that we prepare oorselve tae be 
 the vessel o ' grace , and forbear frae pollute the cause o ' the Gospel 
 by wear the livery o ' the devil'--here he glare at a gaily attire 
 cavalier at the other side of the table--'or by the playing o ' caird , 
 the singing o ' profane song and the swear o ' oath , all which be 
 nichtly do by member o ' this army , wi ' the effect o ' give much 
 scandal tae God 's ain folk . ' 

 a hum of assent and approval rise up from the more puritan member of 
 the council at this expression of opinion , while the courtier glance 
 at each other and curl their lip in derision . Monmouth take two or 
 three turn and then call for another opinion . 

 ' you , Lord Grey , ' he say , ' be a soldier and a man of experience . what 
 be your advice ? should we halt here or push forward towards London ? ' 

 ' to advance to the East would , in my humble judgment , be fatal to we , ' 
 Grey answer , speak slowly , with the manner of a man who have think 
 long and deeply before deliver an opinion . ' James Stuart be strong 
 in horse , and we have none . we can hold our own amongst hedgerow or in 
 broken country , but what chance could we have in the middle of Salisbury 
 Plain ? with the dragoon round we we should be like a flock of sheep 
 amid a pack of wolf . again , every step which we take towards London 
 remove we from our natural vantage ground , and from the fertile country 
 which supply our necessity , while it strengthen our enemy by 
 shorten the distance he have to convey his troop and his victual . 
 unless , therefore , we hear of some great outbreak elsewhere , or of some 
 general movement in London in our favour , we would do good to hold our 
 ground and wait an attack . ' 

 ' you argue shrewdly and well , my Lord Grey , ' say the King . ' but how 
 long be we to wait for this outbreak which never come , and for this 
 support which be ever promise and never provide ? we have now be 
 seven long day in England , and during that time of all the House of 
 Commons no single man hath come over to we , and of the lord none give 
 my Lord Grey , who be himself an exile . not a baron or an earl , and only 
 one baronet , hath take up arm for I . where be the man whom danver 
 and Wildman promise I from London ? where be the brisk boy of the 
 City who be say to be long for I ? where be the breaking out 
 from Berwick to Portland which they foretold ? not a man hath move 
 save only these good peasant . I have be delude , ensnare , 
 trap -- trap by vile agent who have lead I into the shamble . ' he 
 pace up and down , wring his hand and bite his lip , with despair 
 stamp upon his face . I observe that Buyse smile and whisper 
 something to Saxon -- a hint , I suppose , that this be the cold fit of 
 which he speak . 

 ' tell I , Colonel Buyse , ' say the King , master his emotion by a 
 strong effort . ' do you , as a soldier , agree with my Lord Grey ? ' 

 ' ask Saxon , your Majesty , ' the German answer . ' my opinion in a 
 Raths - Versammlung be , I have observe , ever the same as his . ' 

 ' then we turn to you , Colonel Saxon , ' say Monmouth . ' we have in this 
 council a party who be in favour of an advance and a party who wish 
 to stand their ground . their weight and number be , methink , nearly 
 equal . if you have the casting vote how would you decide ? ' all eye be 
 bent upon our leader , for his martial bearing , and the respect show to 
 he by the veteran Buyse , make it likely that his opinion might really 
 turn the scale . he sit for a few moment in silence with his hand 
 before his face . 

 ' I will give my opinion , your Majesty , ' he say at last . ' Feversham and 
 Churchill be make for Salisbury with three thousand foot , and they 
 have push on eight hundred of the Blue Guards , and two or three 
 dragoon regiment . we should , therefore , as Lord Grey say , have to 
 fight on Salisbury Plain , and our foot arm with a medley of weapon 
 could scarce make head against their horse . all be possible to the Lord , 
 as Dr. Ferguson wisely say . we be as grain of dust in the hollow of 
 his hand . yet he hath give we brain wherewith to choose the well 
 course , and if we neglect it we must suffer the consequence of our 
 folly . ' 

 Ferguson laugh contemptuously , and breathe out a prayer , but many of 
 the other Puritans nod their head to acknowledge that this be not 
 an unreasonable view to take of it . 

 ' on the other hand , sire , ' Saxon continue , ' it appear to I that to 
 remain here be equally impossible . your Majesty 's friend throughout 
 England would lose all heart if the army lie motionless and strike no 
 blow . the rustic would flock off to their wife and home . such an 
 example be catch . I have see a great army thaw away like an icicle 
 in the sunshine . once go , it be no easy matter to collect they again . 
 to keep they we must employ they . never let they have an idle minute . 
 drill they . March they . exercise they . work they . preach to they . make 
 they obey God and their Colonel . this can not be do in snug quarter . 
 they must travel . we can not hope to end this business until we get 
 to London . London , then , must be our goal . but there be many way of 
 reach it . you have , sire , as I have hear , many friend at Bristol 
 and in the Midlands . if I might advise , I should say let we march round 
 in that direction . every day that pass will serve to swell your force 
 and improve your troop , while all will feel something be astirre . 
 should we take Bristol -- and I hear that the work be not very 
 strong -- it would give we a very good command of shipping , and a rare 
 centre from which to act . if all go well with we , we could make 
 our way to London through Gloucestershire and Worcestershire . in the 
 meantime I might suggest that a day of fast and humiliation be call to 
 bring down a blessing on the cause . ' 

 this address , skilfully compound of worldly wisdom and of spiritual 
 zeal , win the applause of the whole council , and especially that of King 
 Monmouth , whose melancholy vanish as if by magic . 

 ' by my faith , Colonel , ' say he , ' you make it all as clear as day . 
 of course , if we make ourselves strong in the West , and my uncle be 
 threaten with disaffection elsewhere , he will have no chance to hold 
 out against we . should he wish to fight we upon our own ground , he must 
 need drain his troop from north , south , and east , which be not to be 
 think of . we may very well march to London by way of Bristol . ' 

 ' I think that the advice be good , ' Lord Grey observe ; ' but I should 
 like to ask Colonel Saxon what warrant he hath for say that Churchill 
 and Feversham be on their way , with three thousand regular foot and 
 several regiment of horse ? ' 

 ' the word of an officer of the Blues with whom I converse at 
 Salisbury , ' Saxon answer . ' he confide in I , believe I to be one 
 of the Duke of Beaufort 's household . as to the horse , one party pursue 
 we on Salisbury Plain with bloodhound , and another attack we not 
 twenty mile from here and lose a score of trooper and a cornet . ' 

 ' we hear something of the brush , ' say the King . ' it be bravely do . 
 but if these man be so close we have no great time for preparation . ' 

 ' their foot can not be here before a week , ' say the Mayor . ' by that time 
 we might be behind the wall of Bristol . ' 

 ' there be one point which might be urge , ' observe Wade the lawyer . ' we 
 have , as your Majesty most truly say , meet with heavy discouragement in 
 the fact that no nobleman and few commoner of repute have declare for 
 we . the reason be , I opine , that each doth wait for his neighbour to 
 make a move . should one or two come over the other would soon follow . 
 how , then , be we to bring a duke or two to our standard ? ' 

 ' there be the question , Master Wade , ' say Monmouth , shake his head 
 despondently . 

 ' I think that it might be do , ' continue the Whig lawyer . ' mere 
 proclamation address to the commonalty will not catch these gold 
 fish . they be not to be angle for with a naked hook . I should 
 recommend that some form of summon or writ be serve upon each of they , 
 call upon they to appear in our camp within a certain date under pain 
 of high treason . ' 

 ' there spake the legal mind , ' quoth King Monmouth , with a laugh . ' but 
 you have omit to tell we how the say writ or summon be to be 
 convey to these same delinquent . ' 

 ' there be the Duke of Beaufort , ' continue Wade , disregard the King 's 
 objection . ' he be President of Wales , and he be , as your Majesty know , 
 lieutenant of four english county . his influence overshadow the whole 
 West . he hath two hundred horse in his stable at Badminton , and a 
 thousand man , as I have hear , sit down at his table every day . why 
 should not a special effort be make to gain over such a one , the more so 
 as we intend to march in his direction ? ' 

 ' Henry , Duke of Beaufort , be unfortunately already in arm against his 
 sovereign , ' say Monmouth gloomily . 

 ' he be , sire , but he may be induce to turn in your favour the weapon 
 which he hath raise against you . he be a protestant . he be say to be a 
 Whig . why should we not send a message to he ? Flatter his pride . appeal 
 to his religion . coax and threaten he . who know ? he may have private 
 grievance of which we know nothing , and may be ripe for such a move . ' 

 ' your counsel be good , Wade , ' say Lord Grey , ' but methink his Majesty 
 hath ask a pertinent question . your messenger would , I fear , find 
 himself swing upon one of the Badminton oak if the Duke desire to 
 show his loyalty to James Stuart . where be we to find a man who be wary 
 enough and bold enough for such a mission , without risk one of our 
 leader , who could be ill - spar at such a time ? ' 

 ' it be true , ' say the King . ' it be well not to venture it at all 
 than to do it in a clumsy and halting fashion . beaufort would think that 
 it be a plot not to gain he over , but to throw discredit upon he . but 
 what mean our giant at the door by sign to we ? ' 

 ' if it please your Majesty , ' I ask , ' have I permission to speak ? ' 

 ' we would fain hear you , Captain , ' he answer graciously . ' if your 
 understanding be in any degree correspondent to your strength , your 
 opinion should be of weight . ' 

 ' then , your Majesty , ' say I , ' I would offer myself as a fitting 
 messenger in this matter . my father bid I spare neither life nor limb 
 in this quarrel , and if this honourable council think that the Duke 
 may be gain over , I be ready to guarantee that the message shall be 
 convey to he if man and horse can do it . ' 

 ' I will warrant that no well herald could be find , ' cry Saxon . ' the 
 lad hath a cool head and a staunch heart . ' 

 ' then , young sir , we shall accept your loyal and gallant offer , ' say 
 Monmouth . ' be ye all agree , gentleman , upon the point ? ' a murmur of 
 assent rise from the company . 

 ' you shall draw up the paper , Wade . offer he money , a seniority amongst 
 the duke , the perpetual Presidentship of Wales -- what you will , if you 
 can but shake he . if not , sequestration , exile , and everlaste infamy . 
 and , hark ye ! you can enclose a copy of the paper draw up by Van 
 Brunow , which prove the marriage of my mother , together with the 
 attestation of the witness . have they ready by to - morrow at daybreak , 
 when the messenger may start . ' ( note H , Appendix . ) 

 ' they shall be ready , your Majesty , ' say Wade . 

 ' in that case , gentleman , ' continue King Monmouth , ' I may now dismiss 
 ye to your post . should anything fresh arise I shall summon ye again , 
 that I may profit by your wisdom . here we shall stay , if Sir Stephen 
 Timewell will have we , until the man be refresh and the recruit 
 enrol . we shall then make our way Bristolwards , and see what luck 
 await we in the North . if Beaufort come over all will be well . 
 Farewell , my kind friend ! I need not tell ye to be diligent and 
 faithful . ' 

 the council rise at the King 's salutation , and bow to he they begin 
 to file out of the Castle hall . several of the member cluster round 
 I with hint for my journey or suggestion as to my conduct . 

 ' he be a proud , froward man , ' say one . ' speak humbly to he or he will 
 never hearken to your message , but will order you to be scourge out of 
 his presence . ' 

 ' Nay , nay ! ' cry another . ' he be hot , but he love a man that be a 
 man . speak boldly and honestly to he , and he be more like to listen to 
 reason . ' 

 ' speak as the Lord shall direct you , ' say a Puritan . ' it be his message 
 which you bear as well as the King 's . ' 

 ' entice he out alone upon some excuse , ' say Buyse , ' then up and away 
 mit he upon your crupper . Hagelsturm ! that would be a proper game . ' 

 ' leave he alone , ' cry Saxon . ' the lad hath as much sense as any of 
 ye . he will see which way the cat jump . come , friend , let we make our 
 way back to our man . ' 

 ' I be sorry , indeed , to lose you , ' he say , as we thread our way 
 through the throng of peasant and soldier upon the Castle Green . ' your 
 company will miss you sorely . Lockarby must see to the two . if all go 
 well you should be back in three or four day . I need not tell you that 
 there be a real danger . if the Duke wish to prove to James that 
 he would not allow himself to be tamper with , he can only do it by 
 punish the messenger , which as lieutenant of a county he hath power 
 to do in time of civil commotion . he be a hard man if all report be 
 true . on the other hand , if you should chance to succeed it may lay the 
 foundation of your fortune and be the mean of save Monmouth . he 
 need help , by the Lord Harry ! never have I see such a rabble as this 
 army of his . Buyse say that they fight lustily at this ruffle at 
 Axminster , but he be of one mind with I , that a few whiff of shot and 
 cavalry charge would scatter they over the countryside . have you any 
 message to leave ? ' 

 ' none , save my love to my mother , ' say I. 

 ' it be well . should you fall in any unfair way , I shall not forget his 
 Grace of Beaufort , and the next of his gentleman who come in my way 
 shall hang as high as Haman . and now you have good make for your chamber , 
 and have as good a slumber as you may , since to - morrow at cock - crow 
 begin your new mission . ' 



 Chapter XXII . of the News from Havant 

 have give my order that Covenant should be saddle and bridle by 
 daybreak , I have go to my room and be prepare for a long night 's 
 rest , when Sir Gervas , who sleep in the same apartment , come dance in 
 with a bundle of paper wave over his head . 

 ' three guess , Clarke ! ' he cry . ' what would you most desire ? ' 

 ' letter from Havant , ' say I eagerly . 

 ' right , ' he answer , throw they into my lap . ' three of they , and not 
 a woman 's hand among they . sink I , if I can understand what you have 
 be do all your life . 

           " how can youthful heart resign 
            lovely woman , sparkle wine ? " 

 but you be so lose in your news that you have not observe my 
 transformation . ' 

 ' why , wherever do you get these ? ' I ask in astonishment , for he 
 be attire in a delicate plum - coloured suit with gold button and 
 trimming , set off by silken hosen and spanish leather shoe with rose 
 on the instep . 

 ' it smack more of the court than of the camp , ' quoth Sir Gervas , 
 rub his hand and glance down at himself with some satisfaction . 
 ' I be also revictualle in the matter of ratafia and orange - flower 
 water , together with two new wig , a bob and a court , a pound of the 
 Imperial snuff from the sign of the Black Man , a box of De Crepigny 's 
 hair powder , my foxskin muff , and several other necessary . but I 
 hinder you in your reading . ' 

 ' I have see enough to tell I that all be well at home , ' I answer , 
 glance over my father 's letter . ' but how come these thing ? ' 

 ' some horseman have come in from Petersfield , bear they with they . as 
 to my little box , which a fair friend of mine in town pack for I , 
 it be to be forward to Bristol , where I be now suppose to be , and 
 should be be it not for my good fortune in meet your party . it 
 chance to find its way , however , to the Bruton inn , and the good woman 
 there , whom I have conciliate , find mean to send it after I . it be a 
 good rule to go upon , Clarke , in this earthly pilgrimage , always to 
 kiss the landlady . it may seem a small thing , and yet life be make up 
 of small thing . I have few fix principle , I fear , but two there be 
 which I can say from my heart that I never transgress . I always carry a 
 corkscrew , and I never forget to kiss the landlady . ' 

 ' from what I have see of you , ' say I , laugh , ' I could be warranty 
 that those two duty be ever fulfil . ' 

 ' I have letter , too , ' say he , sit on the side of the bed and 
 turn over a sheaf of paper . ' " your break - hearted Araminta . " Hum ! 
 the wench can not know that I be ruin or her heart would speedily be 
 restore . what be this ? a challenge to match my bird Julius against my 
 Lord Dorchester 's cockerel for a hundred guineas . faith ! I be too busy 
 back the Monmouth rooster for the champion stake . another ask I 
 to chase the stag at Epping . zound ! have I not clear off I should 
 have be run down myself , with a pack of bandog bailiff at my heel . 
 a dun letter from my clothier . he can afford to lose this bill . 
 he hath have many a long one out of I . an offer of three thousand from 
 little Dicky Chichester . no , no , Dicky , it will not do . a gentleman can not 
 live upon his friend . none the less grateful . how now ? from Mrs. 
 Butterworth ! no money for three week ! bailiff in the house ! now , curse 
 I , if this be not too bad ! ' 

 ' what be the matter ? ' I ask , glance up from my own letter . the 
 baronet 's pale face have take a tinge of red , and he be stride 
 furiously up and down the bedroom with a letter crumple up in his hand . 

 ' it be a burn shame , Clarke , ' he cry . ' hang it , she shall have my 
 watch . it be by Tompion , of the sign of the Three Crowns in Paul 's 
 Yard , and cost a hundred when new . it should keep she for a few month . 
 mortimer shall measure sword with I for this . I shall write villain 
 upon he with my rapier 's point . ' 

 ' I have never see you ruffle before , ' say I. 

 ' no , ' he answer , laugh . ' many have live with I for year and 
 would give I a certificate for temper . but this be too much . Sir Edward 
 Mortimer be my mother 's young brother , Clarke , but he be not many 
 year old than myself . a proper , strait - lace , soft - voice lad he have 
 ever be , and , as a consequence , he throve in the world , and join 
 land to land after the scriptural fashion . I have befriend he from my 
 purse in the old day , but he soon come to be a rich man than I , for 
 all that he gain he keep , whereas all I get -- well , it go off like 
 the smoke of the pipe which you be light . when I find that all be 
 up with I I receive from Mortimer an advance , which be sufficient to 
 take I accord to my wish over to Virginia , together with a horse and 
 a personal outfit . there be some chance , Clarke , of the Jerome acre 
 go to he should aught befall I , so that he be not averse to 
 help I off to a land of fever and scalp knife . Nay , never shake 
 your head , my dear country lad , you little know the wile of the world . ' 

 ' give he credit for the good until the bad be prove , ' say I , 
 sit up in bed smoking , with my letter litter about in front of 
 I . 

 ' the bad _ be _ prove , ' say Sir Gervas , with a darken face . ' I 
 have , as I say , do Mortimer some turn which he might remember , 
 though it do not become I to remind he of they . this mistress 
 Butterworth be mine old wet - nurse , and it hath be the custom of the 
 family to provide for she . I could not bear the thought that in the ruin 
 of my fortune she should lose the paltry guinea or so a week which stand 
 between she and hunger . my only request to Mortimer , therefore , make on 
 the score of old friendship , be that he should continue this pittance , 
 I promise that should I prosper I would return whatever he should 
 disburse . the mean - hearted villain wring my hand and swear that it 
 should be so . how vile a thing be human nature , Clarke ! for the sake of 
 this paltry sum he , a rich man , hath break his pledge , and leave this 
 poor woman to starve . but he shall answer to I for it . he think that 
 I be on the Atlantic . if I march back to London with these brave boy 
 I shall disturb the tenor of his sainted existence . meanwhile I shall 
 trust to sun - dial , and off go my watch to Mother Butterworth . Bless 
 her ample bosom ! I have try many liquor , but I dare bet that the 
 first be the most healthy . but how of your own letter ? you have be 
 frown and smile like an April day . ' 

 ' there be one from my father , with a few word attach from my mother , ' 
 say I. ' the second be from an old friend of mine , Zachariah Palmer , the 
 village carpenter . the third be from Solomon Sprent , a retired seaman , 
 for whom I have an affection and respect . ' 

 ' you have a rare trio of newsmen . I would I know your father , Clarke , he 
 must , from what you say , be a stout bit of british oak . I speak even now 
 of your know little of the world , but indeed it may be that in your 
 village you can see mankind without the varnish , and so come to learn 
 more of the good of human nature . varnish or none , the bad will ever 
 peep through . now this carpenter and seaman show themselves no doubt for 
 what they be . a man might know my friend of the court for a lifetime , 
 and never come upon their real self , nor would it perhaps repay the 
 search when you have come across it . sink I , but I wax philosophical , 
 which be the old refuge of the ruin man . give I a tub , and I shall 
 set up in the Piazza of Covent Garden , and be the Diogenes of London . I 
 would not be wealthy again , micah ! how go the old lilt?-- 

           " our money shall never indite we 
            or drag we to Goldsmith Hall , 
            no pirate or wreck can affright we . 
            we that have no estate 
            fear no plunder or rate , 
            nor care to lock gate . 
            he that lie on the ground can not fall ! " 

 that last would make a good motto for an almshouse . ' 

 ' you will have Sir Stephen up , ' say I warningly , for he be carol 
 away at the pitch of his lung . 

 ' never fear ! he and his ' prentice be all at the broad - sword exercise 
 in the hall as I come by . it be worth something to see the old fellow 
 stamp , and swing his sword , and cry , " ha ! " on the down - cut . mistress 
 Ruth and friend Lockarby be in the tapestried room , she spin and he 
 read aloud one of those entertaining volume which she would have I 
 read . methink she hath take his conversion in hand , which may end in 
 his convert she from a maid into a wife . and so you go to the Duke of 
 Beaufort ! well , I would that I could travel with you , but Saxon will not 
 hear of it , and my musqueteer must be my first care . God send you safe 
 back ! where be my jasmine powder and the patch - box ? read I your letter 
 if there be aught in they of interest . I have be split a flask 
 with our gallant Colonel at his inn , and he hath tell I enough of your 
 home at Havant to make I wish to know more . ' 

 ' this one be somewhat grave , ' say I. 

 ' Nay , I be in the humour for grave thing . have at it , if it contain the 
 whole platonic philosophy . ' 

 '' tis from the venerable carpenter who hath for many year be my 
 adviser and friend . he be one who be religious without be sectarian , 
 philosophic without be a partisan , and love without be weak . ' 

 ' a paragon , truly ! ' exclaim Sir Gervas , who be busy with his eyebrow 
 brush . 

 ' this be what he saith , ' I continue , and proceed to read the very 
 letter which I now read to you . 

 ' " have hear from your father , my dear lad , that there be some chance 
 of be able to send a letter to you , I have write this , and be 
 now send it under the charge of the worthy John Packingham , of 
 Chichester , who be bind for the West . I trust that you be now safe 
 with Monmouth 's army , and that you have receive honourable appointment 
 therein . I doubt not that you will find among your comrade some who 
 be extreme sectary , and other who be scoffer and disbeliever . 
 be advise by I , friend , and avoid both the one and the other . for the 
 zealot be a man who not only defend his own right of worship , wherein 
 he hath justice , but wish to impose upon the conscience of other , 
 by which he fall into the very error against which he fight . the mere 
 brainless scoffer be , on the other hand , low than the beast of 
 the field , since he lack the animal 's self - respect and humble 
 resignation . " ' 

 ' my faith ! ' cry the Baronet , ' the old gentleman hath a rough side to 
 his tongue . ' 

 ' " let we take religion upon its broad base , for the truth must be 
 broad than aught which we can conceive . the presence of a table doth 
 prove the existence of a carpenter , and so the presence of a universe 
 prove the existence of a universe maker , call he by what name 
 you will . so far the ground be very firm beneath we , without either 
 inspiration , teaching , or any aid whatever . since , then , there _ must _ be 
 a world Maker , let we judge of his nature by his work . we can not observe 
 the glory of the firmament , its infinite extent , its beauty , and the 
 Divine skill wherewith every plant and animal hath its want care for , 
 without see that he be full of wisdom , intelligence , and power . we 
 be still , you will perceive , upon solid ground , without have to call 
 to our aid aught save pure reason . " ' 

 ' " have get so far , let we inquire to what end the universe be make , 
 and we put upon it . the teaching of all nature show that it must be to 
 the end of improvement and upward growth , the increase in real virtue , 
 in knowledge , and in wisdom . nature be a silent preacher which hold 
 forth upon week - day as on Sabbaths . we see the acorn grow into the oak , 
 the egg into the bird , the maggot into the butterfly . shall we doubt , 
 then , that the human soul , the most precious of all thing , be also 
 upon the upward path ? and how can the soul progress save through the 
 cultivation of virtue and self - mastery ? what other way be there ? there 
 be none . we may say with confidence , then , that we be place here to 
 increase in knowledge and in virtue . " ' 

 ' " this be the core of all religion , and this much need no faith in 
 the acceptance . it be as true and as capable of proof as one of those 
 exercise of Euclid which we have go over together . on this common 
 ground man have raise many different building . Christianity , the creed 
 of Mahomet , the creed of the Easterns , have all the same essence . the 
 difference lie in the form and the detail . let we hold to our own 
 christian creed , the beautiful , often - profess , and seldom - practise 
 doctrine of love , but let we not despise our fellow - man , for we be all 
 branch from the common root of truth . " ' 

 ' " man come out of darkness into light . he tarry awhile and then 
 pass into darkness again . Micah , lad , the day be pass , mine as 
 well as thine . let they not be waste . they be few in number . what say 
 Petrarch ? ' to he that enter , life seem infinite ; to he that 
 depart , nothing . ' let every day , every hour , be spend in further the 
 Creator 's end -- in get out whatever power for good there be in you . 
 what be pain , or work , or trouble ? the cloud that pass over the sun . 
 but the result of work well do be everything . it be eternal . it live 
 and wax strong through the century . pause not for rest . the rest 
 will come when the hour of work be past . " ' 

 ' " may God protect and guard you ! there be no great news . the Portsmouth 
 garrison hath march to the West . Sir John Lawson , the magistrate , hath 
 be down here threaten your father and other , but he can do little 
 for want of proof . Church and Dissent be at each other 's throat as 
 ever . truly the stern law of Moses be more enduring than the sweet word 
 of Christ . Adieu , my dear lad ! all good wish from your grey - head 
 friend , zachariah PALMER . " ' 

 ' Od 's fish ! ' cry Sir Gervas , as I fold up the letter , ' I have hear 
 Stillingfleet and Tenison , but I never listen to a well sermon . this 
 be a bishop disguise as a carpenter . the crozier would suit his hand 
 well than the plane . but how of our seaman friend ? be he a tarpaulin 
 theologian -- a divine among the tarry - breek ? ' 

 ' Solomon Sprent be a very different man , though good enough in his way , ' 
 say I. ' but you shall judge he from his letter . ' 

 ' " Master Clarke . Sir,--When last we be in company I have run in under 
 the battery on cut - out service , while you do stand on and off in 
 the channel and wait signal . have stop to refit and to overhaul my 
 prize , which prove to be in proper trim alow and aloft-- " ' 

 ' what the devil doth he mean ? ' ask Sir Gervas . 

 ' it be a maid of whom he talk -- Phoebe Dawson , the sister of the 
 blacksmith . he hath scarce put foot on land for nigh forty year , and 
 can as a consequence only speak in this sea jargon , though he fancy 
 that he use as pure King 's English as any man in Hampshire . ' 

 ' proceed , then , ' quoth the Baronet . 

 ' " have also read she the article of war , I explain to her the 
 condition under which we be to sail in company on life 's voyage , 
 namely : " ' 

 ' " first . she to obey signal without question as soon as receive . " ' 

 ' " second . she to steer by my reckoning . " ' 

 ' " Third . she to stand by I as true consort in foul weather , battle , or 
 shipwreck . " ' 

 ' " fourth . she to run under my gun if assail by picaroon , 
 privateero , or garda - costa . " ' 

 ' " Fifth . I to keep she in due repair , dry - dock she at interval , 
 and see that she hath her allowance of coat of paint , streamer , and 
 bunting , as befit a saucy pleasure boat . " ' 

 ' " Sixth . I to take no other craft in tow , and if any be now attach , 
 to cut their hawser . " ' 

 ' " Seventh . I to revictual her day by day . " ' 

 ' " Eighth . should she chance to spring a leak , or be blow on her beam 
 end by the wind of misfortune , to stand by she and see she pump out 
 or right . " ' 

 ' " ninth . to fly the protestant ensign at the peak during life 's voyage , 
 and to lay our course for the great harbour , in the hope that mooring 
 and grind to swing may be find for two British - build craft when lay 
 up for eternity . " ' 

 ' " ' twas close on eight - bell before these article be sign and 
 seal . when I head after you I could not so much as catch a glimpse 
 of your topsail . soon after I hear as you have go a - soldiering , 
 together with that lean , rakish , long - spar , picaroon - like craft which 
 I have see of late in the village . I take it unkind of you that you 
 have not so much as dip ensign to I on leave . but perchance 
 the tide be favourable , and you could not tarry . have I not be 
 jury - rig , with one of my spar shoot away , I should have dearly love 
 to have strap on my hanger and come with you to smell gunpowder once 
 more . I would do it now , timber - toe and all , be it not for my consort , 
 who might claim it as a breach of the article , and so sheer off . I must 
 follow the light on her poop until we be fairly join . " ' 

 ' " farewell , mate ! in action , take an old sailor 's advice . keep the 
 weather - gauge and board ! tell that to your admiral on the day of battle . 
 Whisper it in his ear . say to he , ' keep the weather - gauge and board ! ' 
 tell he also to strike quick , strike hard , and keep on strike . that be 
 the word of Christopher Mings , and a well man have not be launch , 
 though he do climb in through the hawse - pipe.--yours to command , 
 SOLOMON SPRENT . " ' 

 Sir Gervas have be chuckle to himself during the reading of this 
 epistle , but at the last part we both break out a - laughing . 

 ' land or sea , he will have it that battle be fight in ship , ' 
 say the Baronet . ' you should have have that sage piece of advice for 
 Monmouth 's council to - day . should he ever ask your opinion it must be , 
 " keep the weather - gauge and board ! " ' 

 ' I must to sleep , ' say I , lay aside my pipe . ' I should be on the 
 road by daybreak . ' 

 ' Nay , I prythee , complete your kindness by let I have a glimpse of 
 your respected parent , the Roundhead . ' 

 '' tis but a few line , ' I answer . ' he be ever short of speech . but 
 if they interest you , you shall hear they . " I be send this by a godly 
 man , my dear son , to say that I trust that you be bear yourself as 
 become you . in all danger and difficulty trust not to yourself , but 
 ask help from on high . if you be in authority , teach your man to sing 
 psalm when they fall on , as be the good old custom . in action give 
 point rather than edge . a thrust must beat a cut . your mother and the 
 other send their affection to you . Sir John Lawson hath be down 
 here like a ravening wolf , but could find no proof against I . John 
 Marchbank , of Bedhampton , be cast into prison . truly Antichrist reign 
 in the land , but the kingdom of light be at hand . strike lustily for 
 truth and conscience.--your love father , JOSEPH CLARKE . " ' 

 ' " Postscriptum ( from my mother).--I trust that you will remember what I 
 have say concern your hosen and also the broad linen collar , which 
 you will find in the bag . it be little over a week since you leave , yet 
 it seem a year . when cold or wet , take ten drop of Daffy 's elixir in a 
 small glass of strong water . should your foot chafe , rub tallow on the 
 inside of your boot . commend I to Master Saxon and to Master Lockarby , 
 if he be with you . his father be mad at his going , for he hath a great 
 brewing go forward , and none to mind the mash - tub . Ruth hath bake a 
 cake , but the oven hath play her false , and it be lumpy in the inside . 
 a thousand kiss , dear heart , from your love mother , M. C. " ' 

 ' a right sensible couple , ' quoth Sir Gervas , who , have complete his 
 toilet , have betake he to his couch . ' I now begin to understand your 
 manufacture , Clarke . I see the thread that be use in the weaving of 
 you . your father look to your spiritual want . your mother concern 
 herself with the material . yet the old carpenter 's preaching be , 
 methink , more to your taste . you be a rank latitudinarian , man . Sir 
 Stephen would cry fie upon you , and Joshua Pettigrue abjure you ! well , 
 out with the light , for we should both be stir at cock - crow . that be 
 our religion at present . ' 

 ' Early Christians , ' I suggest , and we both laugh as we settle down 
 to sleep . 



 Chapter XXIII . of the Snare on the Weston Road 

 just after sunrise I be awake by one of the Mayor 's servant , who 
 bring word that the Honourable Master Wade be await I downstairs . 
 have dress and descend , I find he seat by the table in the 
 sitting - room with paper and wafer - box , seal up the missive which I 
 be to carry . he be a small , worn , grey - face man , very erect in his 
 bearing and sudden in his speech , with more of the soldier than of the 
 lawyer in his appearance . 

 ' so , ' say he , press his seal above the fastening of the string , ' I 
 see that your horse be ready for you outside . you have well make your way 
 round by Nether Stowey and the Bristol Channel , for we have hear that 
 the enemy 's horse guard the road on the far side of Wells . here be your 
 packet . ' 

 I bow and place it in the inside of my tunic . 

 ' it be a write order as suggest in the council . the Duke 's reply may 
 be write , or it may be by word of mouth . in either case guard it well . 
 this packet contain also a copy of the deposition of the clergyman at 
 the Hague , and of the other witness who see Charles of England marry 
 Lucy Walters , the mother of his Majesty . your mission be one of such 
 importance that the whole success of our enterprise may turn upon it . 
 see that you serve the paper upon Beaufort in person , and not through 
 any intermediary , or it might not stand in a court of law . ' 

 I promise to do so if possible . 

 ' I should advise you also , ' he continue , ' to carry sword and pistol as 
 a protection against the chance danger of the road , but to discard your 
 head - piece and steel - front as give you too warlike an aspect for a 
 peaceful messenger . ' 

 ' I have already come to that resolve , ' say I. 

 ' there be nothing more to be say , Captain , ' say the lawyer , give I 
 his hand . ' may all good fortune go with you . keep a still tongue and a 
 quick ear . watch keenly how all thing go . Mark whose face be gloomy and 
 whose content . the Duke may be at Bristol , but you have good make for his 
 seat at Badminton . our sign of the day be tewkesbury . ' 

 thank my instructor for his advice I go out and mount Covenant , 
 who paw and champ at his bit in his delight at get start 
 once more . few of the townsman be stir , though here and there 
 a night - bonnet head star out at I through a casement . I take the 
 precaution of walk the horse very quietly until we be some distance 
 from the house , for I have tell Reuben nothing of my intended journey , 
 and I be convince that if he know of it neither discipline , nor even 
 his new tie of love , would prevent he from come with I . Covenant 's 
 iron - shod foot rang sharply , in spite of my care , upon the cobblestone , 
 but look back I see that the blind of my faithful friend 's room 
 be undrawn , and that all seem quiet in the house . I shake my bridle , 
 therefore , and ride at a brisk trot through the silent street , which 
 be still strew with fade flower and gay with streamer . at the 
 north gate a guard of half a company be station , who let I pass upon 
 hear the word . once beyond the old wall I find myself out on the 
 country side , with my face to the north and a clear road in front of I . 

 it be a blithesome morning . the sun be rise over the distant hill , 
 and heaven and earth be ruddy and golden . the tree in the wayside 
 orchard be full of swarm of bird , who chatter and sing until the 
 air be full of their piping . there be lightsomeness and gladness in 
 every breath . the wistful - eyed red Somerset kine stand along by the 
 hedgerow , cast great shadow down the field and gaze at I as 
 I pass . farm horse lean over wooden gate , and snort a word of 
 greeting to their glossy - coat brother . a great herd of snowy - fleece 
 sheep stream towards we over the hillside and frisk and gambol in 
 the sunshine . all be innocent life , from the lark which sing on high 
 to the little shrew - mouse which run amongst the ripen corn , or the 
 martin which dash away at the sound of my approach . all alive and all 
 innocent . what be we to think , my dear child , when we see the beast 
 of the field full of kindness and virtue and gratitude ? where be this 
 superiority of which we talk ? 

 from the high ground to the north I look back upon the sleep town , 
 with the broad edging of tent and waggon , which show how suddenly 
 its population have outgrow it . the Royal Standard still flutter 
 from the tower of St. Mary Magdalene , while close by its beautiful 
 brother - turret of St. James bore aloft the blue flag of Monmouth . as 
 I gaze the quick petulant roll of a drum rise up on the still morning 
 air , with the clear ringing call of the bugle summon the troop from 
 their slumber . beyond the town , and on either side of it , stretch a 
 glorious view of the Somersetshire down , roll away to the distant 
 sea , with town and hamlet , castle turret and church tower , woode coombe 
 and stretch of grain - land -- as fair a scene as the eye could wish to rest 
 upon . as I wheel my horse and speed upon my way I feel , my dear , that 
 this be a land worth fight for , and that a man 's life be a small 
 thing if he could but aid , in however trifle a degree , in work out 
 its freedom and its happiness . at a little village over the hill I fall 
 in with an outpost of horse , the commander of which ride some distance 
 with I , and set I on my road to Nether Stowey . it seem strange to 
 my Hampshire eye to note that the earth be all red in these part -- very 
 different to the chalk and gravel of Havant . the cow , too , be mostly 
 red . the cottage be build neither of brick nor of wood , but of some 
 form of plaster , which they call cob , which be strong and smooth so 
 long as no water come near it . they shelter the wall from the rain , 
 therefore , by great overhanging thatch . there be scarcely a steeple in 
 the whole country - side , which also seem strange to a man from any other 
 part of England . every church hath a square tower , with pinnacle upon 
 the top , and they be mostly very large , with fine peal of bell . 

 my course run along by the foot of the beautiful Quantock Hills , where 
 heavy - woode coombe be scatter over the broad heathery down , deep 
 with bracken and whortle - bush . on either side of the track steep 
 wind glen slop downward , line with yellow gorse , which blaze 
 out from the deep - red soil like a flame from ember . peat - colour 
 stream splash down these valley and over the road , through which 
 Covenant plough fetlock deep , and shy to see the broad - back trout 
 dart from between his fore foot . 

 all day I ride through this beautiful country , meet few folk , for 
 I keep away from the main road . a few shepherd and farmer , a 
 long - legged clergyman , a packman with his mule , and a horseman with a 
 great bag , whom I take to be a buyer of hair , be all that I can recall . 
 a black jack of ale and the heel of a loaf at a wayside inn be all my 
 refreshment . Near Combwich , Covenant cast a shoe , and two hour be 
 waste before I find a smithy in the town and have the matter set right . 
 it be not until evening that I at last come out upon the bank of the 
 Bristol Channel , at a place call Shurton Bars , where the muddy Parret 
 make its way into the sea . at this point the channel be so broad that 
 the Welsh mountain can scarcely be distinguish . the shore be flat 
 and black and oozy , fleck over with white patch of sea - bird , but 
 far to the east there rise a line of hill , very wild and rugged , 
 rise in place into steep precipice . these cliff run out into the 
 sea , and numerous little harbour and bay be form in their break 
 surface , which be dry half the day , but can float a good - sized boat at 
 half - tide . the road wind over these bleak and rocky hill , which be 
 sparsely inhabit by a wild race of fisherman , or shepherd , who come 
 to their cabin door on hear the clatter of my horse 's hoof , and 
 shoot some rough west - country jest at I as I pass . as the night draw 
 in the country become bleaker and more deserted . an occasional light 
 twinkling in the distance from some lonely hillside cottage be the only 
 sign of the presence of man . the rough track still skirt the sea , and 
 high as it be , the spray from the breaker drift across it . the salt 
 prinkle on my lip , and the air be fill with the hoarse roar of the 
 surge and the thin piping of curlew , who flit past in the darkness 
 like white , shadowy , sad - voice creature from some other world . the 
 wind blow in short , quick , angry puff from the westward , and far out on 
 the black water a single glimmer of light rise and fall , toss 
 up , and then sink out of sight , show how fierce a sea have rise in 
 the channel . 

 rid through the gloaming in this strange wild scenery my mind 
 naturally turn towards the past . I think of my father and my mother , 
 of the old carpenter and of Solomon Sprent . then I ponder over Decimus 
 Saxon , his many - faced character have in it so much to be admire and 
 so much to be abhor . do I like he or no ? it be more than I could 
 say . from he I wander off to my faithful Reuben , and to his love 
 passage with the pretty Puritan , which in turn bring I to Sir Gervas 
 and the wreck of his fortune . my mind then wander to the state of the 
 army and the prospect of the rising , which lead I to my present mission 
 with its peril and its difficulty . have turn over all these 
 thing in my mind I begin to doze upon my horse 's back , overcome by the 
 fatigue of the journey and the drowsy lullaby of the wave . I have just 
 fall into a dream in which I see Reuben Lockarby crown King of 
 England by Mistress Ruth Timewell , while Decimus Saxon endeavour to 
 shoot he with a bottle of Daffy 's elixir , when in an instant , 
 without warn , I be dash violently from my horse , and leave lie 
 half - conscious on the stony track . 

 so stunned and shake be I by the sudden fall , that though I have a dim 
 knowledge of shadowy figure bend over I , and of hoarse laughter 
 sound in my ear , I could not tell for a few minute where I be nor 
 what have befall I . when at last I do make an attempt to recover my 
 foot I find that a loop of rope have be slip round my arm and my 
 leg so as to secure they . with a hard struggle I get one hand free , and 
 dash it in the face of one of the man who be hold I down ; but 
 the whole gang of a dozen or more set upon I at once , and while some 
 thump and kick at I , other tie a fresh cord round my elbow , and 
 deftly fasten it in such a way as to pinion I completely . find 
 that in my weak and daze state all effort be of no avail , I lay 
 sullen and watchful , take no heed of the random blow which be still 
 shower upon I . so dark be it that I could neither see the face of 
 my attacker , nor form any guess as to who they might be , or how they 
 have hurl I from my saddle . the champing and stamping of a horse hard 
 by show I that Covenant be a prisoner as well as his master . 

 ' Dutch Pete 's get as much as he can carry , ' say a rough , harsh voice . 
 ' he lie on the track as limp as a conger . ' 

 ' ah , poor pete ! ' mutter another . ' he will never deal a card or drain a 
 glass of the right Cognac again . ' 

 ' there you lie , mine goot vriend , ' say the injure man , in weak , 
 quaver tone . ' and I will prove that you lie if you have a flaschen 
 in your pocket . ' 

 ' if Pete be dead and bury , ' the first speaker say , ' a word about 
 strong water would bring he to . give he a sup from your bottle , 
 Dicon . ' 

 there be a great gurgling and suck in the darkness , follow by a 
 gasp from the drinker . ' gott sei gelobt , ' he exclaim in a strong 
 voice , ' I have see more star than ever be make . have my kopf not 
 be well hoop he would have knock it in like an ill - stave cask . he 
 shlag like the kick of a horse . ' 

 as he speak the edge of the moon peep over a cliff and throw a flood 
 of cold clear light upon the scene . look up I see that a strong rope 
 have be tie across the road from one tree trunk to another about eight 
 foot above the ground . this could not be see by I , even have I be 
 fully awake , in the dusk ; but catch I across the breast as Covenant 
 trot under it , it have sweep I off and dash I with great force to 
 the ground . either the fall or the blow which I have receive have cut I 
 badly , for I could feel the blood trickle in a warm stream past my 
 ear and down my neck . I make no attempt to move , however , but wait in 
 silence to find out who these man be into whose hand I have fall . 
 my one fear be lest my letter should be take away from I , and my 
 mission render of no avail . that in this , my first trust , I should be 
 disarm without a blow and lose the paper which have be confide to 
 I , be a chance which make I flush and tingle with shame at the very 
 thought . 

 the gang who have seize I be rough - bearded fellow in fur cap and 
 fustian jacket , with buff belt round their waist , from which hung 
 short straight whinyard . their dark sun - dry face and their great 
 boot mark they as fisherman or seaman , as might be guess from their 
 rude sailor speech . a pair knelt on either side with their hand upon 
 my arm , a third stand behind with a cocked pistol point at my head , 
 while the other , seven or eight in number , be help to his foot the 
 man whom I have strike , who be bleed freely from a cut over the eye . 

 ' take the horse up to Daddy Mycroft 's , ' say a stout , black - bearded man , 
 who seem to be their leader . ' it be no mere dragoon hack,(Note 
 I. Appendix ) but a comely , full - blooded brute , which will fetch sixty 
 piece at the least . your share of that , Peter , will buy salve and 
 plaster for your cut . ' 

 ' ha , houndsfoot ! ' cry the Dutchman , shake his fist at I . ' you 
 would strike Peter , would you ? you would draw Peter 's blood , would you ? 
 tausend Teufel , man ! if you and I be together upon the hillside we 
 should see vich vas the petter man . ' 

 ' slack your jaw tackle , Pete , ' growl one of his comrade . ' this fellow 
 be a limb of Satan for sure , and doth follow a calling that none but a 
 mean , snivel , baseborn son of a gun would take to . yet I warrant , 
 from the look of he , that he could truss you like a woodcock if he have 
 his great hand upon you . and you would howl for help as you do last 
 Martinmas , when you do mistake Cooper Dick 's wife for a gauger . ' 

 ' truss I , would he ? Todt und Holle ! ' cry the other , whom the blow 
 and the brandy have drive to madness . ' we shall see . take that , thou 
 deyvil 's spawn , take that ! ' he run at I , and kick I as hard as he 
 could with his heavy sea - boot . 

 some of the gang laugh , but the man who have speak before give 
 the Dutchman a shove that send he whirling . ' none of that , ' he say 
 sternly . ' we will have british fair - play on british soil , and none of your 
 cursed longshore trick . I will not stand by and see an Englishman 
 kick , d'ye see , by a tub - belly , round - starne , schnapps - swill , 
 chicken - hearted son of an Amsterdam lust - vrouw . hang he , if the skipper 
 like . that be all above board , but by thunder , if it be a fight that you 
 will have , touch that man again . ' 

 ' all right , Dicon , ' say their leader soothingly . ' we all know that 
 Pete be not a fight man , but he be the good cooper on the coast , eh , 
 Pete ? there be not his equal at stave , hooping , and bumping . he will 
 take a plank of wood and turn it into a keg while another man would be 
 think of it . ' 

 ' oh , you remember that , Captain Murgatroyd , ' say the Dutchman sulkily . 
 ' but you see I knock about and shlagge , and bully , and call 
 name , and what help have I ? so help I , when the _ Maria _ be in the 
 Texel next , I will take to my old trade , I will , and never set foot on she 
 again . ' 

 ' no fear , ' the Captain answer , laugh . ' while the _ Maria _ bring in 
 five thousand good piece a year , and can show her heel to any cutter 
 on the coast , there be no fear of greedy Pete lose his share of she . 
 why , man , at this rate you may have a lust - haus of your own in a year or 
 two , with a trimmed lawn , and the tree all clip like peacock , and 
 the flower in pattern , and a canal by the door , and a great bounce 
 house - wife just like any burgomeister . there be many such a fortune be 
 make out of Mechlin and Cognac . ' 

 ' Aye , and there be many a broken kopf get over Mechlin and Cognac , ' 
 grumble my enemy . ' Donner ! there be other thing beside lust - house 
 and flower - bed . there be lee - shore and nor'-wester , beak and 
 preventive . ' 

 ' and there be where the smart seaman have the pull over the herre buss , 
 or the skulk coaster that work from Christmas to Christmas with all 
 the danger and none of the little picking . but enough say ! up with the 
 prisoner , and let we get he safely into the bilbo . ' 

 I be raise to my foot and half carry , half drag along in the 
 midst of the gang . my horse have already be lead away in the opposite 
 direction . our course lie off the road , down a very rocky and rugged 
 ravine which slop away towards the sea . there seem to be no trace of 
 a path , and I could only stumble along over rock and bush as good I 
 might in my fettered and crippled state . the blood , however , have 
 dry over my wound , and the cool sea breeze playing upon my forehead 
 refresh I , and help I to take a clear view of my position . 

 it be plain from their talk that these man be smuggler . as such , 
 they be not likely to have any great love for the Government , or 
 desire to uphold King James in any way . on the contrary , their goodwill 
 would probably be with Monmouth , for have I not see the day before a 
 whole regiment of foot in his army , raise from among the coaster folk ? 
 on the other hand , their greed might be strong than their loyalty , and 
 might lead they to hand I over to justice in the hope of reward . on the 
 whole it would be good , I think , to say nothing of my mission , and to 
 keep my paper secret as long as possible . 

 but I could not but wonder , as I be drag along , what have lead these 
 man to lie in wait for I as they have do . the road along which I have 
 travel be a lonely one , and yet a fair number of traveller bind 
 from the West through Weston to Bristol must use it . the gang could 
 not lie in perpetual guard over it . why have they set a trap on this 
 particular night , then ? the smuggler be a lawless and desperate body , 
 but they do not , as a rule , descend to foot - paddery or robbery . as long 
 as no one interfere with they they be seldom the first to break the 
 peace . then , why have they lain in wait for I , who have never injure 
 they ? could it possibly be that I have be betray ? I be still turn 
 over these question in my mind when we all come to a halt , and the 
 Captain blow a shrill note on a whistle which hang round his neck . 

 the place where we find ourselves be the dark and most rugged spot 
 in the whole wild gorge . on either side great cliff shoot up , which 
 arch over our head , with a fringe of fern and bracken on either lip , 
 so that the dark sky and the few twinkle star be well - nigh hid . 
 great black rock loom vaguely out in the shadowy light , while in 
 front a high tangle of what seem to be brushwood bar our road . at a 
 second whistle , however , a glint of light be see through the branch , 
 and the whole mass be swing to one side as though it move upon a 
 hinge . beyond it a dark wind passage open into the side of the 
 hill , down which we go with our back bow , for the rock ceiling be 
 of no great height . on every side of we sound the throbbing of the 
 sea . 

 pass through the entrance , which must have be dig with great labour 
 through the solid rock , we come out into a lofty and roomy cave , light 
 up by a fire at one end , and by several torch . by their smoky yellow 
 glare I could see that the roof be , at least , fifty foot above we , and 
 be hang by long lime - crystal , which sparkle and gleam with great 
 brightness . the floor of the cave be form of fine sand , as soft and 
 velvety as a Wilton carpet , slop down in a way which show that the 
 cave must at its mouth open upon the sea , which be confirm by the 
 booming and splash of the wave , and by the fresh salt air which 
 fill the whole cavern . no water could be see , however , as a sharp 
 turn cut off our view of the outlet . 

 in this rock - girt space , which may have be sixty pace long and 
 thirty across , there be gather great pile of cask , keg and case ; 
 musket , cutlass , stave , cudgel , and straw be litter about upon 
 the floor . at one end a high wood fire blaze merrily , cast strange 
 shadow along the wall , and sparkle like a thousand diamond among 
 the crystal on the roof . the smoke be carry away through a great 
 cleft in the rock . seat on box , or stretch on the sand round the 
 fire , there be seven or eight more of the band , who spring to their 
 foot and run eagerly towards we as we enter . 

 have ye get he ? ' they cry . ' do he indeed come ? have he attendant ? ' 

 ' he be here , and he be alone , ' the Captain answer . ' our hawser fetch 
 he off his horse as neatly as ever a gull be net by a cragsman . 
 what have ye do in our absence , Silas ! ' 

 ' we have the pack ready for carriage , ' say the man address , a 
 sturdy , weather - beat seaman of middle age . ' the silk and lace be do 
 in these square cover over with sack . the one I have mark " yarn " 
 and the other " jute"--a thousand of Mechlin to a hundred of the shiny . 
 they will sling over a mule 's back . Brandy , schnapp , Schiedam , and 
 Hamburg Goldwasser be all set out in due order . the ' baccy be in the 
 flat case over by the Black Drop there . a plaguey job we have carry 
 it all out , but here it be ship - shape at last , and the lugger float 
 like a skim dish , with scarce ballast enough to stand up to a 
 five - knot breeze . ' 

 ' any sign of the _ Fairy Queen _ ? ' ask the smuggler . 

 ' none . long John be down at the water 's edge look out for her 
 flash - light . this wind should bring she up if she have round 
 Combe - Martin Point . there be a sail about ten mile to the 
 east - nor'-east at sundown . she might have be a Bristol schooner , or 
 she might have be a King 's fly - boat . ' 

 ' a King 's crawl - boat , ' say Captain Murgatroyd , with a sneer . ' we can not 
 hang the gauger until Venables bring up the _ Fairy Queen _ , for after 
 all it be one of his hand that be snackle . let he do his own dirty 
 work . ' 

 ' Tausend Blitzen ! ' cry the ruffian Dutchman , ' would it not be a kindly 
 grass to Captain Venables to chuck the gauger down the Black Drop ere he 
 come ? he may have such another job to do for we some day . ' 

 ' Zounds , man , be you in command or be I ? ' say the leader angrily . 
 ' bring the prisoner forward to the fire ! now , hark ye , dog of a 
 land - shark ; you be as surely a dead man as though you be lay out 
 with the taper burn . see here'--he lift a torch , and show by 
 its red light a great crack in the floor across the far end of the 
 cave--'you can judge of the Black Drop 's depth ! ' he say , raise an 
 empty keg and toss it over into the yawning gulf . for ten second 
 we stand silent before a dull distant clatter tell that it have at last 
 reach the bottom . 

 ' it will carry he half - way to hell before the breath leave he , ' say 
 one . 

 ' it be an easy death than the Devizes gallow ! ' cry a second . 

 ' Nay , he shall have the gallow first ! ' a third shout . ' it be but his 
 burial that we be arrange . ' 

 ' he hath not open his mouth since we take he , ' say the man who be 
 call Dicon . ' be he a mute , then ? find your tongue , my fine fellow , and 
 let we hear what your name be . it would have be well for you if you 
 have be bear dumb , so that you could not have swear our comrade 's life 
 away . ' 

 ' I have be wait for a civil question after all this brawl and 
 brabble , ' say I. ' my name be Micah Clarke . now , pray inform I who ye 
 may be , and by what warrant ye stop peaceful traveller upon the public 
 highway ? ' 

 ' this be our warrant , ' Murgatroyd answer , touch the hilt of his 
 cutlass . ' as to who we be , ye know that well enough . your name be 
 not Clarke , but Westhouse , or Waterhouse , and you be the same curse 
 exciseman who snackle our poor comrade , Cooper Dick , and swear away his 
 life at Ilchester . ' 

 ' I swear that you be mistaken , ' I reply . ' I have never in my life 
 be in these part before . ' 

 ' fine word ! fine word ! ' cry another smuggler . ' Gauger or no , you 
 must jump for it , since you know the secret of our cave . ' 

 ' your secret be safe with I , ' I answer . ' but if ye wish to murder I , 
 I shall meet my fate as a soldier should . I should have choose to die on 
 the field of battle , rather than to lie at the mercy of such a pack of 
 water - rat in their burrow . ' 

 ' my faith ! ' say Murgatroyd . ' this be too tall talk for a gauger . he 
 bear himself like a soldier , too . it be possible that in snare the 
 owl we have catch the falcon . yet we have certain token that he would 
 come this way , and on such another horse . ' 

 ' call up Long John , ' suggest the Dutchman . ' I vould not give a plug of 
 Trinidado for the Schelm 's word . long John be with Cooper Dick when he 
 be take . ' 

 ' aye , ' growl the mate Silas . ' he get a wipe over the arm from the 
 gauger 's whinyard . he will know his face , if any will . ' 

 ' call he , then , ' say Murgatroyd , and presently a long , loose - limbe 
 seaman come up from the mouth of the cave , where he have be on watch . 
 he wear a red kerchief round his forehead , and a blue jerkin , the sleeve 
 of which he slowly roll up as he come nigh . 

 ' where be Gauger Westhouse ? ' he cry ; ' he have leave his mark on my arm . 
 Rat I , if the scar be heal yet . the sun be on our side of the wall 
 now , gauger . but hullo , mate ! who be this that ye have clap into 
 iron ? this be not our man ! ' 

 ' not our man ! ' they cry , with a volley of curse . 

 ' why , this fellow would make two of the gauger , and leave enough over 
 to fashion a magistrate 's clerk . Ye may hang he to make sure , but still 
 he be not the man . ' 

 ' yes , hang he ! ' say Dutch Pete . ' sapperment ! be our cave to be the 
 talk of all the country ? vere be the pretty _ Maria _ to go then , vid her 
 silk and her satin , her keg and her case ' ? be we to risk our 
 cave for the sake of this fellow ? besides , have he not schlagge my 
 kopf -- schlagge your cooper 's kopf -- as if he have hit I mit mine own 
 mallet ? be that not vorth a hemp cravat ? ' 

 ' worth a jorum of rumbo , ' cry Dicon . ' by your leave , Captain , I would 
 say that we be not a gang of padder and micher , but a crew of honest 
 seaman , who harm none but those who harm we . Exciseman Westhouse hath 
 slay Cooper Dick , and it be just that he should die for it ; but as to 
 take this young soldier 's life , I would as soon think of scuttle the 
 saucy _ Maria _ , or of mount the Jolly Roger at her peak . ' 

 what answer would have be give to this speech I can not tell , for 
 at that moment a shrill whistle resound outside the cave , and two 
 smuggler appear bear between they the body of a man . it hang so 
 limp that I think at first that he might be dead , but when they throw 
 he on the sand he move , and at last sit up like one who be but half 
 awoken from a swoon . he be a square dog - faced fellow , with a long 
 white scar down his cheek , and a close - fitting blue coat with brass 
 button . 

 ' it be Gauger Westhouse ! ' cry a chorus of voice . ' yes , it be Gauger 
 westhouse , ' say the man calmly , give his neck a wriggle as though he 
 be in pain . ' I represent the King 's law , and in its name I arrest ye 
 all , and declare all the contraband good which I see around I to be 
 confiscate and forfeit , accord to the second section of the first 
 clause of the statute upon illegal dealing . if there be any honest man 
 in this company , they will assist I in the execution of my duty . ' he 
 stagger to his foot as he speak , but his spirit be great than his 
 strength , and he sink back upon the sand amid a roar of laughter from 
 the rough seaman . 

 ' we find he lie on the road when we come from Daddy Mycroft 's , ' say 
 one of the new - comer , who be the same man who have lead away my horse . 
 ' he must have pass just after you leave , and the rope catch he under 
 the chin and throw he a dozen pace . we see the revenue button on his 
 coat , so we bring he down . body o ' I , but he kick and plunge for 
 all that he be three - quarter stun . ' 

 ' have ye slack the hawser ? ' the Captain ask . 

 ' we cast one end loose and let it hang . ' 

 '' tis well . we must keep he for Captain Venables . but now , as to our 
 other prisoner : we must overhaul he and examine his paper , for so many 
 craft be sail under false colour that we must need be careful . 
 Hark ye , Mister Soldier ! what bring you to these part , and what king 
 do you serve ? for I hear there be a mutiny break out , and two skipper 
 claim equal rating in the old british ship . ' 

 ' I be serve under King Monmouth , ' I answer , see that the propose 
 search must end in the finding of my paper . 

 ' under King Monmouth ! ' cry the smuggler . ' nay , friend , that ring 
 somewhat false . the good King hath , I hear , too much need of his friend 
 in the south to let an able soldier go wander along the sea coast 
 like a cornish wrecker in a sou'-wester . ' 

 ' I bear despatch , ' say I , ' from the King 's own hand to Henry Duke 
 of Beaufort , at his castle at Badminton . Ye can find they in my inner 
 pocket , but I pray ye not to break the seal , lest it bring discredit 
 upon my mission . ' 

 ' Sir , ' cry the gauger , raise himself upon his elbow , ' I do hereby 
 arrest you on the charge of be a traitor , a promoter of treason , a 
 vagrant , and a masterless man within the meaning of the fourth statute 
 of the Act . as an officer of the law I call upon you to submit to my 
 warrant . ' 

 ' Brace up his jaw with your scarf , Jim , ' say Murgatroyd . ' when Venables 
 come he will soon find a way to check his gab . yes , ' he continue , 
 look at the back of my paper , ' it be mark , as you say , " from James 
 the Second of England , know lately as the Duke of Monmouth , to Henry 
 Duke of Beaufort , President of Wales , by the hand of Captain Micah 
 Clarke , of Saxon 's regiment of Wiltshire foot . " cast off the lashing , 
 Dicon . so , Captain , you be a free man once more , and I grieve that we 
 should have unwittingly harm you . we be good Lutherans to a man , and 
 would rather speed you than hinder you on this mission . ' 

 ' could we not indeed help he on his way ! ' say the mate Silas . ' for 
 myself , I do not fear a wet jacket or a tarry hand for the cause , and 
 I doubt not ye be all of my way of thinking . now with this breeze we 
 could run up to Bristol and drop the Captain by morning , which would 
 save he from be snap up by any land - shark on the road . ' 

 ' aye , aye , ' cry Long John . ' the King 's horse be out beyond Weston , 
 but he could give they the slip if he have the _ Maria _ under he . ' 

 ' well , ' say Murgatroyd , ' we could get back by three long tack . 
 Venables will need a day or so to get his good ashore . if we be to 
 sail back in company we shall have time on our hand . how would the plan 
 suit you , Captain ? ' 

 ' my horse ! ' I object . 

 ' it need not stop we . I can rig up a handy horse - stall with my spare 
 spar and the grating . the wind have die down . the lugger could be 
 bring to Dead Man 's Edge , and the horse lead down to it . run up to 
 Daddy 's , Jim ; and you , Silas , see to the boat . here be some cold junk 
 and biscuit -- seaman 's fare , Captain -- and a glass o ' the real Jamaica to 
 wash it down an ' thy stomach be not too dainty for rough living . ' 

 I seat myself on a barrel by the fire , and stretch my limb , which 
 be cramp and stiffen by their confinement , while one of the seaman 
 bath the cut on my head with a wet kerchief , and another lay out some 
 food on a case in front of I . the rest of the gang have troop away to 
 the mouth of the cave to prepare the lugger , save only two or three who 
 stand on guard round the ill - fated gauger . he lie with his back resting 
 against the wall of the cave , and his arm cross over his breast , 
 glance round from time to time at the smuggler with menacing eye , as 
 a staunch old hound might gaze at a pack of wolf who have overmatche 
 he . I be turn it over in my own mind whether aught could be do to 
 help he , when Murgatroyd come over , and dip a tin pannikin into the 
 open rum tub , drain it to the success of my mission . 

 ' I shall send Silas Bolitho with you , ' say he , ' while I bide here to 
 meet Venables , who command my consort . if there be aught that I can do 
 to repay you for your ill usage-- ' 

 ' there be but one thing , Captain , ' I break in eagerly . ' it be as much , 
 or more , for your own sake than mine that I ask it . do not allow this 
 unhappy man to be murder . ' 

 Murgatroyd 's face flush with anger . ' you be a plain speaker , Captain 
 Clarke , ' say he . ' this be no murder . it be justice . what harm do we 
 here ? there be not an old housewife over the whole countryside who do 
 not bless we . where be she to buy she souchong , or her strong water , 
 except from we ! we charge little , and force our good on no one . we be 
 peaceful trader . yet this man and his fellow be ever yelp at our 
 heel , like so many dogfish on a cod bank . we have be harry , and 
 chivy , and shoot at until we be drive into such den as this . a month 
 ago , four of our man be bear a keg up the hillside to Farmer Black , 
 who hath deal with we these five year back . of a sudden , down come 
 half a score of horse , lead by this gauger , hack and slash with their 
 broad - sword , cut Long John 's arm open , and take Cooper Dick prisoner . 
 Dick be hale to Ilchester Gaol , and hang up after the assize like 
 a stoat on a gamekeeper 's door . this night we have news that this very 
 gauger be come this way , little know that we should be on the 
 look - out for he . be it a wonder that we should lay a trap for he , and 
 that , have catch he , we should give he the same justice as he give 
 our comrade ? ' 

 ' he be but a servant , I argue . ' he hath not make the law . it be his 
 duty to enforce it . it be with the law itself that your quarrel be . ' 

 ' you be right , ' say the smuggler gloomily . ' it be with Judge Moorcroft 
 that we have our chief account to square . he may pass this road upon his 
 circuit . Heaven send he do ! but we shall hang the gauger too . he know 
 our cave now , and it would be madness to let he go . ' 

 I see that it be useless to argue long , so I content myself with 
 drop my pocket - knife on the sand within reach of the prisoner , in 
 the hope that it might prove to be of some service to he . his guard 
 be laugh and joke together , and give little heed to their 
 charge , but the gauger be keen enough , for I see his hand close over 
 it . 

 I have walk and smoke for an hour or more , when Silas the mate 
 appear , and say that the lugger be ready and the horse aboard . 
 Bidding Murgatroyd farewell , I venture a few more word in favour of 
 the gauger , which be receive with a frown and an angry shake of the 
 head . a boat be draw up on the sand , inside the cave , at the water 's 
 edge . into this I step , as direct , with my sword and pistol , which 
 have be give back to I , while the crew push she off and spring in 
 as she glide into deep water . 

 I could see by the dim light of the single torch which Murgatroyd hold 
 upon the margin , that the roof of the cave slop sheer down upon we as 
 we scull slowly out towards the entrance . so low do it come at last 
 that there be only a space of a few foot between it and the water , and 
 we have to bend our head to avoid the rock above we . the boatman give 
 two strong stroke , and we shoot out from under the overhang ledge , 
 and find ourselves in the open with the star shin murkily above 
 we , and the moon show herself dimly and cloudily through a gathering 
 haze . right in front of we be a dark blur , which , as we pull towards 
 it , take the outline of a large lugger rise and fall with the pulse 
 of the sea . her tall thin spar and delicate network of cordage tower 
 above we as we glide under the counter , while the creaking of block 
 and rattle of rope show that she be all ready to glide off upon her 
 journey . lightly and daintily she ride upon the water , like some giant 
 seafowl , spread one white pinion after another in preparation for 
 her flight . the boatman run we alongside and steady the dinghy while I 
 climb over the bulwark on to the deck . 

 she be a roomy vessel , very broad in the beam , with a graceful curve in 
 her bow , and mast which be tall than any that I have see on such 
 a boat on the Solent . she be deck over in front , but very deep in the 
 after part , with rope fix all round the side to secure keg when the 
 hold should be full . in the midst of this after - deck the mariner have 
 build a strong stall , in which my good steed be stand , with a bucket 
 full of oats in front of he . my old friend shove his nose against my 
 face as I come aboard , and neigh his pleasure at find his master 
 once more . we be still exchange caress when the grizzle head of 
 Silas Bolitho the mate pop out of the cabin hatchway . 

 ' we be fairly on our way now , Captain Clarke , ' say he . ' the breeze 
 have fall away to nothing , as you can see , and we may be some time in 
 run down to our port . be you not aweary ? ' 

 ' I be a little tired , ' I confess . ' my head be throb from the crack 
 I get when that hawser of yours dash I from my saddle . ' 

 ' an hour or two of sleep will make you as fresh as a Mother Carey 's 
 chicken , ' say the smuggler . ' your horse be well care for , and you can 
 leave he without fear . I will set a man to tend he , though , truth to 
 say , the rogue know more about stud - sail and halliard than they 
 do of steed and their requirement . yet no harm can come to he , so you 
 have well come down and turn in . ' 

 I descend the steep stair which lead down into the low - roof cabin of 
 the lugger . on either side a recess in the wall have be fit up as a 
 couch . 

 ' this be your bed , ' say he , point to one of they . ' we shall call 
 you if there be aught to report . ' I need no second invitation , but 
 fling myself down without undress , I sink in a few minute into 
 a dreamless sleep , which neither the gentle motion of the boat nor the 
 clank of foot above my head could break off . 



 Chapter XXIV . of the welcome that meet I at Badminton 

 when I open my eye I have some ado to recall where I be , but on 
 sit up it be bring home to I by my head strike the low ceiling 
 with a sharp rap . on the other side of the cabin Silas Bolitho be 
 stretch at full length with a red woollen nightcap upon his head , fast 
 asleep and snore . in the centre of the cabin hang a swing - table , 
 much worn , and stain all over with the mark of countless glass 
 and pannikin . a wooden bench , screw to the floor , complete the 
 furniture , with the exception of a stand of musket along one side . 
 above and below the berth in which we lay be row of locker , in 
 which , doubtless , some of the more choice lace and silk be stow . 
 the vessel be rise and fall with a gentle motion , but from the 
 flapping of canvas I judge that there be little wind . slip quietly 
 from my couch , so as not to wake the mate , I steal upon deck . 

 we be , I find , not only becalm , but hem in by a dense fog - bank 
 which roll in thick , choke wreath all round we , and hide the very 
 water beneath we . we might have be a ship of the air rid upon 
 a white cloud - bank . now and anon a little puff of breeze catch the 
 foresail and belly it out for a moment , only to let it flap back 
 against the mast , limp and slack , once more . a sunbeam would at time 
 break through the dense cloud , and would spangle the dead grey wall with 
 a streak of rainbow colour , but the haze would gather in again and shut 
 off the bright invader . Covenant be star right and leave with great 
 questioning eye . the crew be gather along the bulwark and smoke 
 their pipe while they peer out into the dense fog . 

 ' God den , Captain , ' say Dicon , touch his fur cap . ' we have have a 
 rare run while the breeze last , and the mate reckon before he turn 
 in that we be not many mile from Bristol town . ' 

 ' in that case , my good fellow , ' I answer , ' ye can set I ashore , for I 
 have not far to go . ' 

 ' we must e'en wait till the fog lift , ' say Long John . ' there be only 
 one place along here , d'ye see , where we can land cargoe unquestione . 
 when it clear we shall turn her head for it , but until we can take our 
 bearing it be anxious work wi ' the sand under our lee . ' 

 ' keep a look - out there , Tom Baldock ! ' cry Dicon to a man in the bow . 
 ' we be in the track of every Bristol ship , and though there be so little 
 wind , a high - spar craft might catch a breeze which we miss . ' 

 ' sh ! ' say Long John suddenly , hold up his hand in warning . ' sh ! ' 

 we listen with all our ear , but there be no sound , save the gentle 
 wash of the unseen wave against our side . 

 ' call the mate ! ' whisper the seaman . ' there be a craft close by we . I 
 hear the rattle of a rope upon her deck . ' 

 Silas Bolitho be up in an instant , and we all stand strain our ear , 
 and peer through the dense fog - bank . we have well - nigh make up our 
 mind that it be a false alarm , and the mate be turn back in no 
 very good humour , when a clear loud bell sound seven time quite 
 close to we , follow by a shrill whistle and a confused shouting and 
 stamp . 

 ' it be a king 's ship , ' growl the mate . ' that be seven bell , and the 
 bo'sun be turn out the watch below . ' 

 ' it be on our quarter , ' whisper one . 

 ' Nay , I think it be on our larboard bow , ' say another . 

 the mate hold up his hand , and we all listen for some fresh sign 
 of the whereabouts of our scurvy neighbour . the wind have freshen a 
 little , and we be slip through the water at four or five knot 
 an hour . of a sudden a hoarse voice be hear roar at our very side . 
 '' bout ship ! ' it shout . ' bear a hand on the lee - brace , there ! stand 
 by the halliard ! bear a hand , ye lazy rogue , or I will be among ye with 
 my cane , with a wannion to ye ! ' 

 ' it be a King 's ship , sure enough , and she lie just there , ' say Long 
 John , point out over the quarter . ' merchant adventurer have 
 civil tongue . it be your blue - coat , gold - braid , swivel - eye , 
 quarter - decker that talk of cane . ha ! do I not tell ye ! ' 

 as he speak , the white screen of vapour roll up like the curtain in 
 a playhouse , and uncover a stately war - ship , lie so close that we 
 could have throw a biscuit aboard . her long , lean , black hull rise 
 and fall with a slow , graceful rhythm , while her beautiful spar and 
 snow - white sail shoot aloft until they be lose in the wreath of fog 
 which still hang around she . nine bright brass cannon peep out at we 
 from her porthole . above the line of hammock , which hang like card 
 wool along her bulwark , we could see the head of the seaman star 
 down at we , and point we out to each other . on the high poop stand an 
 elderly officer with cocked hat and trim white wig , who at once whip 
 up his glass and gaze at we through it . 

 ' ahoy , there ! ' he shout , lean over the taffrail . ' what lugger be 
 that ? ' 

 ' the _ Lucy _ , ' answer the mate , ' bind from Porlock Quay to Bristol 
 with hide and tallow . stand ready to tack ! ' he add in a low voice , 
 ' the fog be come down again . ' 

 ' ye have one of the hide with the horse still in it , ' cry the 
 officer . ' run down under our counter . we must have a close look at ye . ' 

 ' aye , aye , sir ! ' say the mate , and put his helm hard down the boom 
 swing across , and the _ Maria _ dart off like a scared seabird into the 
 fog . look back there be nothing but a dim loom to show where we have 
 leave the great vessel . we could hear , however , the hoarse shouting of 
 order and the bustle of man . 

 ' look out for squall , lad ! ' cry the mate . ' he will let we have it 
 now . ' 

 he have scarcely speak before there be half - a - dozen throb of flame in 
 the mist behind , and as many ball sing among our rigging . one cut away 
 the end of the yard , and leave it dangle ; another graze the bowsprit , 
 and send a puff of white splinter into the air . 

 ' warm work , Captain , eh ? ' say old Silas , rub his hand . ' Zounds , 
 they shoot well in the dark than ever they do in the light . there 
 have be more shot fire at this lugg than she could carry wear she 
 load with they . and yet they never so much as knock the paint off 
 she before . there they go again ! ' 

 a fresh discharge burst from the man - of - war , but this time they have lose 
 all trace of we , and be fire by guess . 

 ' that be their last bark , sir , ' say Dicon . 

 ' no fear . they will blaze away for the rest of the day , ' growl another 
 of the smuggler . ' why , Lor ' bless ye , it be good exercise for the crew , 
 and the ' munition be the King 's , so it do not cost nobody a groat . ' 

 ' it be well the breeze freshen , ' say Long John . ' I hear the creak o ' 
 davit just after the first discharge . she be lower her boat , or 
 I be a Dutchman . ' 

 ' the petter for you if you vas , you seven - foot stock - fish , ' cry my 
 enemy the cooper , whose aspect be not improve by a great strip of 
 plaster over his eye . ' you might have learn something petter than to 
 pull on a rope , or to swab deck like a vrouw all your life . ' 

 ' I will set you adrift in one of your own barrel , you skin of lard , ' say 
 the seaman . ' how often be we to trounce you before we knock the sauce 
 out of you ? ' 

 ' the fog lift a little towards the land , ' Silas remark . ' methink I 
 see the loom of St. Austin 's point . it rise there upon the starboard 
 bow . ' 

 ' there it be , sure enough , sir ! ' cry one of the seaman , point to a 
 dark cape which cut into the mist . 

 ' steer for the three - fathom creek then , ' say the mate . ' when we be on 
 the other side of the point , Captain Clarke , we shall be able to land 
 your horse and yourself . you will then be within a few hour ' ride of 
 your destination . ' 

 I lead the old seaman aside , and have thank he for the kindness 
 which he have show I , I speak to he of the gauger , and implore he to 
 use his influence to save the man . 

 ' it rest with Captain Venables , ' say he gloomily . ' if we let he go 
 what become of our cave ? ' 

 ' be there no way of insure his silence ? ' I ask . ' well , we might ship 
 he to the Plantations , ' say the mate . ' we could take he to the Texel 
 with we , and get Captain Donders or some other to give he a lift across 
 the western ocean . ' 

 ' do so , ' say I , ' and I shall take care that King Monmouth shall hear of 
 the help which ye have give his messenger . ' 

 ' well , we shall be there in a brace of shake , ' he remark . ' let we go 
 below and load your ground tier , for there be nothing like start well 
 trim with plenty of ballast in the hold . ' 

 follow the sailor 's advice I go down with he and enjoy a rude 
 but plentiful meal . by the time that we have finish , the lugger have 
 be run into a narrow creek , with shelve sandy bank on either side . 
 the district be wild and marshy , with few sign of any inhabitant . 
 with much coax and push Covenant be induce to take to the water , 
 and swam easily ashore , while I follow in the smuggler 's dinghy . a 
 few word of rough , kindly leave - taking be shout after I ; I see the 
 dinghy return , and the beautiful craft glide out to sea and fade away 
 once more into the mist which still hang over the face of the water . 

 truly Providence work in strange way , my child , and until a 
 man come to the autumn of his day he can scarce say what hath be 
 ill - luck and what hath be good . for of all the seem misfortune 
 which have befall I during my wandering life , there be not one which 
 I have not come to look upon as a blessing . and if you once take this 
 into your heart , it be a mighty help in enable you to meet all 
 trouble with a stiff lip ; for why should a man grieve when he hath not 
 yet determined whether what hath chance may not prove to be a cause of 
 rejoice . now here ye will perceive that I begin by be dash upon 
 a stony road , beat , kick , and finally well - nigh put to death in 
 mistake for another . yet it end in my being safely carry to my 
 journey 's end , whereas , have I go by land , it be more than likely that 
 I should have be cut off at Weston ; for , as I hear afterwards , a 
 troop of horse be make themselves very active in those part by 
 block the road and seize all who come that way . 

 be now alone , my first care be to bathe my face and hand in a 
 stream which run down to the sea , and to wipe away any trace of my 
 adventure of the night before . my cut be but a small one , and be 
 conceal by my hair . have reduce myself to some sort of order I next 
 rub down my horse as good I could , and rearrange his girth and his 
 saddle . I then lead he by the bridle to the top of a sandhill hard by , 
 whence I might gain some idea as to my position . 

 the fog lie thick upon the Channel , but all inland be very clear and 
 bright . along the coast the country be dreary and marshy , but at the 
 other side a goodly extent of fertile plain lie before I , well till 
 and care for . a range of lofty hill , which I guess to be the 
 Mendips , border the whole skyline , and far north there lie a 
 second chain in the blue distance . the glitter Avon wind its way 
 over the country - side like a silver snake in a flower - bed . close to its 
 mouth , and not more than two league from where I stand , rise the spire 
 and tower of stately Bristol , the queen of the West , which be and 
 still may be the second city in the kingdom . the forest of mast which 
 shoot up like a pinegrove above the roof of the house bear witness to 
 the great trade both with Ireland and with the Plantations which have 
 build up so flourish a city . 

 as I know that the Duke 's seat be mile on the Gloucestershire side of 
 the city , and as I fear lest I might be arrest and examine should I 
 attempt to pass the gate , I strike inland with intent to ride round the 
 wall and so avoid the peril . the path which I follow lead I into a 
 country lane , which in turn open into a broad highway crowd with 
 traveller , both on horseback and on foot . as the troublous time 
 require that a man should journey with his arm , there be naught in 
 my outfit to excite remark , and I be able to jog on among the other 
 horseman without question or suspicion . from their appearance they be , 
 I judge , country farmer or squire for the most part , who be rid 
 into Bristol to hear the news , and to store away their thing of price 
 in a place of safety . 

 ' by your leave , zur ! ' say a burly , heavy - faced man in a velveteen 
 jacket , rid up upon my bridle - arm . ' can you tell I whether his grace 
 of Beaufort be in Bristol or at his house o ' Badminton ? ' 

 I answer that I could not tell , but that I be myself bind for his 
 presence . 

 ' he be in Bristol yestreen a - drilling o ' the train - band , ' say the 
 stranger ; ' but , indeed , his grace be that loyal , and work that hard for 
 his Majesty 's cause , that he be a ' ower the county , and it be but chance 
 work for to try and to catch he . but if you be about to zeek he , 
 whither shall you go ? ' 

 ' I will to Badminton , ' I answer , ' and await he there . can you tell I 
 the way ? ' 

 ' what ! not know the way to Badminton ! ' he cry , with a blank stare of 
 wonder . ' Whoy , I think all the warld know that . you be not fra wale 
 or the border county , zur , that be very clear . ' 

 ' I be a Hampshire man , ' say I. ' I have come some distance to see the 
 Duke . ' 

 ' Aye , so I should think ! ' he cry , laugh loudly . ' if you doan't know 
 the way to Badminton you doan't know much ! but I will go with you , dange 
 if I doan't , and I will show you your road , and run my chance o ' find 
 the Duke there . what be your name ? ' 

 ' Micah Clarke be my name . ' 

 ' and Vairmer Brown be mine -- John Brown by the register , but well 
 know as the Vairmer . tak ' this turn to the right off the high - road . 
 now we can trot our beast and not be smother in other folk 's dust . 
 and what be you go to beaufort for ? ' 

 ' on private matter which will not brook discussion , ' I answer . 

 ' Lor ' , now ! affair o ' state belike , ' say he , with a whistle . ' well , a 
 still tongue save many a neck . I be a cautious man myself , and these be 
 time when I wouldna whisper some o ' my thought -- no , not into the ear 
 o ' my old brown mare here -- for fear I would see she some day stand over 
 against I in the witness - box . ' 

 ' they seem very busy over there , ' I remark , for we be now in full 
 sight of the wall of Bristol , where gang of man be work hard with 
 pick and shovel improve the defence . 

 ' Aye , they be busy sure enough , makin ' ready in case the rebel come 
 this road . Cromwell and his tawnie find it a rasper in my vather 's 
 time , and Monmouth be like to do the same . ' 

 ' it hath a strong garrison , too , ' say I , bethink I of Saxon 's 
 advice at Salisbury . ' I see two or three regiment out yonder on the 
 bare open space . ' 

 ' they have four thousand foot and a thousand horse , ' the farmer 
 answer . ' but the foot be only train - band , and there be no trusting 
 they after Axminster . they say up here that the rebel run to nigh 
 twenty thousand , and that they give no quarter . well , if we must have 
 civil war , I hope it may be hot and sudden , not spin out for a dozen 
 year like the last one . if our throat be to be cut , let it be with a 
 shairp knife , and not with a blunt hedge shear . ' 

 ' what say you to a stoup of cider ? ' I ask , for we be pass an 
 ivy - clothe inn , with ' the Beaufort Arms ' print upon the sign . 

 ' with all my heart , lad , ' my companion answer . ' ho , there ! two pint 
 of the old hard - brew ! that will serve to wash the dust down . the real 
 Beaufort Arms be up yonder at Badminton , for at the buttery hatch one 
 may call for what one will in reason and never put hand to pocket . ' 

 ' you speak of the house as though you know it well , ' say I. 

 ' and who should know it well ? ' ask the sturdy farmer , wipe his 
 lip , as we resume our journey . ' why , it seem but yesterday that I 
 play hide - and - seek wi ' my brother in the old Boteler Castle , that 
 stand where the new house o ' Badminton , or Acton Turville , as some call 
 it , now stand . the Duke hath build it but a few year , and , indeed , his 
 Dukedom itself be scarce old . there be some who think that he would 
 have do well to stick by the old name that his forebear bore . ' 

 ' what manner of man be the Duke ? ' I ask . 

 ' hot and hasty , like all of his blood . yet when he hath time to think , 
 and hath cool down , he be just in the main . your horse hath be in 
 the water this morning , vriend . ' 

 ' yes , ' say I shortly , ' he hath have a bath . ' 

 ' I be go to his grace on the business of a horse , ' quoth my 
 companion . ' his officer have press my piebald four - year - old , and 
 take it without a " with your leave , " or " by your leave , " for the use of 
 the king . I would have they know that there be something high than 
 the Duke , or even than the king . there be the english law , which will 
 preserve a man 's good and his chattel . I would do aught in reason for 
 King James 's service , but my piebald four - year - old be too much . ' 

 ' I fear that the need of the public service will override your 
 objection , ' say I. 

 ' why it be enough to make a man a Whig , ' he cry . ' even the roundhead 
 always pay their vair penny for every pennyworth they have , though they 
 want a vair pennyworth for each penny . I have hear my father say that 
 trade be never so brisk as in ' forty - six , when they be down this way . 
 Old Noll have a noose of hemp ready for horse - stealer , be they for 
 King or for Parliament . but here come his grace 's carriage , if I 
 mistake not . ' 

 as he speak a great heavy yellow coach , draw by six cream - colour 
 Flemish mare , dash down the road , and come swiftly towards we . two 
 mount lackey gallop in front , and two other all in light blue and 
 silver livery ride on either side . 

 ' his grace be not within , else there have be an escort behind , ' say 
 the farmer , as we rein our horse aside to let the carriage pass . as 
 they sweep by he shout out a question as to whether the Duke be at 
 Badminton , and receive a nod from the stately bewigge coachman in 
 reply . 

 ' we be in luck to catch he , ' say Farmer Brown . ' he be as hard to find 
 these day as a crake in a wheatfield . we should be there in an hour 
 or less . I must thank you that I do not take a fruitless journey into 
 Bristol . what do you say your errand be ? ' 

 I be again compel to assure he that the matter be not one of which 
 I could speak with a stranger , on which he appear to be huff , and 
 ride for some mile without open his mouth . grove of tree line the 
 road on either side , and the sweet smell of pine be in our nostril . 
 far away the musical pealing of a bell rise and fall on the hot , close 
 summer air . the shelter of the branch be pleasant , for the sun be 
 very strong , blaze down out of a cloudless heaven , and raise a haze 
 from the field and valley . 

 '' tis the bell from Chipping Sodbury , ' say my companion at last , wipe 
 his ruddy face . ' that be Sodbury Church yonder over the brow of the hill , 
 and here on the right be the entrance of Badminton Park . ' 

 high iron gate , with the leopard and griffin , which be the supporter 
 of the Beaufort arm , fix on the pillar which flank they , open 
 into a beautiful domain of lawn and grass land with clump of tree 
 scatter over it , and broad sheet of water , thick with wild fowl . at 
 every turn as we ride up the wind avenue some new beauty catch our 
 eye , all of which be point out and expound by Farmer Brown , who 
 seem to take as much pride in the place as though it belong to he . 
 here it be a rockery where a thousand bright - colour stone shine out 
 through the fern and creeper which have be train over they . there 
 it be a pretty prattling brook , the channel of which have be turn so 
 as to make it come foam down over a steep ledge of rock . or perhaps 
 it be some statue of nymph or sylvan god , or some artfully build 
 arbour overgrown with rose or honeysuckle . I have never see ground 
 so tastefully lay out , and it be do , as all good work in art must 
 be do , by follow Nature so closely that it only differ from her 
 handiwork in its profusion in so narrow a compass . a few year later our 
 healthy english taste be spoil by the pedant gardening of the Dutch 
 with their straight flat pond , and their tree all clipped and in a 
 line like vegetable grenadier . in truth , I think that the Prince of 
 Orange and Sir William Temple have much to answer for in work this 
 change , but thing have now come round again , I understand , and we have 
 cease to be wise than Nature in our pleasure - ground . 

 as we draw near the house we come on a large extent of level sward on 
 which a troop of horse be exercise , who be raise , as my companion 
 inform I , entirely from the Duke 's own personal attendant . pass 
 they we ride through a grove of rare tree and come out on a broad space 
 of gravel which lie in front of the house . the building itself be of 
 great extent , build after the new italian fashion , rather for comfort 
 than for defence ; but on one wing there remain , as my companion 
 point out , a portion of the old keep and battlement of the feudal 
 castle of the Botelers , look as out of place as a farthingale of 
 Queen Elizabeth join to a court dress fresh from Paris . the main 
 doorway be lead up to by line of column and a broad flight of marble 
 step , on which stand a group of footman and groom , who take our horse 
 when we dismount . a grey - haired steward or major - domo inquire our 
 business , and on learn that we wish to see the Duke in person , he 
 tell we that his Grace would give audience to stranger in the afternoon 
 at half after three by the clock . in the meantime he say that the 
 guest ' dinner have just be lay in the hall , and it be his master 's 
 wish that none who come to Badminton should depart hungry . my companion 
 and I be but too glad to accept the steward 's invitation , so have 
 visit the bath - room and attend to the need of the toilet , we 
 follow a footman , who usher we into a great room where the company 
 have already assemble . 

 the guest may have number fifty or sixty , old and young , gentle and 
 simple , of the most varied type and appearance . I observe that many 
 of they cast haughty and inquire glance round they , in the pause 
 between the dish , as though each marvel how he come to be a member 
 of so motley a crew . their only common feature appear to be the 
 devotion which they show to the platter and the wine flagon . there be 
 little talk , for there be few who know their neighbour . some be 
 soldier who have come to offer their sword and their service to 
 the King 's lieutenant ; other be merchant from Bristol , with some 
 proposal or suggestion anent the safety of their property . there 
 be two or three official of the city , who have come out to receive 
 instruction as to its defence , while here and there I mark the child 
 of Israel , who have find his way there in the hope that in time of 
 trouble he might find high interest and noble borrower . horse - dealer , 
 saddler , armourer , surgeon , and clergyman complete the company , 
 who be wait upon by a staff of powdered and liveried servant , who 
 bring and remove the dish with the silence and deftness of long 
 training . 

 the room be a contrast to the bare plainness of Sir Stephen Timewell 's 
 dining - hall at Taunton , for it be richly panel and highly decorate 
 all round . the floor be form of black and white marble , set in 
 square , and the wall be of polished oak , and bear a long line of 
 painting of the Somerset family , from John of Gaunt downward . the 
 ceiling , too , be tastefully paint with flower and nymph , so that a 
 man 's neck be stiff ere he have do admire it . at the further end of 
 the hall yawn a great fireplace of white marble , with the lion and 
 lily of the Somerset arm carve in oak above it , and a long gilt 
 scroll bear the family motto , " mutare vel timere sperno . " the massive 
 table at which we sit be load with silver charger and candelabra , 
 and bright with the rich plate for which Badminton be famous . I could 
 not but think that , if Saxon could clap eye upon it , he would not be 
 long in urge that the war be carry on in this direction . 

 after dinner we be all show into a small ante - chamber , set round with 
 velvet settee , where we be to wait till the Duke be ready to see we . 
 in the centre of this room there stand several case , glass - top and 
 line with silk , wherein be little steel and iron rod , with brass 
 tube and diver other thing , very bright and ingenious , though I 
 could not devise for what end they have be put together . a 
 gentleman - in - waiting come round with paper and ink - horn , make note 
 of our name and of our business . he I ask whether it might not be 
 possible for I to have an entirely private audience . 

 ' his grace never see in private , ' he reply . ' he have ever his choose 
 councillor and officer in attendance . ' 

 ' but the business be one which be only fit for his own ear , ' I urge . 

 ' his Grace hold that there be no business fit only for his own ear , ' 
 say the gentleman . ' you must arrange matter as well you can when 
 you be show in to he . I will promise , however , that your request be 
 carry to he , though I warn you that it can not be grant . ' 

 I thank he for his good office , and turn away with the farmer to 
 look at the strange little engine within the case . 

 ' what be it ? ' I ask . ' I have never see aught that be like it . ' 

 ' it be the work of the mad Marquis of Worcester , ' quoth he . ' he be the 
 Duke 's grandfather . he be ever make and devise such toy , but they 
 be never of any service to himself or to other . now , look ye here ! 
 this wi ' the wheel be call the water - engine , and it be his crazy 
 think that , by heat the water in that ere kettle , ye might make the 
 wheel go round , and thereby travel along iron bar quick nor a 
 horse could run . ' oon ! I would match my old brown mare against all such 
 contrivance to the end o ' time . but to our place , for the Duke be 
 come . ' 

 we have scarce take our seat with the other suitor , when the 
 folding - door be fling open , and a stout , thick , short man of fifty , 
 or thereabout , come bustle into the room , and stride down it between 
 two line of bow client . he have large project blue eye , with 
 great pouch of skin beneath they , and a yellow , sallow visage . at his 
 heel walk a dozen officer and man of rank , with flow wig and 
 clank sword . they have hardly pass through the opposite door into 
 the Duke 's own room , when the gentleman with the list call out a name , 
 and the guest begin one after the other to file into the great man 's 
 presence . 

 ' methink his grace be in no very gentle temper , ' quoth Farmer Brown . 
 ' do you not mark how he gnaw his nether lip as he pass ? ' 

 ' he seem a quiet gentleman enough , ' I answer . ' it would try Job 
 himself to see all these folk of an afternoon . ' 

 ' Hark at that ! ' he whisper , raise his finger . as he speak the 
 sound of the Duke 's voice in a storm of wrath be hear from the inner 
 chamber , and a little sharp - faced man come out and fly through the 
 ante - chamber as though fright have turn his head . 

 ' he be an armourer of Bristol , ' whisper one of my neighbour . ' it be 
 likely that the Duke can not come to term with he over a contract . ' 

 ' Nay , ' say another . ' he supply Sir Marmaduke Hyson 's troop with 
 sabre , and it be say that the blade will bend as though they be 
 lead . once use they can never be fit back into the scabbard again . ' 

 ' the tall man who go in now be an inventor , ' quoth the first . ' he hath 
 the secret of some very grievous fire , such as hath be use by the 
 Greeks against the Turks in the Levant , which he desire to sell for the 
 well fortifying of Bristol . ' 

 the greek fire seem to be in no great request with the Duke , for the 
 inventor come out presently with his face as red as though it have be 
 touch by his own compound . the next upon the list be my honest friend 
 the farmer . the angry tone which greet he promise badly for the 
 fate of the four - year - old , but a lull ensue , and the farmer come out 
 and resume his seat , rub his great red hand with satisfaction . 

 ' ecod ! ' he whisper . ' he be plaguy hot at first , but he soon come 
 round , and he hath promise that if I pay for the hire of a dragooner as 
 long as the war shall last I shall have back the piebald . ' 

 I have be sit all this time wonder how in the world I be 
 to conduct my business amid the swarm of suppliant and the crowd of 
 officer who be attend the Duke . have there be any likelihood 
 of my gain audience with he in any other way I should gladly have 
 adopt it , but all my endeavour to that end have be useless . unless I 
 take this occasion I might never come face to face with he at all . 
 but how could he give due thought or discussion to such a matter 
 before other ? what chance be there of his weigh it as it should be 
 weigh ? even if his feeling incline he that way , he dare not show 
 any sign of wavering when so many eye be upon he . I be tempt to 
 feign some other reason for my coming , and trust to fortune to give I 
 some more favourable chance for hand he my paper . but then that 
 chance might never arrive , and time be press . it be say that he 
 would return to Bristol next morning . on the whole , it seem good that 
 I should make the fit use I could of my present position in the hope 
 that the Duke 's own discretion and self - command might , when he see the 
 address upon my despatch , lead to a more private interview . 

 I have just come to this resolution when my name be read out , on which I 
 rise and advance into the inner chamber . it be a small but lofty room , 
 hang in blue silk with a broad gold cornice . in the centre be a square 
 table litter over with pile of paper , and behind this sit his grace 
 with full - bottomed wig roll down to his shoulder , very stately and 
 impose . he have the same subtle air of the court which I have observe 
 both in Monmouth and in Sir Gervas , which , with his high bold feature 
 and large pierce eye , mark he as a leader of man . his private 
 scrivener sit beside he , take note of his direction , while the 
 other stand behind in a half circle , or take snuff together in the deep 
 recess of the window . 

 ' make a note of Smithson 's order , ' he say , as I enter . ' a hundred 
 pot and as many front and back to be ready by Tuesday ; also six score 
 snaphance for the musqueteer , and two hundred extra spade for the 
 worker . mark that the order be declare null and void unless fulfil 
 within the time appoint . ' 

 ' it be so marked , your grace . ' 

 ' Captain Micah Clarke , ' say the Duke , read from the list in front of 
 he . ' what be your wish , Captain ? ' 

 ' one which it would be well if I could deliver privately to your 
 grace , ' I answer . 

 ' ah , you be he who desire private audience ? well , Captain , these be 
 my council and they be as myself . so we may look upon ourselves as 
 alone . what I may hear they may hear . Zounds , man , never stamm and 
 boggle , but out with it ! ' 

 my request have rouse the interest of the company , and those who be in 
 the window come over to the table . nothing could have be bad for the 
 success of my mission , and yet there be no help for it but to deliver 
 my despatch . I can say with a clear conscience , without any vainglory , 
 that I have no fear for myself . the doing of my duty be the one thought 
 in my mind . and here I may say once for all , my dear child , that I be 
 speak of myself all through this statement with the same freedom 
 as though it be another man . in very truth the strong active lad of 
 one - and - twenty _ be _ another man from the grey - head old fellow who 
 sit in the chimney corner and can do naught well than tell old tale 
 to the youngster . shallow water give a great splash , and so a braggart 
 have ever be contemptible in my eye . I trust , therefore , that ye will 
 never think that your grandad be sing his own praise , or set 
 himself up as well than his neighbour . I do but lie the fact , as far 
 as I can recall they , before ye with all freedom and with all truth . 

 my short delay and hesitation have send a hot flush of anger into the 
 Duke 's face , so I draw the packet of paper from my inner pocket and 
 hand they to he with a respectful bow . as his eye fall upon the 
 superscription , he give a sudden start of surprise and agitation , make 
 a motion as though to hide they in his bosom . if this be his impulse 
 he overcome it , and sit lose in thought for a minute or more with the 
 paper in his hand . then with a quick toss of the head , like a man who 
 hath form his resolution , he break the seal and cast his eye over 
 the content , which he then throw down upon the table with a bitter 
 laugh . 

 ' what think ye , gentleman ! ' he cry , look round with scornful eye ; 
 ' what think ye this private message hath prove to be ? it be a letter 
 from the traitor Monmouth , call upon I to resign the allegiance of 
 my natural sovereign and to draw my sword in his behalf ! if I do this 
 I be to have his gracious favour and protection . if not , I incur 
 sequestration , banishment , and ruin . he think Beaufort 's loyalty be 
 to be buy like a packman 's ware , or bully out of he by ruffle 
 word . the descendant of John of Gaunt be to render fealty to the brat 
 of a wandering playwoman ! ' 

 several of the company spring to their foot , and a general buzz of 
 surprise and anger greet the Duke 's word . he sit with bent brow , 
 beat his foot against the ground , and turn over the paper upon 
 the table . 

 ' what hath raise his hope to such mad height ? ' he cry . ' how doth 
 he presume to send such a missive to one of my quality ? be it because he 
 hath see the back of a parcel of rascally militiaman , and because 
 he hath draw a few hundred chawbacon from the plough 's tail to his 
 standard , that he venture to hold such language to the President of 
 Wales ? but ye will be my witness as to the spirit in which I receive 
 it ? ' 

 ' we can preserve your grace from all danger of slander on that point , ' 
 say an elderly officer , while a murmur of assent from the other 
 greet the remark . 

 ' and you ! ' cry Beaufort , raise his voice and turn his flash 
 eye upon I ; ' who be you that dare to bring such a message to 
 Badminton ? you have surely take leave of your sens ere you do set out 
 upon such an errand ! ' 

 ' I be in the hand of God here as elsewhere , ' I answer , with some 
 flash of my father 's fatalism . ' I have do what I promise to do , and 
 the rest be no concern of mine . ' 

 ' you shall find it a very close concern of thine , ' he shout , spring 
 from his chair and pace up and down the room ; ' so close as to put an 
 end to all thy other concern in this life . call in the halberdier from 
 the outer hall ! now , fellow , what have you to say for yourself ? ' 

 ' there be naught to be say , ' I answer . 

 ' but something to be do , ' he retort in a fury . ' seize this man and 
 secure his hand ! ' 

 four halberdier who have answer the summon close in upon I and lay 
 hand on I . Resistance would have be folly , for I have no wish to harm 
 the man in the doing of their duty . I have come to take my chance , and 
 if that chance should prove to be death , as seem likely enough at 
 present , it must be meet as a thing foresee . I think of those old - time 
 line which Master Chillingfoot , of Petersfield , have ever hold up to our 
 admiration-- 

           Non civium ardor prava jubentium 
           Non vultus instantis tyranni 
           Mente quatit solida . 

 here be the ' vultus instantis tyranni , ' in this stout , be - wig , 
 lace - cover , yellow - faced man in front of I . I have obey the poet in 
 so far that my courage have not be shake . I confess that this spinning 
 dust - heap of a world have never have such attraction for I that it would 
 be a pang to leave it . never , at least , until my marriage -- and that , you 
 will find , alter your thought about the value of your life , and many 
 other of your thought as well . this be so , I stand erect , with my 
 eye fix upon the angry nobleman , while his soldier be put the 
 gyve about my wrist . 



 Chapter XXV . of Strange Doings in the Boteler Dungeon 

 ' take down this fellow 's statement , ' say the Duke to his scrivener . 
 ' now , sirrah , it may not be know to you that his gracious Majesty the 
 King hath confer plenary power upon I during these troubled time , 
 and that I have his warrant to deal with all traitor without either 
 jury or judge . you do bear a commission , I understand , in the rebellious 
 body which be here describe as Saxon 's regiment of Wiltshire Foot ? 
 speak the truth for your neck 's sake . ' 

 ' I will speak the truth for the sake of something high than that , your 
 grace , ' I answer . ' I command a company in that regiment . ' 

 ' and who be this Saxon ? ' 

 ' I will answer all that I may concern myself , ' say I , ' but not a 
 word which may reflect upon other . ' 

 ' ha ! ' he roar , hot with anger . ' our pretty gentleman must need stand 
 upon the nicety of honour after take up arm against his king . I 
 tell you , sir , that your honour be in such a parlous state already that 
 you may well throw it over and look to your safety . the sun be sink 
 in the west . Ere it set your life , too , may have set for ever . ' 

 ' I be the keeper of my own honour , your grace , ' I answer . ' as to my 
 life , I should not be stand here this moment if I have any great dread 
 of lose it . it be right that I should tell you that my Colonel hath 
 swear to exact a return for any evil that may befall I , on you or any 
 of your household who may come into his power . this I say , not as a 
 threat , but as a warning , for I know he to be a man who be like to be 
 as good as his word . ' 

 ' your Colonel , as you call he , may find it hard enough to save himself 
 soon , ' the Duke answer with a sneer . ' how many man hath Monmouth with 
 he ? ' 

 I smile and shake my head . 

 ' how shall we make this traitor find his tongue ? ' he ask furiously , 
 turn to his council . 

 ' I should clap on the thumbikin , ' say one fierce - face old soldier . 

 ' I have know a lighted match between the finger work wonder , ' another 
 suggest . ' Sir Thomas Dalzell hath in the scottish war be able to 
 win over several of that most stubborn and hardened race , the Western 
 Covenanters , by such persuasion . ' 

 ' Sir Thomas Dalzell , ' say a grey - haired gentleman , clothe in black 
 velvet , ' hath study the art of war among the Muscovites , in their 
 barbarous and bloody encounter with the Turks . God forbid that we 
 Christians of England should seek our example among the skin - clothe 
 idolater of a savage country . ' 

 ' Sir William would like to see war carry out on truly courteous 
 principle , ' say the first speaker . ' a battle should be like a stately 
 minuet , with no loss of dignity or of etiquette . ' 

 ' Sir , ' the other answer hotly , ' I have be in battle when you be 
 in your baby - linen , and I handle a battoon when you could scarce shake 
 a rattle . in leaguer or onfall a soldier 's work be sharp and stern , but 
 I say that the use of torture , which the law of England hath abolish , 
 should also be lay aside by the law of nation . ' 

 ' enough , gentleman , enough ! ' cry the Duke , see that the dispute be 
 like to wax warm . ' your opinion , Sir William , hath much weight with we , 
 and yours also , Colonel Hearn . we shall discuss this at great length 
 in privacy . halberdier , remove the prisoner , and let a clergyman be 
 send to look to his spiritual need ! ' 

 ' shall we take he to the strong room , your grace ? ' ask the Captain of 
 the guard . 

 ' no , to the old Boteler dungeon , ' he reply ; and I hear the next name 
 upon the list call out , while I be lead through a side door with a 
 guard in front and behind I . we pass through endless passage and 
 corridor , with heavy stop and clank of arm , until we reach the 
 ancient wing . here , in the corner turret , be a small , bare room , mouldy 
 and damp , with a high , arched roof , and a single long slit in the outer 
 wall to admit light . a small wooden couch and a rude chair form 
 the whole of the furniture . into this I be show by the Captain , who 
 station a guard at the door , and then come in after I and loosen 
 my wrist . he be a sad - faced man , with solemn sink eye and a 
 dreary expression , which match ill with his bright trapping and gay 
 sword - knot . 

 ' keep your heart up , friend , ' say he , in a hollow voice . ' it be but a 
 choke and a struggle . a day or two since we have the same job to do , and 
 the man scarcely groan . Old Spender , the Duke 's marshal , hath as sure 
 a trick of tie and as good judgment in arrange a drop as hath Dun 
 of Tyburn . be of good heart , therefore , for you shall not fall into the 
 hand of a bungler . ' 

 ' I would that I could let Monmouth know that his letter be 
 deliver , ' I exclaim , seat myself on the side of the bed . 

 ' I ' faith , they be deliver . have you be the penny postman of Mr. 
 Robert Murray , of whom we hear so much in London last spring , you could 
 not have hand it in more directly . why do you not talk the Duke fair ? 
 he be a gracious nobleman , and kind of heart , save when he be thwart 
 or anger . some little talk as to the rebel ' number and disposition 
 might have save you . ' 

 ' I wonder that you , as a soldier , should speak or think of such a 
 thing , ' say I coldly . 

 ' well , well ! your neck be your own . if it please you to take a leap into 
 nothing it be pity to thwart you . but his grace command that you 
 should have the chaplain . I must away to he . ' 

 ' I prythee do not bring he , ' say I. ' I be one of a dissent stock , 
 and I see that there be a Bible in yonder recess . no man can aid I in 
 make my peace with God . ' 

 ' it be well , ' he answer , ' for Dean Hewby hath come over from 
 Chippenham , and he be discourse with our good chaplain on the need of 
 self - denial , moisten his throat the while with a flask of the prime 
 Tokay . at dinner I hear he put up thank for what he be to receive , 
 and in the same breath ask the butler how he dare to serve a deacon 
 of the Church with a pullet without truffle dress . but , perhaps , you 
 would desire Dean Hewby 's spiritual help ? no ? well , what I can do for 
 you in reason shall be do , since you will not be long upon our hand . 
 above all , keep a cheery heart . ' 

 he leave the cell , but presently unlock the door and push his dismal 
 face round the corner . ' I be Captain Sinclair , of the Duke 's household , ' 
 he say , ' should you have occasion to ask for I . you have well have 
 spiritual help , for I do assure you that there hath be something bad 
 than either warder or prisoner in this cell . ' 

 ' what then ? ' I ask . 

 ' why , marry , nothing less than the Devil , ' he answer , come in and 
 close the door . ' it be in this way , ' he go on , sink his voice : 
 ' two year agone Hector Marot , the highwayman , be shut up in this very 
 Boteler dungeon . I be myself on guard in the corridor that night , and 
 see the prisoner at ten o'clock sit on that bed even as you be now . 
 at twelve I have occasion to look in , as my custom be , with the hope 
 of cheer his lonely hour , when lo , he be go ! yes , you may well 
 stare . mine eye have never be off the door , and you can judge what 
 chance there be of his get through the window . wall and floor be 
 both solid stone , which might be solid rock for the thickness . when 
 I enter there be a plaguy smell of brimstone , and the flame of my 
 lanthorn burn blue . Nay , it be no smile matter . if the Devil do not 
 run away with Hector Marot , pray who do ? for sure I be that no angel of 
 grace could come to he as to Peter of old . perchance the Evil One may 
 desire a second bird out of the same cage , and so I tell you this that 
 you may be on your guard against his assault . ' 

 ' Nay , I fear he not , ' I answer . 

 ' it be well , ' croak the Captain . ' be not cast down ! ' his head 
 vanish , and the key turn in the creak lock . so thick be the 
 wall that I could hear no sound after the door be close . save for 
 the sighing of the wind in the branch of the tree outside the narrow 
 window , all be as silent as the grave within the dungeon . 

 thus leave to myself I try to follow Captain Sinclair 's advice as to 
 the keeping up of my heart , though his talk be far from be of a 
 cheering nature . in my young day , more particularly among the sectary 
 with whom I have be bring most in contact , a belief in the occasional 
 appearance of the Prince of Darkness , and his interference in bodily 
 form with the affair of man , be widespread and unquestione . 
 philosopher in their own quiet chamber may argue learnedly on the 
 absurdity of such thing , but in a dim - light dungeon , cut off from the 
 world , with the grey gloaming creep down , and one 's own fate hang 
 in the balance , it become a very different matter . the escape , if the 
 Captain 's story be true , appear to border upon the miraculous . I 
 examine the wall of the cell very carefully . they be form of great 
 square stone cunningly fit together . the thin slit or window be 
 cut through the centre of a single large block . all over , as high as 
 the hand could reach , the face of the wall be cover with letter and 
 legend cut by many generation of captive . the floor be compose of 
 old foot - wear slab , firmly cement together . the close search fail 
 to show any hole or cranny where a rat could have escape , far less a 
 man . 

 it be a very strange thing , my dear , to sit down in cold blood , and 
 think that the chance be that within a few hour your pulse will 
 have give their last throb , and your soul have speed away upon its final 
 errand . strange and very awesome ! the man who rideth down into the 
 press of the battle with his jaw set and his grip tight upon reign and 
 sword - hilt can not feel this , for the human mind be such that one emotion 
 will ever push out another . neither can the man who draw slow and 
 catch breath upon the bed of deadly sickness be say to have 
 experience of it , for the mind weaken with disease can but submit 
 without examine too closely that which it submit to . when , however , 
 a young and hale man sit alone in quiet , and see present death hang 
 over he , he hath such food for thought that , should he survive and live 
 to be grey - head , his whole life will be mark and alter by those 
 solemn hour , as a stream be change in its course by some rough bank 
 against which it hath strike . every little fault and blemish stand 
 out clear in the presence of death , as the dust speck appear when the 
 sunbeam shin into the darken room . I note they then , and I have , I 
 trust , note they ever since . 

 I be seat with my head bow upon my breast , deeply bury in this 
 solemn train of thought , when I be startle by hear a sharp click , 
 such as a man might give who wish to attract attention . I spring to my 
 foot and gaze round in the gathering gloom without be able to tell 
 whence it come . I have well - nigh persuade myself that my sens have 
 deceive I , when the sound be repeat louder than before , and cast 
 my eye upwards I see a face peer in at I through the slit , or part 
 of a face rather , for I could but see the eye and corner of the cheek . 
 stand on my chair I make out that it be none other than the farmer 
 who have be my companion upon the road . 

 ' hush , lad ! ' he whisper , with a warning forefinger push through the 
 narrow crack . ' speak low , or the guard may chance to hear . what can I do 
 for you ? ' 

 ' how do you come to know where I be ? ' I ask in astonishment . 

 ' Whoy , mun , ' he answer , ' I know as much of this ' ere house as Beaufort 
 do himsel ' . afore Badminton be build , I and my brother have spend 
 many a day in climb over the old Boteler tower . it be not the first 
 time that I have speak through this window . but , quick ; what can I do 
 for you ? ' 

 ' I be much beholden to you , sir , ' I answer , ' but I fear that there be 
 no help which you can give I , unless , indeed , you could convey news to 
 my friend in the army of what hath befall I . ' 

 ' I might do that , ' whisper Farmer Brown . ' Hark ye in your ear , lad , 
 what I never breathe to man yet . mine own conscience prick I at time 
 over this bolstering up of a Papist to rule over a protestant nation . 
 let like rule like , say I. at the ' lection I ride to Sudbury , and I 
 put in my vote for Maister Evans , of Turnford , who be in favour o ' the 
 Exclusionists . sure enough , if that same Bill have be carry , the Duke 
 would be sit on his father 's throne . the law would have say yes . 
 now , it say nay . a wonderful thing be the law with its yea , yea , and 
 nay , nay , like Barclay , the Quaker man , that come down here in a leather 
 suit , and ca'd the parson a steepleman . there be the law . it be no use 
 shootin ' at it , or passin ' pike through it , no , nor chargin ' at it wi ' 
 a troop of horse . if it begin by say " nay " it will say " nay " to the 
 end of the chapter . ye might as well fight wi ' the book o ' Genesis . let 
 Monmouth get the law change , and it will do more for he than all the 
 duke in England . for all that he be a protestant , and I would do what I 
 might to serve he . ' 

 ' there be a Captain Lockarby , who be serve in Colonel Saxon 's 
 regiment , in Monmouth 's army , ' say I. ' should thing go wrong with I , 
 I would take it as a great kindness if you would bear he my love , and 
 ask he to break it gently , by word or by letter , to those at Havant . 
 if I be sure that this would be do , it would be a great ease to my 
 mind . ' 

 ' it shall be do , lad , ' say the good farmer . ' I shall send my good man 
 and fleet horse this very night , that they may know the strait in 
 which you be . I have a file here if it would help you . ' 

 ' Nay , ' I answer , ' human aid can do little to help I here . ' 

 ' there use to be a hole in the roof . look up and see if you can see 
 aught of it . ' 

 ' it arch high above my head , ' I answer , look upwards ; ' but there 
 be no sign of any opening . ' 

 ' there be one , ' he repeat . ' my brother Roger hath swing himself down 
 wi ' a rope . in the old time the prisoner be put in so , like Joseph 
 into the pit . the door be but a new thing . ' 

 ' Hole or no hole , it can not help I , ' I answer . ' I have no mean 
 of climb to it . do not wait long , kind friend , or you may find 
 yourself in trouble . ' 

 ' good - bye then , my brave heart , ' he whisper , and the honest grey eye 
 and corner of ruddy cheek disappear from the casement . many a time 
 during the course of the long evening I glance up with some wild hope 
 that he might return , and every creak of the branch outside bring I 
 on to the chair , but it be the last that I see of Farmer Brown . 

 this kindly visit , short as it be , relieve my mind greatly , for I have 
 a trusty man 's word that , come what might , my friend should , at least , 
 have some news of my fate . it be now quite dark , and I be pace up 
 and down the little chamber , when the key turn in the door , and the 
 Captain enter with a rushlight and a great bowl of bread and milk . 

 ' here be your supper , friend , ' say he . ' take it down , appetite or no , 
 for it will give you strength to play the man at the time ye wot of . 
 they say it be beautiful to see my Lord Russell die upon Tower Hill . be 
 of good cheer ! folk may say as much of you . his grace be in a terrible 
 way . he walketh up and down , and biteth his lip , and clencheth his hand 
 like one who can scarce contain his wrath . it may not be against you , 
 but I know not what else can have anger he . ' 

 I make no answer to this Job 's comforter , so he presently leave I , 
 place the bowl upon the chair , with the rushlight beside it . I 
 finish the food , and feel the well for it , stretch myself upon 
 the couch , and fall into a heavy and dreamless sleep . this may have 
 last three or four hour , when I be suddenly awake by a sound like 
 the creaking of hinge . sit up on the pallet I gaze around I . the 
 rushlight have burn out and the cell be impenetrably dark . a greyish 
 glimmer at one end show dimly the position of the aperture , but all 
 else be thick and black . I strain my ear , but no further sound fall 
 upon they . yet I be certain that I have not be deceive , and that the 
 noise which have arouse I be within my very chamber . I rise and feel 
 my way slowly round the room , pass my hand over the wall and door . 
 then I pace backwards and forward to test the flooring . neither around 
 I nor beneath I be there any change . whence do the sound come from , 
 then ? I sit down upon the side of the bed and wait patiently in the 
 hope of hear it once again . 

 presently it be repeat , a low groaning and creak as though a door 
 or shutter long disuse be be slowly and stealthily open . at the 
 same time a dull yellow light stream down from above , issue from a 
 thin slit in the centre of the arched roof above I . slowly as I watch 
 it this slit widen and extend as if a slide panel be be 
 pull out , until a good - sized hole be leave , through which I see a 
 head , look down at I , outline against the misty light behind it . 
 the knotted end of a rope be pass through this aperture , and come 
 dangle down to the dungeon floor . it be a good stout piece of hemp , 
 strong enough to bear the weight of a heavy man , and I find , upon 
 pull at it , that it be firmly secured above . clearly it be the 
 desire of my unknown benefactor that I should ascend by it , so I go 
 up hand over hand , and after some difficulty in squeeze my shoulder 
 through the hole I succeed in reach the room above . while I be 
 still rub my eye after the sudden change from darkness into light , 
 the rope be swiftly whisk up and the slide shutter close once 
 more . to those who be not in the secret there be nothing to throw 
 light upon my disappearance . 

 I find myself in the presence of a stout short man clothe in a rude 
 jerkin and leather breech , which give he somewhat the appearance of a 
 groom . he wear a broad feel hat draw down very low over his eye , while 
 the low part of his face be swathe round with a broad cravat . in his 
 hand he bear a horn lanthorn , by the light of which I see that the 
 room in which we be be of the same size as the dungeon beneath , and 
 differed from it only in have a broad casement which look out upon 
 the park . there be no furniture in the chamber , but a great beam run 
 across it , to which the rope have be fasten by which I ascend . 

 ' speak low , friend , ' say the stranger . ' the wall be thick and the 
 door be close , yet I would not have your guardian know by what mean 
 you have be spirit away . ' 

 ' truly , sir , ' I answer , ' I can scarce credit that it be other than a 
 dream . it be wondrous that my dungeon should be so easily break into , 
 and more wondrous still that I should find a friend who would be willing 
 to risk so much for my sake . ' 

 ' look there ! ' quoth he , hold down his lanthorn so as to cast its 
 light on the part of the floor where the panel be fit . can you not 
 see how old and crumble be the stone - work which surround it ? this 
 opening in the roof be as old as the dungeon itself , and old far 
 than the door by which you be lead into it . for this be one of those 
 bottle - shape cell or oubliette which hard man of old devise for the 
 safe keeping of their captive . once lower through this hole into the 
 stone - girt pit a man might eat his heart out , for his fate be seal . 
 yet you see that the very device which once hinder escape have now 
 bring freedom within your reach . ' 

 ' thank to your clemency , your grace , ' I answer , look keenly at my 
 companion . 

 ' now out on these disguise ! ' he cry , peevishly push back the 
 broad - edged hat and disclosing , as I expect , the feature of the Duke . 
 ' even a blunt soldier lad can see through my attempt at concealment . 
 I fear , Captain , that I should make a bad plotter , for my nature be as 
 open -- well , as thine be . I can not better the simile . ' 

 ' your grace 's voice once hear be not easily forget , ' say I. 

 ' especially when it talk of hemp and dungeon , ' he answer , with a 
 smile . ' but if I clap you into prison , you must confess that I have 
 make you amend by pull you out again at the end of my line , like a 
 minnow out of a bottle . but how come you to deliver such paper in the 
 presence of my council ? ' 

 ' I do what I could to deliver they in private , ' say I. ' I send you a 
 message to that effect . ' 

 ' it be true , ' he answer ; ' but such message come in to I from every 
 soldier who wish to sell his sword , and every inventor who hath a long 
 tongue and a short purse . how could I tell that the matter be of real 
 import ? ' 

 ' I fear to let the chance slip lest it might never return , ' say I. ' I 
 hear that your grace hath little leisure during these time . ' 

 ' I can not blame you , ' he answer , pace up and down the room . ' but it 
 be untoward . I might have hide the despatch , yet it would have rouse 
 suspicion . your errand would have leak out . there be many who envy 
 my lofty fortune , and who would seize upon a chance of injure I with 
 King James . Sunderland or Somers would either of they blow the least 
 rumour into a flame which might prove unquenchable . there be naught for 
 it , therefore , but to show the paper and to turn a harsh face on the 
 messenger . the most venomous tongue could not find fault in my conduct . 
 what course would you have advise under such circumstance ? ' ' the most 
 direct , ' I answer . ' aye , aye , Sir . Honesty . public man have , however , 
 to pick their step as good they may , for the straight path would lead 
 too often to the cliff - edge . the Tower would be too scanty for its 
 guest be we all to wear our heart upon our sleeve . but to you in 
 this privacy I can tell my real thought without fear of betrayal or 
 misconstruction . on paper I will not write one word . your memory must 
 be the sheet which bear my answer to Monmouth . and first of all , erase 
 from it all that you have hear I say in the council - room . let it be as 
 though it never be speak . be that do ? ' 

 ' I understand that it do not really represent your grace 's thought . ' 

 ' very far from it , Captain . but prythee tell I what expectation of 
 success be there among the rebel themselves ? you must have hear your 
 Colonel and other discuss the question , or note by their bearing which 
 way their thought lay . have they good hope of hold out against the 
 King 's troop ? ' 

 ' they have meet with naught but success hitherto , ' I answer . 

 ' against the militia . but they will find it another thing when they have 
 train troop to deal with . and yet -- and yet!--one thing I know , that 
 any defeat of Feversham 's army would cause a general rise throughout 
 the country . on the other hand , the King 's party be active . every 
 post bring news of some fresh levy . Albemarle still hold the militia 
 together in the west . the Earl of Pembroke be in arm in Wiltshire . 
 Lord Lumley be move from the east with the Sussex force . the Earl of 
 Abingdon be up in Oxfordshire . at the university the cap and gown be 
 all turn into head - piece and steel front . James 's dutch regiment 
 have sail from Amsterdam . yet Monmouth hath gain two fight , and why 
 not a third ? they be troubled water -- troubled water ! ' the Duke pace 
 backwards and forwards with brow draw down , mutter all this to 
 himself rather than to I , and shake his head like one in the sore 
 perplexity . 

 ' I would have you tell Monmouth , ' he say at last , ' that I thank he for 
 the paper which he hath send I , and that I will duly read and weigh 
 they . tell he also that I wish he well in his enterprise , and would 
 help he be it not that I be hem in by those who watch I closely , 
 and who would denounce I be I to show my true thought . tell he 
 that , should he move his army into these part , I may then openly 
 declare myself ; but to do so now would be to ruin the fortune of my 
 house , without in any way help he . can you bear he that message ? ' 

 ' I shall do so , your grace . 

 ' tell I , ' he ask , ' how doth Monmouth bear himself in this 
 enterprise ? ' 

 ' like a wise and gallant leader , ' I answer . 

 ' strange , ' he murmur ; ' it be ever the jest at court that he have 
 scarce energy or constancy enough to finish a game at ball , but would 
 ever throw his racquet down ere the win point be score . his plan 
 be like a weather - vane , alter by every breeze . he be constant 
 only in his inconstancy . it be true that he lead the King 's troop in 
 Scotland , but all man know that Claverhouse and Dalzell be the real 
 conqueror at Bothwell Bridge . methink he resemble that Brutus in 
 roman history who feign weakness of mind as a cover to his ambition . ' 

 the Duke be once again converse with himself rather than with I , so 
 that I make no remark , save to observe that Monmouth have win the heart 
 of the low people . 

 ' there lie his strength , ' say Beaufort . ' the blood of his mother run 
 in his vein . he doth not think it beneath he to shake the dirty paw 
 of Jerry the tinker , or to run a race against a bumpkin on the village 
 green . well , event have show that he hath be right . these same 
 bumpkin have stand by he when nobler friend have hold aloof . I would 
 I could see into the future . but you have my message , Captain , and 
 I trust that , if you change it in the delivery , it will be in the 
 direction of great warmth and kindliness . it be time now that you 
 depart , for within three hour the guard be change , and your escape 
 will be discover . ' 

 ' but how depart ? ' I ask . 

 ' through here , ' he answer , push open the casement , and slide the 
 rope along the beam in that direction . ' the rope may be a foot or two 
 short , but you have extra inch to make matter even . when you have 
 reach the ground , take the gravel path which turn to the right , and 
 follow it until it lead you to the high tree which skirt the park . the 
 seventh of these hath a bough which shoot over the boundary wall . Climb 
 along the bough , drop over upon the other side , and you will find my 
 own valet wait with your horse . up with you , and ride , haste , haste , 
 post - haste , for the south . by morn you should be well out of danger 's 
 way . ' 

 ' my sword ? ' I ask . 

 ' all your property be there . tell Monmouth what I have say , and let he 
 know that I have use you as kindly as be possible . ' 

 ' but what will your Grace 's council say when they find that I be go ? ' 
 I ask . 

 ' Pshaw , man ! never fret about that ! I will off to Bristol at daybreak , 
 and give my council enough to think of without their have time to 
 devote to your fate . the soldier will but have another instance of 
 the working of the Father of Evil , who hath long be think to have a 
 weakness for that cell beneath we . faith , if all we hear be true , there 
 have be horror enough act there to call up every devil out of the 
 pit . but time press . gently through the casement ! so ! remember the 
 message . ' 

 ' Adieu , your grace ! ' I answer , and seize the rope slip rapidly 
 and noiselessly to the ground , upon which he draw it up and close the 
 casement . as I look round , my eye fall upon the dark narrow slit which 
 open into my cell , and through which honest Farmer Brown have hold 
 converse with I . half - an - hour ago I have be stretch upon the prison 
 pallet without a hope or a thought of escape . now I be out in the open 
 with no hand to stay I , breathe the air of freedom with the prison 
 and the gallow cast off from I , as the wake man cast off his evil 
 dream . such change shake a man 's soul , my child . the heart that can 
 steel itself against death be soften by the assurance of safety . so 
 I have know a worthy trader bear up manfully when convince that his 
 fortune have be engulf in the ocean , but lose all philosophy on 
 find that the alarm be false , and that they have come safely through 
 the danger . for my own part , believe as I do that there be nothing of 
 chance in the affair of this world , I feel that I have be expose to 
 this trial in order to dispose I to serious thought , and that I have 
 be save that I might put those thought into effect . as an earnest of 
 my endeavour to do so I kneel down on the green sward , in the shadow of 
 the Boteler turret , and I pray that I might come to be of use on 
 the earth , and that I might be help to rise above my own want and 
 interest , to aid forward whatever of good or noble might be stir in 
 my day . it be well - nigh fifty year , my dear , since I bow my spirit 
 before the Great Unknown in the moon - tint park of Badminton , but I 
 can truly say that from that day to this the aim which I lay down 
 for myself have serve I as a compass over the dark water of life -- a 
 compass which I may perchance not always follow -- for flesh be weak and 
 frail , but which hath , at least , be ever present , that I might turn to 
 it in season of doubt and of danger . 

 the path to the right lead through grove and past carp pond for a mile 
 or more , until I reach the line of tree which skirt the boundary 
 wall . not a live thing do I see upon my way , save a herd of 
 fallow - deer , which scud away like swift shadow through the 
 shimmering moonshine . look back , the high turret and gable of the 
 Boteler wing stand out dark and threaten against the starlit sky . 
 have reach the seventh tree , I clamber along the project bough 
 which shoot over the park wall , and drop down upon the other side , 
 where I find my good old dapple - grey await I in the charge of a 
 groom . spring to my saddle , I strap my sword once more to my side , 
 and gallop off as fast as the four willing foot could carry I on my 
 return journey . 

 all that night I ride hard without draw bridle , through sleep 
 hamlet , by moon - bath farmhouse , past shin stealthy river , and 
 over birch - clothe hill . when the eastern sky deepen from pink into 
 scarlet , and the great sun push his rim over the blue north Somerset 
 hill , I be already far upon my journey . it be a Sabbath morning , and 
 from every village rise the sweet tinkling and call of the bell . 
 I bear no dangerous paper with I now , and might therefore be more 
 careless as to my route . at one point I be question by a keen - eye 
 toll - keeper as to whence I come , but my reply that I be rid direct 
 from his Grace of Beaufort put an end to his suspicion . far down , 
 near Axbridge , I overtake a grazier who be jog into Wells upon his 
 sleek cob . with he I ride for some time , and learn that the whole 
 of North Somerset , as well as south , be now in open revolt , and that 
 Wells , Shepton Mallet , and Glastonbury be hold by armed volunteer 
 for King Monmouth . the royal force have all retire west , or east , until 
 help should come . as I ride through the village I mark the blue flag 
 upon the church tower , and the rustic drill upon the green , without 
 any sign of trooper or dragoon to uphold the authority of the Stuarts . 

 my road lie through Shepton Mallet , Piper 's Inn , Bridgewater , and North 
 Petherton , until in the cool of the evening I pull up my weary horse 
 at the Cross Hands , and see the tower of Taunton in the valley beneath 
 I . a flagon of beer for the rider , and a sieveful of oats for the 
 steed , put fresh mettle into both of we , and we be jog on our way 
 once more , when there come gallop down the side of the hill about 
 forty cavalier , as hard as their horse could carry they . so wild be 
 their riding that I pull up , uncertain whether they be friend or 
 foe , until , as they come whirl towards I , I recognise that the two 
 officer who ride in front of they be none other than Reuben Lockarby 
 and Sir Gervas Jerome . at the sight of I they fling up their hand , and 
 Reuben shoot on to his horse 's neck , where he sit for a moment astride of 
 the mane , until the brute toss he back into the saddle . 

 ' it be Micah ! it be Micah ! ' he gasp , with his mouth open , and the tear 
 hop down his honest face . 

 ' Od 's pitlikin , man , how do you come here ? ' ask Sir Gervas , poke 
 I with his forefinger as though to see if I be really of flesh and 
 blood . ' we be lead a forlorn of horse into Beaufort 's country to 
 beat he up , and to burn his fine house about his ear if you have come 
 to harm . there have just come a groom from some farmer in those part who 
 hath bring we news that you be under sentence of death , on which I 
 come away with my wig half frizzle , and find that friend Lockarby have 
 leave from Lord Grey to go north with these trooper . but how have you 
 fare ? ' 

 ' well and ill , ' I answer , wring their kindly hand . ' I have not 
 think last night to see another sun rise , and yet ye see that I be 
 here , sound in life and limb . but all these thing will take some time 
 in the telling . ' 

 ' Aye , and King Monmouth will be on thorn to see you . right about , my 
 lad , and back for the camp . never be errand so rapidly and happily 
 finish as this of our . it would have fare ill with Badminton have you 
 be hurt . ' 

 the trooper turn their horse and trot slowly back to Taunton , 
 while I ride behind they between my two faithful friend , hear from 
 they all that have occur in my absence , and tell my own adventure 
 in return . the night have fall ere we ride through the gate , where I 
 hand Covenant over to the Mayor 's groom , and go direct to the castle 
 to deliver an account of my mission . 



 Chapter XXVI . of the Strife in the Council 

 King Monmouth 's council be assemble at the time of my coming , and my 
 entrance cause the utmost surprise and joy , as they have just hear news 
 of my sore danger . even the royal presence could not prevent several 
 member , among whom be the old Mayor and the two soldier of fortune , 
 from spring to their foot and shake I warmly by the hand . Monmouth 
 himself say a few gracious word , and request that I should be seat 
 at the board with the other . 

 ' you have earn the right to be of our council , ' say he ; ' and lest 
 there should be a jealousy amongst other captain that you should come 
 among we , I do hereby confer upon you the special title of Scout - master , 
 which , though it entail few if any duty in the present state of our 
 force , will yet give you precedence over your fellow . we have hear that 
 your greeting from Beaufort be of the roughest , and that you be in 
 sore strait in his dungeon . but you have happily come yourself on the 
 very heel of he who bear the tiding . tell we then from the beginning 
 how thing have fare with you . ' 

 I should have wish to have limit my story to Beaufort and his 
 message , but as the council seem to be intent upon hear a full 
 account of my journey , I tell in as short and simple speech as I 
 could the various passage which have befall I -- the ambuscado of 
 the smuggler , the cave , the capture of the gauger , the journey in the 
 lugger , the acquaintance with Farmer Brown , my be cast into prison , 
 with the manner of my release and the message wherewith I have be 
 commission . to all of this the council hearken with the uttermost 
 attention , while a muttered oath ever and anon from a courtier or a 
 groan and prayer from a Puritan show how keenly they follow the 
 various phase of my fortune . above all , they give the great heed 
 to Beaufort 's word , and stop I more than once when I appear to be 
 pass over any saying or event before they have due time to weigh 
 it . when I at last finish they all sit speechless , look into each 
 other 's face and wait for an expression of opinion . 

 ' on my word , ' say Monmouth at last , ' this be a young Ulysses , though 
 his Odyssey doth but take three day in the acting . scudery might not be 
 so dull be she to take a hint from these smuggler ' cave and slide 
 panel . how say you , Grey ? ' 

 ' he hath indeed have his share of adventure , ' the nobleman answer , ' and 
 hath also perform his mission like a fearless and zealous messenger . 
 you say that Beaufort give you nought in writing ? ' 

 ' not a word , my lord , ' I reply . 

 ' and his private message be that he wish we well , and would join we 
 if we be in his country ? ' 

 ' that be the effect , my lord . ' 

 ' yet in his council , as I understand , he do utter bitter thing against 
 we , put affront upon the king , and make light of his just claim 
 upon the fealty of his nobility ? ' 

 ' he do , ' I answer . 

 ' he would fain stand upon both side of the hedge at once , ' say King 
 Monmouth . ' such a man be very like to find himself on neither side , but 
 in the very heart of the briar . it may be as well , however , that we 
 should move his way , so as to give he the chance of declare himself . ' 

 ' in any case , as your Majesty remember , ' say Saxon , ' we have determine 
 to march Bristolwards and attempt the town . ' 

 ' the work be be strengthen , ' say I , ' and there be five thousand 
 of the Gloucestershire train - band assemble within . I see the labourer 
 at work upon the rampart as I pass . ' 

 ' if we gain Beaufort we shall gain the town , ' quoth Sir Stephen 
 Timewell . ' there be already a strong body of godly and honest folk 
 therein , who would rejoice to see a protestant army within their gate . 
 should we have to beleaguer it we may count upon some help from within . ' 

 ' Hegel und blitzen ! ' exclaim the german soldier , with an impatience 
 which even the presence of the King could not keep in bound ; ' how can 
 we talk of siege and leaguer when we have not a breaching - piece in the 
 army ? ' 

 ' the Lard will find we the breaching - piece , ' cry Ferguson , in his 
 strange , nasal voice . ' do the Lard no breach the too'er o ' Jericho 
 withoot the aid o ' gunpooder ? do the Lard no raise up the man Robert 
 Ferguson and presairve he through five - and - thairty indictment and 
 twa - and - twenty proclamation o ' the godless ? what be there he canna do ? 
 Hosannah ! Hosannah ! ' 

 ' the Doctor be right , ' say a square - faced , leather - skin English 
 Independent . ' we talk too much o ' carnal mean and worldly chance , 
 without lean upon that heavenly goodwill which should be to we as a 
 staff on stony and broken path . yes , gentleman , ' he continue , raise 
 his voice and glance across the table at some of the courtier , ' ye 
 may sneer at word of piety , but I say that it be you and those like you 
 who will bring down God 's anger upon this army . ' 

 ' and I say so too , ' cry another sectary fiercely . 

 ' and I , ' ' and I , ' shout several , with Saxon , I think , among they . 

 ' be it your wish , your Majesty , that we should be insult at your very 
 council board ? ' cry one of the courtier , spring to his foot with 
 a flushed face . ' how long be we to be subject to this insolence because 
 we have the religion of a gentleman , and prefer to practise it in the 
 privacy of our heart rather than at the street corner with these 
 pharisees ? ' 

 ' speak not against God 's saint , ' cry a Puritan , in a loud stern 
 voice . ' there be a voice within I which tell I that it be well to 
 strike thee dead -- yea , even in the presence of the king -- than to allow 
 thee to revile those who have be bear again . ' 

 several have spring to their foot on either side . hand be lay upon 
 sword - hilt , and glance as stern and as deadly as rapi thrust be 
 flash backwards and forwards ; but the more neutral and reasonable 
 member of the council succeed in restore peace , and in persuade 
 the angry disputant to resume their seat . 

 ' how now , gentleman ? ' cry the King , his face dark with anger , when 
 silence be at last restore . ' be this the extent of my authority that 
 ye should babble and brawl as though my council - chamber be a Fleet 
 Street pot - house ? be this your respect for my person ? I tell ye that I 
 would forfeit my just claim for ever , and return to Holland , or devote 
 my sword to the cause of Christianity against the Turk , rather than 
 submit to such indignity . if any man he prove to have stir up strife 
 amongst the soldier or commonalty on the score of religion I shall 
 know how to deal with he . let each preach to his own , but let he not 
 interfere with the flock of his neighbour . as to you , Mr. Bramwell , 
 and you , Mr. Joyce , and you also , Sir Henry Nuttall , we shall hold ye 
 excuse from attend these meeting until ye have further notice from 
 we . Ye may now separate , each to your quarter , and to - morrow morning 
 we shall , with the blessing of God , start for the north to see what luck 
 may await our enterprise in those part . ' 

 the King bow as a sign that the formal meeting be over , and take 
 Lord Grey aside , he converse with he anxiously in a recess . the 
 courtier , who number in their party several English and foreign 
 gentleman , who have come over together with some Devonshire and Somerset 
 country squire , swagger out of the room in a body , with much clinking 
 of spur and clanking of sword . the Puritans draw gravely together and 
 follow after they , walk not with demure and downcast look , as be 
 their common use , but with grim face and knitted brow , as the Jews of 
 old may have appear when , ' to your tent , o Israel ! ' be still ring 
 in their ear . 

 indeed , religious dissension and sectarian heat be in the very air . 
 outside , on the Castle Green , the voice of preacher rise up like the 
 drone of insect . every waggon or barrel or chance provision case have 
 be convert into a pulpit , each with its own orator and little knot 
 of eager hearkener . here be a russet - coat Taunton volunteer in 
 jackboot and bandoli , hold forth on the justification by work . 
 far on a grenadier of the militia , with blaze red coat and white 
 cross - belt , be deep in the mystery of the Trinity . in one or two 
 place , where the rude pulpit be too near to each other , the sermon 
 have change into a hot discussion between the two preacher , in which 
 the audience take part by hum or groan , each applaud the champion 
 whose creed be most in accordance with his own . through this wild 
 scene , make more striking by the ruddy flicker glare of the 
 camp - fire , I pick my way with a weight at my heart , for I feel how 
 vain it must be to hope for success where such division reign , Saxon 
 look on , however , with glisten eye , and rub his hand with 
 satisfaction . 

 ' the leaven be work , ' quoth he . ' something will come of all this 
 ferment . ' 

 ' I see not what can come of it save disorder and weakness , ' I answer . 

 ' good soldier will come of it , lad , ' say he . ' they be all sharpen 
 themselves , each after his own fashion , on the whetstone of religion . 
 this argue breedeth fanatic , and fanatic be the stuff out of which 
 conqueror be fashion . have you not hear how Old Noll 's army divide 
 into Presbyterians , Independents , Ranters , Anabaptists , Fifth Monarchy 
 man , brownist , and a score of other sect , out of whose strife rise the 
 fine regiment that ever form line upon a field of battle ? 

           " such as do build their faith upon 
            the holy text of sword and gun . " 

 you know old Samuel 's couplet . I tell you , I would rather see they thus 
 employ than at their drill , for all their wrangling and jangling . ' 

 ' but how of this split in the council ? ' I ask . 

 ' ah , that be indeed a graver matter . all creed may be weld together , 
 but the Puritan and the scoffer be like oil and water . yet the Puritan 
 be the oil , for he will be ever atop . these courtier do but stand for 
 themselves , while the other be back up by the pith and marrow of the 
 army . it be well that we be afoot to - morrow . the King 's troop be , I 
 hear , pour across Salisbury Plain , but their ordnance and store be 
 delay they , for they know well that they must bring all they need , 
 since they can expect little from the goodwill of the country folk . ah , 
 friend Buyse , wie geht es ? ' 

 ' Ganz gut , ' say the big German , loom up before we through the 
 darkness . ' but , sapperment , what a cawing and croaking , like a rookery 
 at sunset ! you English be a strange people -- yes , donnerwetter , a very 
 strange people ! there be no two of you who think alike upon any subject 
 under Himmel ! the Cavalier will have his gay coat and his loose word . 
 the Puritan will cut your throat rather than give up his sad - colour 
 dress and his Bible . " King James ! " cry some , " King Monmouth ! " say the 
 peasant . " King Jesus ! " say the Fifth Monarchy man . " no King at all ! " 
 cry Master Wade and a few other who be for a Commonwealth . since I 
 set foot on the Helderenbergh at Amsterdam , my head hath be in a whirl 
 with try to understand what it be that ye desire , for before I have 
 get to the end of one man 's tale , and begin to see a little through the 
 finsterniss , another will come with another story , and I be in as evil a 
 case as ever . but , my young Hercules , I be right glad to see you back 
 in safety . I be half in fear to give you my hand now , after your recent 
 treatment of it . I trust that you be none the bad for the danger that 
 you have go through . ' 

 ' mine eyelid be in truth a little heavy , ' I answer . ' save for an 
 hour or two aboard the lugger , and about as long on a prison couch , I 
 have not close eye since I leave the camp . ' 

 ' we shall fall in at the second bugle call , about eight of the clock , ' 
 say Saxon . ' we shall leave you , therefore , that you may restore 
 yourself after your fatigue . ' with a parting nod the two old soldier 
 stride off together down the crowded Fore Street , while I make the good 
 of my way back to the Mayor 's hospitable dwelling , where I have to repeat 
 my story all over again to the assemble household before I be at last 
 suffer to seek my room . 



 Chapter XXVII . of the Affair near Keynsham Bridge 

 Monday , June 21 , 1685 , break very dark and windy , with dull cloud 
 move heavily across the sky and a constant sputter of rain . yet a 
 little after daybreak Monmouth 's bugle be blow in every quarter 
 of the town , from Tone Bridge to Shuttern , and by the hour appoint the 
 regiment have muster , the roll have be call , and the vanguard be 
 march briskly out through the eastern gate . it go forth in the same 
 order as it enter , our own regiment and the Taunton burgher bring 
 up the rear . Mayor Timewell and Saxon have the ordering of this part of 
 the army between they , and be man who have see much service , they 
 draw the ordnance into a less hazardous position , and place a strong 
 guard of horse , a cannon 's shot in the rear , to meet any attempt of the 
 Royal dragoon . 

 it be remark on all side that the army have improve in order and 
 discipline during the three day ' halt , owe perchance to the example 
 of our own unceasing drill and soldierly bear . in number it have 
 increase to nigh eight thousand , and the man be well fed and light 
 of heart . with sturdy close - locked rank they splash their way through 
 mud and puddle , with many a rough country joke and many a lusty stave 
 from song or hymn . Sir Gervas ride at the head of his musqueteer , whose 
 befloure tail hang limp and lank with the water dripping from 
 they . Lockarby 's pikeman and my own company of scythesman be mostly 
 labourer from the country , who be harden against all weather , and 
 plod patiently along with the rain - drop glistening upon their ruddy 
 face . in front be the Taunton foot ; behind , the lumber train of 
 baggage waggon , with the horse in the rear of they . so the long line 
 wind its way over the hill . 

 at the summit , where the road begin to dip down upon the other side , a 
 halt be call to enable the regiment to close up , and we look back 
 at the fair town which many of we be never to see again . from the dark 
 wall and house roof we could still mark the flapping and flutter of 
 white kerchief from those whom we leave behind . Reuben sit his horse 
 beside I , with his spare shirt streaming in the wind and his great 
 pikemen all agrin behind he , though his thought and his eye be 
 too far away to note they . as we gaze , a long thin quiver of sunshine 
 slip out between two cloud bank and gild the summit of the 
 Magdalene tower , with the Royal standard which still wave from it . the 
 incident be hail as a happy augury , and a great shout spread from 
 rank to rank at the sight of it , with a waving of hat and a clattering 
 of weapon . then the bugle blow a fanfare , the drum strike up a point 
 of war , Reuben thrust his shirt into his haversack , and on we march 
 through mud and slush , with the dreary cloud bend low over we , and 
 buttress by the no less dreary hill on either side . a seeker for 
 omen might have say that the heavens be weep over our ill - fat 
 venture . 

 all day we trudge along road which be quagmire , over our ankle 
 in mud , until in the evening we make our way to Bridgewater , where we 
 gain some recruit , and also some hundred pound for our military 
 chest , for it be a well - to - do place , with a thriving coast trade 
 carry on down the River Parret . after a night in snug quarter we set 
 off again in even bad weather than before . the country in these part 
 be a quagmire in the dry season , but the heavy rain have cause the 
 fen to overflow , and turn they into broad lake on either side of the 
 road . this may have be to some degree in our favour , as shield we 
 from the raid of the King 's cavalry , but it make our march very 
 slow . all day it be splash and swash through mud and mire , the 
 rain - drop shin on the gun - barrel and dripping from the heavy - footed 
 horse . past the swollen Parret , through Eastover , by the peaceful 
 village of Bawdrip , and over Polden Hill we make our way , until the 
 bugle sound a halt under the grove of Ashcot , and a rude meal be 
 serve out to the man . then on again , through the pitiless rain , past 
 the woode park of Piper 's Inn , through Walton , where the flood be 
 threaten the cottage , past the orchard of Street , and so in the 
 dusk of the evening into the grey old town of Glastonbury , where the 
 good folk do their good by the warmth of their welcome to atone for the 
 bitterness of the weather . 

 the next morning be wet still and inclement , so the army make a short 
 march to Wells , which be a good - sized town , well lay out , with a fine 
 cathedral , which hath a great number of figure carve in stone and 
 place in niche on the outer side , like that which we see at Salisbury . 
 the townsfolk be strong for the protestant cause , and the army be so 
 well receive that their victual cost little from the military chest . on 
 this march we first begin to come into touch with the Royal horse . More 
 than once when the rain mist clear we see the gleam of arm upon the 
 low hill which overlook the road , and our scout come in with report 
 of strong body of dragoon on either flank . at one time they mass 
 heavily upon our rear , as though plan a descent upon the baggage . 
 Saxon , however , plant a regiment of pike on either side , so that they 
 break up again and glint off over the hill . 

 from Wells we march upon the twenty - fourth to Shepton Mallet , with the 
 ominous sabre and helmet still twinkle behind and on either side of 
 we . 

 that evening we be at Keynsham Bridge , less than two league from 
 Bristol as the crow fly , and some of our horse ford the river and 
 push on almost to the wall . 

 by morning the rain cloud have at last clear , so Reuben and I ride 
 slowly up one of the slop green hill which rise behind the camp , in 
 the hope of gain some sight of the enemy . our man we leave litter 
 about upon the grass , try to light fire with the damp stick , or 
 lay out their clothe to dry in the sunshine . a strange - look band 
 they be , coat and splash with mud from head to heel , their hat 
 all limp and draggle , their arm rust , and their boot so wear that 
 many walk barefoot , and other have swathe their kerchief round 
 their foot . yet their short spell of soldiering have change they 
 from honest - face yokel into fierce - eye , half - shaven , gaunt - cheek 
 fellow , who could carry arm or port pike as though they have do 
 nought else since childhood . 

 the plight of the officer be no well than that of the man , nor 
 should an officer , my dear , when he be upon service , ever demean 
 himself by partake of any comfort which all can not share with he . let 
 he lie by a soldier 's fire and eat a soldier 's fare , or let he hence , 
 for he be a hindrance and a stumbling - block . our clothe be pulp , our 
 steel front red with rust , and our charger as stain and splash as 
 though they have roll in the mire . our very sword and pistol be in 
 such a plight that we could scarce draw the one or snap the other . Sir 
 Gervas alone succeed in keep his attire and his person as neat and 
 as dainty as ever . what he do in the watch of the night , and how he 
 gain his sleep , hath ever be a mystery to I , for day after day 
 he turn out at the bugle call , wash , scented , brush , with wig 
 in order , and clothe from which every speck of mud have be carefully 
 remove . at his saddle - bow he bear with he the great flour dredger 
 which we see he use at Taunton , and his honest musqueteer have their 
 head duly dust every morning , though in an hour their tail would 
 be as brown as nature make they , while the flour would be trickle in 
 little milky stream down their broad back , or form in cake upon 
 the skirt of their coat . it be a long contest between the weather and 
 the Baronet , but our comrade prove the victor . 

 ' there be a time when I be call plump Reuben , ' quoth my friend , as 
 we ride together up the wind track . ' what with too little that be 
 solid and too much that be liquid I be like to be skeleton Reuben ere I 
 see Havant again . I be as full of rain - water as my father 's cask be of 
 October . I would , Micah , that you would wring I out and hang I to dry 
 upon one of these bush . ' 

 ' if we be wet , King James 's man must be wetter , ' say I , ' for at least 
 we have have such shelter as there be . ' 

 ' it be poor comfort when you be starve to know that another be in 
 the same plight . I give you my word , Micah , I take in one hole of my 
 sword - belt on Monday , two on Tuesday , one yesterday , and one to - day . I 
 tell you , I be thaw like an icicle in the sun . ' 

 ' if you should chance to dwindle to nought , ' say I , laugh , ' what 
 account be we to give of you in Taunton ? since you have don armour 
 and take to win the heart of fair maiden , you have outstrip we 
 all in importance , and become a man of weight and substance . ' 

 ' I have more substance and weight ere I begin trail over the 
 countryside like a Hambledon packman , ' quoth he . ' but in very truth and 
 with all gravity , Micah , it be a strange thing to feel that the whole 
 world for you , your hope , your ambition , your all , be gather into 
 so small a compass that a hood might cover it , and two little patten 
 support it . I feel as if she be my own high self , my loftier 
 part , and that I , should I be tear from she , would remain for ever an 
 incomplete and half - form being . with she , I ask nothing else . without 
 she , all else be nothing . ' 

 ' but have you speak to the old man ? ' I ask . ' be you indeed 
 betroth ? ' 

 ' I have speak to he , ' my friend answer , ' but he be so busy in 
 fill ammunition case that I could not gain his attention . when I 
 try once more he be count the spare pike in the Castle armoury 
 with a tally and an ink - horn . I tell he that I have come to crave his 
 granddaughter 's hand , on which he turn to I and ask , " which hand ? " 
 with so blank a stare that it be clear that his mind be elsewhere . on 
 the third trial , though , the day that you do come back from Badminton , 
 I do at last prefer my request , but he flash out at I that this be 
 no time for such foolery , and he bid I wait until King Monmouth be 
 on the throne , when I might ask he again . I warrant that he do not 
 call such thing foolery fifty year ago , when he go a - court 
 himself . ' 

 ' at least he do not refuse you , ' say I. ' it be as good as a promise 
 that ; should the cause be successful , you shall be so too . ' 

 ' by my faith , ' cry Reuben , ' if a man could by his own single blade 
 bring that about , there be none who hath so strong an interest in it as 
 I. no , not Monmouth himself ! the apprentice Derrick hath for a long time 
 raise his eye to his master 's daughter , and the old man be ready to 
 have he as a son , so much be he take by his godliness and zeal . yet I 
 have learn from a side - wind that he be but a debauched and low - live 
 man , though he cover his pleasure with a mask of piety . I think as 
 you do think that he be at the head of the roisterer who try to 
 bear Mistress Ruth away , though , I ' faith , I can scarce think harshly 
 of they , since they do I the great service that ever man do yet . 
 meanwhile I have take occasion , ere we leave Wells two night ago , to 
 speak to Master Derrick on the matter , and to warn he as he love his 
 life to plan no treachery against she . 

 ' and how take he this mild intimation ? ' I ask . 

 ' as a rat take a rat trap . snarl out some few word of godly hatred , 
 and so slunk away . ' 

 ' on my life , lad , ' say I , ' you have be have as many adventure in 
 your own way as I in mine . but here we be upon the hill - top , with as 
 fair an outlook as man could wish to have . ' 

 just beneath we run the Avon , curve in long bend through the 
 woodland , with the gleam of the sun strike back from it here and 
 there , as though a row of baby sun have be set upon a silver string . 
 on the further side the peaceful , many - hue country , rise and fall 
 in a swell of cornfield and orchard , sweep away to break in a fringe 
 of forest upon the distant Malverns . on our right be the green hill 
 near Bath and on our leave the rugged Mendips , with queenly Bristol 
 crouch behind her fort , and the grey channel behind fleck with 
 snow - white sail . at our very foot lie Keynsham Bridge , and our army 
 spot in dark patch over the green field , the smoke of their fire 
 and the babble of their voice float up in the still summer air . 

 a road run along the Somersetshire bank of the Avon , and down this two 
 troop of our horse be advance , with intent to establish outpost 
 upon our eastern flank . as they jangle past in somewhat loose order , 
 their course lie through a pine - wood , into which the road take a sharp 
 bend . we be gaze down at the scene when , like lightning from a 
 cloud , a troop of the Horse Guards wheel out into the open , and 
 break from trot to canter , and from canter to gallop , dash down in 
 a whirlwind of blue and steel upon our unprepared squadron . a crackle 
 of hastily unslung carbine break from the lead rank , but in an 
 instant the Guards burst through they and plunge on into the second 
 troop . for a space the gallant rustic hold their own , and the dense 
 mass of man and horse sway backwards and forwards , with the swirling 
 sword - blade play above they in flash of angry light . then blue 
 coat begin to break from among the russet , the fight roll wildly back 
 for a hundred pace , the dense throng be split asunder , and the Royal 
 Guards come pour through the rent , and swerve off to right and leave 
 through hedge and over ditch , stab and hack at the flee 
 horseman . the whole scene , with the stamp horse , toss mane , 
 shout of triumph or despair , gasp of hard - draw breath and musical 
 clink and clatter of steel , be to we upon the hill like some wild 
 vision , so swiftly do it come and so swiftly go . a sharp , stern 
 bugle - call summon the blue back into the road , where they form up 
 and trot slowly away before fresh squadron could come up from the 
 camp . the sun gleam and the river ripple as ever , and there be 
 nothing save the long litter of man and horse to mark the course of the 
 hell blast which have break so suddenly upon we . 

 as the Blues retire we observe that a single officer bring up the 
 rear , rid very slowly , as though it go much against his mood to 
 turn his back even to an army . the space betwixt the troop and he be 
 steadily grow great , yet he make no effort to quicken his pace , 
 but jog quietly on , look back from time to time to see if he be 
 follow . the same thought spring into my comrade 's mind and my own at 
 the same instant , and we read it in each other 's face . 

 ' this path , ' cry he eagerly . ' it bring we out beyond the grove , and 
 be in the hollow all the way . ' 

 ' lead the horse until we get on well ground , ' I answer . ' we may 
 just cut he off if we be lucky . ' 

 there be no time for another word , for we hurry off down the uneven 
 track , slide and slip on the rain - soak turf . spring into our 
 saddle we dash down the gorge , through the grove , and so out on to 
 the road in time to see the troop disappear in the distance , and to meet 
 the solitary officer face to face . 

 he be a sun - burn , high - feature man , with black mustachio , mount 
 on a great raw - boned chestnut charger . as we break out on to the road he 
 pull up to have a good look at we . then , have fully make up his mind 
 as to our hostile intent , he draw his sword , pluck a pistol out of his 
 holster with his left hand , and grip the bridle between his tooth , 
 dig his spur into his horse 's flank and charge down upon we at the 
 top of his speed . as we dash at he , Reuben on his bridle arm and I 
 on the other , he cut fiercely at I , and at the same moment fire at my 
 companion . the ball graze Reuben 's cheek , leave a red weal behind it 
 like a lash from a whip , and blacken his face with the powder . his 
 cut , however , fall short , and throw my arm round his waist as the two 
 horse dash past each other , I pluck he from the saddle and draw 
 he face upwards across my saddlebow . Brave Covenant lumber on with 
 his double burden , and before the Guards have learn that they have lose 
 their officer , we have bring he safe , in spite of his struggle and 
 writhing , to within sight of Monmouth 's camp . 

 ' a narrow shave , friend , ' quoth Reuben , with his hand to his cheek . ' he 
 hath tattooed my face with powder until I shall be take for Solomon 
 Sprent 's young brother . ' 

 ' thank God that you be unhurt , ' say I. ' See , our horse be advance 
 along the upper road . Lord Grey himself rid at their head . we have well 
 take our prisoner into camp , since we can do nought here . ' 

 ' for Christ 's sake , either slay I or set I down ! ' he cry . ' I can not 
 bear to be carry in this plight , like a half - wean infant , through 
 your campful of grin yokel . ' 

 ' I would not make sport of a brave man , ' I answer . ' if you will give 
 your word to stay with we , you shall walk between we . ' 

 ' willingly , ' say he , scramble down and arrange his ruffled attire . 
 ' by my faith , sir , ye have teach I a lesson not to think too meanly 
 of mine enemy . I should have ride with my troop have I think that 
 there be a chance of fall in with outpost or vidette . ' 

 ' we be upon the hill before we cut you off , ' quoth Reuben . ' have that 
 pistol ball be a thought straighter , it be I that should have be 
 truly the cut - off one . Zounds , Micah ! I be grumble even now that I 
 have fall away , but have my cheek be as round as of old the slug have 
 be through it . ' 

 ' where have I see you before ? ' ask our captive , bend his dark 
 eye upon I . ' Aye , I have it ! it be in the inn at Salisbury , where 
 my light - head comrade Horsford do draw upon an old soldier who be 
 rid with you . mine own name be Ogilvy -- Major Ogilvy of the Horse 
 Guards Blue . I be right glad that ye do come off safely from the 
 hound . some word have come of your errand after your departure , so this 
 same Horsford with the Mayor and one or two other tantivie , whose zeal 
 methink outran their humanity , slip the dog upon your trail . ' 

 ' I remember you well , ' I answer . ' you will find Colonel Decimus Saxon , 
 my former companion , in the camp . no doubt you will be shortly exchange 
 for some prisoner of our . ' 

 ' much more likely to have my throat cut , ' say he , with a smile . ' I 
 fear that Feversham in his present temper will scarce pause to make 
 prisoner , and Monmouth may be tempt to pay he back in his own 
 coin . yet it be the fortune of war , and I should pay for my want of all 
 soldierly caution . truth to tell , my mind be far from battle and rus 
 at the moment , for it have wander away to aqua - regia and its action 
 upon the metal , until your appearance bring I back to soldiership . ' 

 ' the horse be out of sight , ' say Reuben , look backwards , ' our as 
 well as theirs . yet I see a clump of man over yonder at the other side 
 of the Avon , and there on the hillside can you not see the gleam of 
 steel ? ' 

 ' there be foot there , ' I answer , pucker my eye . ' it seem to I 
 that I can discern four or five regiment and as many colour of horse . 
 King Monmouth should know of this with all speed . ' 

 ' he do know of it , ' say Reuben . ' yonder he stand under the tree 
 with his council about he . see , one of they rid this way ! ' 

 a trooper have indeed detach himself from the group and gallop 
 towards we . ' if you be Captain Clarke , sir , ' he say , with a salute , 
 ' the King order you to join his council . ' 

 ' then I leave the Major in your keeping , Reuben , ' I cry . ' see that 
 he hath what our mean allow . ' so say I spur my horse , and soon 
 join the group who be gather round the king . there be Grey , 
 Wade , Buyse , Ferguson , Saxon , Hollis , and a score more , all look very 
 grave , and peer down the valley with their glass . Monmouth himself 
 have dismount , and be lean against the trunk of a tree , with his 
 arm fold upon his breast , and a look of white despair upon his face . 
 behind the tree a lackey pace up and down lead his glossy black 
 charger , who prance and toss his lordly mane , a very king among 
 horse . 

 ' you see , friend , ' say Monmouth , turn lack - lustre eye from one 
 leader to another , ' providence would seem to be against we . some new 
 mishap be ever at our heel . ' 

 ' not providence , your Majesty , but our own negligence , ' cry Saxon 
 boldly . ' have we advanced on Bristol last night , we might have be on 
 the right side of the rampart by now . ' 

 ' but we have no thought that the enemy 's foot be so near ! ' exclaim 
 Wade . 

 ' I tell ye what would come of it , and so do Oberst Buyse and the worthy 
 Mayor of Taunton , ' Saxon answer . ' however , there be nought to be 
 gain by mourn over a broken pipkin . we must e'en piece it together 
 as good we may . ' 

 ' let we advance on Bristol , and put oor trust in the high , ' quoth 
 Ferguson . ' if it be his mighty will that we should tak ' it , then 
 shall we enter into it , yea , though drake and saker lie as thick as 
 cobblestane in the street . ' 

 ' aye ! aye ! on to Bristol ! God with we ! ' cry several of the Puritans 
 excitedly . 

 ' but it be madness -- dummheit -- utter foolishness , ' Buyse break in hotly . 
 ' you have the chance and you will not take it . now the chance be go 
 and you be all eager to go . here be an army of , as near as I can judge , 
 five thousand man on the right side of the river . we be on the wrong 
 side , and yet you talk of cross and make a beleaguering of Bristol 
 without breach - piece or spade , and with this force in our rear . 
 will the town make term when they can see from their rampart the van 
 of the army which come to help they ? or do it assist we in fight 
 the army to have a strong town beside we , from which horse and foot can 
 make an outfall upon our flank ? I say again that it be madness . ' 

 what the german soldier say be so clearly the truth that even the 
 fanatic be silence . away in the east the long shimmering line 
 of steel , and the patch of scarlet upon the green hillside , be 
 argument which the most thoughtless could not overlook . 

 ' what would you advise , then ? ' ask Monmouth moodily , tap his 
 jewel riding - whip against his high boot . 

 ' to cross the river and come to hand - grip with they ere they can 
 get help from the town , ' the burly German answer bluntly . ' I can not 
 understand what we be here for if it be not to fight . if we win , the 
 town must fall . if we lose , we have have a bold stroke for it , and can do 
 no more . ' 

 ' be that your opinion , too , Colonel Saxon ? ' the King ask . 

 ' assuredly , your Majesty , if we can fight to advantage . we can scarce 
 do that , however , by cross the river on a single narrow bridge in 
 the face of such a force . I should advise that we destroy this Keynsham 
 Bridge , and march down this southern bank in the hope of force a fight 
 in a position which we may choose . ' 

 ' we have not yet summon bath , ' say Wade . ' let we do as Colonel Saxon 
 propose , and let we in the meantime march in that direction and send a 
 trumpet to the governor . ' 

 ' there be yet another plan , ' quoth Sir Stephen Timewell , ' which be to 
 hasten to Gloucester , to cross the Severn there , and so march through 
 Worcestershire into Shropshire and Cheshire . your Majesty have many 
 friend in those part . ' 

 Monmouth pace up and down with his hand to his forehead like one 
 distrait . ' what be I to do , ' he cry at last , ' in the midst of all this 
 conflict advice , when I know that not only my own success , but the 
 life of these poor faithful peasant and craftsman depend upon my 
 resolution ? ' 

 ' with all humbleness , your Majesty , ' say Lord Grey , who have just 
 return with the horse , ' I should suggest , since there be only a few 
 troop of their cavalry on this side of the Avon , that we blow up the 
 bridge and move onwards to Bath , whence we can pass into Wiltshire , 
 which we know to be friendly . ' 

 ' so be it ! ' cry the King , with the reckless air of one who accept 
 a plan , not because it be the good , but because he feel that all be 
 equally hopeless . ' what think you , gentleman ? ' he add , with a bitter 
 smile . ' I have hear news from London this morning , that my uncle have 
 clap two hundred merchant and other who be suspect of be true 
 to their creed into the Tower and the Fleet . he will have one half of 
 the nation mount guard over the other half ere long . ' 

 ' or the whole , your Majesty , mount guard over he , ' suggest Wade . 
 ' he may himself see the Traitor 's Gate some of these morning . ' 

 ' ha , ha ! think ye so ? think ye so ! ' cry Monmouth , rub his hand 
 and brighten into a smile . ' well , mayhap you have nick the truth . 
 who know ? Henry 's cause seem a lose one until Bosworth Field 
 settle the contention . to your charge , gentleman . we shall march in 
 half - an - hour . Colonel Saxon and you , Sir Stephen , shall cover the rear 
 and guard the baggage -- a service of honour with this fringe of horse 
 upon our skirt . ' 

 the council break up forthwith , every man rid off to his own 
 regiment . the whole camp be in a stir , bugle blow and drum 
 rattle , until in a very short time the army be draw up in order , and 
 the forlorn of cavalry have already start along the road which lead to 
 Bath . five hundred horse with the Devonshire militiaman be in the van . 
 after they in order come the sailor regiment , the North Somerset man , 
 the first Taunton regiment of burgher , the Mendip and Bagworthy miner , 
 the lace and wool - worker of Honiton , Wellington , and Ottery St. Mary ; 
 the woodman , the grazier , the marsh - man , and the man from the Quantock 
 district . behind be the gun and the baggage , with our own brigade and 
 four colour of horse as a rearguard . on our march we could see the red 
 coat of Feversham keep pace with we upon the other side of the Avon . 
 a large body of his horse and dragoon have ford the stream and hover 
 upon our skirt , but Saxon and Sir Stephen cover the baggage so 
 skilfully , and face round so fiercely with such a snarl of musketry 
 whenever they come too nigh , that they never venture to charge home . 



 Chapter XXVIII . of the Fight in Wells Cathedral 

 I be fairly tie to the chariot - wheel of history now , my dear child , 
 and must follow on with name and place and date , whether my tale suffer 
 by it or no . with such a drama as this afoot it be impertinent to 
 speak of myself , save in so far as I see or hear what may make these 
 old scene more vivid to you . it be no pleasant matter for I to dwell 
 upon , yet , convince as I be that there be no such thing as chance 
 either in the great or the little thing of this world , I be very sure 
 that the sacrifice of these brave man be not throw away , and that 
 their striving be not as profitless as might at first sight appear . 
 if the perfidious race of Stuart be not now seat upon the throne , and 
 if religion in England be still a thing of free growth , we may , to my 
 thinking , thank these Somerset yokel for it , who first show how small 
 a thing would shake the throne of an unpopular monarch . Monmouth 's 
 army be but the vanguard of that which march throe year later into 
 London , when James and his cruel minister be fly as outcast over 
 the face of the earth . 

 on the night of June 27 , or rather early in the morning of June 28 , we 
 reach the town of Frome , very wet and miserable , for the rain have come 
 on again , and all the road be quagmire . from this next day we push 
 on once more to Wells , where we spend the night and the whole of the 
 next day , to give the man time to get their clothe dry , and to recover 
 themselves after their privation . 

 in the forenoon a parade of our Wiltshire regiment be hold in the 
 Cathedral Close , when Monmouth praise it , as it well deserve , for the 
 soldierly progress make in so short a time . 

 as we return to our quarter after dismiss our man we come upon a 
 great throng of the rough Bagworthy and Oare miner , who be assemble 
 in the open space in front of the Cathedral , listen to one of their 
 own number , who be address they from a cart . the wild and frenzied 
 gesture of the man show we that he be one of those extreme sectary 
 whose religion run perilously near to madness . the hum and groan 
 which rise from the crowd prove , however , that his fiery word be 
 well suited to his hearer , so we halt on the verge of the multitude 
 and hearken to his address . a red - bearded , fierce - faced man he be , 
 with tangle shaggy hair tumble over his gleam eye , and a hoarse 
 voice which resound over the whole square . 

 ' what shall we not do for the Lord ? ' he cry ; ' what shall we not do for 
 the Holy of Holies ? why be it that his hand be heavy upon we ? why be it 
 that we have not free this land , even as Judith free Bethulia ? Behold , 
 we have look for peace but no good come , and for a time of health , and 
 behold trouble ! why be this , I say ? truly , brother , it be because we 
 have slight the Lord , because we have not be wholehearte towards 
 Him . Lo ! we have praise he with our breath , but in our deed we have 
 be cold towards he . ye know well that Prelacy be an accursed thing -- a 
 hissing and an abomination in the eye of the Almighty ! yet what have 
 we , his servant , work for he in this matter ? have we not see 
 Prelatist church , church of form and of show , where the creature be 
 confound with the Creator -- have we not see they , I say , and have we 
 not forborne to sweep they away , and so lend our sanction to they ? there 
 be the sin of a lukewarm and back - slide generation ! there be the cause 
 why the Lord should look coldly upon his people ! lo ! at Shepton and at 
 Frome we have leave such church behind we . at Glastonbury , too , we have 
 spar those wicked wall which be rear by idolatrous hand of old . 
 Woe unto ye , if , after have put your hand to God 's plough , ye turn 
 back from the work ! see there ! ' he howl , face round to the beautiful 
 Cathedral , ' what mean this great heap of stone ? be it not an altar of 
 Baal ? be it not build for man - worship rather than God - worship ? be it not 
 there that the man Ken , trick out in his foolish rochet and bauble , 
 may preach his soulless and lie doctrine , which be but the old dish 
 of Popery serve up under a new cover ? and shall we suffer this thing ? 
 shall we , the choose child of the great one , allow this plague - spot 
 to remain ? can we expect the Almighty to help we when we will not 
 stretch out a hand to help he ? we have leave the other temple of 
 Prelacy behind we . shall we leave this one , too , my brother ? ' 

 ' no , no ! ' yell the crowd , tossing and swaying . 

 ' shall we pluck it down , then , until no one stone be leave upon another ? ' 

 ' yes , yes ! ' they shout . 

 ' now , at once ? ' 

 ' yes , yes ! ' 

 ' then to work ! ' he cry , and spring from the cart he rush towards 
 the Cathedral , with the whole mob of wild fanatic at his heel . some 
 crowd in , shout and yelling , through the open door , while other 
 swarm up the pillar and pedestal of the front , hack at the 
 sculpture ornament , and tug at the grey old image which fill 
 every niche . 

 ' this must be stop , ' say Saxon curtly . ' we can not afford to insult 
 and estray the whole Church of England to please a few hot - head 
 ranter . the pillage of this Cathedral would do our cause more harm than 
 a pitched battle lose . do you bring up your company , Sir Gervas , and we 
 shall do what we can to hold they in check until they come . ' 

 ' hi , Masterton ! ' cry the Baronet , spy one of his under - officer 
 among the crowd who be look on , neither assist nor oppose the 
 rioter . ' do you hasten to the quarter , and tell Barker to bring up the 
 company with their match burn . I may be of use here . ' 

 ' ha , here be Buyse ! ' cry Saxon joyously , as the huge german plough 
 his way through the crowd . ' and Lord Grey , too ! we must save the 
 Cathedral , my lord ! they would sack and burn it . ' 

 ' this way , gentleman , ' cry an old grey - haired man , run out towards 
 we with hand outspread , and a bunch of key clank at his girdle . ' oh 
 hasten , gentleman , if ye can indeed prevail over these lawless man ! they 
 have pull down Saint Peter , and they will have Paul down too unless 
 help come . there will not be an apostle leave . the east window be 
 break . they have bring a hogshead of beer , and be broach it 
 upon the high altar . oh , alas , alas ! that such thing should be in a 
 christian land ! ' he sob aloud and stamp about in a very frenzy of 
 grief . 

 ' it be the verger , sir , ' say one of the townsfolk . ' he hath grow grey 
 in the Cathedral . ' 

 ' this way to the vestry door , my lord and gentleman , ' cry the old 
 man , push a way strenuously through the crowd . ' now , lack - a - day , the 
 saint Paul hath go too ! ' 

 as he speak a splintering crash from inside the Cathedral announce some 
 fresh outrage on the part of the zealot . our guide hasten on with 
 renew speed , until he come to a low oaken door heavily arch , which 
 he unlock with much rasping of ward and creaking of hinge . through 
 this we sidle as good we might , and hurry after the old man down a 
 stone - flag corridor , which lead through a wicket into the Cathedral 
 close by the high altar . 

 the great building be full of the rioter , who be rush hither and 
 thither , destroy and break everything which they could lay their 
 hand on . a good number of these be genuine zealot , the follower of 
 the preacher whom we have listen to outside . other , however , be on 
 the face of they mere rogue and thief , such as gather round every 
 army upon the march . while the former be tear down image from the 
 wall , or hurl the book of common prayer through the stain - glass 
 window , the other be root up the massive brass candlestick , 
 and carry away everything which promise to be of value . one ragged 
 fellow be in the pulpit , tear off the crimson velvet and hurl it 
 down among the crowd . another have upset the reading - desk , and be busily 
 engage in wrench off the brazen fastening . in the centre of 
 the side aisle a small group have a rope round the neck of Mark the 
 Evangelist , and be drag lustily upon it , until , even as we 
 enter , the statue , after totter for a few moment , come crash 
 down upon the marble floor . the shout which greet every fresh 
 outrage , with the splintering of woodwork , the smashing of window , and 
 the clatter of fall masonry , make up a most deafening uproar , which 
 be increase by the droning of the organ , until some of the rioter 
 silence it by slit up the bellow . 

 what more immediately concern ourselves be the scene which be be 
 enact just in front of we at the high altar . a barrel of beer have be 
 place upon it , and a dozen ruffian gather round it , one of whom with 
 many ribald jest have climb up , and be engage in knock in the 
 top of the cask with a hatchet . as we enter he have just succeed in 
 broach it , and the brown mead be foam over , while the mob with 
 roar of laughter be pass up their dipper and pannikin . the 
 german soldier rap out a rough jagged oath at this spectacle , and 
 shoulder his way through the roisterer he spring upon the altar . 
 the ringleader be bend over his cask , black - jack in hand , when the 
 soldier 's iron grip fall upon his collar , and in a moment his heel be 
 flap in the air , and his head three foot deep in the cask , while the 
 beer splash and foam in every direction . with a mighty heave Buyse 
 pick up the barrel with the half - drown miner inside , and hurl it 
 clatter down the broad marble step which lead from the body of the 
 church . at the same time , with the aid of a dozen of our man who have 
 follow we into the Cathedral , we drive back the fellow 's comrade , and 
 thrust they out beyond the rail which divide the choir from the nave . 

 our inroad have the effect of check the riot , but it simply do so by 
 turn the fury of the zealot from the wall and window to ourselves . 
 image , stone - work , and wood - carving be all abandon , and the whole 
 swarm come rush up with a hoarse buzz of rage , all discipline and 
 order completely lose in their religious frenzy . ' smite the Prelatists ! ' 
 they howl . ' down with the friend of antichrist ! cut they off even at 
 the horn of the altar ! down with they ! ' on either side they mass , a 
 wild , half - demented crowd , some with arm and some without , but fill 
 to a man with the very spirit of murder . 

 ' this be a civil war within a civil war , ' say Lord Grey , with a quiet 
 smile . ' we have good draw , gentleman , and defend the gap in the rail , if 
 we may hold it good until help arrive . ' he flash out his rapi as 
 he speak , and take his stand on the top of the step , with Saxon and Sir 
 Gervas upon one side of he , Buyse , Reuben , and myself upon the other . 
 there be only room for six to wield their weapon with effect , so our 
 scanty band of follower scatter themselves along the line of the 
 rail , which be luckily so high and strong as to make an escalado 
 difficult in the face of any opposition . 

 the riot have now change into open mutiny among these marshman and 
 miner . pike , scythe , and knife glimmer through the dim light , 
 while their wild cry re - echo from the high arched roof like the 
 howling of a pack of wolf . ' go forward , my brother , ' cry the 
 fanatic preacher , who have be the cause of the outbreak--'go forward 
 against they ! what though they be in high place ! there be one who 
 be high than they . shall we shrink from his work because of a naked 
 sword ? shall we suffer the Prelatist altar to be preserve by these son 
 of Amalek ? on , on ! in the name of the Lord ! ' 

 ' in the name of the Lord ! ' cry the crowd , with a sort of hiss gasp , 
 like one who be about to plunge into an icy bath . ' in the name of the 
 Lord ! ' from either side they come on , gather speed and volume , until 
 at last with a wild cry they surge right down upon our sword - point . 

 I can say nothing of what take place to right or leave of I during the 
 ruffle , for indeed there be so many press upon we , and the fight 
 be so hot , that it be all that each of we could do to hold our own . 
 the very number of our assailant be in our favour , by hamper their 
 sword - arm . one burly miner cut fiercely at I with his scythe , but 
 miss I he swing half round with the force of the blow , and I pass 
 my sword through his body before he could recover himself . it be the 
 first time that I have ever slay a man in anger , my dear child , and 
 I shall never forget his white startled face as he look over his 
 shoulder at I ere he fall . another close in with I before I could get 
 my weapon disengage , but I strike he out with my left hand , and then 
 bring the flat of my sword upon his head , lay he senseless 
 upon the pavement . God know , I do not wish to take the life of the 
 misguided and ignorant zealot , but our own be at stake . a marshman , 
 look more like a shaggy wild beast than a human being , dart under 
 my weapon and catch I round the knee , while another bring a flail 
 down upon my head - piece , from which it glance on to my shoulder . a 
 third thrust at I with a pike , and prick I on the thigh , but I shore 
 his weapon in two with one blow , and split his head with the next . the 
 man with the flail give back at sight of this , and a kick free I from 
 the unarmed ape - like creature at my foot , so that I find myself clear 
 of my assailant , and none the bad for my encounter , save for a touch 
 on the leg and some stiffness of the neck and shoulder . 

 look round I find that my comrade have also beat off those who 
 be oppose to they . Saxon be hold his bloody rapier in his left 
 hand , while the blood be trickle from a slight wound upon his right . 
 two miner lie across each other in front of he , but at the foot of 
 Sir Gervas Jerome no few than four body be pile together . he have 
 pluck out his snuff - box as I glance at he , and be offer it with 
 a bow and a flourish to Lord Grey , as unconcernedly as though he be 
 back once more in his London coffee - house . Buyse lean upon his long 
 broadsword , and look gloomily at a headless trunk in front of he , 
 which I recognise from the dress as be that of the preacher . as to 
 Reuben , he be unhurt himself , but in sore distress over my own trifling 
 scar , though I assure the faithful lad that it be a less thing than 
 many a tear from branch or thorn which we have have when blackberry 
 together . 

 the fanatic , though drive back , be not man to be content with a 
 single repulse . they have lose ten of their number , include their 
 leader , without be able to break our line , but the failure only 
 serve to increase their fury . for a minute or so they gather pant 
 in the aisle . then with a mad yell they dash in once more , and make a 
 desperate effort to cut a way through to the altar . it be a fiercer and 
 more prolonged struggle than before . one of our follower be stab to 
 the heart over the rail , and fall without a groan . another be stun 
 by a mass of masonry hurl at he by a giant cragsman . Reuben be 
 fell by a club , and would have be drag out and hack to piece 
 have I not stand over he and beat off his assailant . Sir Gervas be 
 bear off his leg by the rush , but lie like a wounded wildcat , strike 
 out furiously at everything which come within his reach . Buyse and 
 Saxon , back to back , stand firm amidst the seethe , rush crowd , 
 cut down every man within sweep of their sword . yet in such a 
 struggle number must in the end prevail , and I confess that I for one 
 have begin to have fear for the upshot of our contest , when the heavy 
 tramp of discipline foot rang through the Cathedral , and the Baronet 's 
 musqueteer come at a quick run up the central aisle . the fanatic do 
 not await their charge , but dart off over bench and pew , follow 
 by our ally , who be furious on see their beloved Captain upon the 
 ground . there be a wild minute or two , with confused shuffling of foot , 
 stab , groan , and the clatter of musket butt on the marble floor . of 
 the rioter some be slain , but the great part throw down their arm 
 and be arrest at the command of Lord Grey , while a strong guard be 
 place at the gate to prevent any fresh outburst of sectarian fury . 

 when at last the Cathedral be clear and order restore , we have time 
 to look around we and to reckon our own injury . in all my wandering , 
 and the many war in which I afterwards fight -- war compare to which 
 this affair of Monmouth 's be but the mere skirmish -- I have never see 
 a stranger or more impressive scene . in the dim , solemn light the pile 
 of body in front of the rail , with their twisted limb and white - set 
 face , have a most sad and ghost - like aspect . the evening light , shin 
 through one of the few unbroken stain - glass window , cast great 
 splotch of vivid crimson and of sickly green upon the heap of 
 motionless figure . a few wounded man sit about in the front pew or lie 
 upon the step moan for water . of our own small company not one have 
 escape unscathed . three of our follower have be slay outright , while 
 a fourth be lie stunned from a blow . Buyse and Sir Gervas be much 
 bruised . Saxon be cut on the right arm . Reuben have be fell by a 
 bludgeon stroke , and would certainly have be slay but for the fine 
 temper of Sir Jacob Clancing 's breastplate , which have turn a fierce 
 pike - thrust . as to myself it be scarce worth the mention , but my head 
 sing for some hour like a good wife 's kettle , and my boot be full of 
 blood , which may have be a blessing in disguise , for Sneckson , our 
 Havant barber , be ever din into my ear how much the well I 
 should be for a phlebotomy . 

 in the meantime all the troop have assemble and the mutiny be swiftly 
 stamp out . there be doubtless many among the Puritans who have no 
 love for the Prelatists , but none save the most crack - brain fanatic 
 could fail to see that the sacking of the Cathedral would set the 
 whole Church of England in arm , and ruin the cause for which they be 
 fight . as it be , much damage have be do ; for whilst the gang 
 within have be smash all which they could lay their hand upon , 
 other outside have chip off cornice and gargoyle , and have even 
 drag the lead cover from the roof and hurl it down in great 
 sheet to their companion beneath . this last lead to some profit , for 
 the army have no great store of ammunition , so the lead be gather up 
 by Monmouth 's order and recast into bullet . the prisoner be hold 
 in custody for a time , but it be deem unwise to punish they , so that 
 they be finally pardon and dismiss from the army . 

 a parade of our whole force be hold in the field outside the town upon 
 the second day of our stay at Wells , the weather have at last become 
 warm and sunny . the foot be then find to muster six regiment of nine 
 hundred man , or five thousand four hundred in all . of these fifteen 
 hundred be musqueteer , two thousand be pikemen , and the rest be 
 scythesman or peasant with flail and hammer . a few body , such as 
 our own or those from Taunton , might fairly lay claim to be soldier , 
 but the most of they be still labourer and craftsman with weapon 
 in their hand . yet , ill - arm and ill - drill as they be , they be 
 still strong robust Englishmen , full of native courage and of religious 
 zeal . the light and fickle Monmouth begin to take heart once more at the 
 sight of their sturdy bearing , and at the sound of their hearty cheer . 
 I hear he as I sit my horse beside his staff speak exultantly to those 
 around he , and ask whether these fine fellow could possibly be beat 
 by mercenary half - hearted hireling . 

 ' what say you , Wade ! ' he cry . ' be we never to see a smile on that sad 
 face of your ? do you not see a woolsack in store for you as you look 
 upon these brave fellow ? ' 

 ' God forbid that I should say a word to damp your Majesty 's ardour , ' the 
 lawyer answer ; ' yet I can not but remember that there be a time when 
 your Majesty , at the head of these same hireling , do drive man as 
 brave as these in headlong rout from Bothwell Bridge . ' 

 ' true , true ! ' say the King , pass his hand over his forehead -- a 
 favourite motion when he be worried and annoyed . ' they be bold man , 
 the western Covenanters , yet they could not stand against the rush of 
 our battalion . but they have have no training , whereas these can fight in 
 line and fire a platoon as well as one would wish to see . ' 

 ' if we hadna a gun nor a patronal among we , ' say Ferguson , ' if we hadna 
 sae muckle as a sword , but just oor ain hond , yet would the Lard gie we 
 the victory , if it seem good in his a ' see een . ' 

 ' all battle be but chance work , your Majesty , ' remark Saxon , whose 
 sword - arm be bind round with his kerchief . ' some lucky turn , some slip 
 or chance which none can foresee , be ever likely to turn the scale . I 
 have lose when I have look to win , and I have win when I have look 
 to lose . it be an uncertain game , and one never know the finish till 
 the last card be play . ' 

 ' not till the stake be draw , ' say Buyse , in his deep guttural voice . 
 ' there be many a leader that win what you call the trick , and yet lose 
 the game . ' 

 ' the trick be the battle and the game the campaign , ' quoth the King , 
 with a smile . ' our german friend be a master of camp - fire metaphor . but 
 methink our poor horse be in a sorry state . what would cousin William 
 over at the Hague , with his spruce guard , think of such a show as 
 this ? ' 

 during this talk the long column of foot have tramp past , still bear 
 the banner which they have bring with they to the war , though much 
 the bad for wind and weather . Monmouth 's remark have be draw forth 
 by the aspect of the ten troop of horse which follow . the charger 
 have be sadly wear by the continue work and constant rain , while the 
 rider , have allow their cap and front to get coat with rust , 
 appear to be in as bad a plight as their steed . it be clear to the 
 least experienced of we that if we be to hold our own it be upon 
 our foot that we must rely . on the top of the low hill all round the 
 frequent shimmer of arm , glance here and there when the sun 's ray 
 strike upon they , show how strong our enemy be in the very point 
 in which we be so weak . yet in the main this Wells review be cheer 
 to we , as show that the man keep in good heart , and that there be no 
 ill - feeling at the rough handling of the zealot upon the day before . 

 the enemy 's horse hover about we during these day , but the foot have 
 be delay through the heavy weather and the swollen stream . on the 
 last day of June we march out of Wells , and make our way across flat 
 sedgy plain and over the low Polden Hills to Bridgewater , where we 
 find some few recruit await we . here Monmouth have some thought 
 of make a stand , and even set to work raise earthwork , but it be 
 point out to he that , even could he hold the town , there be not more 
 than a few day ' provision within it , while the country round have be 
 already sweep so bare that little more could be expect from it . the 
 work be therefore abandon , and , fairly drive to bay , without a 
 loophole of escape leave , we await the approach of the enemy . 



 chapter XXIX . of the great Cry from the Lonely House 

 and so our weary marching and counter - marching come at last to an end , 
 and we find ourselves with our back fairly against the wall , and the 
 whole strength of the Government turn against we . not a word come 
 to we of a rise or movement in our favour in any part of England . 
 everywhere the Dissenters be cast into prison and the Church dominant . 
 from north and east and west the militia of the county be on its 
 march against we . in London six regiment of dutch troop have arrive as 
 a loan from the Prince of Orange . other be say to be on their way . 
 the City have enrol ten thousand man . everywhere there be muster 
 and march to succour the flower of the english army , which be 
 already in Somersetshire . and all for the purpose of crush some five 
 or six thousand clodhopper and fisherman , half - armed and penniless , who 
 be ready to throw their life away for a man and for an idea . 

 but this idea , my dear child , be a noble one , and one which a man 
 might very well sacrifice all for , and yet feel that all be well spend . 
 for though these poor peasant , in their dumb , blunder fashion , would 
 have find it hard to give all their reason in word , yet in the inmost 
 heart of they they know and feel that it be England 's cause which they 
 be fight for , and that they be uphold their country 's true 
 self against those who would alter the old system under which she have 
 lead the nation . three more year make all this very plain , and show 
 that our simple unlettered follower have see and judge the sign of 
 the time more correctly than those who call themselves their better . 
 there be , to my thinking , stage of human progress for which the Church 
 of Rome be admirably suit . where the mind of a nation be young , it may 
 be good that it should not concern itself with spiritual affair , but 
 should lean upon the old staff of custom and authority . but England have 
 cast off her swaddling - clothe , and be a nursery of strong , think 
 man , who would bow to no authority save that which their reason and 
 conscience approve . it be hopeless , useless , foolish , to try to drive 
 such man back into a creed which they have outgrow . such an attempt be , 
 however , be make , back by all the weight of a bigoted king with a 
 powerful and wealthy Church as his ally . in three year the nation would 
 understand it , and the King would be fly from his angry people ; but 
 at present , sink in a torpor after the long civil war and the corrupt 
 reign of Charles , they fail to see what be at stake , and turn 
 against those who would warn they , as a hasty man turn on the messenger 
 who be the bearer of evil tiding . be it not strange , my dear , how 
 quickly a mere shadowy thought come to take living form , and grow into 
 a very tragic reality ? at one end of the chain be a king brood over a 
 point of doctrine ; at the other be six thousand desperate man , chivy 
 and chase from shire to shire , stand to bay at last amid the bleak 
 bridgewater marsh , with their heart as bitter and as hopeless as 
 those of hunt beast of prey . a king 's theology be a dangerous thing 
 for his subject . 

 but if the idea for which these poor man fight be a worthy one , what 
 shall we say of the man who have be choose as the champion of their 
 cause ? alas , that such man should have have such a leader ! swing from 
 the height of confidence to the depth of despair , choose his future 
 council of state one day and propose to fly from the army on the 
 next , he appear from the start to be possess by the very spirit 
 of fickleness . yet he have bear a fair name before this enterprise . in 
 Scotland he have win golden opinion , not only for his success , but for 
 the moderation and mercy with which he treat the vanquished . on the 
 continent he have command an english brigade in a way that earn 
 praise from old soldier of Louis and the empire . yet now , when his own 
 head and his own fortune be at stake , he be feeble , irresolute , and 
 cowardly . in my father 's phrase , ' all the virtue have go out of he . ' 
 I declare when I have see he rid among his troop , with his head 
 bow upon his breast and a face like a mute at a burying , cast an 
 air of gloom and of despair all round he , I have feel that , even in 
 case of success , such a man could never wear the crown of the Tudors and 
 the Plantagenets , but that some strong hand , be it that of one of 
 his own general , would wrest it from he . 

 I will do Monmouth the justice to say that from the time when it be at 
 last decide to fight -- for the very good reason that no other course be 
 open -- he show up in a more soldierly and manly spirit . for the first 
 few day in July no mean be neglect to hearten our troop and to 
 nerve they for the come battle . from morning to night we be at work , 
 teach our foot how to form up in dense group to meet the charge of 
 horse , and how to depend upon each other , and look to their officer for 
 order . at night the street of the little town from the Castle Field 
 to the Parret Bridge resound with the praying and the preaching . there 
 be no need for the officer to quell irregularity , for the troop 
 punish they amongst themselves . one man who come out on the street 
 hot with wine be well - nigh hang by his companion , who finally cast 
 he out of the town as be unworthy to fight in what they look 
 upon as a sacred quarrel . as to their courage , there be no occasion to 
 quicken that , for they be as fearless as lion , and the only danger 
 be lest their fiery daring should lead they into foolhardiness . their 
 desire be to hurl themselves upon the enemy like a horde of Moslem 
 fanatic , and it be no easy matter to drill such hot - head fellow 
 into the steadiness and caution which war demand . 

 provision run low upon the third day of our stay in Bridgewater , which 
 be due to our have exhaust that part of the country before , and 
 also to the vigilance of the Royal Horse , who scour the district round 
 and cut off our supply . Lord Grey determine , therefore , to send 
 out two troop of horse under cover of night , to do what they could to 
 refill the larder . the command of the small expedition be give over 
 to Major Martin Hooker , an old Lifeguardsman of rough speech and curt 
 manner , who have do good service in drill the headstrong farmer 
 and yeoman into some sort of order . Sir Gervas Jerome and I ask leave 
 from Lord Grey to join the foray -- a favour which be readily grant , 
 since there be little stirring in the town . 

 it be about eleven o'clock on a moonless night that we sally out 
 of Bridgewater , intend to explore the country in the direction of 
 Boroughbridge and Athelney . we have word that there be no large body 
 of the enemy in that quarter , and it be a fertile district where 
 good store of supply might be hop for . we take with we four empty 
 waggon , to carry whatever we might have the luck to find . our commander 
 arrange that one troop should ride before these and one behind , while a 
 small advance party , under the charge of Sir Gervas , keep some hundred 
 of pace in front . in this order we clatter out of the town just as 
 the late bugle be blow , and sweep away down the quiet shadowy 
 road , bring anxious peering face to the casement of the wayside 
 cottage as we whirl past in the darkness . 

 that ride come very clearly before I as I think of it . the dark loom 
 of the club - head willow flit by we , the moaning of the breeze 
 among the withy , the vague , blurred figure of the trooper , the dull 
 thud of the hoof , and the jingling of scabbard against stirrup -- eye and 
 ear can both conjure up those old - time memory . the Baronet and I ride 
 in front , knee against knee , and his light - hearted chatter of life in 
 town , with his little snatch of verse or song from Cowley or Waller , 
 be a very balm of Gilead to my sombre and somewhat heavy spirit . 

 ' life be indeed life on such a night as this , ' quoth he , as we breathe 
 in the fresh country air with the reek of crop and of kine . ' rabbit 
 I ! but you be to be envy , Clarke , for have be bear and breed in 
 the country ! what pleasure have the town to offer compare to the free 
 gift of nature , provide always that there be a perruquier 's and 
 a snuff merchant 's , and a scent vendor 's , and one or two tolerable 
 outfitter within reach ? with these and a good coffee - house and a 
 playhouse , I think I could make shift to lead a simple pastoral life for 
 some month . ' 

 ' in the country , ' say I , laugh , ' we have ever the feeling that the 
 true life of mankind , with the growth of knowledge and wisdom , be be 
 work out in the town . ' 

 ' Ventre Saint - Gris ! it be little knowledge or wisdom that I acquire 
 there , ' he answer . ' truth to tell , I have live more and learn more 
 during these few week that we have be slide about in the rain with 
 our ragged lad , than ever I do when I be page of the court , with the 
 ball of fortune at my foot . it be a sorry thing for a man 's mind to have 
 nothing high to dwell upon than the turning of a compliment or the 
 dancing of a corranto . Zounds , lad ! I have your friend the carpenter to 
 thank for much . as he say in his letter , unless a man can get the good 
 that be in he out , he be of loss value in the world than one of those 
 fowl that we hear cackle , for they at least fulfill their mission , if 
 it be only to lay egg . Ged , it be a new creed for I to be preach ! ' 

 ' but , ' say I , ' when you be a wealthy man you must have be of 
 service to some one , for how could one spend so much money and yet none 
 be the well ? ' 

 ' you dear bucolic Micah ! ' he cry , with a gay laugh . ' you will ever 
 speak of my poor fortune with bated breath and in an awestruck voice , as 
 though it be the wealth of the Indies . you can not think , lad , how easy 
 it be for a money - bag to take unto itself wing and fly . it be true that 
 the man who spend it doth not consume the money , but pass it on to 
 some one who profit thereby . yet the fault lie in the fact that it be 
 to the wrong folk that we pass our money , thereby breed a useless 
 and debauch class at the expense of honest calling . Od 's fish , lad ! 
 when I think of the swarm of needy beggar , the lecherous pimp , the 
 nose - slit bully , the toady and the flatterer who be rear by 
 we , I feel that in hatch such a poisonous brood our money hath do 
 what no money can undo . have I not see they thirty deep of a morning 
 when I have hold my levee , cringe up to my bedside-- ' 

 ' your bedside ! ' I exclaim . 

 ' Aye ! it be the mode to receive in bed , attire in laced cambric 
 shirt and periwig , though afterwards it be permit to sit up in your 
 chamber , but dress _ a la negligence _ , in gown and slipper . the mode 
 be a terrible tyrant , Clarke , though its arm may not extend as far as 
 Havant . the idle man of the town must have some rule of life , so he 
 become a slave to the law of the fashion . no man in London be more 
 subject to it than myself . I be regular in my irregularity , and 
 orderly in my disorder . at eleven o'clock to the stroke , up come my 
 valet with the morning cup of hippocras , an excellent thing for the 
 qualm , and some slight refection , as the breast of an ortolan or wing 
 of a widgeon . then come the levee , twenty , thirty , or forty of the class 
 I have speak of , though now and then perhaps there might be some honest 
 case of want among they , some needy man - of - letter in quest of a guinea , 
 or pupil - less pedant with much ancient learning in his head and very 
 little modern coinage in his pocket . it be not only that I have some 
 power of mine own , but I be know to have the ear of my Lord Halifax , 
 Sidney Godolphin , Lawrence Hyde , and other whose will might make or mar 
 a man . mark you those light upon the left ! would it not be well to see 
 if there be not something to be have there ? ' 

 ' Hooker hath order to proceed to a certain farm , ' I answer . ' this we 
 could take upon our return should we still have space . we shall be back 
 here before morning . ' 

 ' we must get supply , if I have to ride back to Surrey for they , ' say 
 he . ' rat I , if I dare look my musqueteer in the face again unless I 
 bring they something to toast upon the end of their ramrod ! they have 
 little more savoury than their own bullet to put in their mouth when 
 I leave they . but I be speak of old day in London . our time be 
 well fill . should a man of quality incline to sport there be ever 
 something to attract he . he might see sword - playing at Hockley , or 
 cocking at Shoe Lane , or bait at Southwark , or shoot at Tothill 
 Fields . again , he might walk in the physic garden of St. James 's , or go 
 down the river with the ebb tide to the cherry orchard at Rotherhithe , 
 or drive to Islington to drink the cream , or , above all , walk in the 
 Park , which be most modish for a gentleman who dress in the fashion . 
 you see , Clarke , that we be active in our idleness , and that there be 
 no lack of employment . then as evening come on there be the playhouse 
 to draw we , Dorset Gardens , Lincoln 's Inn , Drury Lane , and the 
 Queen's -- among the four there be ever some amusement to be find . ' 

 ' there , at least , your time be well employ , ' say I ; ' you could 
 not hearken to the grand thought or lofty word of Shakespeare or of 
 Massinger without feel some image of they in your own soul . ' 

 Sir Gervas chuckle quietly . ' you be as fresh to I , Micah , as this 
 sweet country air , ' say he . ' know , thou dear babe , that it be not to 
 see the play that we frequent the playhouse . ' 

 ' then why , in Heaven 's name ? ' I ask . 

 ' to see each other , ' he answer . ' it be the mode , I assure you , for a 
 man of fashion to stand with his back turn to the stage from the 
 rise of the curtain to the fall of it . there be the orange wench to 
 quiz -- plaguey sharp of tongue the hussy be , too -- and there be the 
 vizard of the pit , whose little black mask do invite inquiry , and 
 there be the beauty of the town and the toast of the Court , 
 all fair mark for our quizzing - glass . play , indeed ! S'bud , we have 
 something well to do than to listen to alexandrine or weigh the 
 merit of hexameter ! ' tis true that if La Jeune be dancing , or if 
 Mrs. Bracegirdle or Mrs. Oldfield come upon the board , we would hum 
 and clap , but it be the fine woman that we applaud rather than the 
 actress . ' 

 ' and when the play be over you go doubtless to supper and so to bed ? ' 

 ' to supper , certainly . sometimes to the Rhenish House , sometimes to 
 Pontack 's in Abchurch Lane . every one have his own taste in that matter . 
 then there be dice and card at the Groom Porter 's or under the arch 
 at Covent Garden , piquet , passage , hazard , primero -- what you choose . 
 after that you could find all the world at the coffee - house , where an 
 arriere supper be often serve with devil bone and prune , to drive 
 the fume of wine from the head . Zounds , Micah ! if the Jews should relax 
 their pressure , or if this war bring we any luck , you shall come to 
 town with I and shall see all these thing for yourself . ' 

 ' truth to tell , it doth not tempt I much , ' I answer . ' slow and solemn 
 I be by nature , and in such scene as you have describe I should feel a 
 very death 's head at a banquet . ' 

 Sir Gervas be about to reply , when of a sudden out of the silence 
 of the night there rise a long - draw pierce scream , which thrill 
 through every nerve of our body . I have never hear such a wail of 
 despair . we pull up our horse , as do the trooper behind we , and 
 strain our ear for some sign as to whence the sound proceed , for 
 some be of opinion that it come from our right and some from our left . 
 the main body with the waggon have come up , and we all listen intently 
 for any return of the terrible cry . presently it break upon we again , 
 wild , shrill , and agonise : the scream of a woman in mortal distress . 

 ' tis over there , Major Hooker , ' cry Sir Gervas , stand up in his 
 stirrup and peer through the darkness . ' there be a house about two 
 field off . I can see some glimmer , as from a window with the blind 
 draw . ' 

 ' shall we not make for it at once ? ' I ask impatiently , for our 
 commander sit stolidly upon his horse as though by no mean sure what 
 course he should pursue . 

 ' I be here , Captain Clarke , ' say he , ' to convey supply to the army , 
 and I be by no mean justify in turn from my course to pursue other 
 adventure . ' 

 ' death , man ! there be a woman in distress , ' cry Sir Gervas . ' why , 
 Major , you would not ride past and let she call in vain for help ? Hark , 
 there she be again ! ' as he speak the wild scream ring out once more from 
 the lonely house . 

 ' Nay , I can abide this no long , ' I cry , my blood boil in my 
 vein ; ' do you go on your errand , Major Hooker , and my friend and I 
 shall leave you here . we shall know how to justify our action to the 
 King . come , Sir Gervas ! ' 

 ' Mark ye , this be flat mutiny , Captain Clarke , ' say Hooker ; ' you be 
 under my order , and should you desert I you do so at your peril . ' 

 ' in such a case I care not a groat for thy order , ' I answer hotly . 
 turn Covenant I spur down a narrow , deeply - rut lane which 
 lead towards the house , follow by Sir Gervas and two or three of the 
 trooper . at the same moment I hear a sharp word of command from Hooker 
 and the creaking of wheel , show that he have indeed abandon we and 
 proceed on his mission . 

 ' he be right , ' quoth the Baronet , as we ride down the lane ; ' Saxon or 
 any other old soldier would commend his discipline . ' 

 ' there be thing which be high than discipline , ' I mutter . 
 ' I could not pass on and leave this poor soul in her distress . but 
 see -- what have we here ? ' 

 a dark mass loom in front of we , which prove as we approach to be 
 four horse fasten by their bridle to the hedge . 

 ' cavalry horse , Captain Clarke ! ' cry one of the trooper who have 
 spring down to examine they . ' they have the Government saddle and 
 holster . here be a wooden gate which open on a pathway lead to the 
 house . ' 

 ' we have good dismount , then , ' say Sir Gervas , jump down and tie 
 his horse beside the other . ' do you , lad , stay by the horse , and if 
 we call for ye come to our aid . Sergeant Holloway , you can come with we . 
 bring your pistol with you ! ' 



 Chapter XXX . of the Swordsman with the Brown Jacket 

 the sergeant , who be a great raw - boned west - countryman , push the gate 
 open , and we be advance up the wind pathway , when a stream of 
 yellow light flood out from a suddenly open door , and we see a dark 
 squat figure dart through it into the inside of the house . at the same 
 moment there rise up a babel of sound , follow by two pistol shot , 
 and a roaring , gasp hubbub , with clash of sword and storm of oath . 
 at this sudden uproar we all three run at our topmost speed up the 
 pathway and peer in through the open door , where we see a scene such 
 as I shall never forget while this old memory of mine can conjure up any 
 picture of the past . 

 the room be large and lofty , with long row of ham and salt meat 
 dangle from the smoke - brown rafter , as be usual in Somersetshire 
 farmhouse . a high black clock tick in a corner , and a rude table , 
 with plate and dish lay out as for a meal , stand in the centre . 
 right in front of the door a great fire of wood faggot be blaze , and 
 before this , to our unutterable horror , there hang a man head downwards , 
 suspend by a rope which be knot round his ankle , and which , 
 pass over a hook in a beam , have be make fast to a ring in the 
 floor . the struggle of this unhappy man have cause the rope to whirl 
 round , so that he be spin in front of the blaze like a joint 
 of meat . across the threshold lie a woman , the one whose cry have 
 attract we , but her rigid face and twisted body show that our 
 aid have come too late to save she from the fate which she have see 
 impend . close by her two swarthy dragoon in the glare red coat of 
 the Royal army lie stretch across each other upon the floor , dark and 
 scowl even in death . in the centre of the room two other dragoon 
 be cut and stab with their broad - sword at a thick , short , 
 heavy - shoulder man , clothe in coarse brown kersey stuff , who spring 
 about among the chair and round the table with a long basket - hilte 
 rapi in his hand , parry or dodge their blow with wonderful 
 adroitness , and every now and then put in a thrust in return . 
 Hard press as he be , his set resolute face , firm mouth , and bright 
 well - open eye speak of a bold spirit within , while the blood which 
 drip from the sleeve of one of his opponent prove that the contest 
 be not so unequal as it might appear . even as we gaze he spring back 
 to avoid a fierce rush of the furious soldier , and by a quick sharp 
 side stroke he sever the rope by which the victim be hung . the body 
 fall with a heavy thud upon the brick floor , while the little swordsman 
 dance off in a moment into another quarter of the room , still stop 
 or avoid with the utmost ease and skill the shower of blow which 
 rain upon he . 

 this strange scene hold we spell - bind for a few second , but there be 
 no time for delay , for a slip or trip would prove fatal to the gallant 
 stranger . rush into the chamber , sword in hand , we fall upon the 
 dragoon , who , outnumber as they be , back into a corner and strike 
 out fiercely , know that they need expect no mercy after the devil 's 
 work in which they have be engage . Holloway , our sergeant of horse , 
 spring furiously in , lay himself open to a thrust which stretch 
 he dead upon the ground . before the dragoon could disengage his weapon , 
 Sir Gervas cut he down , while at the same moment the stranger get past 
 the guard of his antagonist , and wound he mortally in the throat . 
 of the four red - coat not one escape alive , while the body of our 
 sergeant and of the old couple who have be the first victim increase 
 the horror of the scene . 

 ' Poor Holloway be go , ' say I , place my hand over his heart . ' who 
 ever see such a shamble ? I feel sick and ill . ' 

 ' here be eau - de - vie , if I mistake not , ' cry the strange , clamber 
 up on a chair and reach a bottle from the shelf . ' good , too , by the 
 smell . take a sup , for you be as white as a new - bleached sheet . ' 

 ' honest warfare I can abide , but scene like this make my blood run 
 cold , ' I answer , take a gulp from the flask . I be a very young 
 soldier then , my dear , but I confess that to the end of my campaign 
 any form of cruelty have the same effect upon I . I give you my word that 
 when I go to London last fall the sight of an overworked , raw - back 
 cart - horse straining with its load , and flog for not do that which 
 it could not do , give I great qualm than do the field of Sedgemoor , 
 or that great day when ten thousand of the flower of France lay 
 stretch before the earthwork of Landen . 

 ' the woman be dead , ' say Sir Gervas , ' and the man be also , I fear , past 
 recovery . he be not burn , but suffer , I should judge , poor devil ! 
 from the rush of blood to the head . ' 

 ' if that be all it may well be cure , ' remark the stranger ; and take 
 a small knife from his pocket , he roll up the old man 's sleeve and 
 open one of his vein . at first only a few sluggish black drop ooze 
 from the wound , but presently the blood begin to flow more freely , and 
 the injured man show sign of return sense . 

 ' he will live , ' say the little swordsman , put his lancet back in 
 his pocket . ' and now , who may you be to whom I owe this interference 
 which shorten the affair , though mayhap the result would have be the 
 same have you leave we to settle it amongst ourselves ? ' 

 ' we be from Monmouth 's army , ' I answer . ' he lie at Bridgewater , and 
 we be scout and seek supply . ' 

 ' and who be you ? ' ask Sir Gervas . ' and how come you into this 
 ruffle ? S'bud , you be a game little rooster to fight four such great 
 cockerel ! ' 

 ' my name be Hector Marot , ' the man answer , clean out his empty 
 pistol and very carefully reload they . ' as to who I be , it be a 
 matter of small moment . suffice it that I have help to lessen Kirk 's 
 horse by four of his rogue . mark their face , so dusky and sun - dry 
 even in death . these man have learn warfare fight against the 
 heathen in Africa , and now they practise on poor harmless English folk 
 the devil 's trick which they have pick up amongst the savage . the 
 Lord help Monmouth 's man should they be beat ! these vermin be more to 
 be fear than hangman 's cord or headsman 's axe . ' 

 ' but how do you chance upon the spot at the very nick of time ? ' I 
 ask . 

 ' why , marry , I be jog down the road on my mare when I hear the 
 clatter of hoof behind I , and conceal myself in a field , as a 
 prudent man would while the country be in its present state , I see these 
 four rogue gallop past . they make their way up to the farmhouse 
 here , and presently from cry and other token I know what manner of 
 hell - fire business they have on hand . on that I leave my mare in the field 
 and run up , when I see they through the casement , trice the good man 
 up in front of his fire to make he confess where his wealth lie hide , 
 though indeed it be my own belief that neither he nor any other farmer 
 in these part hath any wealth leave to hide , after two army have be 
 quarter in turn upon they . find that his mouth remain closed , 
 they run he up , as you see , and would assuredly have toast he like a 
 snipe , have I not step in and wing two of they with my barker . the 
 other set upon I , but I pink one through the forearm , and should 
 doubtless have give a good account of both of they but for your 
 incoming . ' 

 ' right gallantly do ! ' I exclaim . ' but where have I hear your name 
 before , Mr. Hector Marot ? ' 

 ' Nay , ' he answer , with a sharp , sidelong look , ' I can not tell that . ' 

 ' it be familiar to mine ear , ' say I. 

 he shrug his broad shoulder , and continue to look to the priming 
 of his pistol , with a half - defiant and half - uneasy expression . he be 
 a very sturdy , deep - cheste man , with a stern , square - jaw face , and a 
 white seam across his bronzed forehead as from a slash with a knife . he 
 wear a gold - edge riding - cap , a jacket of brown sad - coloured stuff much 
 stain by the weather , a pair of high rusty jack - boot , and a small 
 bob - wig . 

 Sir Gervas , who have be star very hard at the man , suddenly give a 
 start , and slap his hand against his leg . 

 ' of course ! ' he cry . ' sink I , if I could remember where I have see 
 your face , but now it come back to I very clearly . ' 

 the man glance doggedly from under his bent brow at each of we 
 in turn . ' it seem that I have fall among acquaintance , ' he say 
 gruffly ; ' yet I have no memory of ye . methink , young sir , that your 
 fancy doth play ye false . ' 

 ' not a whit , ' the Baronet answer quietly , and , bend forward , he 
 whisper a few word into the man 's ear , which cause he to spring 
 from his seat and take a couple of quick stride forward , as though to 
 escape from the house . 

 ' Nay , nay ! ' cry Sir Gervas , spring between he and the door , ' you 
 shall not run away from we . Pshaw , man ! never lie your hand upon your 
 sword . we have have bloody work enough for one night . besides , we would 
 not harm you . ' 

 ' what mean ye , then ? what would ye have ? ' he ask , glance about like 
 some fierce wild beast in a trap . 

 ' I have a most kindly feeling to you , man , after this night 's work , ' 
 cry Sir Gervas . ' what be it to I how ye pick up a living , as long as 
 you be a true man at heart ? let I perish if I ever forget a face which 
 I have once see , and your bonne mine , with the trade - mark upon your 
 forehead , be especially hard to overlook . ' 

 ' suppose I be the same ? what then ? ' the man ask sullenly . 

 ' there be no suppose in the matter . I could swear to you . but I would 
 not , lad -- not if I catch you red - handed . you must know , Clarke , since 
 there be none to overhear we , that in the old day I be a Justice of 
 the Peace in Surrey , and that our friend here be bring up before I 
 on a charge of rid somewhat late o ' night , and of be plaguey short 
 with traveller . you will understand I . he be refer to assize , but 
 get away in the meanwhile , and so save his neck . right glad I be of 
 it , for you will agree with I that he be too proper a man to give a 
 tight - rope dance at Tyburn . ' 

 ' and I remember well now where I have hear your name , ' say I. ' be 
 you not a captive in the Duke of Beaufort 's prison at Badminton , and do 
 you not succeed in escape from the old Boteler dungeon ? ' 

 ' nay , gentleman , ' he reply , seat himself on the edge of the table , 
 and carelessly swing his leg , ' since ye know so much it would be 
 folly for I to attempt to deceive ye . I be indeed the same Hector Marot 
 who hath make his name a terror on the great western road , and who hath 
 see the inside of more prison than any man in the south . with truth , 
 however , I can say that though I have be ten year upon the road , I 
 have never yet take a groat from the poor , or injure any man who do 
 not wish to injure I . on the contrary , I have often risk life and 
 limb to save those who be in trouble . ' 

 ' we can bear you out in that , ' I answer , ' for if these four red - coat 
 devil have pay the price of their crime , it be your do rather than 
 our . ' 

 ' Nay , I can take little credit for that , ' our new acquaintance answer . 
 ' indeed , I have other score to settle with Colonel Kirke 's horse , and 
 be but too glad to have this breather with they . ' 

 whilst we be talk the man whom we have leave with the horse have come 
 up , together with some of the neighbour farmer and cottager , who 
 be aghast at the scene of slaughter , and much trouble in their mind 
 over the vengeance which might be exact by the royal troop next day . 

 ' for Christ 's zake , zur , ' cry one of they , an old ruddy - face 
 countryman , ' move the body o ' these soldier rogue into the road , and 
 let it zeem as how they have perish in a chance fight wi ' your own 
 trooper loike . should it be know as they have meet their end within 
 a varmhouse , there will not be a thatch leave unlighte over t ' whole 
 country side ; as it be , we can scarce keep these murthere Tangiers 
 devil from oor throat . ' 

 ' his request be in reason , ' say the highwayman bluntly . ' we have no 
 right to have our fun , and then go our way leave other to pay the 
 score . ' 

 ' well , hark ye , ' say Sir Gervas , turn to the group of frightened 
 rustic . ' I will strike a bargain with ye over the matter . we have come 
 out for supply , and can scarce go back empty - handed . if ye will among 
 ye provide we with a cart , fill it with such breadstuff and green 
 as ye may , with a dozen bullock as well , we shall not only screen ye in 
 this matter , but I shall promise payment at fair market rate if ye will 
 come to the protestant camp for the money . ' 

 ' I will spare the bullock , ' quoth the old man whom we have rescue , who 
 be now sufficiently recover to sit up . ' zince my poor dame be foully 
 murthere it matter little to I what become o ' the stock . I shall 
 zee she lay in Durston graveyard , and shall then vollow you to t ' camp , 
 where I shall die happy if I can but rid the earth o ' one more o ' these 
 incarnate devil . ' 

 ' you say well , gaffer ! ' cry Hector Marot ; ' you show the true spirit . 
 methink I see an old birding - piece on yonder hook , which , with a brace 
 of slug in it and a bold man behind it , might bring down one of these 
 fine bird for all their gay feather . ' 

 ' she be be a true mate to I for more'n thirty year , ' say the old man , 
 the tear course down his wrinkle cheek . ' thirty zeed - toime and 
 thirty harvest we have work together . but this be a zeed - toime which 
 shall have a harvest o ' blood if my right hand can compass it . ' 

 ' if you go to t ' war , Gaffer Swain , we will look to your homestead , ' 
 say the farmer who have speak before . ' as to t ' greenstuff as this 
 gentleman ask for he shall have not one wainload but three , if he will 
 but gi ' we half - an - hour to fill they up . if he do not tak they t ' 
 other will , so we have raither that they go to the good cause . here , 
 Miles , do you wak the labourer , and zee that they throw the potato 
 store wi ' the spinach and the dry meat into the waggon wi ' all 
 speed . ' 

 ' then we have well set about our part of the contract , ' say Hector 
 Marot . with the aid of our trooper he carry out the four dragoon and 
 our dead sergeant , and lay they on the ground some way down the lane , 
 lead the horse all round and between their body , so as to trample 
 the earth , and bear out the idea of a cavalry skirmish . while this be 
 do , some of the labourer have wash down the brick floor of the 
 kitchen and remove all trace of the tragedy . the murder woman have 
 be carry up to her own chamber , so that nothing be leave to recall 
 what have occur , save the unhappy farmer , who sit moodily in the same 
 place , with his chin rest upon his stringy work - wear hand , star 
 out in front of he with a stony , empty gaze , unconscious apparently of 
 all that be go on around he . 

 the loading of the waggon have be quickly accomplish , and the little 
 drove of oxen gather from a neighbouring field . we be just start 
 upon our return journey when a young countryman ride up , with the news 
 that a troop of the Royal Horse be between the camp and ourselves . 
 this be grave tiding , for we be but seven all tell , and our pace be 
 necessarily slow whilst we be hamper with the supply . 

 ' how about Hooker ? ' I suggest . ' should we not send after he and give 
 he warn ? ' 

 ' I will goo at once , ' say the countryman . ' I be bind to zee he if he be 
 on the Athelney road . ' so say he set spur to his horse and gallop 
 off through the darkness . 

 ' while we have such volunteer scout as this , ' I remark , ' it be easy 
 to see which side the country folk have in their heart . Hooker hath 
 still the well part of two troop with he , so surely he can hold his 
 own . but how be we to make our way back ? ' 

 ' Zounds , Clarke ! let we extemporise a fortress , ' suggest Sir Gervas . 
 ' we could hold this farmhouse against all comer until Hooker return , 
 and then join our force to his . now would our redoubtable Colonel be in 
 his glory , to have a chance of devise cross - fire , and flanking - fire , 
 with all the other refinement of a well - conduct leaguer . ' 

 ' Nay , ' I answer , ' after leave Major Hooker in a somewhat cavalier 
 fashion , it would be a bitter thing to have to ask his help now that 
 there be danger . ' 

 ' Ho , ho ! ' cry the Baronet . ' it do not take a very deep lead - line 
 to come to the bottom of your stoical philosophy , friend Micah . for all 
 your cold - blooded stolidity you be keen enough where pride or honour be 
 concern . shall we then ride onwards , and chance it ? I will lay an even 
 crown that we never as much as see a red coat . ' 

 ' if you will take my advice , gentleman , ' say the highwayman , trot 
 up upon a beautiful bay mare , ' I should say that your good course be to 
 allow I to act as guide to you as far as the camp . it will be strange 
 if I can not find road which shall baffle these blunder soldier . ' 

 ' a very wise and seasonable proposition , ' cry Sir Gervas . ' Master 
 Marot , a pinch from my snuff - box , which be ever a covenant of friendship 
 with its owner . Adslidikins , man ! though our acquaintance at present 
 be limit to my have nearly hang you on one occasion , yet I have 
 a kindly feeling towards you , though I wish you have some more savoury 
 trade . ' 

 ' so do many who ride o ' night , ' Marot answer , with a chuckle . ' but we 
 have good start , for the east be whiten , and it will be daylight ere 
 we come to Bridgewater . ' 

 leave the ill - omen farmhouse behind we we set off with all military 
 precaution , Marot rid with I some distance in front , while two of 
 the trooper cover the rear . it be still very dark , though a thin 
 grey line on the horizon show that the dawn be not far off . in spite 
 of the gloom , however , our new acquaintance guide we without a moment 's 
 halt or hesitation through a network of lane and bypath , across field 
 and over bog , where the waggon be sometimes up to their axle in 
 bog , and sometimes be groan and strain over rock and stone . so 
 frequent be our turning , and so often do we change the direction of 
 our advance , that I fear more than once that our guide be at fault ; 
 yet , when at last the first ray of the sun brighten the landscape we 
 see the steeple of Bridgewater parish church shoot up right in front 
 of we . 

 ' Zounds , man ! you must have something of the cat in you to pick your way 
 so in the dark , ' cry Sir Gervas , rid up to we . ' I be right glad to 
 see the town , for my poor waggon have be creak and strain until 
 my ear be weary with listen for the snap of the axle - bar . Master 
 Marot , we owe you something for this . ' 

 ' be this your own particular district ? ' I ask , ' or have you a like 
 knowledge of every part of the south ? ' 

 ' my range , ' say he , light his short , black pipe , ' be from Kent to 
 Cornwall , though never north of the Thames or Bristol Channel . through 
 that district there be no road which be not familiar to I , nor as much 
 as a break in the hedge which I could not find in black midnight . it 
 be my calling . but the trade be not what it be . if I have a son I should 
 not bring he up to it . it hath be spoil by the armed guard to 
 the mail - coach , and by the accursed goldsmith , who have open their 
 bank and so take the hard money into their strong box , give out 
 instead slip of paper , which be as useless to we as an old newsletter . 
 I give ye my word that only a week go last Friday I stop a grazier 
 come from Blandford fair , and I take seven hundred guinea off he in 
 these paper cheque , as they call they -- enough , have it be in gold , to 
 have last I for a three month rouse . truly the country be come to a 
 pretty pass when such trash as that be allow to take the place of the 
 King 's coinage . ' 

 ' why should you persevere in such a trade ? ' say I. ' your own knowledge 
 must tell you that it can only lead to ruin and the gallow . have you 
 ever know one who have thrive at it ? ' 

 ' that have I , ' he answer readily . ' there be Kingston Jones , who 
 work Hounslow for many a year . he take ten thousand yellow boy on 
 one job , and , like a wise man , he vow never to risk his neck again . 
 he go into Cheshire , with some tale of have newly arrive from the 
 Indies , buy an estate , and be now a flourish country gentleman of 
 good repute , and a Justice of the Peace into the bargain . zound , man ! 
 to see he on the bench , condemn some poor devil for steal a dozen 
 egg , be as good as a comedy in the playhouse . ' 

 ' Nay ! but , ' I persist , ' you be a man , judge from what we have see 
 of your courage and skill in the use of your weapon , who would gain 
 speedy preferment in any army . surely it be well to use your gift 
 to the gaining of honour and credit , than to make they a stepping - stone 
 to disgrace and the gallow ? ' 

 ' for the gallow I care not a clip shilling , ' the highwayman 
 answer , send up thick blue curl of smoke into the morning air . ' we 
 have all to pay nature 's debt , and whether I do it in my boot or on a 
 feather bed , in one year or in ten , matter as little to I as to any 
 soldier among you . as to disgrace , it be a matter of opinion . I see 
 no shame myself in take a toll upon the wealth of the rich , since I 
 freely expose my own skin in the doing of it . ' 

 ' there be a right and there be a wrong , ' I answer , ' which no word 
 can do away with , and it be a dangerous and unprofitable trick to juggle 
 with they . ' 

 ' besides , even if what you have say be true as to property , ' Sir 
 Gervas remark , ' it would not hold you excuse for that recklessness of 
 human life which your trade beget . ' 

 ' Nay ! it be but hunt , save that your quarry may at any time turn 
 round upon you , and become in turn the hunter . it be , as you say , a 
 dangerous game , but two can play at it , and each have an equal chance . 
 there be no loading of the dice , or throw of fulham . now it be but 
 a few day back that , rid down the high - road , I perceive three jolly 
 farmer at full gallop across the field with a leash of dog yelp in 
 front of they , and all in pursuit of one little harmless bunny . it be 
 a bare and unpeopled countryside on the border of Exmoor , so I bethink 
 I that I could not employ my leisure well than by chase the 
 chaser . Odd 's woun ! it be a proper hunt . away go my gentleman , 
 whooping like madman , with their coat skirt flap in the breeze , 
 chivy on the dog , and have a rare morning 's sport . they never 
 mark the quiet horseman who ride behind they , and who without a 
 " yoick ! " or " hark - a - way ! " be relish his chase with the loud of 
 they . it need but a posse of peace officer at my heel to make up a 
 brave string of we , catch - who - catch - can , like the game the lad play on 
 the village green . ' 

 ' and what come of it ? ' I ask , for our new acquaintance be laugh 
 silently to himself . 

 ' well , my three friend run down their hare , and pull out their 
 flask , as man who have do a good stroke of work . they be still 
 hobnob and laugh over the slaughter bunny , and one have 
 dismount to cut off its ear as the prize of their chase , when I come 
 up at a hand - gallop . " good - morrow , gentleman , " say I , " we have have rare 
 sport . " they look at I blankly enough , I promise you , and one of 
 they ask I what the devil I do there , and how I dare to join in a 
 private sport . " Nay , I be not chase your hare , gentleman , " say I. 
 " what then , fellow ? " ask one of they . " why , marry , I be chase you , " 
 I answer , " and a well run I have not have for year . " with that I 
 lug out my persuader , and make the thing clear in a few word , and 
 I will warrant you would have laugh could you have see their face as 
 they slowly drag the fat leather purse from their fobs . seventy - one 
 pound be my prize that morning , which be well worth rid for than 
 a hare 's ear . ' 

 ' do they not raise the country on your track ? ' I ask . 

 ' Nay ! when Brown Alice be give her head she fly fast than the news . 
 Rumour spread quick , but the good mare 's stride be quick still . ' 

 ' and here we be within our own outpost , ' quoth Sir Gervas . ' now , mine 
 honest friend -- for honest you have be to we , whatever other may 
 say of you -- will you not come with we , and strike in for a good cause ? 
 Zounds , man ! you have many an ill deed to atone for , I will warrant . 
 why not add one good one to your account , by risk your life for the 
 reform faith ? ' 

 ' not i , ' the highwayman answer , rein up his horse . ' my own skin be 
 nothing , but why should I risk my mare in such a fool 's quarrel ? should 
 she come to harm in the ruffle , where could I get such another ? besides , 
 it matter nothing to she whether Papist or Protestant sit on the 
 throne of England -- do it , my beauty ? ' 

 ' but you might chance to gain preferment , ' I say . ' our Colonel , Decimus 
 Saxon , be one who love a good swordsman , and his word hath power with 
 King Monmouth and the council . ' 

 ' Nay , nay ! ' cry Hector Marot gruffly . ' let every man stick to his own 
 trade . Kirke 's horse I be ever ready to have a brush with , for a party 
 of they hang old blind Jim Houston of Milverton , who be a friend of 
 mine . I have send seven of the red - handed rogue to their last account 
 for it , and might work through the whole regiment have I time . but I will 
 not fight against King James , nor will I risk the mare , so let I hear 
 no more of it . and now I must leave ye , for I have much to do . farewell 
 to you ! ' 

 ' farewell , farewell ! ' we cry , press his brown horny hand ; ' our 
 thank to you for your guidance . ' raise his hat , he shake his bridle 
 and gallop off down the road in a rolling cloud of dust . 

 ' rat I , if I ever say a word against the thief again ! ' say Sir 
 Gervas . ' I never see a man wield sword more deftly in my life , and he 
 must be a rare hand with a pistol to bring those two tall fellow down 
 with two shot . but look over there , Clarke ! can you not see body of 
 red - coat ? ' 

 ' surely I can , ' I answer , gaze out over the broad , reedy , 
 dead - colour plain , which extend from the other side of the winding 
 Parret to the distant Polden Hills . ' I can see they over yonder in the 
 direction of Westonzoyland , as bright as the poppy among corn . ' 

 ' there be more upon the left , near Chedzoy , ' quoth Sir Gervas . ' one , 
 two , three , and one yonder , and two other behind -- six regiment of foot 
 in all . methink I see the breastplate of horse over there , and some 
 sign of ordnance too . faith ! Monmouth must fight now , if he ever hop 
 to feel the gold rim upon his temple . the whole of King James 's army 
 hath close upon he . ' 

 ' we must get back to our command , then , ' I answer . ' if I mistake not , 
 I see the flutter of our standard in the market - place . ' we spur our 
 weary steed forward , and make our way with our little party and the 
 supply which we have collect , until we find ourselves back in 
 our quarter , where we be hail by the lusty cheer of our hungry 
 comrade . before noon the drove of bullock have be change into joint 
 and steak , while our green stuff and other victual have help to 
 furnish the last dinner which many of our man be ever destine to eat . 
 Major Hooker come in shortly after with a good store of provision , but 
 in no very good case , for he have have a skirmish with the dragoon , and 
 have lose eight or ten of his man . he bear a complaint straightway to the 
 council concern the manner in which we have desert he ; but great 
 event be come fast upon we now , and there be small time to inquire 
 into petty matter of discipline . for myself , I freely confess , look 
 back on it , that as a soldier he be entirely in the right , and that 
 from a strict military point of view our conduct be not to be excuse . 
 yet I trust , my dear , even now , when year have weigh I down , that 
 the scream of a woman in distress would be a signal which would draw I 
 to her aid while these old limb could bear I . for the duty which 
 we owe to the weak override all other duty and be superior to all 
 circumstance , and I for one can not see why the coat of the soldier 
 should harden the heart of the man . 



 chapter XXXI . of the Maid of the Marsh and the bubble which rise from 
 the Bog 

 all Bridgewater be in a ferment as we ride in , for King James 's force 
 be within four mile , on the Sedgemoor Plain , and it be likely that 
 they would push on at once and storm the town . some rude work have be 
 throw up on the Eastover side , behind which two brigade be draw 
 up in arm , while the rest of the army be hold in reserve in the 
 market - place and Castle Field . towards afternoon , however , party of 
 our horse and peasant from the fen country come in with the news that 
 there be no fear of an assault be attempt . the royal troop have 
 quarter themselves snugly in the little village of the neighbourhood , 
 and have levy contribution of cider and of beer from the farmer , 
 they show no sign of any wish to advance . 

 the town be full of woman , the wife , mother , and sister of our 
 peasant , who have come in from far and near to see their love one once 
 more . Fleet Street or Cheapside upon a busy day be not more crowded 
 than be the narrow street and lane of the Somersetshire town . 
 Jack - boot , buff - coat trooper ; scarlet militiaman ; brown , 
 stern - faced Tauntonians ; serge - clothe pikemen ; wild , ragged miner ; 
 smockfrocke yokel ; reckless , weather - tan seaman ; gaunt cragsman 
 from the northern coast -- all push and jostle each other in a thick , 
 many - colour crowd . everywhere among they be the country woman , 
 straw - bonnet and loud - tongue , weeping , embrace , and exhort . 
 here and there amid the motley dress and gleam of arm move the dark , 
 sombre figure of a Puritan minister , with sweeping sad - coloured mantle 
 and penthouse hat , scatter abroad short fiery ejaculation and stern 
 pithy text of the old fighting order , which warm the man 's blood like 
 liquor . ever and anon a sharp , fierce shout would rise from the people , 
 like the yelp of a high - spirited hound which be strain at its leash 
 and hot to be at the throat of its enemy . 

 our regiment have be take off duty whenever it be clear that 
 Feversham do not mean to advance , and they be now busy upon the 
 victual which our night - foray have furnish . it be a Sunday , fresh and 
 warm , with a clear , unclouded sky , and a gentle breeze , sweet with the 
 smack of the country . all day the bell of the neighbouring village 
 ring out their alarm , peal their music over the sunlit countryside . 
 the upper window and red - tile roof of the house be crowd with 
 pale - face woman and child , who peer out to eastward , where the 
 splotch of crimson upon the dun - coloured moor mark the position of 
 our enemy . 

 at four o'clock Monmouth hold a last council of war upon the square 
 tower out of which spring the steeple of Bridgewater parish church , 
 whence a good view can be obtain of all the country round . since my 
 ride to Beaufort I have always be honour with a summon to attend , in 
 spite of my humble rank in the army . there be some thirty councillor 
 in all , as many as the space would hold , soldier and courtier , 
 Cavaliers and Puritans , all draw together now by the bond of a common 
 danger . indeed , the near approach of a crisis in their fortune have 
 break down much of the distinction of manner which have serve to 
 separate they . the sectary have lose something of his austerity and 
 become flushed and eager at the prospect of battle , while the giddy man 
 of fashion be hush into unwonted gravity as he consider the danger 
 of his position . their old feud be forget as they gather on the 
 parapet and gaze with set face at the thick column of smoke which 
 rise along the sky - line . 

 King Monmouth stand among his chief , pale and haggard , with the 
 dishevel , unkempt look of a man whose distress of mind have make he 
 forgetful of the care of his person . he hold a pair of ivory glass , 
 and as he raise they to his eye his thin white hand shake and 
 twitch until it be grievous to watch he . Lord Grey hand his own 
 glass to Saxon , who lean his elbow upon the rough stone breastwork 
 and star long and earnestly at the enemy . 

 ' they be the very man I have myself lead , ' say Monmouth at last , in a 
 low voice , as though utter his thought aloud . ' over yonder at the 
 right I see Dumbarton 's foot . I know these man well . they will fight . 
 have we they with we all would be well . ' 

 ' Nay , your Majesty , ' Lord Grey answer with spirit , ' you do your brave 
 follower an injustice . they , too , will fight to the last drop of their 
 blood in your quarrel . ' 

 ' look down at they ! ' say Monmouth sadly , point at the swarm 
 street beneath we . ' braver heart never beat in english breast , yet do 
 but mark how they brabble and clamour like clown on a Saturday night . 
 compare they with the stern , orderly array of the train battalion . 
 alas ! that I should have drag these honest soul from their little 
 home to fight so hopeless a battle ! ' 

 ' Hark at that ! ' cry Wade . ' they do not think it hopeless , nor do we . ' 
 as he speak a wild shout rise from the dense crowd beneath , who be 
 listen to a preacher who be hold forth from a window . 

 ' it be worthy Doctor Ferguson , ' say Sir Stephen Timewell , who have 
 just come up . ' he be as one inspire , powerfully bear onwards in his 
 discourse . verily he be even as one of the prophet of old . he have 
 choose for his text , " the Lord God of god he knoweth and Israel he 
 shall know . if it be in rebellion or if in transgression against the 
 Lord , save we not this day . " ' 

 ' amen , amen ! ' cry several of the puritan soldier devoutly , while 
 another hoarse burst of shout from below , with the clashing of 
 scythe - blade and the clatter of arm , show how deeply the people be 
 move by the burn word of the fanatic . 

 ' they do indeed seem to be hot for battle , ' say Monmouth , with a more 
 sprightly look . ' it may be that one who have command regular troop , as 
 I have do , be prone to lay too much weight upon the difference which 
 discipline and training make . these brave lad seem high of heart . what 
 think you of the enemy 's disposition , Colonel Saxon ? ' 

 ' by my faith , I think very little of they , your Majesty , ' Saxon answer 
 bluntly . ' I have see army draw up in array in many different part 
 of the world and under many commander . I have likewise read the section 
 which treat of the matter in the " De re militari " of Petrinus Bellus , 
 and in the work of a Fleming of repute , yet I have neither see nor 
 hear anything which can commend the arrangement which we see before 
 we . ' 

 ' how call you the hamlet on the left -- that with the square ivy - clothe 
 church tower ? ' ask Monmouth , turn to the Mayor of Bridgewater , 
 a small , anxious - faced man , who be evidently far from easy at the 
 prominence which his office have bring upon he . 

 ' Westonzoyland , your Honour -- that be , your grace -- I mean , your Majesty , ' 
 he stammer . ' the other , two mile far off , be Middlezoy , and away 
 to the left , just on the far side of the rhine , be Chedzoy . ' 

 ' the rhine , sir ! what do you mean ? ' ask the king , start violently , 
 and turn so fiercely upon the timid burgher , that he lose the little 
 balance of wit which be leave to he . 

 ' why , the rhine , your grace , your Majesty , ' he quaver . ' the rhine , 
 which , as your Majesty 's Grace can not but perceive , be what the country 
 folk call the rhine . ' 

 ' it be a name , your Majesty , for the deep and broad ditch which drain 
 off the water from the great morass of Sedgemoor , ' say Sir Stephen 
 Timewell . 

 Monmouth turn white to his very lip , and several of the council 
 exchange significant glance , recall the strange prophetic jingle 
 which I have be the mean of bring to the camp . the silence be 
 break , however , by an old Cromwellian Major name Hollis , who have be 
 draw upon paper the position of the village in which the enemy be 
 quarter . 

 ' if it please your Majesty , there be something in their order which 
 recall to my mind that of the army of the Scots upon the occasion 
 of the battle of Dunbar . Cromwell lie in Dunbar even as we lie in 
 Bridgewater . the ground around , which be boggy and treacherous , be 
 hold by the enemy . there be not a man in the army who would not own 
 that , have old Leslie hold his position , we should , as far as human 
 wisdom could see , have have to betake we to our ship , leave our store 
 and ordnance , and so make the good of our way to Newcastle . he move , 
 however , through the blessing of Providence , in such a manner that a 
 quagmire intervene between his right wing and the rest of his army , on 
 which Cromwell fall upon that wing in the early dawn , and dash it 
 to piece , with such effect that the whole army flee , and we have the 
 execution of they to the very gate of Leith . seven thousand Scots lose 
 their life , but not more than a hundred or so of the honest folk . 
 now , your Majesty will see through your glass that a mile of bogland 
 intervene between these village , and that the near one , Chedzoy , as 
 I think they call it , might be approach without ourselves enter the 
 morass . very sure I be that be the Lord - General with we now he would 
 counsel we to venture some such attack . ' 

 ' it be a bold thing with raw peasant to attack old soldier , ' quoth Sir 
 Stephen Timewell . ' yet if it be to be do , I know well that there be 
 not a man bear within sound of the bell of St. Mary Magdalene who will 
 flinch from it . ' 

 ' you say well , Sir Stephen , ' say Monmouth . ' at Dunbar Cromwell have 
 veteran at his back , and be oppose to troop who have small experience 
 of war . ' 

 ' yet there be much good sense in what Major Hollis have say , ' remark 
 Lord Grey . ' we must either fall on , or be gradually gird round and 
 starve out . that be so , why not take advantage at once of the chance 
 which Feversham 's ignorance or carelessness hath give we ? to - morrow , if 
 Churchill can prevail over his chief , I have little doubt that we 
 shall find their camp rearrange , and so have cause to regret our lost 
 opportunity . ' 

 ' their horse lie at Westonzoyland , ' say Wade . ' the sun be so fierce now 
 that we can scarce see for its glare and the haze which rise up from 
 the marsh . yet a little while ago I could make out through my glass 
 the long line of horse picket on the moor beyond the village . 
 behind , in Middlezoy , be two thousand militia , while in Chedzoy , where 
 our attack would fall , there be five regiment of regular foot . ' 

 ' if we could break those all would be well , ' cry Monmouth . ' what be 
 your advice , Colonel Buyse ? ' 

 ' my advice be ever the same , ' the German answer . ' we be here to 
 fight , and the soon we get to work at it the well . ' 

 ' and your , Colonel Saxon ? do you agree with the opinion of your 
 friend ? ' 

 ' I think with Major Hollis , your Majesty , that Feversham by his 
 disposition hath lay himself open to attack , and that we should take 
 advantage of it forthwith . yet , consider that train man and a 
 numerous horse have great advantage by daylight , I should be in favour 
 of a camisado or night onfall . ' 

 ' the same thought be in my mind , ' say Grey . ' our friend here know 
 every inch of the ground , and could guide we to Chedzoy as surely in the 
 darkness as in the day . ' 

 ' I have hear , ' say Saxon , ' that much beer and cider , with wine and 
 strong water , have find their way into their camp . if this be so 
 we may give they a rouse while their head be still buzz with the 
 liquor , when they shall scarce know whether it be ourselves or the blue 
 devil which have come upon they . ' 

 a general chorus of approval from the whole council show that the 
 prospect of at last come to an engagement be welcome , after the weary 
 marching and delay of the last few week . 

 ' have any cavalier anything to say against this plan ? ' ask the King . 

 we all look from one to the other , but though many face be doubtful 
 or desponding , none have a word to say against the night attack , for it 
 be clear that our action in any case must be hazardous , and this have at 
 least the merit of promise a well chance of success than any other . 
 yet , my dear , I dare say the bold of we feel a sinking at the heart 
 as we look at our downcast , sad - faced leader , and ask ourselves 
 whether this be a likely man to bring so desperate an enterprise to a 
 success . 

 ' if all be agree , ' say he , ' let our word be " Soho , " and let we come 
 upon they as soon after midnight as may be . what remain to be settle 
 as to the order of battle may be leave for the meantime . you will now , 
 gentleman , return to your regiment , and you will remember that be the 
 upshot of this what it may , whether Monmouth be the crown King of 
 England or a hunted fugitive , his heart , while it can still beat , will 
 ever bear in memory the brave friend who stand at his side in the hour 
 of his trouble . ' 

 at this simple and kindly speech a flush of devotion , mingle in my 
 own case at least with a heart - whole pity for the poor , weak gentleman , 
 sweep over we . we press round he with our hand upon the hilt of our 
 sword , swear that we would stand by he , though all the world stand 
 between he and his right . even the rigid and impassive Puritans be 
 move to a show of loyalty ; while the courtier , carry away by zeal , 
 draw their rapier and shout until the crowd beneath catch the 
 enthusiasm , and the air be full of the cheering . the light return 
 to Monmouth 's eye and the colour to his cheek as he listen to the 
 clamour . for a moment at least he look like the king which he aspire 
 to be . 

 ' my thank to ye , dear friend and subject , ' he cry . ' the issue rest 
 with the Almighty , but what man can do will , I know well , be do by you 
 this night . if Monmouth can not have all England , six foot of she shall 
 at least be his . meanwhile , to your regiment , and may God defend the 
 right ! ' 

 ' may God defend the right ! cry the council solemnly , and separate , 
 leave the King with Grey to make the final disposition for the 
 attack . 

 ' these popinjay of the Court be ready enough to wave their rapier 
 and shout when there be four good mile between they and the foe , ' 
 say Saxon , as we make our way through the crowd . ' I fear that they will 
 scarce be as forward when there be a line of musqueteer to be face , 
 and a brigade of horse perhaps charge down upon their flank . but here 
 come friend Lockarby , with news write upon his face . ' 

 ' I have a report to make , Colonel , ' say Reuben , hurry breathlessly 
 up to we . ' you may remember that I and my company be place on guard 
 this day at the eastern gate ? ' 

 Saxon nod . 

 ' be desirous of see all that I could of the enemy , I clamber up 
 a lofty tree which stand just without the town . from this post , by the 
 aid of a glass , I be able to make out their line and camp . whilst I 
 be gaze I chance to observe a man slink along under cover of the 
 birch - tree half - way between their line and the town . watch he , I 
 find that he be indeed move in our direction . presently he come so 
 near that I be able to distinguish who it be -- for it be one whom I 
 know -- but instead of enter the town by my gate he walk round under 
 cover of the peat cutting , and so make his way doubtless to some other 
 entrance . he be a man , however , who I have reason to believe have no true 
 love for the cause , and it be my belief that he hath be to the 
 Royal camp with news of our doing , and hath now come back for further 
 information . ' 

 ' aye ! ' say Saxon , raise his eyebrow . ' and what be the man 's name ? ' 

 ' his name be Derrick , one time chief apprentice to Master Timewell at 
 Taunton , and now an officer in the Taunton foot . ' 

 ' what , the young springald who have his eye upon pretty Mistress Ruth ! 
 now , out on love , if it be to turn a true man into a traitor ! but 
 methought he be one of the elect ? I have hear he hold forth to the 
 pikemen . how come it that one of his kidney should lend help to the 
 Prelatist cause ? ' 

 ' love again , ' quoth I. ' this same love be a pretty flower when it grow 
 unchecked , but a sorry weed if thwart . ' 

 ' he hath an ill - feeling towards many in the camp , ' say Reuben , ' and he 
 would ruin the army to avenge himself on they , as a rogue might sink 
 a ship in the hope of drown one enemy . Sir Stephen himself hath 
 incur his hatred for refuse to force his daughter into accept 
 his suit . he have now return into the camp , and I have report the 
 matter to you , that you may judge whether it would not be well to send 
 a file of pikemen and lie he by the heel lest he play the spy once 
 more . ' 

 ' perhaps it would be good so , ' Saxon answer , full of thought , ' and yet 
 no doubt the fellow would have some tale prepare which would outweigh 
 our mere suspicion . could we not take he in the very act ? ' 

 a thought slip into my head . I have observe from the tower that there 
 be a single lonely cottage about a third of the way to the enemy 's 
 camp , stand by the road at a place where there be marsh on either 
 side . any one journeying that way must pass it . if Derrick try to 
 carry our plan to Feversham he might be cut off at this point by a 
 party place to lie in wait for he . 

 ' most excellent ! ' Saxon exclaim , when I have explain the project . ' my 
 learn fleming himself could not have devise a well rusus belli . do 
 ye convey as many file as ye may think fit to this point , and I shall 
 see that Master Derrick be prim up with some fresh news for my Lord 
 Feversham . ' 

 ' Nay , a body of troop march out would set tongue wag , ' say 
 Reuben . ' why should not micah and I go ourselves ? ' 

 ' that would indeed be well . ' Saxon answer . ' but ye must pledge your 
 word , come what may , to be back at sundown , for your company must 
 stand to arm an hour before the advance . ' 

 we both gladly give the desire promise ; and have learn for certain 
 that Derrick have indeed return to the camp , Saxon undertake to let 
 drop in his presence some word as to the plan for the night , while we 
 set off at once for our post . our horse we leave behind , and slip 
 out through the eastern gate we make our way over bog and moor , 
 conceal ourselves as good we could , until we come out upon the lonely 
 roadway , and find ourselves in front of the house . 

 it be a plain , whitewash , thatch - roof cottage , with a small board 
 above the door , whereon be write a notice that the occupier sell milk 
 and butter . no smoke reek up from the chimney , and the shutter of the 
 window be close , from which we gather that the folk who own it 
 have flee away from their perilous position . on either side the marsh 
 extend , reedy and shallow at the edge , but deeply at a distance , with 
 a bright green scum which cover its treacherous surface . we knock 
 at the weather - blotch door , but receive , as we expect , no reply , 
 I presently put my shoulder against it and force the staple from its 
 fastening . 

 there be but a single chamber within , with a straight ladder in the 
 corner , lead through a square hole in the ceiling to the sleep 
 chamber under the roof . three or four chair and stool be scatter 
 over the earthen floor , and at the side a deal table with the broad 
 brown milk basin upon it . green blotch upon the wall and a sinking 
 in of one side of the cottage show the effect of its damp , marsh - girt 
 position . 

 to our surprise it have still one inmate within its wall . in the centre 
 of the room , face the door as we enter , stand a little bright , 
 golden - haired maid , five or six year of age . she be clothe in a clean 
 white smock , with trim leather belt and shin buckle about her waist . 
 two plump little leg with sock and leathern boot peep out from 
 under the dress , stoutly plant with right foot in advance as one who 
 be bent upon hold her ground . her tiny head be throw back , and her 
 large blue eye be full of mingled wonder and defiance . as we enter 
 the little witch flap her kerchief at we , and shoo as though we 
 be two of the intrusive fowl whom she be will not to chevy out of the 
 house . Reuben and I stand on the threshold , uncertain , and awkward , like 
 a pair of overgrown school lad , look down at this fairy queen whose 
 realm we have invade , in two mind whether to beat a retreat or to 
 appease her wrath by soft and coax word . 

 ' go ' way ! ' she cry , still wave her hand and shake her kerchief . 
 ' go ' way ! Granny tell I to tell any one that come to go ' way ! ' 

 ' but if they would not go away , little mistress , ' ask Reuben , ' what 
 be you to do then ? ' 

 ' I be to drive they ' way , ' she answer , advance boldly against we 
 with many flap . ' you bad man ! ' she continue , flash out at I , ' you 
 have break granny 's bolt . ' 

 ' Nay , I will mend it again , ' I answer penitently , and catch up 
 a stone I soon fasten the injure staple . ' there , mistress , your 
 granddam will never tell the difference . ' 

 ' ye must go ' way all the same , ' she persist ; ' this be granny 's house , 
 not your . ' 

 what be we to do with this resolute little dame of the marsh ? that 
 we should stay in the house be a cry need , for there be no other 
 cover or shelter among the dreary bog where we could hide ourselves . 
 yet she be bent upon drive we out with a decision and fearlessness 
 which might have put Monmouth to shame . 

 ' you sell milk , ' say Reuben . ' we be tired and thirsty , so we have come 
 to have a horn of it . ' 

 ' Nay , ' she cry , break into smile , ' will ye pay I just as the folk 
 pay granny ? oh , heart alive ! but that will be fine ! ' she skip up 
 on to a stool and fill a pair of deep mug from the basin upon the 
 table . ' a penny , please ! ' say she . 

 it be strange to see the little wife hide the coin away in her smock , 
 with pride and joy in her innocent face at this rare stroke of business 
 which she have do for her absent granny . we bear our milk away to the 
 window , and have loose the shutter we seat ourselves so as to have 
 an outlook down the road . 

 ' for the Lord 's sake , drink slow ! ' whisper Reuben , under his breath . 
 ' we must keep on swill milk or she will want to turn we out . ' 

 ' we have pay toll now , ' I answer ; ' surely she will let we bide . ' 

 ' if you have do you must go ' way , ' she say firmly . 

 ' be ever two man - at - arm so tyrannise over by a little dolly such as 
 this ! ' say I , laugh . ' Nay , little one , we shall compound with you by 
 pay you this shilling , which will buy all your milk . we can stay here 
 and drink it at our ease . ' 

 ' Jinny , the cow , be just across the marsh , ' quoth she . ' it be nigh 
 milking time , and I shall fetch her round if ye wish more . ' 

 ' now , God forbid ! ' cry Reuben . ' it will end in our have to buy the 
 cow . where be your granny , little maid ? ' 

 ' she hath go into the town , ' the child answer . ' there be bad man 
 with red coat and gun come to steal and to fight , but granny will 
 soon make they go ' way . granny have go to set it all right . ' 

 ' we be fight against the man with the red coat , my chuck , ' say 
 I ; ' we shall take care of your house with you , and let no one steal 
 anything . ' 

 ' Nay , then ye may stay , ' quoth she , climb up upon my knee as grave as 
 a sparrow upon a bough . ' what a great boy you be ! ' 

 ' and why not a man ? ' I ask . 

 ' because you have no beard upon your face . why , granny hath more hair 
 upon her chin than you . besides , only boy drink milk . man drink cider . ' 

 ' then if I be a boy I shall be your sweetheart , ' say I. 

 ' Nay , indeed ! ' she cry , with a toss of her golden lock . ' I have no 
 mind to we d for a while , but Giles Martin of Gommatch be my sweetheart . 
 what a pretty shin tin smock you have , and what a great sword ! why 
 should people have these thing to harm each other with when they be in 
 truth all brother ? ' 

 ' why be they all brother , little mistress ? ' ask Reuben . 

 ' because granny say that they be all the child of the great 
 Father , ' she answer . ' if they have all one father they must be 
 brother , must not they ? ' 

 ' out of the mouth of babe and suckling , Micah , ' quoth Reuben , star 
 out of the window . 

 ' you be a rare little marsh flower , ' I say , as she clamber up to 
 grasp at my steel cap . ' be it not strange to think , Reuben , that there 
 should be thousand of christian man upon either side of we , athirst 
 for each other 's life , and here between they be a blue - eyed cherub who 
 lisp out the blessed philosophy which would send we all to our home 
 with soften heart and hale body ? ' 

 ' a day of this child would sicken I for over of soldiering , ' Reuben 
 answer . ' the cavalier and the butcher become too near of kin , as I 
 listen to she . ' 

 ' perhaps both be equally needful , ' say I , shrug my shoulder . ' we 
 have put our hand to the plough . but methink I see the man for whom we 
 wait come down under the shadow of yonder line of pollard willow . ' 

 ' it be he , sure enough , ' cry Reuben , peep through the diamond - pan 
 window . 

 ' then , little one , you must sit here , ' say I , raise she up from my 
 knee and place she on a chair in a corner . ' you must be a brave lass 
 and sit still , whatever may chance . will you do so ? ' 

 she purse up her rosy lip and nod her head . 

 ' he come on apace , Micah , ' quoth my comrade , who be still stand 
 by the casement . ' be he not like some treacherous fox or other beast of 
 prey ? ' 

 there be indeed something in his lean , black - clothe figure and swift 
 furtive movement which be like some cruel and cunning animal . he steal 
 along under shadow of the stunt tree and withy , with bent body and 
 gliding gait , so that from Bridgewater it would be no easy matter for 
 the most keen - sighted to see he . indeed , he be so far from the town 
 that he might safely have come out from his concealment and strike 
 across the moor , but the deep morass on either side prevent he from 
 leave the road until he have pass the cottage . 

 as he come abreast of our ambush we both spring out from the open door 
 and bar his way . I have hear the Independent minister at Emsworth 
 give an account of Satan 's appearance , but if the worthy man have be 
 with we that day , he need not have draw upon his fancy . the man 's dark 
 face whiten into a sickly and mottled pallor , while he draw back with 
 a long sharp intaking of the breath and a venomous flash from his black 
 eye , glance swiftly from right to leave for some mean of escape . for 
 an instant his hand shot towards his sword - hilt , but his reason tell he 
 that he could scarce expect to fight his way past we . then he glance 
 round , but any retreat would lead he back to the man whom he have 
 betray . so he stand sullen and stolid , with heavy , downcast face and 
 shifting , restless eye , the very type and symbol of treachery . 

 ' we have wait some time for you , Master John Derrick , ' say I. ' you 
 must now return with we to the town . ' 

 ' on what ground do you arrest I ? ' he ask , in hoarse , broken tone . 
 ' where be your warranty ? who hath give you a commission to molest 
 traveller upon the King 's highway ? ' 

 ' I have my Colonel 's commission , ' I answer shortly . ' you have be 
 once already to Feversham 's camp this morning . ' 

 ' it be a lie , ' he snarl fiercely . ' I do but take a stroll to enjoy the 
 air . ' 

 ' it be the truth , ' say Reuben . ' I see you myself on your return . let we 
 see that paper which peep from your doublet . ' 

 ' we all know why you should set this trap for I , ' Derrick cry 
 bitterly . ' you have set evil report afloat against I , lest I stand in 
 your light with the Mayor 's daughter . what be you that you should dare 
 to raise your eye to she ! a mere vagrant and masterless man , come 
 none know whence . why should you aspire to pluck the flower which have 
 grow up amongst we ? what have you to do with she or with we ? answer I ! ' 

 ' it be not a matter which I shall discuss , save at a more fitting time 
 and place , ' Reuben answer quietly . ' do you give over your sword and 
 come back with we . for my part , I promise to do what I can to save your 
 life . should we win this night , your poor effort can do little to harm 
 we . should we lose , there may be few of we leave to harm . ' 

 ' I thank you for your kindly protection , ' he reply , in the same white , 
 cold , bitter manner , unbuckle his sword as he speak , and walk 
 slowly up to my companion . ' you can take this as a gift to Mistress 
 Ruth , ' he say , present the weapon in his left hand , ' and this ! ' he 
 add , pluck a knife from his belt and bury it in my poor friend 's 
 side . 

 it be do in an instant -- so suddenly that I have neither time to spring 
 between , nor to grasp his intention before the wounded man sink gasp 
 on the ground , and the knife tinkle upon the pathway at my foot . the 
 villain set up a shrill cry of triumph , and bound back in time to 
 avoid the savage sword thrust which I make at he , he turn and flee 
 down the road at the top of his speed . he be a far light man than I , 
 and more scantily clad , yet I have , from my long wind and length of limb , 
 be the good runner of my district , and he soon learn by the sound of 
 my foot that he have no chance of shake I off . twice he double as a 
 hare do when the hound be upon he , and twice my sword pass within a 
 foot of he , for in very truth I have no more thought of mercy than if 
 he have be a poisonous snake who have fasten his fang into my friend 
 before my eye . I never dream of give nor do he of claim it . 
 at last , hear my step close upon he and my breathing at his 
 very shoulder , he spring wildly through the reed and dash into the 
 treacherous morass . ankle - deep , knee - deep , thigh - deep , waist - deep , we 
 struggle and stagger , I still gain upon he , until I be within 
 arm' - reach of he , and have whirl up my sword to strike . it have be 
 ordain , however , my dear child , that he should die not the death of 
 a man , but that of the reptile which he be , for even as I close upon 
 he he sink of a sudden with a gurgle sound , and the green marsh scum 
 meet above his head . no ripple be there and no splash to mark the spot . 
 it be sudden and silent , as though some strange monster of the marsh 
 have seize he and drag he down into the depth . as I stand with 
 upraised sword still gaze upon the spot , one single great bubble rise 
 and burst upon the surface , and then all be still once more , and the 
 dreary fen lie stretch before I , the very home of death and of 
 desolation . I know not whether he have indeed come upon some sudden pit 
 which have engulf he , or whether in his despair he have cast himself 
 down of set purpose . I do but know that there in the great Sedgemoor 
 morass be bury the bone of the traitor and the spy . 

 I make my way as good I could through the oozy cling mud to the 
 margin , and hasten back to where Reuben be lie . bend over he 
 I find that the knife have pierce through the side leather which 
 connect his back and front plate , and that the blood be not only 
 pour out of the wound , but be trickle from the corner of his 
 mouth . with tremble finger I undo the strap and buckle , loosen 
 the armour , and press my kerchief to his side to staunch the flow . 

 ' I trust that you have not slay he , Micah , ' he say of a sudden , 
 open his eye . 

 ' a high power than our have judge he , Reuben , ' I answer . 

 ' poor devil ! he have have much to embitter he , ' he murmur , and 
 straightway faint again . as I kneel over he , mark the lad 's white 
 face and laboured breathing , and bethink I of his simple , kindly 
 nature and of the affection which I have do so little to deserve , I be 
 not ashamed to say , my dear , albeit I be a man somewhat backward in my 
 emotion , that my tear be mingle with his blood . 

 as it chance , Decimus Saxon have find time to ascend the church tower 
 for the purpose of watch we through his glass and see how we 
 fare . note that there be something amiss , he have hurry down for 
 a skilled chirurgeon , whom he bring out to we under an escort of 
 scythesman . I be still kneel by my senseless friend , do what an 
 ignorant man might to assist he , when the party arrive and help I 
 to bear he into the cottage , out of the glare of the sun . the minute 
 be as hour while the man of physic with a grave face examine and 
 probe the wound . 

 ' it will scarce prove fatal , ' he say at last , and I could have embrace 
 he for the word . ' the blade have glance on a rib , though the lung be 
 slightly tear . we shall hear he back with we to the town . ' 

 ' you hear what he say , ' say Saxon kindly . ' he be a man whose opinion 
 be of weight-- 

           " a skilful leach be well far , 
            than half a hundred man of war . " 

 cheer up , man ! you be as white as though it be your blood and not his 
 which be drain away . where be Derrick ? ' 

 ' drown in the marsh , ' I answer . 

 '' tis well ! it will save we six foot of good hemp . but our position here 
 be somewhat expose , since the Royal Horse might make a dash at we . who 
 be this little maid who sit so white and still in the corner . ' 

 '' tis the guardian of the house . her granny have leave she here . ' 

 ' you have well come with we . there may be rough work here ere all be 
 over . ' 

 ' Nay , I must wait for granny , ' she answer , with the tear run down 
 her cheek . 

 ' but how if I take you to granny , little one , ' say I. ' we can not 
 leave you here . ' I hold out my arm , and the child spring into they and 
 nestle up against my bosom , sob as though her heart would break . 
 ' take I away , ' she cry ; ' i'se frighten . ' 

 I soothe the little trembling thing as good I might , and bear she off 
 with I upon my shoulder . the scythesman have pass the handle of their 
 long weapon through the sleeve of their jerkin in such a way as to 
 form a couch or litter , upon which poor Reuben be lay . a slight dash 
 of colour have come back to his cheek in answer to some cordial give 
 he by the chirurgeon , and he nod and smile at Saxon . thus , pacing 
 slowly , we return to Bridgewater , where Reuben be carry to our 
 quarter , and I bear the little maid of the marsh to kind townsfolk , 
 who promise to restore she to her home when the trouble be over . 



 Chapter XXXII . of the Onfall at Sedgemoor 

 however press our own private grief and need , we have little time 
 now to dwell upon they , for the moment be at hand which be to decide 
 for the time not only our own fate , but that of the protestant cause 
 in England . none of we make light of the danger . nothing less than a 
 miracle could preserve we from defeat , and most of we be of opinion 
 that the day of the miracle be past . other , however , think 
 otherwise . I believe that many of our Puritans , have they see the 
 heaven open that night , and the army of the Seraphim and the Cherubim 
 descend to our aid , would have look upon it as by no mean a 
 wonderful or unexpected occurrence . 

 the whole town be loud with the preaching . every troop or company have 
 its own choose orator , and sometimes more than one , who hold forth 
 and expound . from barrel , from waggon , from window , and even from 
 housetop , they address the crowd beneath ; nor be their eloquence 
 in vain . Hoarse , fierce shout rise up from the street , with broken 
 prayer and ejaculation . man be drunk with religion as with wine . 
 their face be flushed , their speech thick , their gesture wild . Sir 
 Stephen and Saxon smile at each other as they watch they , for they 
 know , as old soldier , that of all cause which make a man valiant in 
 deed and careless of life , this religious fit be the strong and the 
 most enduring . 

 in the evening I find time to look in upon my wound friend , and find 
 he prop up with cushion upon his couch , breathe with some pain , 
 but as bright and merry as ever . our prisoner , Major Ogilvy , who have 
 conceive a warm affection for we , sit by his side and read aloud to he 
 out of an old book of play . 

 ' this wound hath come at an evil moment , ' say Reuben impatiently . 
 ' be it not too much that a little prick like this should send my man 
 captainless into battle , after all our marching and drilling ? I have 
 be present at the grace , and be cut off from the dinner . ' 

 ' your company hath be join to mine , ' I answer , ' though , indeed , 
 the honest fellow be cast down at not have their own captain . have 
 the physician be to see you ? ' 

 ' he have leave even now , ' say Major Ogilvy . ' he pronounce our friend to 
 be do right well , but hath warn I against allow he to talk . ' 

 ' Hark to that , lad ! ' say I , shake my finger at he . ' if I hear a word 
 from you I go . you will escape a rough waking this night , Major . what 
 think you of our chance ? ' 

 ' I have think little of your chance from the first , ' he reply 
 frankly . ' Monmouth be like a ruin gamester , who be now put his 
 last piece upon the board . he can not win much , and he may lose all . ' 

 ' Nay , that be a hard saying , ' say I. ' a success might set the whole of 
 the Midlands in arm . ' 

 ' england be not ripe for it , ' the Major answer , with a shake of his 
 head . ' it be true that it have no fancy either for Papistry or for a 
 Papist King , but we know that it be but a pass evil , since the next 
 in succession , the Prince of Orange , be a protestant . why , then , should 
 we risk so many evil to bring that about which time and patience must , 
 perforce , accomplish between they ? besides , the man whom ye support have 
 show that he be unworthy of confidence . do he not in his declaration 
 promise to leave the choice of a monarch to the Commons ? and yet , in 
 less than a week , he proclaim himself at Taunton Market Cross ! who 
 could believe one who have so little regard for truth ? ' 

 ' Treason , Major , rank treason , ' I answer , laugh . ' yet if we could 
 order a leader as one do a coat we might , perchance , have choose 
 one of a strong texture . we be in arm not for he , but for the old 
 liberty and right of Englishmen . have you see Sir Gervas ? ' 

 Major Ogilvy , and even Reuben , burst out laugh . ' you will find he 
 in the room above , ' say our prisoner . ' never do a famous toast prepare 
 herself for a court ball as he be prepare for his battle . if the 
 King 's troop take he they will assuredly think that they have the 
 Duke . he hath be in here to consult we as to his patch , hosen , and I 
 know not what beside . you have well go up to he . ' 

 ' adieu , then , Reuben ! ' I say , grasp his hand in mine . 

 ' Adieu , Micah ! God shield you from harm , ' say he . 

 ' can I speak to you aside , Major ? ' I whisper . ' I think , ' I go on , 
 as he follow I into the passage , ' that you will not say that your 
 captivity hath be make very harsh for you . may I ask , therefore , that 
 you will keep an eye upon my friend should we be indeed defeat this 
 night ? no doubt if Feversham gain the upper hand there will be bloody 
 work . the hale can look after themselves , but he be helpless , and will 
 need a friend . ' 

 the Major press my hand . ' I swear to God , ' he say , ' that no harm 
 shall befall he . ' 

 ' you have take a load from my heart , ' I answer ; ' I know that I leave 
 he in safety . ' I can now ride to battle with an easy mind . ' with a 
 friendly smile the soldier return to the sick - room , whilst I ascend 
 the stair and enter the quarter of Sir Gervas Jerome . 

 he be stand before a table which be litter all over with pot , 
 brush , box , and a score of the like trifle , which he have either 
 buy or borrow for the occasion . a large hand - mirror be balance 
 against the wall , with rush - light on either side of it . in front of 
 this , with a most solemn and serious expression upon his pale , handsome 
 face , the Baronet be arrange and re - arrange a white berdash cravat . 
 his riding - boot be brightly polished , and the broken seam repair . 
 his sword - sheath , breastplate , and trapping be clear and bright . 
 he wear his gay and new suit , and above all he have don a most 
 noble and impressive full - bottom periwig , which droop down to his 
 shoulder , as white as powder could make it . from his dainty riding - hat 
 to his shin spur there be no speck or stain upon he -- a sad set - off 
 to my own state , plaster as I be with a thick crust of the Sedgemoor 
 mud , and disorder from have ride and work for two day without 
 rest or repose . 

 ' split I , but you have come in good time ! ' he exclaim , as I enter . 
 ' I have even now send down for a flask of canary . ah , and here it 
 come ! ' as a maid from the inn trip upstairs with the bottle and 
 glass . ' here be a gold piece , my pretty dear , the very last that I 
 have in the whole world . it be the only survivor of a goodly family . pay 
 mine host for the wine , little one , and keep the change for thyself , to 
 buy ribbon for the next holiday . now , curse I if I can get this cravat 
 to fit unwrinkled ! ' 

 ' there be nought amiss with it , ' I answer . ' how can such trifle 
 occupy you at such a time ? ' 

 ' Trifles ! ' he cry angrily . ' trifle ! well , there , it boot not to 
 argue with you . your bucolic mind would never rise to the subtle import 
 which may lie in such matter -- the rest of mind which it be to have 
 they right , and the plaguey uneasiness when aught be wrong . it come , 
 doubtless , from training , and it may be that I have it more than other 
 of my class . I feel as a cat who would lick all day to take the least 
 speck from her fur . be not the patch over the eyebrow happily choose ? 
 Nay , you can not even offer an opinion ; I would as soon ask friend Marot , 
 the knight of the pistol . fill up your glass ! ' 

 ' your company await you by the church , ' I remark ; ' I see they as I 
 pass . ' 

 ' how look they ? ' he ask . ' be they powdered and clean ? ' 

 ' Nay , I have little leisure to observe . I see that they be cut 
 their match and arrange their priming . ' 

 ' I would that they have all snaphance , ' he answer , sprinkle himself 
 with scented water ; ' the matchlock be slow and cumbersome . have you 
 have wine enough ? ' 

 ' I will take no more , ' I answer . 

 ' then mayhap the Major may care to finish it . it be not often I ask help 
 with a bottle , but I would keep my head cool this night . let we go down 
 and see to our man . ' 

 it be ten o'clock when we descend into the street . the hubbub of 
 the preacher and the shouting of the people have die away , for the 
 regiment have fall into their place , and stand silent and stern , 
 with the faint light from the lamp and window play over their dark 
 serrie rank . a cool , clear moon shine down upon we from amidst fleecy 
 cloud , which drift ever and anon across her face . away in the north 
 tremulous ray of light flicker up into the heaven , come and go 
 like long , quiver finger . they be the northern light , a sight 
 rarely see in the southland county . it be little wonder that , come 
 at such a time , the fanatic should have point to they as signal 
 from another world , and should have compare they to that pillar of fire 
 which guide Israel through the danger of the desert . the footpath and 
 the window be crowd with woman and child , who break into shrill 
 cry of fear or of wonder as the strange light wax and wan . 

 ' it be half after ten by St. Mary 's clock , ' say Saxon , as we ride up to 
 the regiment . ' have we nothing to give the man ? ' 

 ' there be a hogshead of Zoyland cider in the yard of yonder inn , ' say 
 Sir Gervas . ' here , Dawson , do you take those gold sleeve link and give 
 they to mine host in exchange . Broach the barrel , and let each man have 
 his horn full . sink I , if they shall fight with nought but cold water 
 in they . ' 

 ' they will feel the need of it ere morning , ' say Saxon , as a score 
 of pikeman hasten off to the inn . ' the marsh air be chill to the 
 blood . ' 

 ' I feel cold already , and Covenant be stamp with it , ' say I. ' might 
 we not , if we have time upon our hand , canter our horse down the 
 line ? ' 

 ' of a surety , ' Saxon answer gladly , ' we could not do well ; ' so 
 shake our bridle we ride off , our horse ' hoof strike fire from 
 the flint - pave street as we pass . 

 behind the horse , in a long line which stretch from the Eastover gate , 
 across the bridge , along the High Street , up the Cornhill , and so past 
 the church to the Pig Cross , stand our foot , silent and grim , save when 
 some woman 's voice from the window call forth a deep , short answer 
 from the rank . the fitful light gleam on scythe - blade or gun - barrel , 
 and show up the line of rugged , hard set face , some of mere child 
 with never a hair upon their cheek , other of old man whose grey beard 
 sweep down to their cros - belt , but all bear the same stamp of a 
 dog courage and a fierce self - contain resolution . here be still 
 the fisher folk of the south . here , too , be the fierce man from the 
 Mendips , the wild hunter from Porlock Quay and Minehead , the poacher 
 of Exmoor , the shaggy marshman of axbridge , the mountain man from the 
 Quantocks , the serge and wool - worker of Devonshire , the grazier of 
 Bampton , the red - coat from the Militia , the stout burgher of Taunton , 
 and then , as the very bone and sinew of all , the brave smockfrocke 
 peasant of the plain , who have turn up their jacket to the elbow , 
 and expose their brown and cord arm , as be their will not when good 
 work have to be do . as I speak to you , dear child , fifty year 
 roll by like a mist in the morning , and I be rid once more down 
 the wind street , and see again the serried rank of my gallant 
 companion . brave heart ! they show to all time how little training it 
 take to turn an Englishman into a soldier , and what manner of man be 
 breed in those quiet , peaceful hamlet which dot the sunny slope of the 
 Somerset and Devon down . if ever it should be that England should 
 be strike upon her knee , if those who fight her battle should have 
 desert she , and she should find herself unarmed in the presence of her 
 enemy , let she take heart and remember that every village in the realm 
 be a barrack , and that her real stand army be the hardy courage and 
 simple virtue which stand ever in the breast of the humblest of her 
 peasant . 

 as we ride down the long line a buzz of greeting and welcome rise now 
 and again from the rank as they recognise through the gloom Saxon 's 
 tall , gaunt figure . the clock be on the stroke of eleven as we return 
 to our own man , and at that very moment King Monmouth ride out from the 
 inn where he be quarter , and trot with his staff down the High 
 Street . all cheering have be forbid , but wave cap and brandish 
 arm speak the ardour of his devoted follower . no bugle be to sound 
 the march , but as each receive the word the one in its rear follow 
 its movement . the clatter and shuffle of hundred of move foot come 
 nearer and nearer , until the Frome man in front of we begin to march , 
 and we find ourselves fairly start upon the last journey which many 
 of we be ever to take in this world . 

 our road lie across the Parret , through Eastover , and so along the 
 winding track past the spot where Derrick meet his fate , and the lonely 
 cottage of the little maid . at the other side of this the road become 
 a mere pathway over the plain . a dense haze lie over the moor , gather 
 thickly in the hollow , and veil both the town which we have leave and 
 the village which we be approach . now and again it would lift 
 for a few moment , and then I could see in the moonlight the long black 
 writhing line of the army , with the shimmer of steel playing over it , 
 and the rude white standard flap in the night breeze . far on the 
 right a great fire be blaze -- some farmhouse , doubtless , which the 
 Tangiers devil have make spoil of . very slow our march be , and very 
 careful , for the plain be , as Sir Stephen Timewell have tell we , cut 
 across by great ditch or rhine , which could not be pass save at 
 some few place . these ditch be cut for the purpose of drain the 
 marsh , and be many foot deep of water and of mud , so that even 
 the horse could not cross they . the bridge be narrow , and some time 
 pass before the army could get over . at last , however , the two main 
 one , the Black Ditch and the Langmoor Rhine , be safely traverse and 
 a halt be call while the foot be form in line , for we have reason 
 to believe that no other force lie between the Royal camp and ourselves . 
 so far our enterprise have succeed admirably . we be within half a 
 mile of the camp without mistake or accident , and none of the enemy 's 
 scout have show sign of their presence . clearly they hold we in such 
 contempt that it have never occur to they that we might open the 
 attack . if ever a general deserve a beating it be Feversham that 
 night . as he draw up upon the moor the clock of Chedzoy strike one . 

 ' be it not glorious ? ' whisper Sir Gervas , as we rein up upon the 
 further side of the Langmoor Rhine . ' what be there on earth to compare 
 with the excitement of this ? ' 

 ' you speak as though it wear a cocking - match or a bull - baiting , ' I 
 answer , with some little coldness . ' it be a solemn and a sad occasion . 
 win who will , english blood must soak the soil of England this night . ' 

 ' the more room for those who be leave , ' say he lightly . ' mark over 
 yonder the glow of their camp - fire amidst the fog . what be it that 
 your seaman friend do recommend ? get the weather - gauge of they and 
 board -- eh ? have you tell that to the Colonel ? ' 

 ' Nay , this be no time for quip and crank , ' I answer gravely ; ' the 
 chance be that few of we will ever see to - morrow 's sun rise . ' 

 ' I have no great curiosity to see it , ' he remark , with a laugh . ' it 
 will be much as yesterday 's . zound ! though I have never rise to see 
 one in my life , I have look on many a hundred ere I go to bed . ' 

 ' I have tell friend Reuben such few thing as I should desire to be do 
 in case I should fall , ' say I. ' it have ease my mind much to know that 
 I leave behind some word of farewell , and little remembrance to all whom 
 I have know . be there no service of the sort which I can do for you ? ' 

 ' Hum ! ' say he , muse . ' if I go under , you can tell Araminta -- nay , let 
 the poor wench alone ! why should I send her message which may plague 
 she ! should you be in town , little Tommy Chichester would be glad to 
 hear of the fun which we have have in Somerset . you will find he at the 
 Coca Tree every day of the week between two and four of the clock . there 
 be Mother Butterworth , too , whom I might commend to your notice . she 
 be the queen of wet - nurse , but alas ! cruel time hath dry up her 
 business , and she hath need of some little nursing herself . ' 

 ' if I live and you should fall , I shall do what may be do for she , ' 
 say I. ' have you aught else to say ? ' 

 ' only that Hacker of Paul 's Yard be the good for vest , ' he answer . 
 ' it be a small piece of knowledge , yet like most other knowledge it hath 
 be buy and pay for . one other thing ! I have a trinket or two leave 
 which might serve as a gift for the pretty Puritan maid , should our 
 friend lead she to the altar . Od be my life , but she will make he read 
 some queer book ! how now , Colonel , why be we stick out on the moor 
 like a row of heron among the sedge ? ' 

 ' they be order the line for the attack , ' say Saxon , who have ride 
 up during our conversation . ' Donnerblitz ! who ever see a camp so 
 expose to an onfall ? oh for twelve hundred good horse -- for an hour of 
 Wessenburg 's pandour ! would I not trample they down until their camp 
 be like a field of young corn after a hail - storm ! ' 

 ' may not our horse advance ? ' I ask . 

 the old soldier give a deep snort of disdain . ' if this fight be to be 
 win it must be by our foot , ' say he ; ' what can we hope for from such 
 cavalry ? keep your man well in hand , for we may have to bear the brunt 
 of the King 's dragoon . a flank attack would fall upon we , for we be in 
 the post of honour . ' 

 ' there be troop to the right of we , ' I answer , peer through the 
 darkness . 

 ' Aye ! the Taunton burgher and the Frome peasant . our brigade cover 
 the right flank . next we be the Mendip miner , nor could I wish for 
 well comrade , if their zeal do not outrun their discretion . they be 
 on their knee in the mud at this moment . ' 

 ' they will fight none the bad for that , ' I remark ; ' but surely the 
 troop be advance ! ' 

 ' aye , aye ! ' cry Saxon joyously , pluck out his sword , and tie 
 his handkerchief round the handle to strengthen his grip . ' the hour have 
 come ! forward ! ' 

 very slowly and silently we creep on through the dense fog , our foot 
 splash and slip in the sodden soil . with all the care which 
 we could take , the advance of so great a number of man could not be 
 conduct without a deep sonorous sound from the thousand of marching 
 foot . ahead of we be splotch of ruddy light twinkle through the 
 fog which mark the Royal watch - fire . immediately in front in a dense 
 column our own horse move forwards . of a sudden out of the darkness 
 there come a sharp challenge and a shout , with the discharge of a 
 carbine and the sound of gallop hoof . away down the line we hear 
 a ripple of shot . the first line of outpost have be reach . at the 
 alarm our horse charge forward with a huzza , and we follow they as 
 fast as our man could run . we have cross two or three hundred yard of 
 moor , and could hear the blowing of the Royal bugle quite close to we , 
 when our horse come to a sudden halt , and our whole advance be at a 
 standstill . 

 ' Sancta Maria ! ' cry Saxon , dash forward with the rest of we to find 
 out the cause of the delay . ' we must on at any cost ! a halt now will 
 ruin our camisado . ' 

 ' Forwards , forwards ! ' cry Sir Gervas and I , wave our sword . 

 ' it be no use , gentleman , ' cry a cornet of horse , wring his hand ; 
 ' we be undo and betray . there be a broad ditch without a ford in 
 front of we , full twenty foot across ! ' 

 ' give I room for my horse , and I shall show ye the way across ! ' cry 
 the Baronet , back his steed . ' now , lad , who be for a jump ? ' 

 ' Nay , sir , for God 's sake ! ' say a trooper , lay his hand upon his 
 bridle . ' Sergeant Sexton hath spring in even now , and horse and man have 
 go to the bottom ! ' 

 ' let we see it , then ! ' cry Saxon , push his way through the crowd 
 of horseman . we follow close at his heel , until we find ourselves on 
 the border of the vast trench which impede our advance . 

 to this day I have never be able to make up my mind whether it be 
 by chance or by treachery on the part of our guide that this fosse be 
 overlook until we stumble upon it in the dark . there be some who say 
 that the Bussex Rhine , as it be call , be not either deep or broad , 
 and be , therefore , unmentione by the moorsman , but that the recent 
 constant rain have swell it to an extent never before know . other 
 say that the guide have be deceive by the fog , and take a wrong 
 course , whereas , have we follow another track , we might have be able 
 to come upon the camp without cross the ditch . however that may be , 
 it be certain that we find it stretch in front of we , broad , black , 
 and forbid , full twenty foot from bank to bank , with the cap of the 
 ill - fated sergeant just visible in the centre as a mute warning to all 
 who might attempt to ford it . 

 ' there must be a passage somewhere , ' cry Saxon furiously . ' every 
 moment be worth a troop of horse to they . where be my Lord Grey ? Hath 
 the guide meet with his desert ? ' 

 ' Major Hollis hath hurl the guide into the ditch , ' the young cornet 
 answer . ' my Lord Grey hath ride along the bank seek for a ford . ' 

 I catch a pike out of a footman 's hand , and probe into the black 
 oozy mud , stand myself up to the waist in it , and hold Covenant 's 
 bridle in my left hand . nowhere could I touch bottom or find any hope of 
 solid foothold . 

 ' here , fellow ! ' cry Saxon , seize a trooper by the arm . ' make for 
 the rear ! Gallop as though the devil be behind you ! bring up a pair 
 of ammunition waggon , and we shall see whether we can not bridge this 
 infernal puddle . ' 

 ' if a few of we could make a lodgment upon the other side we might make 
 it good until help come , ' say Sir Gervas , as the horseman gallop off 
 upon his mission . 

 all down the rebel line a fierce low roar of disappointment and rage 
 show that the whole army have meet the same obstacle which hinder 
 our attack . on the other side of the ditch the drum beat , the bugle 
 scream , and the shout and oath of the officer could be hear as 
 they marshal their man . glancing light in Chedzoy , Westonzoyland , 
 and the other hamlet to leave and right , show how fast the alarm 
 be extend . Decimus Saxon ride up and down the edge of the fosse , 
 patter forth foreign oath , grind his tooth in his fury , and 
 rise now and again in his stirrup to shake his gauntlete hand at 
 the enemy . 

 ' for whom be ye ? ' shout a hoarse voice out of the haze . 

 ' for the king ! ' roar the peasant in answer . 

 ' for which king ? ' cry the voice . 

 ' for King Monmouth ! ' 

 ' let they have it , lad ! ' and instantly a storm of musket bullet 
 whistle and sing about our ear . as the sheet of flame spring out of 
 the darkness the madden , half - break horse dash wildly away across 
 the plain , resist the effort of the rider to pull they up . there 
 be some , indeed , who say that those effort be not very strong , and 
 that our trooper , dishearten at the check at the ditch , be not 
 sorry to show their heel to the enemy . as to my Lord Grey , I can say 
 truly that I see he in the dim light among the fly squadron , do 
 all that a brave cavalier could do to bring they to a stand . away they 
 go , however , thunder through the rank of the foot and out over the 
 moor , leave their companion to bear the whole brunt of the battle . 

 ' on to your face , man ! ' shout Saxon , in a voice which rise high above 
 the crash of the musketry and the cry of the wounded . the pikeman and 
 scythesman throw themselves down at his command , while the musqueteer 
 knelt in front of they , loading and firing , with nothing to aim at save 
 the burn match of the enemy 's piece , which could be see twinkle 
 through the darkness . all along , both to the right and the left , a 
 rolling fire have break out , come in short , quick volley from the 
 soldier , and in a continuous confused rattle from the peasant . on the 
 further wing our four gun have be bring into play , and we could hear 
 their dull growling in the distance . 

 ' sing , brother , sing ! ' cry our stout - hearted chaplain , Master Joshua 
 Pettigrue , bustle backwards and forwards among the prostrate rank . 
 ' let we call upon the Lord in our day of trial ! ' the man raise a loud 
 hymn of praise , which swell into a great chorus as it be take up by 
 the Taunton burgher upon our right and the miner upon our left . at 
 the sound the soldier on the other side raise a fierce huzza , and the 
 whole air be full of clamour . 

 our musqueteer have be bring to the very edge of the Bussex Rhine , 
 and the royal troop have also advance as far as they be able , so that 
 there be not five pikes'-length between the line . yet that short 
 distance be so impassable that , save for the more deadly fire , a 
 quarter of a mile might have divide we . so near be we that the 
 burn wad from the enemy 's musket fly in flake of fire over 
 our head , and we feel upon our face the hot , quick flush of their 
 discharge . yet though the air be alive with bullet , the aim of the 
 soldier be too high for our kneeling rank , and very few of the man 
 be strike . for our part , we do what we could to keep the barrel of 
 our musket from incline upwards . Saxon , Sir Gervas , and I walk 
 our horse up and down without cease , push they level with our 
 sword - blade , and call on the man to aim steadily and slowly . the 
 groan and cry from the other side of the ditch show that some , at 
 least , of our bullet have not be fire in vain . 

 ' we hold our own in this quarter , ' say I to Saxon . ' it seem to I that 
 their fire slacken . ' 

 ' it be their horse that I fear , ' he answer . ' they can avoid the ditch , 
 since they come from the hamlet on the flank . they may be upon we at 
 any time . ' 

 ' Hullo , sir ! ' shout Sir Gervas , rein up his steed upon the very 
 brink of the ditch , and raise his cap in salute to a mount officer 
 upon the other side . ' can you tell I if we have the honour to be 
 oppose to the foot guard ? ' 

 ' we be Dumbarton 's regiment , sir , ' cry the other . ' we shall give ye 
 good cause to remember have meet we . ' 

 ' we shall be across presently to make your further acquaintance , ' Sir 
 Gervas answer , and at the same moment roll , horse and all , into the 
 ditch , amid a roar of exultation from the soldier . half - a - dozen of his 
 musqueteer spring instantly , waist deep , into the mud , and drag our 
 friend out of danger , but the charger , which have be shoot through the 
 heart , sink without a struggle . 

 ' there be no harm ! ' cry the Baronet , spring to his foot , ' I would 
 rather fight on foot like my brave musqueteer . ' the man break out 
 a - cheering at his word , and the fire on both side become hotter 
 than ever . it be a marvel to I , and to many more , to see these brave 
 peasant with their mouth full of bullet , loading , priming , and fire 
 as steadily as though they have be at it all their life , and hold 
 their own against a veteran regiment which have prove itself in other 
 field to be second to none in the army of England . 

 the grey light of morning be steal over the moor , and still the 
 fight be undecided . the fog hang about we in feathery streak , and 
 the smoke from our gun drift across in a dun - colour cloud , through 
 which the long line of red coat upon the other side of the rhine 
 loom up like a battalion of giant . my eye ache and my lip prinkle 
 with the smack of the powder . on every side of I man be fall fast , 
 for the increase light have improve the aim of the soldier . our good 
 chaplain , in the very midst of a psalm , have utter a great shout 
 of praise and thanksgiving , and so pass on to join those of his 
 parishioner who be scatter round he upon the moor . hope - above 
 Williams and Keeper Milson , under - officer , and among the stout 
 man in the company , be both down , the one dead and the other sorely 
 wound , but still ram down charge , and spitting bullet into his 
 gun - barrel . the two stukeley of Somerton , twin , and lad of great 
 promise , lie silently with grey face turn to the grey sky , unite in 
 death as they have be in birth . everywhere the dead lie thick amid the 
 living . yet no man flinch from his place , and Saxon still walk 
 his horse among they with word of hope and praise , while his stern , 
 deep - line face and tall sinewy figure be a very beacon of hope to 
 the simple rustic . such of my scythesman as could handle a musket be 
 throw forward into the fight line , and furnish with the arm and 
 pouch of those who have fall . 

 ever and anon as the light wax I could note through the rift in the 
 smoke and the fog how the fight be progress in other part of the 
 field . on the right the heath be brown with the Taunton and Frome 
 man , who , like ourselves , be lie down to avoid the fire . along the 
 border of the Bussex Rhine a deep fringe of their musqueteer be 
 exchange murderous volley , almost muzzle to muzzle , with the 
 left wing of the same regiment with which we be engage , which be 
 support by a second regiment in broad white facing , which I believe 
 to have belong to the Wiltshire Militia . on either bank of the black 
 trench a thick line of dead , brown on the one side , and scarlet on the 
 other , serve as a screen to their companion , who shelter themselves 
 behind they and rest their musket - barrel upon their prostrate body . 
 to the left amongst the withy lie five hundred Mendip and Bagworthy 
 miner , sing lustily , but so ill - armed that they have scarce one gun 
 among ten wherewith to reply to the fire which be pour into they . 
 they could not advance , and they would not retreat , so they shelter 
 themselves as well they might , and wait patiently until their leader 
 might decide what be to be do . far down for half a mile or more 
 the long rolling cloud of smoke , with petulant flash of flame spurt 
 out through it , show that every one of our raw regiment be bear 
 its part manfully . the cannon on the left have cease firing . the Dutch 
 gunner have leave the islander to settle their own quarrel , and be 
 scamper back to Bridgewater , leave their silent piece to the Royal 
 Horse . 

 the battle be in this state when there rise a cry of ' the King , the 
 king ! ' and Monmouth ride through our rank , bare - headed and wild - eye , 
 with Buyse , Wade , and a dozen more beside he . they pull up within a 
 spear's - length of I , and Saxon , spur forward to meet they , raise 
 his sword to the salute . I could not but mark the contrast between 
 the calm , grave face of the veteran , compose yet alert , and the half 
 frantic bearing of the man whom we be compel to look upon as our 
 leader . 

 ' how think ye , Colonel Saxon ? ' he cry wildly . ' how go the fight ? be 
 all well with ye ? what an error , alas ! what an error ! shall we draw off , 
 eh ? how say you ? ' 

 ' we hold our own here , your Majesty , ' Saxon answer . ' methink have we 
 something after the nature of palisado or stockado , after the swedish 
 fashion , we might even make it good against the horse . ' 

 ' ah , the horse ! ' cry the unhappy Monmouth . ' if we get over this , my 
 Lord Grey shall answer for it . they run like a flock of sheep . what 
 leader could do anything with such troop ? oh , lack - a - day , lack - a - day ! 
 shall we not advance ? ' 

 ' there be no reason to advance , your Majesty , now that the surprise have 
 fail , ' say Saxon . ' I have send for cart to bridge over the trench , 
 accord to the plan which be commend in the treatise , " De vallis et 
 fossis , " but they be useless now . we can but fight it out as we be . ' 

 ' to throw troop across would be to sacrifice they , ' say Wade . ' we have 
 lose heavily , Colonel Saxon , but I think from the look of yonder bank 
 that ye have give a good account of the red - coat . ' 

 ' stand firm ! for God 's sake , stand firm ! ' cry Monmouth distractedly . 
 ' the horse have flee , and the cannonier also . oh ! what can I do with 
 such man ? what shall I do ? alas , alas ! ' he set spur to his horse and 
 gallop off down the line , still ring his hand and utter his 
 dismal wailing . oh , my child , how small , how very small a thing be 
 death when weigh in the balance with dishonour ! have this man but bear 
 his fate silently , as do the mean footman who follow his banner , 
 how proud and glad would we have be to have discourse of he , our 
 princely leader . but let he rest . the fear and agitation and petty 
 fond emotion , which show upon he as the breeze show upon the water , 
 be all still now for many a long year . let we think of the kind heart 
 and forget the feeble spirit . 

 as his escort troop after he , the great german man - at - arm separate 
 from they and turn back to we . ' I be weary of trot up and down 
 like a lust - ritter at a fair , ' say he . ' if I bide with ye I be like to 
 have my share of any fighting which be go . so , steady , mein Liebchen . 
 that ball graze her tail , but she be too old a soldier to wince at 
 trifle . Hullo , friend , where be your horse ? ' 

 ' at the bottom of the ditch , ' say Sir Gervas , scrap the mud off his 
 dress with his sword - blade . '' tis now half - past two , ' he continue , 
 ' and we have be at this child's - play for an hour and more . with a line 
 regiment , too ! it be not what I have look forward to ! ' 

 ' you shall have something to console you anon , ' cry the German , with 
 his eye shin . ' Mein Gott ! be it not splendid ? look to it , friend 
 Saxon , look to it ! ' 

 it be no light matter which have so rouse the soldier 's admiration . out 
 of the haze which still lie thick upon our right there twinkle here and 
 there a bright gleam of silvery light , while a dull , thunder noise 
 break upon our ear like that of the surf upon a rocky shore . More and 
 more frequent come the fitful flash of steel , louder and yet loud 
 grow the hoarse gathering tumult , until of a sudden the fog be rent , 
 and the long line of the Royal cavalry break out from it , wave after 
 wave , rich in scarlet and blue and gold , as grand a sight as ever the 
 eye rest upon . there be something in the smooth , steady sweep of so 
 great a body of horseman which give the feeling of irresistible power . 
 Rank after rank , and line after line , with wave standard , toss 
 mane , and gleam steel , they pour onwards , an army in themselves , 
 with either flank still shroud in the mist . as they thunder along , 
 knee to knee and bridle to bridle , there come from they such a gust of 
 deep - cheste oath with the jangle of harness , the clash of steel , and 
 the measured beat of multitudinous hoof , that no man who hath not stand 
 up against such a whirlwind , with nothing but a seven - foot pike in his 
 hand , can know how hard it be to face it with a steady lip and a firm 
 grip . 

 but wonderful as be the sight , there be , as ye may guess , my 
 dear , little time for we to gaze upon it . Saxon and the german flung 
 themselves among the pikemen and do all that man could do to thicken 
 their array . Sir Gervas and I do the same with the scythesman , who have 
 be train to form a triple front after the german fashion , one rank 
 kneeling , one stoop , and one stand erect , with weapon advance . 
 close to we the Taunton man have harden into a dark sullen ring , 
 bristling with steel , in the centre of which might be see and hear 
 their venerable Mayor , his long beard flutter in the breeze , and his 
 strident voice clang over the field . louder and louder grow the roar 
 of the horse . ' Steady , my brave lad , ' cry Saxon , in trumpet tone . 
 ' dig the pike - butt into the earth ! good it on the right foot ! give not 
 an inch ! steady ! ' a great shout go up from either side , and then the 
 live wave break over we . 

 what hope be there to describe such a scene as that -- the crashing of 
 wood , the sharp gasp cry , the snorting of horse , the jar when the 
 push of pike meet with the sweep of sword ! who can hope to make 
 another see that of which he himself carry away so vague and dim an 
 impression ? one who have act in such a scene gather no general sense 
 of the whole combat , such as might be gain by a mere onlooker , but 
 he have stamp for ever upon his mind just the few incident which may 
 chance to occur before his own eye . thus my memory be confine to a 
 swirl of smoke with steel cap and fierce , eager face break through 
 it , with the red gap nostril of horse and their paw fore - foot 
 as they recoil from the hedge of steel . I see , too , a young beardless 
 lad , an officer of dragoon , crawl on hand and knee under the 
 scythe , and I hear his groan as one of the peasant pin he to the 
 ground . I see a bearded , broad - face trooper rid a grey horse just 
 outside the fringe of the scythe , seek for some entrance , and 
 scream the while with rage . small thing imprint themselves upon a 
 man 's notice at such a time . I even mark the man 's strong white tooth 
 and pink gum . at the same time I see a white - faced , thin - lipped man 
 lean far forward over his horse 's neck and drive at I with his 
 sword point , curse the while as only a dragoon can curse . all these 
 image start up as I think of that fierce rally , during which I hack 
 and cut and thrust at man and horse without a thought of parry or 
 of guard . all round rise a fierce babel of shout and cry , godly 
 ejaculation from the peasant and oath from the horseman , with Saxon 's 
 voice above all implore his pikemen to stand firm . then the cloud 
 of horse - man recoil , circle off over the plain , and the shout of 
 triumph from my comrade , and an open snuff - box thrust out in front of 
 I , proclaim that we have see the back of as stout a squadron as ever 
 follow a kettledrum . 

 but if we could claim it as a victory , the army in general could scarce 
 say as much . none but the very pick of the troop could stand against 
 the flood of heavy horse and steel - clothe man . the Frome peasant be 
 go , sweep utterly from the field . many have be drive by pure weight 
 and pressure into the fatal mud which have check our advance . many 
 other , sorely cut and slash , lie in ghastly heap all over the ground 
 which they have hold . a few by join our rank have save themselves 
 from the fate of their companion . far off the man of Taunton still 
 stand fast , though in sadly diminish number . a long ridge of horse 
 and cavalier in front of they show how stern have be the attack and 
 how fierce the resistance . on our leave the wild miner have be break 
 at the first rush , but have fight so savagely , throw themselves upon 
 the ground and stab upwards at the stomach of the horse , that they 
 have at last beat off the dragoon . the Devonshire militiamen , however , 
 have be scatter , and share the fate of the man of Frome . during the 
 whole of the struggle the foot upon the further bank of the Bussex Rhine 
 be pour in a hail of bullet , which our musqueteer , have to 
 defend themselves against the horse , be unable to reply to . 

 it need no great amount of soldierly experience to see that the battle 
 be lose , and that Monmouth 's cause be doom . it be broad daylight 
 now , though the sun have not yet rise . our cavalry be go , our 
 ordnance be silent , our line be pierce in many place , and more than 
 one of our regiment have be destroy . on the right flank the Horse 
 Guards Blue , the Tangiers Horse , and two dragoon regiment be form 
 up for a fresh attack . on the left the foot - guard have bridge the ditch 
 and be fight hand to hand with the man from North Somerset . in 
 front a steady fire be be pour into we , to which our reply be 
 feeble and uncertain , for the powder cart have go astray in the dark , 
 and many be call hoarsely for ammunition , while other be load 
 with pebble instead of ball . add to this that the regiment which still 
 hold their ground have all be badly shake by the charge , and have lose 
 a third of their number . yet the brave clown send up cheer after cheer , 
 and shout word of encouragement and homely jest to each other , 
 as though a battle be but some rough game which must as a matter of 
 course be play out while there be a player leave to join in it . 

 ' be Captain Clarke there ? ' cry Decimus Saxon , rid up with his 
 sword - arm fleck with blood . ' ride over to Sir Stephen Timewell and 
 tell he to join his man to ours . apart we shall be break -- together we 
 may stand another charge . ' 

 set spur to Covenant I ride over to our companion and deliver 
 the message . Sir Stephen , who have be strike by a petronel bullet , 
 and wear a crimsoned kerchief bind round his snow - white head , see 
 the wisdom of the advice , and move his townsman as direct . his 
 musqueteer be well provide with powder than our do good service 
 by keep down for a time the deadly fire from across the fosse . 

 ' who would have think it of he ? ' cry Sir Stephen , with flash 
 eye , as Buyse and Saxon ride out to meet he . ' what think ye now of our 
 noble monarch , our champion of the protestant cause ? ' 

 ' he be no very great Krieger , ' say Buyse . ' yet perhaps it may be from 
 want of habit as much as from want of courage . ' 

 ' courage ! ' cry the old Mayor , in a voice of scorn . ' look over yonder 
 and behold your king . ' he point out over the moor with a finger 
 which shake as much from anger as from age . there , far away , show 
 up against the dark peat - colour soil , ride a gaily - dress cavalier , 
 follow by a knot of attendant , gallop as fast as his horse would 
 carry he from the field of battle . there be no mistaking the fugitive . 
 it be the recreant Monmouth . 

 ' hush ! ' cry Saxon , as we all give a cry of horror and execration ; 
 ' do not dishearten our brave lad ! cowardice be catch and will run 
 through an army like the putrid fever . ' 

 ' Der Feigherzige ! ' cry Buyse , grind his tooth . ' and the brave 
 country folk ! it be too much . ' 

 ' stand to your pike , man ! ' roar Saxon , in a voice of thunder , and 
 we have scarce time to form our square and throw ourselves inside of it , 
 before the whirlwind of horse be upon we once more . when the Taunton 
 man have join we a weak spot have be leave in our rank , and through 
 this in an instant the Blue Guards smash their way , pour through 
 the opening , and cut fiercely to right and leave . the burgher on the 
 one side and our own man on the other reply by savage stab from their 
 pike and scythe , which empty many a saddle , but while the struggle 
 be at its hot the King 's cannon open for the first time with a 
 deafen roar upon the other side of the rhine , and a storm of ball 
 plough their way through our dense rank , leave furrow of dead 
 and wound behind they . at the same moment a great cry of ' powder ! for 
 Christ 's sake , powder ! ' arise from the musqueteer whose last charge have 
 be fire . again the cannon roar , and again our man be mow down 
 as though death himself with his scythe be amongst we . at last our 
 rank be break . in the very centre of the pikemen steel cap be 
 gleam , and broadsword rise and fall . the whole body be sweep 
 back two hundred pace or more , struggle furiously the while , and 
 be there mix with other like body which have be dash out of all 
 semblance of military order , and yet refuse to fly . man of Devon , of 
 Dorset , of Wiltshire , and of Somerset , tread down by horse , slash by 
 dragoon , drop by score under the rain of bullet , still fight on 
 with a dog , desperate courage for a ruined cause and a man who 
 have desert they . everywhere as I glance around I be set face , 
 clench tooth , yell of rage and defiance , but never a sound of fear 
 or of submission . some clamber up upon the crupper of the rider and 
 drag they backwards from their saddle . other lie upon their face 
 and hamstrung the charger with their scythe - blade , stab the 
 horseman before they could disengage themselves . again and again the 
 guard crash through they from side to side , and yet the shatter 
 rank close up behind they and continue the long - draw struggle . so 
 hopeless be it and so pitiable that I could have find it in my heart 
 to wish that they would break and fly , be it not that on the broad 
 moor there be no refuge which they could make for . and all this time , 
 while they struggle and fight , blacken with powder and parch with 
 thirst , spill their blood as though it be water , the man who call 
 himself their King be spur over the countryside with a loose rein 
 and a quake heart , his thought centre upon save his own neck , come 
 what might to his gallant follower . 

 large number of the foot fight to the death , neither give nor 
 receive quarter ; but at last , scatter , break , and without 
 ammunition , the main body of the peasant disperse and flee across the 
 moor , closely follow by the horse . Saxon , Buyse , and I have do all 
 that we could to rally they once more , and have cut down some of the 
 foremost of the pursuer , when my eye fall suddenly upon Sir Gervas , 
 stand hatless with a few of his musqueteer in the midst of a swarm 
 of dragoon . spur our horse we cut a way to his rescue , and lay 
 our sword about we until we have clear off his assailant for the 
 moment . 

 ' jump up behind I ! ' I cry . ' we can make good our escape . ' 

 he look up smile and shake his head . ' I stay with my company , ' say 
 he . 

 ' your company ! ' Saxon cry . ' why , man , you be mad ! your company be cut 
 off to the last man . ' 

 ' that be what I mean , ' he answer , flick some dirt from his cravat . 
 ' do not ye mind ! look out for yourself . Goodbye , Clarke ! present my 
 compliment to-- ' the dragoon charge down upon we again . we be all 
 bear backwards , fight desperately , and when we could look round the 
 Baronet be go for ever . we hear afterwards that the King 's troop 
 find upon the field a body which they mistook for that of Monmouth , on 
 account of the effeminate grace of the feature and the richness of the 
 attire . no doubt it be that of our undaunted friend , Sir Gervas Jerome , 
 a name which shall ever be dear to my heart . when , ten year afterwards , 
 we hear much of the gallantry of the young courtier of the household 
 of the french King , and of the sprightly courage with which they fight 
 against we in the Lowlands at Steinkirk and elsewhere , I have always 
 think , from my recollection of Sir Gervas , that I know what manner of 
 man they be . 

 and now it be every man for himself . in no part of the field do 
 the insurgent continue to resist . the first ray of the sun shin 
 slantwise across the great dreary plain light up the long line of the 
 scarlet battalion , and glitter upon the cruel sword which rise and 
 fall among the struggle drove of resistless fugitive . the German have 
 become separate from we in the tumult , and we know not whether he live 
 or be slay , though long afterwards we learn that he make good his 
 escape , only to be capture with the ill - fat Duke of Monmouth . Grey , 
 Wade , Ferguson , and other have contrive also to save themselves , while 
 Stephen Timewell lie in the midst of a stern ring of his hard - face 
 burgher , die as he have live , a gallant Puritan Englishman . all this 
 we learn afterwards . at present we ride for our life across the moor , 
 follow by a few scatter body of horse , who soon abandon their 
 pursuit in order to fasten upon some more easy prey . 

 we be pass a small clump of alder bush when a loud manly voice 
 raise in prayer attract our attention . push aside the branch , we 
 come upon a man , seat with his back up against a great stone , cut 
 at his own arm with a broad - bladed knife , and give forth the Lord 's 
 prayer the while , without a pause or a quiver in his tone . as he glance 
 up from his terrible task we both recognise he as one Hollis , whom I 
 have mention as have be with Cromwell at Dunbar . his arm have 
 be half sever by a cannon - ball , and he be quietly complete the 
 separation in order to free himself from the dangling and useless limb . 
 even Saxon , use as he be to all the form and incident of war , star 
 open - eyed and aghast at this strange surgery ; but the man , with a short 
 nod of recognition , go grimly forward with his task , until , even as 
 we gaze , he separate the last shred which hold it , and lie over with 
 blanch lip which still murmur the prayer . ( 1 ) we could do little 
 to help he , and , indeed , might by our halt attract his pursuer to his 
 hiding - place ; so , throw he down my flask half fill with water , we 
 hasten on upon our way . oh , war , my child , what a terrible thing it 
 be ! how be man cozen and cheat by the rare trapping and prance 
 steed , by the empty term of honour and of glory , until they forget 
 in the outward tinsel and show the real ghastly horror of the accursed 
 thing ! think not of the dazzle squadron , nor of the spirit - stir 
 blare of the trumpet , but think of that lonely man under the shadow of 
 the alder , and of what he be do in a christian age and a christian 
 land . surely I , who have grow grey in harness , and who have see as 
 many field as I have year of my life , should be the last to preach 
 upon this subject , and yet I can clearly see that , in honesty , man must 
 either give up war , or else they must confess that the word of the 
 Redeemer be too lofty for they , and that there be no long any use in 
 pretend that his teaching can be reduce to practice . I have see a 
 Christian minister bless a cannon which have just be found , and 
 another blessing a war - ship as it glide from the slip . they , 
 the so - call representative of Christ , bless these engine of 
 destruction which cruel man have devise to destroy and tear his 
 fellow - worm . what would we say if we read in Holy Writ of our Lord 
 have bless the batter - ram and the catapult of the legion ? 
 would we think that it be in agreement with his teaching ? but there ! 
 as long as the head of the Church wander away so far from the spirit of 
 its teaching as to live in palace and drive in carriage , what wonder 
 if , with such example before they , the low clergy overstep at time 
 the line lay down by their great Master ? 

 look back from the summit of the low hill which lie to the westward 
 of the moor , we could see the cloud of horse - man stream over the 
 bridge of the Parret and into the town of Bridgewater , with the helpless 
 drove of fugitive still fly in front of they . we have pull up our 
 horse , and be look sadly and silently back at the fatal plain , 
 when the thud of hoof fall upon our ear , and , turn round , we find 
 two horseman in the dress of the guard rid towards we . they have make 
 a circuit to cut we off , for they be rid straight for we with draw 
 sword and eager gesture . 

 ' More slaughter , ' I say wearily . ' why will they force we to it ? ' 

 Saxon glance keenly from beneath his droop lid at the approach 
 horseman , and a grim smile wreathe his face in a thousand line and 
 wrinkle . 

 ' it be our friend who set the hound upon our track at Salisbury , ' he 
 say . ' this be a happy meeting . I have a score to settle with he . ' 

 it be , indeed , the hot - headed young comet whom we have meet at the outset 
 of our adventure . some evil chance have lead he to recognise the tall 
 figure of my companion as we ride from the field , and to follow he , in 
 the hope of obtain revenge for the humiliation which he have meet with 
 at his hand . the other be a lance - corporal , a man of square soldierly 
 build , rid a heavy black horse with a white blaze upon its forehead . 

 Saxon ride slowly towards the officer , while the trooper and I fix our 
 eye upon each other . 

 ' well , boy , ' I hear my companion say , ' I trust that you have learn to 
 fence since we meet last . ' 

 the young guardsman give a snarl of rage at the taunt , and an instant 
 afterwards the clink of their sword - blade show that they have meet . 
 for my own part I dare not spare a glance upon they , for my opponent 
 attack I with such fury that it be all that I could do to keep he 
 off . no pistol be draw upon either side . it be an honest contest of 
 steel against steel . so constant be the corporal 's thrust , now at my 
 face , now at my body , that I have never an opening for one of the heavy 
 cut which might have end the matter . our horse spin round each 
 other , biting and paw , while we thrust and parry , until at last , 
 come together knee to knee , we find ourselves within sword - point , and 
 grasp each other by the throat . he pluck a dagger from his belt and 
 strike it into my left arm , but I deal he a blow with my gauntlete 
 hand , which smite he off his horse and stretch he speechless upon 
 the plain . almost at the same moment the cornet drop from his horse , 
 wound in several place . Saxon spring from his saddle , and pick the 
 soldier 's dagger from the ground , would have finish they both have I 
 not jump down also and restrain he . he flash round upon I with 
 so savage a face that I could see that the wild - beast nature within he 
 be fairly rouse . 

 ' what hast thou to do ? ' he snarl . ' let go ! ' 

 ' Nay , nay ! blood enough hath be shed , ' say I. ' let they lie . ' 

 ' what mercy would they have have upon we ? ' he cry passionately , 
 struggle to get his wrist free . ' they have lose , and must pay 
 forfeit . ' 

 ' not in cold blood , ' I say firmly . ' I shall not abide it . ' 

 ' indeed , your lordship , ' he sneer , with the devil peep out through 
 his eye . with a violent wrench he free himself from my grasp , and 
 spring back , pick up the sword which he have drop . 

 ' what then ? ' I ask , stand on my guard astride of the wound man . 

 he stand for a minute or more look at I from under his heavy - hung 
 brow , with his whole face writhe with passion . every instant I 
 expect that he would fly at I , but at last , with a gulp in his 
 throat , he sheathe his rapi with a sharp clang , and spring back into 
 the saddle . 

 ' we part here , ' he say coldly . ' I have twice be on the verge of 
 slay you , and the third time might be too much for my patience . you 
 be no fit companion for a cavalier of fortune . join the clergy , lad ; it 
 be your vocation . ' 

 ' be this Decimus Saxon who speak , or be it will Spotterbridge ? ' I 
 ask , remember his jest concern his ancestry , but no answering 
 smile come upon his rugged face . gather up his bridle in his left 
 hand , he shoot one last malignant glance at the bleed officer , and 
 gallop off along one of the track which lead to the southward . I 
 stand gaze after he , but he never send so much as a hand - wave back , 
 rid on with a rigid neck until he vanish in a dip in the moor . 

 ' there go one friend , ' think I sadly , ' and all forsooth because I 
 will not stand by and see a helpless man 's throat cut . another friend be 
 dead on the field . a third , the old and dearest of all , lie wound 
 at Bridgewater , at the mercy of a brutal soldiery . if I return to my 
 home I do but bring trouble and danger to those whom I love . whither 
 shall I turn ? ' for some minute I stand irresolute beside the prostrate 
 guardsman , while Covenant stroll slowly along crop the scanty 
 herbage , and turn his dark full eye towards I from time to time , as 
 though to assure I that one friend at least be steadfast . Northward I 
 look at the Polden Hills , southward , at the Blackdowns , westward 
 at the long blue range of the Quantocks , and eastward at the broad fen 
 country ; but nowhere could I see any hope of safety . truth to say , I 
 feel sick at heart and care little for the time whether I escape or 
 no . 

 a muttered oath follow by a groan rouse I from my meditation . 
 the corporal be sit up rub his head with a look of stupid 
 astonishment upon his face , as though he be not very sure either of 
 where he be or how he come there . the officer , too , have open his 
 eye and show other sign of return consciousness . his wound be 
 clearly of no very serious nature . there be no danger of their pursuing 
 I even should they wish to do so , for their horse have trot off to 
 join the numerous other riderless steed who be wander all over the 
 moorland . I mount , therefore , and ride slowly away , save my good 
 charger as much as possible , for the morning 's work have already tell 
 somewhat heavily upon he . 

 there be many scatter body of horse rid hither and thither over 
 the marsh , but I be able to avoid they , and trot onwards , keep 
 to the waste country until I find myself eight or ten mile from the 
 battlefield . the few cottage and house which I pass wear deserted , 
 and many of they bore sign of have be plunder . not a peasant be 
 to be see . the evil fame of Kirke 's lamb have chase away all those who 
 have not actually take arm . at last , after rid for three hour , I 
 bethink I that I be far enough from the main line of pursuit to 
 be free from danger , so I choose out a shelter spot where a clump of 
 bush overhang a little brook . there , seat upon a bank of velvet 
 moss , I rest my weary limb , and try to wash the stain of battle 
 from my person . 

 it be only now when I could look quietly at my own attire that it be 
 bring home to I how terrible the encounter must have be in which 
 I have be engage , and how wonderful it be that I have come off so 
 scatheless . of the blow which I have strike in the fight I have faint 
 remembrance , yet they must have be many and terrible , for my sword 
 edge be as jagged and turn as though I have hack for an hour at an 
 iron bar . from head to foot I be splash and crimson with blood , 
 partly my own , but mostly that of other . my headpiece be dinte with 
 blow . a petronel bullet have glance off my front plate , strike it 
 at an angle , and have leave a broad groove across it . two or three other 
 crack and star show where the good sheet of proof steel have save 
 I . my left arm be stiff and well - nigh powerless from the corporal 's 
 stab , but on strip off my doublet and examine the place , I find 
 that though there have be much bleed the wound be on the outer side 
 of the bone , and be therefore of no great import . a kerchief dip in 
 water and bind tightly round it ease the smart and stanch the blood . 
 beyond this scratch I have no injury , though from my own effort I feel 
 as stiff and sore all over as though I have be well cudgel , and the 
 slight wound get in Wells Cathedral have reopen and be bleed . with 
 a little patience and cold water , however , I be able to dress it and to 
 tie myself up as well as any chirurgeon in the kingdom . 

 have see to my injury I have now to attend to my appearance , for 
 in truth I might have stand for one of those gory giant with whom the 
 worthy Don Bellianis of Greece and other stout champion be will not to 
 contend . no woman or child but would have flee at the sight of I , for 
 I be as red as the parish butcher when Martinmas be nigh . a good wash , 
 however , in the brook soon remove those trace of war , and I be 
 able to get the mark off my breastplate and boot . in the case of my 
 clothe , however , it be so hopeless to clean they that I give it up in 
 despair . my good old horse have be never so much as graze by steel or 
 bullet , so that with a little watering and tend he be soon as fresh 
 as ever , and we turn our back on the streamlet a well - favour pair 
 than we have approach it . 

 it be now go on to mid - day , and I begin to feel very hungry , for I 
 have taste nothing since the evening before . two or three house stand 
 in a cluster upon the moor , but the blacken wall and scorch thatch 
 show that it be hopeless to expect anything from they . once or twice 
 I spy folk in the field or on the roadway ; but at sight of an armed 
 horseman they run for their life , dive into the brushwood like wild 
 animal . at one place , where a high oak tree mark the meeting of three 
 road , two body dangle from one of the branch show that the 
 fear of the villager be base upon experience . these poor man have in 
 all likelihood be hang because the amount of their little hoarding 
 have not come up to the expectation of their plunderer ; or because , 
 have give all to one band of robber , they have nothing with which 
 to appease the next . at last , when I be fairly weary of my fruitless 
 search for food , I espy a windmill stand upon a green hill at 
 the other side of some field . judge from its appearance that it have 
 escape the general pillage , I take the pathway which branch away to 
 it from the high - road . ( note J , Appendix ) 

 1 . the incident be historically true , and may serve to show what sort of 
 man they be who have learn their soldiering under Cromwell . 



 Chapter XXXIII . of my Perilous Adventure at the Mill 

 at the base of the mill there stand a shed which be evidently use to 
 stall the horse which bring the farmer ' grain . some grass be heap 
 up inside it , so I loosen Covenant 's girth and leave he to have a 
 hearty meal . the mill itself appear to be silent and empty . I climb 
 the steep wood ladder , and push the door open , walk into a round 
 stone - flagged room , from which a second ladder lead to the loft above . on 
 one side of this chamber be a long wooden box , and all round the wall 
 be range row of sack full of flour . in the fireplace stand a pile 
 of faggot ready for lighting , so with the aid of my tinder - box I soon 
 have a cheerful blaze . take a large handful of flour from the near 
 bag I moisten it with water from a pitcher , and have roll it out 
 into a flat cake , proceed to bake it , smile the while to think of 
 what my mother would say to such rough cookery . very sure I be that 
 Patrick Lamb himself , whose book , the ' Complete Court Cook , ' be ever in 
 the dear soul 's left hand while she stir and baste with her right , 
 could not have turn out a dish which be more to my taste at the 
 moment , for I have not even patience to wait for the browning of it , but 
 snap it up and devour it half hot . I then roll a second one , and 
 have place it before the fire , and draw my pipe from my pocket , 
 I set myself to smoke , wait with all the philosophy which I could 
 muster until it should be ready . 

 I be lose in thought , brood sadly over the blow which the news would 
 be to my father , when I be startle by a loud sneeze , which sound as 
 though it be deliver in my very ear . I start to my foot and gaze 
 all round I , but there be nothing save the solid wall behind and the 
 empty chamber before . I have almost come to persuade myself that I have 
 be the creature of some delusion , when again a crash sneeze , louder 
 and more prolonged than the last , break upon the silence . could some one 
 be hide in one of the bag ? draw my sword I walk round prick the 
 great flour sack , but without be able to find cause for the sound . I 
 be still marvel over the matter when a most extraordinary chorus of 
 gasp , snort , and whistle break out , with cry of ' oh , holy mother ! ' 
 ' Blessed Redeemer ! ' and other such exclamation . this time there could 
 be no doubt as to whence the uproar come . rush up to the great chest 
 upon which I have be seat , I throw back the heavy lid and gaze in . 

 it be more than half full of flour , in the midst of which be 
 flounder some creature , which be so coated and cake with the white 
 powder , that it would have be hard to say that it be human be 
 it not for the pitiable cry which it be uttering . stoop down I 
 drag the man from his hiding - place , when he drop upon his knee 
 upon the floor and yell for mercy , raise such a cloud of dust from 
 every wriggle of his body that I begin to cough and to sneeze . as the 
 skin of powder begin to scale off from he , I see to my surprise that he 
 be no miller or peasant , but be a man - at - arm , with a huge sword girt 
 to his side , look at present not unlike a frosted icicle , and a 
 great steel - face breastplate . his steel cap have remain behind in the 
 flour - bin , and his bright red hair , the only touch of colour about he , 
 stand straight up in the air with terror , as he implore I to spare his 
 life . think that there be something familiar about his voice , I draw 
 my hand across his face , which set he yell as though I have slay 
 he . there be no mistaking the heavy cheek and the little greedy 
 eye . it be none other than Master Tetheridge , the noisy town - clerk of 
 Taunton . 

 but how much change from the town - clerk whom we have see strut , in 
 all the pomp and bravery of his office , before the good Mayor on the day 
 of our come to Somersetshire ! where now be the ruddy colour like a 
 pippin in September ? where be the assured manner and the manly port ? as 
 he kneel his great jack - boot click together with apprehension , and he 
 pour forth in a piping voice , like that of a Lincoln 's inn mumper , a 
 string of pleading , excuse , and entreaty , as though I be Feversham 
 in person , and be about to order he to instant execution . 

 ' I be but a poor scrivener man , your serene highness , ' he bawl . 
 ' indeed , I be a most unhappy clerk , your Honour , who have be drive 
 into these course by the tyranny of those above he . a more loyal man , 
 your grace , never wear neat 's leather , but when the mayor say " yes , " 
 can the clerk say " no " ? spare I , your lordship ; spare a most penitent 
 wretch , whose only prayer be that he may be allow to serve King James 
 to the last drop of his blood ! ' 

 ' do you renounce the Duke of Monmouth ? ' I ask , in a stern voice . 

 ' I do -- from my heart ! ' say he fervently . 

 ' then prepare to die ! ' I roar , whip out my sword , ' for I be one of 
 his officer . ' 

 at the sight of the steel the wretched clerk give a perfect bellow of 
 terror , and fall upon his face he wriggle and twist , until look 
 up he perceive that I be laugh . on that he crawl up on to his 
 knee once more , and from that to his foot , glance at I askance , as 
 though by no mean assure of my intention . 

 ' you must remember I , Master Tetheridge , ' I say . ' I be Captain Clarke , 
 of Saxon 's regiment of Wiltshire foot . I be surprised , indeed , that you 
 should have fall away from that allegiance to which you do not only 
 swear yourself , but do administer the oath to so many other . ' 

 ' not a whit , Captain , not a whit ! ' he answer , resume his old 
 bantam - cock manner as soon as he see that there be no danger . ' I be 
 upon oath as true and as leal a man as ever I be . ' 

 ' that I can fully believe , ' I answer . 

 ' I do but dissimulate , ' he continue , brush the flour from his 
 person . ' I do but practise that cunning of the serpent which should 
 in every warrior accompany the courage of the lion . you have read your 
 Homer , doubtless . eh ? I too have have a touch of the humanity . I be no 
 mere rough soldier , however stoutly I can hold mine own at sword - play . 
 Master Ulysses be my type , even as thine , I take it , be Master Ajax . ' 

 ' Methinks that Master Jack - in - the - box would fit you well , ' say I. 
 ' Wilt have a half of this cake ? how come you in the flour - bin ? ' 

 ' why , marry , in this wise , ' he answer , with his mouth full of dough . 
 ' it be a wile or ruse , after the fashion of the great commander , 
 who have always be famous for conceal their movement , and lurk 
 where they be least expect . for when the fight be lose , and I have 
 cut and hack until my arm be weary and my edge blunt , I find that 
 I be leave alone alive of all the Taunton man . be we on the field you 
 could see where I have stand by the ring of slain which would be find 
 within the sweep of my sword - arm . find that all be lose and that our 
 rogue be flee , I mount our worthy Mayor 's charger , see that the 
 gallant gentleman have no further need for it , and ride slowly from the 
 field . I promise you that there be that in my eye and bear which 
 prevent their horse from make too close a pursuit of I . one trooper 
 do indeed throw himself across my path , but mine old back - handed cut 
 be too much for he . alas , I have much upon my conscience ? I have make 
 both widow and orphan . why will they brave I when -- God of mercy , what 
 be that ? ' 

 '' tis but my horse in the stall below , ' I answer . 

 ' I think it be the dragoon , ' quoth the clerk , wipe away the drop 
 which have start out upon his brow . ' you and I would have go forth 
 and smitten they . ' 

 ' or climb into the flour - bin , ' say I. 

 ' I have not yet make clear to you how I come there , ' he continue . 
 ' have ride , then , some league from the field , and note this 
 windmill , it do occur to I that a stout man might single - handed make 
 it good against a troop of horse . we have no great love of flight , we 
 tetheridge . it may be mere empty pride , and yet the feeling run strong 
 in the family . we have a fighting strain in we ever since my kinsman 
 follow Ireton 's army as a sutler . I pull up , therefore , and have 
 dismount to take my observation , when my brute of a charger give 
 the bridle a twitch , jerk itself free , and be off in an instant over 
 hedge and ditch . I have , therefore , only my good sword leave to trust 
 to . I climb up the ladder , and be engage in plan how the defence 
 could well be conduct , when I hear the clank of hoof , and on the 
 top of it you do ascend from below . I retire at once into ambush , from 
 which I should assuredly have make a sudden outfall or sally , have the 
 flour not so choke my breathing that I feel as though I have a two - pound 
 loaf stick in my gizzard . for myself , I be glad that it have so come 
 about , for in my blind wrath I might unwittingly have do you an 
 injury . hear the clank of your sword as you do come up the ladder , 
 I do opine that you be one of King James 's minion , the captain , 
 perchance , of some troop in the field below . ' 

 ' all very clear and explicit , Master Tetheridge , ' say I , re - light 
 my pipe . ' no doubt your demeanour when I do draw you from your 
 hiding - place be also a mere cloak for your valour . but enough of that . 
 it be to the future that we have to look . what be your intention ? ' 

 ' to remain with you , Captain , ' say he . 

 ' Nay , that you shall not , ' I answer ; ' I have no great fancy for your 
 companionship . your overflow valour may bring I into ruffle which I 
 have otherwise avoid . ' 

 ' Nay , nay ! I shall moderate my spirit , ' he cry . ' in such troublous 
 time you will find yourself none the bad for the company of a try 
 fight man . ' 

 ' try and find wanting , ' say I , weary of the man 's braggart talk . ' I 
 tell you I will go alone . ' 

 ' Nay , you need not be so hot about it , ' he exclaim , shrink away 
 from I . ' in any case , we have good stay here until nightfall , when we 
 may make our way to the coast . ' 

 ' that be the first mark of sense that you have show , ' say I. ' the 
 King 's horse will find enough to do with the Zoyland cider and the 
 Bridgewater ale . if we can pass through , I have friend on the north 
 coast who would give we a lift in their lugger as far as Holland . 
 this help I will not refuse to give you , since you be my fellow in 
 misfortune . I would that Saxon have stay with I ! I fear he will be 
 take ! ' 

 ' if you mean Colonel Saxon , ' say the clerk , ' I think that he also be 
 one who hath much guile as well as valour . a stern , fierce soldier 
 he be , as I know well , have fight back to back with he for forty 
 minute by the clock , against a troop of Sarsfield 's horse . plain of 
 speech he be , and perhaps a trifle inconsiderate of the honour of a 
 cavalier , but in the field it would have be well for the army have they 
 have more such commander . ' 

 ' you say truly , ' I answer ; ' but now that we have refresh ourselves 
 it be time that we bethink we of take some rest , since we may have 
 far to travel this night . I would that I could lay my hand upon a flagon 
 of ale . ' 

 ' I would gladly drink to our further acquaintanceship in the same , ' 
 say my companion , ' but as to the matter of slumber that may be readily 
 arrange . if you ascend that ladder you will find in the loft a litter 
 of empty sack , upon which you can repose . for myself , I will stay down 
 here for a while and cook myself another cake . ' 

 ' do you remain on watch for two hour and then arouse I , ' I reply . 
 ' I shall then keep guard whilst you sleep . ' he touch the hilt of his 
 sword as a sign that he would be true to his post , so not without some 
 misgiving I climb up into the loft , and throw myself upon the 
 rude couch be soon in a deep and dreamless slumber , lull by the low , 
 mournful groaning and creaking of the sail . 

 I be awake by step beside I , and find that the little clerk have 
 come up the ladder and be bend over I . I ask he if the time have 
 come for I to rouse , on which he answer in a strange quavering voice 
 that I have yet an hour , and that he have come up to see if there be any 
 service which he could render I . I be too weary to take much note 
 of his slinking manner and pallid cheek , so thank he for his 
 attention , I turn over and be soon asleep once more . 

 my next waking be a rougher and a sterner one . there come a sudden 
 rush of heavy foot up the ladder , and a dozen red - coat swarm into the 
 room . spring on to my foot I put out my hand for the sword which I 
 have lay all ready by my side , but the trusty weapon have go . it have 
 be steal whilst I slumber . unarmed and take at a vantage , I be 
 strike down and pinion in a moment . one hold a pistol to my head , and 
 swear that he would blow my brain out if I stir , while the other 
 wound a coil of rope round my body and arm , until Samson himself could 
 scarce have get free . feel that my struggle be of no possible 
 avail , I lay silent and wait for whatever be to come . neither now nor 
 at any time , dear child , have I lay great store upon my life , but 
 far less then than now , for each of you be tiny tendril which bind I 
 to this world . yet , when I think of the other dear one who be wait 
 for I on the further shore , I do not think that even now death would 
 seem an evil thing in my eye . what a hopeless and empty thing would 
 life be without it ! 

 have lash my arm , the soldier drag I down the ladder , as 
 though I have be a truss of hay , into the room beneath , which be 
 also crowd with trooper . in one corner be the wretched scrivener , 
 a picture of abject terror , with chatter tooth and tremble knee , 
 only prevent from fall upon the floor by the grasp of a stalwart 
 corporal . in front of he stand two officer , one a little hard brown 
 man with dark twinkle eye and an alert manner , the other tall and 
 slender , with a long golden moustache , which droop down half - way to 
 his shoulder . the former have my sword in his hand , and they be both 
 examine the blade curiously . 

 ' it be a good bit of steel , Dick , ' say one , put the point against 
 the stone floor , and press down until he touch it with the handle . 
 ' see , with what a snap it rebound ! no maker 's name , but the date 1638 
 be stamp upon the pommel . where do you get it , fellow ? ' he ask , 
 fix his keen gaze upon my face . 

 ' it be my father 's before I , ' I answer . 

 ' then I trust that he draw it in a well quarrel than his son hath 
 do , ' say the tall officer , with a sneer . 

 ' in as good , though not in a well , ' I return . ' that sword hath 
 always be draw for the right and liberty of Englishmen , and 
 against the tyranny of king and the bigotry of priest . ' 

 ' what a tag for a playhouse , Dick , ' cry the officer . ' how doth it 
 run ? " the bigotry of king and the tyranny of priest . " why , if well 
 deliver by Betterton close up to the footlight , with one hand upon 
 his heart and the other pointing to the sky , I warrant the pit would 
 rise at it . ' 

 ' very like , ' say the other , twirl his moustache . ' but we have no 
 time for fine speech now . what be we to do with the little one ? ' 

 ' hang he , ' the other answer carelessly . 

 ' no , no , your most gracious honour , ' howl Master Tetheridge , suddenly 
 writhe out of the corporal 's grip and fling himself upon the 
 floor at their foot . ' do I not tell ye where ye could find one of the 
 stout soldier of the rebel army ? do not I guide ye to he ? do not 
 I even creep up and remove his sword lest any of the King 's subject 
 be slay in the taking of he ? surely , surely , ye would not use I so 
 scurvily when I have do ye these service ? have I not make good my 
 word ? be he not as I describe he , a giant in stature and of wondrous 
 strength ? the whole army will bear I out in it , that he be worth any 
 two in single fight . I have give he over to ye . surely ye will let I 
 go ! ' 

 ' very well deliver -- plaguily so ! ' quoth the little officer , clap 
 the palm of one hand softly against the back of the other . ' the emphasis 
 be just , and the enunciation clear . a little far back towards the 
 wing , corporal , if you please . thank you ! now , Dick , it be your cue . ' 

 ' Nay , John , you be too absurd ! ' cry the other impatiently . ' the mask 
 and the buskin be well enough in their place , but you look upon the 
 play as a reality and upon the reality as but a play . what this reptile 
 hath say be true . we must keep faith with he if we wish that other of 
 the country folk should give up the fugitive . there be no help for it ! ' 

 ' for myself I believe in Jeddart law , ' his companion answer . ' I 
 would hang the man first and then discuss the question of our promise . 
 however , pink I if I will obtrude my opinion on any man ! ' 

 ' Nay , it can not be , ' the taller say . ' Corporal , do you take he down . 
 Henderson will go with you . take from he that plate and sword , which 
 his mother would wear with as good a grace . and hark ye , corporal , a few 
 touch of thy stirrup leather across his fat shoulder might not be 
 amiss , as help he to remember the King 's dragoon . ' 

 my treacherous companion be drag off , struggle and yelping , and 
 presently a series of pierce howl , grow fainter and fainter as he 
 flee before his tormentor , announce that the hint have be take . the 
 two officer rush to the little window of the mill and roar with 
 laughter , while the trooper , peep furtively over their shoulder , 
 could not restrain themselves from join in their mirth , from which I 
 gather that Master Tetheridge , as , spur on by fear , he hurl his 
 fat body through hedge and into ditch , be a somewhat comical sight . 

 ' and now for the other , ' say the little officer , turn away from the 
 window and wipe the tear of laughter from his face . ' that beam over 
 yonder would serve our purpose . where be Hangman Broderick , the Jack 
 Ketch of the Royals ? ' 

 ' here I be , sir , ' respond a sullen , heavy - faced trooper , shuffle 
 forward ; ' I have a rope here with a noose . ' 

 ' throw it over the beam , then . what be amiss with your hand , you clumsy 
 rogue , that you should wear linen round it ? ' 

 ' may it please you , sir , ' the man answer , ' it be all through an 
 ungrateful , prick - eare presbyterian knave whom I hang at Gommatch . I 
 have do all that could be do for he . have he be at Tyburn he could 
 scarce have meet with more attention . yet when I do put my hand to his 
 neck to see that all be as it should be , he do fix I with his tooth , 
 and hath gnaw a great piece from my thumb . ' 

 ' I be sorry for you , ' say the officer . ' you know , no doubt , that the 
 human bite under such circumstance be as deadly as that of the mad dog , 
 so that you may find yourself snap and bark one of these fine 
 morning . Nay , turn not pale ! I have hear you preach patience and 
 courage to your victim . you be not afraid of death ? ' 

 ' not of any christian death , your Honour . yet , ten shilling a week be 
 scarce enough to pay a man for an end like that ! ' 

 ' Nay , it be all a lottery , ' remark the captain cheerily . ' I have hear 
 that in these case a man be so draw up that his heel do beat a tattoo 
 against the back of his head . but , mayhap , it be not as painful as it 
 would appear . meanwhile , do you proceed to do your office . ' 

 three or four trooper catch I by the arm , but I shake they off as 
 good I might , and walk with , as I trust , a steady step and a cheerful 
 face under the beam , which be a great smoke - blacken rafter pass 
 from one side of the chamber to the other . the rope be throw over 
 this , and the noose place round my neck with tremble finger by the 
 hangman , who take particular care to keep beyond the range of my tooth . 
 half - a - dozen dragoon seize the further end of the coil , and stand 
 ready to swing I into eternity . through all my adventurous life I have 
 never be so close upon the threshold of death as at that moment , and 
 yet I declare to you that , terrible as my position be , I could think 
 of nothing but the tattoo mark upon old Solomon Sprent 's arm , and the 
 cunning fashion in which he have interweave the red and the blue . yet I 
 be keenly alive to all that be go on around I . the scene of the 
 bleak stone - floor room , the single narrow window , the two lounge 
 elegant officer , the pile of arm in the corner , and even the texture 
 of the coarse red serge and the pattern of the great brass button upon 
 the sleeve of the man who hold I , be all stamp clearly upon my mind . 

 ' we must do our work with order , ' remark the tall Captain , take a 
 note - book from his pocket . ' Colonel Sarsfield may desire some detail . 
 let I see ! this be the seventeenth , be it not ? ' 

 ' four at the farm and five at the cross - road , ' the other answer , 
 count upon his finger . ' then there be the one whom we shoot in the 
 hedge , and the wound one who nearly save himself by die , and the 
 two in the grove under the hill . I can remember no more , save those who 
 be string up in ' Bridgewater immediately after the action . ' 

 ' it be well to do it in an orderly fashion , ' quoth the other , scribble 
 in his book . ' it be very well for Kirke and his man , who be half moor 
 themselves , to hang and to slaughter without discrimination or ceremony , 
 but we should set they a well example . what be your name , sirrah ? ' 

 ' my name be Captain Micah Clarke , ' I answer . 

 the two officer look at each other , and the small one give a long 
 whistle . ' it be the very man ! ' say he . ' this come of ask question ! 
 Rat I , if I have not misgiving that it might prove to be so . they say 
 that he be large of limb . ' 

 ' tell I , sirrah , have you ever know one Major Ogilvy of the Horse 
 Guards Blue ? ' ask the Captain . 

 ' see that I have the honour of take he prisoner , ' I reply , ' and 
 see also that he hath share soldier 's fare and quarter with I ever 
 since , I think I may fairly say that I do know he . ' 

 ' cast loose the cord ! ' say the officer , and the hangman reluctantly 
 slip the cord over my head once more . ' young man , you be surely 
 reserve for something great , for you will never be near your grave 
 until you do actually step into it . this Major Ogilvy hath make great 
 interest both for you and for a wound comrade of yours who lie at 
 Bridgewater . your name hath be give to the commander of horse , with 
 order to bring you in unscathed should you be take . yet it be but fair 
 to tell you that though the Major 's good word may save you from martial 
 law , it will stand you in small stead before a civil judge , before whom 
 ye must in the end take your trial . ' 

 ' I desire to share the same lot and fortune as have befall my 
 companion - in - arm , ' I answer . 

 ' Nay , that be but a sullen way to take your deliverance , ' cry the 
 small officer . ' the situation be as flat as sutler 's beer . otway would 
 have make a bettor thing of it . can you not rise to the occasion ? where 
 be she ? ' 

 ' she ! who ? ' I ask . 

 ' she . the she . the woman . your wife , sweetheart , betroth , what you 
 will . ' 

 ' there be none such , ' I answer . 

 ' there now ! what can be do in a case like that ? ' cry he 
 despairingly . ' she should have rush in from the wing and throw 
 herself upon your bosom . I have see such a situation earn three round 
 from the pit . there be good material spoil here for want of some one 
 to work it up . ' 

 ' we have something else to work up , Jack , ' exclaim his companion 
 impatiently . ' Sergeant Gredder , do you with two trooper conduct the 
 prisoner to Gommatch Church . it be time that we be once more upon our 
 way , for in a few hour the darkness will hinder the pursuit . ' 

 at the word of command the trooper descend into the field where their 
 horse be picket , and be speedily on the march once more , the tall 
 Captain lead they , and the stage - strike cornet bring up the 
 rear . the sergeant to whose care I have be commit -- a great 
 square - shoulder , dark - browed man -- order my own horse to be bring 
 out , and help I to mount it . he remove the pistol from the 
 holster , however , and hang they with my sword at his own saddle - bow . 

 ' shall I tie his foot under the horse 's belly ? ' ask one of the 
 dragoon . 

 ' Nay , the lad hath an honest face , ' the sergeant answer . ' if he 
 promise to be quiet we shall cast free his arm . ' 

 ' I have no desire to escape , ' say I. 

 ' then untie the rope . a brave man in misfortune hath ever my goodwill , 
 strike I dumb else ! Sergeant Gredder be my name , formerly of Mackay 's 
 and now of the royal -- as hard - work and badly - pay a man as any in 
 his Majesty 's service . right wheel , and down the pathway ! do ye ride 
 on either side , and I behind ! our carbine be prim , friend , so stand 
 true to your promise ! ' 

 ' Nay , you can rely upon it , ' I answer . 

 ' your little comrade do play you a scurvy trick , ' say the sergeant , 
 ' for see we ride down the road he do make across to we , and 
 bargain with the Captain that his life should be spar , on condition 
 that he should deliver into our hand what he describe as one of the 
 stout soldier in the rebel army . truly you have thews and sinew 
 enough , though you be surely too young to have see much service . ' 

 ' this hath be my first campaign , ' I answer . 

 ' and be like to be your last , ' he remark , with soldierly frankness . ' I 
 hear that the Privy Council intend to make such an example as will take 
 the heart out of the Whigs for twenty year to come . they have a lawyer 
 come from London whose wig be more to be fear than our helmet . he 
 will slay more man in a day than a troop of horse in a ten - mile chase . 
 Faith ! I would soon they take this butcher - work into their own hand . 
 see those body on yonder tree . it be an evil season when such acorn 
 grow upon english oak . ' 

 ' it be an evil season , ' say I , ' when man who call themselves Christians 
 inflict such vengeance upon poor simple peasant , who have do no more 
 than their conscience urge they . that the leader and officer should 
 suffer be but fair . they stand to win in case of success , and should pay 
 forfeit now that they have lose . but it go to my heart to see those 
 poor godly country folk so treat . ' 

 ' Aye , there be truth in that , ' say the sergeant . ' now if it be some 
 of these snuffle - nosed preacher , the old lank - haired bell - wether who 
 have lead their flock to the devil , it would be another thing . why 
 can they not conform to the Church , and be plague to they ? it be good 
 enough for the king , so surely it be good enough for they ; or be their 
 soul so delicate that they can not satisfy themselves with that on which 
 every honest Englishman thrive ? the main road to Heaven be too common 
 for they . they must need have each a by - path of their own , and cry out 
 against all who will not follow it . ' 

 ' why , ' say I , ' there be pious man of all creed . if a man lead a life 
 of virtue , what matter what he believe ? 

 ' let a man keep his virtue in his heart , ' quoth Sergeant Gredder . ' let 
 he pack it deep in the knapsack of his soul . I suspect godliness 
 which show upon the surface , the snuffle talk , the roll eye , the 
 groaning and the hawking . it be like the forge money , which can be tell 
 by its be more bright and more showy than the real . ' 

 ' an apt comparison ! ' say I. ' but how come it , sergeant , that you have 
 give attention to these matter ? unless they be much belie , the Royal 
 dragoon find other thing to think of . ' 

 ' I be one of Mackay 's foot , ' he answer shortly . ' I have hear of 
 he , ' say I. ' a man , I believe , both of part and of piety . ' 

 ' that , indeed , he be , ' cry Sergeant Gredder warmly . ' he be a man stern 
 and soldierly to the outer eye , but with the heart of a saint within 
 he . I promise you there be little need of the strapado in his 
 regiment , for there be not a man who do not fear the look of sorrow in 
 his Colonel 's eye far more than he do the provost - marshal . ' 

 during the whole of our long ride I find the worthy sergeant a true 
 follower of the excellent Colonel Mackay , for he prove to be a man of 
 more than ordinary intelligence , and of serious and thoughtful habit . 
 as to the two trooper , they ride on either side of I as silent as 
 statue ; for the common dragoon of those day could but talk of wine 
 and woman , and be helpless and speechless when aught else be to the 
 fore . when we at last ride into the little village of Gommatch , which 
 overlook the plain of Sedgemoor , it be with regret on each side that I 
 bade my guardian adieu . as a parting favour I beg he to take charge 
 of Covenant for I , promise to pay a certain sum by the month for his 
 keep , and commission he to retain the horse for his own use should I 
 fail to claim he within the year . it be a load off my mind when I see 
 my trusty companion lead away , star back at I with question eye , 
 as though unable to understand the separation . come what might , I know 
 now that , he be in the keeping of a good man who would see that no harm 
 befell he . 



 Chapter XXXIV . of the coming of Solomon Sprent 

 the church of Gommatch be a small ivy - clothe building with a square 
 Norman tower , stand in the centre of the hamlet of that name . its 
 great oaken door , stud with iron , and high narrow window , fit 
 it well for the use to which it be now turn . two company of 
 Dumbarton 's Foot have be quarter in the village , with a portly Major 
 at their head , to whom I be hand over by Sergeant Gredder , with some 
 account of my capture , and of the reason which have prevent my summary 
 execution . 

 Night be now draw in , but a few dim lamp , hang here and there upon 
 the wall , cast an uncertain , flicker light over the scene . a hundred 
 or more prisoner be scatter about upon the stone floor , many of 
 they wound , and some evidently die . the hale have gather in silent , 
 subdue group round their stricken friend , and be do what they 
 could to lessen their suffering . some have even remove the great part 
 of their clothing in order to furnish head - rest and pallet for the 
 wound . here and there in the shadow dark kneeling figure might be 
 see , and the measured sound of their prayer ring through the aisle , 
 with a groan now and again , or a choke gasp as some poor sufferer 
 battle for breath . the dim , yellow light stream over the earnest 
 pain - draw face , and the tattered mud - colour figure , would have make 
 it a fitting study for any of those Low Country painter whose picture 
 I see long afterwards at the Hague . 

 on Thursday morning , the third day after the battle , we be all 
 convey into Bridgewater , where we be confine for the remainder 
 of the week in St. Mary 's Church , the very one from the tower of which 
 Monmouth and his commander have inspect Feversham 's position . the more 
 we hear of the fight from the soldier and other , the more clear it 
 become that , but for the most unfortunate accident , there be every 
 chance that our night attack might have succeed . there be scarcely a 
 fault which a General could commit which Feversham have not be guilty 
 of . he have think too lightly of his enemy , and leave his camp entirely 
 open to a surprise . when the firing break out he spring from his couch , 
 but fail to find his wig , he have grope about his tent while the 
 battle be be decide , and only come out when it be well - nigh over . 
 all be agree that have it not be for the chance of the Bussex Rhine 
 have be overlook by our guide and scout , we should have be 
 among the tent before the man could have be call to arm . only 
 this and the fiery energy of John Churchill , the second in command , 
 afterwards well know under a high name , both to French and to 
 english history , prevent the Royal army from meet with a reverse 
 which might have alter the result of the campaign.(note K , Appendix . ) 
 should ye hear or read , then , my dear child , that Monmouth 's rise 
 be easily put down , or that it be hopeless from the first , remember 
 that I , who be concern in it , say confidently that it really tremble 
 in the balance , and that this handful of resolute peasant with their 
 pike and their scythe be within an ace of alter the whole 
 course of english history . the ferocity of the Privy Council , after the 
 rebellion be quell , arise from their knowledge of how very close it 
 have be to success . 

 I do not wish to say too much of the cruelty and barbarity of the 
 victor , for it be not good for your childish ear to hear of such 
 doing . the sluggard Feversham and the brutal Kirke have earn 
 themselves a name in the West , which be second only to that of the arch 
 villain who come after they . as for their victim , when they have hang 
 and quarter and do their wicked bad upon they , at least they leave 
 their name in their own little village , to be treasure up and hand 
 from generation to generation , as brave man and true who have die for a 
 noble cause . go now to Milverton , or to Wiveliscombe , or to Minehead , or 
 to Colyford , or to any village through the whole breadth and length of 
 Somersetshire , and you will find that they have not forget what 
 they proudly call their martyr . but where now be Kirke and where be 
 Feversham ? their name be preserve , it be true , but preserve in a 
 county 's hatred . who can fail to see now that these man in punish 
 other bring a far heavy punishment upon themselves ? their sin hath 
 indeed find they out . 

 they do all that wicked and callous - hearted man could do , know well 
 that such deed be acceptable to the cold - blooded , bigote hypocrite 
 who sit upon the throne . they work to win his favour , and they win it . 
 man be hang and cut down and hang again . every cross - road in the 
 country be ghastly with gibbet . there be not an insult or a contumely 
 which might make the pang of death more unendurable , which be not 
 heap upon these long - suffer man ; yet it be proudly recount in 
 their native shire that of all the host of victim there be not one who 
 do not meet his end with a firm lip , protest that if the thing be 
 to do again he be ready to do it . 

 at the end of a week or two news come of the fugitive . Monmouth , it 
 seem , have be capture by Portman 's yellow coat when try to make 
 his way to the New Forest , whence he hop to escape to the continent . 
 he be drag , gaunt , unshaven , and tremble , out of a bean - field in 
 which he have take refuge , and be carry to Ringwood , in Hampshire . 
 strange rumour reach we concern his behaviour -- rumour which come 
 to our ear through the coarse jest of our guard . some say that he 
 have go on his knee to the yokel who have seize he . other that he 
 have write to the King offer to do anything , even to throw over the 
 protestant cause , to save his head from the scaffold.(note L , Appendix . ) 
 we laugh at these story at the time , and set they down as invention 
 of our enemy . it seem too impossible that at a time when his 
 supporter be so sternly and so loyally stand true to he , he , 
 their leader , with the eye of all man upon he , should be show less 
 courage than every little drummer - boy display , who trip along at the 
 head of his regiment upon the field of battle . alas ! time show that 
 the story be indeed true , and that there be no depth of infamy to 
 which this unhappy man would not descend , in the hope of prolong 
 for a few year that existence which have prove a curse to so many who 
 trust he . 

 of Saxon no news have come , good or bad , which encourage I to hope that 
 he have find a hiding - place for himself . Reuben be still confine to 
 his couch by his wound , and be under the care and protection of 
 Major Ogilvy . the good gentleman come to see I more than once , and 
 endeavour to add to my comfort , until I make he understand that it 
 pain I to find myself upon a different footing to the brave fellow 
 with whom I have share the peril of the campaign . one great favour he 
 do I in write to my father , and inform he that I be well and 
 in no press danger . in reply to this letter I have a stout Christian 
 answer from the old man , bid I to be of good courage , and quote 
 largely from a sermon on patience by the Reverend Josiah Seaton of 
 Petersfield . my mother , he say , be in deep distress at my position , 
 but be hold up by her confidence in the decree of Providence . he 
 enclose a draft for Major Ogilvy , commission he to use it in 
 whatever way I should suggest . this money , together with the small hoard 
 which my mother have sew into my collar , prove to be invaluable , for 
 when the gaol fever break out amongst we I be able to get fitting food 
 for the sick , and also to pay for the service of physician , so that 
 the disease be stamp out ere it have time to spread . 

 early in August we be bring from Bridgewater to Taunton , where we 
 be throw with hundred of other into the same wool storehouse where 
 our regiment have be quarter in the early day of the campaign . we 
 gain little by the change , save that we find that our new guard 
 be somewhat more satiate with cruelty than our old one , and be 
 therefore less exact upon their prisoner . not only be friend 
 allow in occasionally to see we , but book and paper could be 
 obtain by the aid of a small present to the sergeant on duty . we be 
 able , therefore , to spend our time with some degree of comfort during 
 the month or more which pass before our trial . 

 one evening I be stand listlessly with my back against the wall , 
 look up at a thin slit of blue sky which show itself through the 
 narrow window , and fancy myself back in the meadow of Havant once 
 more , when a voice fall upon my ear which do , indeed , recall I to my 
 Hampshire home . those deep , husky tone , rise at time into an angry 
 roar , could belong to none other than my old friend the seaman . I 
 approach the door from which the uproar come , and all doubt vanish 
 as I listen to the conversation . 

 ' will not let I pass , will not ye ? ' he be shout . ' let I tell you 
 I have hold on my course when well man than you have ask I to veil 
 topsail . I tell you I have the admiral 's permit , and I will not clew up 
 for a bit of a red - paint cock - boat ; so move from athwart my hawse , or 
 I may chance to run you down . ' 

 ' we do not know nothing about admiral here , ' say the sergeant of the 
 guard . ' the time for see prisoner be over for the day , and if you do 
 not take your ill - favour body out of this I may try the weight o ' my 
 halberd on your back . ' 

 ' I have take blow and give they ere you be ever think of , you 
 land - swab , ' roar old Solomon . ' I be yardarm and yardarm with De 
 Ruyter when you be learn to suck milk ; but , old as I be , I would 
 have you know that I be not condemn yet , and that I be fit to exchange 
 broadside with any lobster - tail piccaroon that ever be trice up to 
 a triangle and have the King 's diamond cut in his back . if I tack back 
 to Major Ogilvy and signal he the way that I have be welcome , he will 
 make your hide red than ever your coat be . ' 

 ' Major Ogilvy ! ' exclaim the sergeant , in a more respectful voice . ' if 
 you have say that your permit be from Major Ogilvy it would have be 
 another thing , but you do rave of admiral and commodore , and God 
 know what other outlandish talk ! ' 

 ' shame on your parent that they should have rear you with so slight 
 a knowledge o ' the King 's English ! ' grumble Solomon . ' in truth , friend , 
 it be a marvel to I why sailor man should be able to show a lead to 
 those on shore in the matter of lingo . for out of seven hundred man in 
 the ship _ worcester_--the same that sink in the Bay of Funchal -- there 
 be not so much as a powder - boy but could understand every word that I 
 say , whereas on shore there be many a great jolterhead , like thyself , 
 who might be a Portugee for all the English that he know , and who 
 stare at I like a pig in a hurricane if I do lint ask he what he 
 make the reckoning , or how many bell have go . ' 

 ' whom be it that you would see ? ' ask the sergeant gruffly . ' you have a 
 most infernally long tongue . ' 

 ' Aye , and a rough one , too , when I have fool to deal with , ' return 
 the seaman . ' if I have you in my watch , lad , for a three year ' cruise , I 
 would make a man of you yet . ' 

 ' pass the old man through ! ' cry the sergeant furiously , and the sailor 
 come stump in , with his bronzed face all screw up and twisted , 
 partly with amusement at his victory over the sergeant , and partly from 
 a great chunk of tobacco which he be will not to stow within his cheek . 
 have glance round without perceive I , he put his hand to his 
 mouth and bellow out my name , with a string of ' Ahoys ! ' which ring 
 through the building . 

 ' here I be , Solomon , ' say I , touch he on the shoulder . 

 ' God bless you , lad ! God bless you ! ' he cry , wring my hand . ' I 
 could not see you , for my port eye be as foggy as the Newfoundland 
 bank , and have be ever since Long Sue Williams of the Point hove a 
 quart pot at it in the Tiger inn nigh thirty year agone . how be you ? 
 all sound , alow and aloft ? ' 

 ' as well as might be , ' I answer . ' I have little to complain of . ' 

 ' none of your stand rigging shoot away ! ' say he . ' no spar cripple ? 
 no shot between wind and water , eh ? you have not be hull , nor 
 rake , nor lay aboard of ? ' 

 ' none of these thing , ' say I , laugh . 

 ' Faith ! you be lean than of old , and have age ten year in two 
 month . you do go forth as smart and trim a fighting ship as over 
 answer helm , and now you be like the same ship when the battle and 
 the storm have take the gloss from her side and tear the love - pennant 
 from her peak . yet be I right glad to see you sound in wind and limb . ' 

 ' I have look upon sight , ' say I , ' which might well add ten year to 
 a man 's age . ' 

 ' aye , aye ! ' he answer , with a hollow groan , shake his head from side 
 to side . ' it be a most accursed affair . yet , bad as the tempest be , the 
 calm will ever come afterwards if you will but ride it out with your 
 anchor place deep in Providence . ah , lad , that be good hold ground ! 
 but if I know you aright , your grief be more for these poor wretch 
 around you than for yourself . ' 

 ' it be , indeed , a sore sight to see they suffer so patiently and 
 uncomplainingly , ' I answer , ' and for such a man , too ! ' 

 ' Aye , the chicken - livere swab ! ' growl the seaman , grind his tooth . 

 ' how be my mother and my father , ' I ask , ' and how come you so far 
 from home ? ' 

 ' Nay , I should have ground on my beef bone have I wait long at my 
 mooring . I cut my cable , therefore , and , make a northerly tack as far 
 as Salisbury , I run down with a fair wind . Thy father hath set his face 
 hard , and go about his work as usual , though much trouble by the 
 Justices , who have twice have he up to winchester for examination , but 
 have find his paper all right and no charge to be bring against he . 
 your mother , poor soul , hath little time to mope or to pipe her eye , for 
 she hath such a sense of duty that , be the ship to founder under she , 
 it be a plate galleon to a china orange that she would stand fast in the 
 caboose curing marigold or roll pastry . they have take to prayer 
 as some would to rum , and warm their heart with it when the wind of 
 misfortune blow chill . they be right glad that I should come down to 
 you , and I give they the word of a sailor that I would get you out of 
 the bilbo if it might anyhow be do . ' 

 ' get I out , Solomon ! ' say I ; ' nay , that may be put outside the 
 question . how could you get I out ? ' 

 ' there be many way , ' he answer , sink his voice to a whisper , and 
 nod his grizzle head as one who talk upon what have cost he much 
 time and think . ' there be scuttle . ' 

 ' scuttle ? ' 

 ' aye , lad ! when I be quartermaster of the galley _ Providence _ in the 
 second dutch war , we be catch betwixt a lee shore and Van Tromp 's 
 squadron , so that after fight until our stick be shoot away and our 
 scupper be arun with blood , we be carry by boarding and send as 
 prisoner to the Texel . we be stow away in iron in the afterhold , 
 amongst the bilge water and the rat , with hatch batten down and 
 guard atop , but even then they could not keep we , for the iron get 
 adrift , and Will Adams , the carpenter 's mate , pick a hole in the seam 
 so that the vessel nearly founder , and in the confusion we fall upon 
 the prize crew , and , use our fetter as cudgel , regain possession 
 of the vessel . but you smile , as though there be little hope from any 
 such plan ! ' 

 ' if this wool - house be the galley _ Providence _ and Taunton Deane be 
 the Bay of Biscay , it might be attempt , ' I say . 

 ' I have indeed get out o ' the channel , ' he answer , with a wrinkle 
 brow . ' there be , however , another most excellent plan which I have 
 conceive , which be to blow up the building . ' 

 ' to blow it up ! ' I cry . 

 ' aye ! a brace of keg and a slow match would do it any dark night . then 
 where would be these wall which now shut ye in ? ' 

 ' where would be the folk that be now inside they ! ' I ask . ' would you 
 not blow they up as well ? ' 

 ' plague take it , I have forget that , ' cry Solomon . ' Nay , then , I leave 
 it with you . what have you to propose ? do but give your sailing order , 
 and , with or without a consort , you will find that I will steer by they 
 as long as this old hulk can answer to her helm . ' 

 ' then my advice be , my dear old friend , ' say I , ' that you leave matter 
 to take their course , and hie back to Havant with a message from I to 
 those who know I , tell they to be of good cheer , and to hope for the 
 good . neither you nor any other man can help I now , for I have throw 
 in my lot with these poor folk , and I would not leave they if I could . 
 do what you can to cheer my mother 's heart , and commend I to Zachary 
 Palmer . your visit hath be a joy to I , and your return will be the 
 same to they . you can serve I well so than by bid here . ' 

 ' sink I if I like go back without a blow strike , ' he growl . ' yet 
 if it be your will there be an end of the matter . tell I , lad . have 
 that lank - spar , slab - side , herring - gutte friend of yours play 
 you false ? for if he have , by the eternal , old as I be , my hanger shall 
 scrape acquaintance with the longshore tuck which hang at his girdle . I 
 know where he hath lay himself up , moor stem and stern , all snug and 
 shipshape , wait for the turn of the tide . ' 

 ' what , Saxon ! ' I cry . ' do you indeed know where he be ? for God 's sake 
 speak low , for it would mean a commission and five hundred good pound 
 to any one of these soldier could he lay hand upon he . ' 

 ' they be scarce like to do that , ' say Solomon . ' on my journey hither I 
 chance to put into port at a place call Bruton , where there be an 
 inn that will compare with most , and the skipper be a wench with a glib 
 tongue and a merry eye . I be drink a glass of spiced ale , as be my 
 custom about six bell of the middle watch , when I chance to notice a 
 great lanky carter , who be load up a waggon in the yard with a cargo 
 o ' beer cask . look close it seem to I that the man 's nose , 
 like the beak of a goshawk , and his glint eye with the lid only 
 half - reef , be know to I , but when I overheard he swear to 
 himself in good High Dutch , then his figurehead come back to I in 
 a moment . I put out into the yard , and touch he on the shoulder . 
 zound , lad ! you should have see he spring back and spit at I like 
 a wildcat with every hair of his head in a bristle . he whip a knife 
 from under his smock , for he think , doubtless , that I be about to 
 earn the reward by hand he over to the red - coat . I tell he that 
 his secret be safe with I , and I ask he if he have hear that you 
 be lay by the heel . he answer that he know it , and that he would 
 be answerable that no harm befell you , though in truth it seem to I 
 that he have his hand full in trim his own sail , without act as 
 pilot to another . however , there I leave he , and there I shall find he 
 again if so be as he have do you an injury . ' 

 ' Nay , ' I answer , ' I be right glad that he have find this refuge . 
 we do separate upon a difference of opinion , but I have no cause 
 to complain of he . in many way he hath show I both kindness and 
 goodwill . ' 

 ' he be as crafty as a purser 's clerk , ' quoth Solomon . ' I have see 
 Reuben Lockarby , who send his love to you . he be still keep in his bunk 
 from his wound , but he meet with good treatment . Major Ogilvy tell I 
 that he have make such interest for he that there be every chance that 
 he will gain his discharge , the more particularly since he be not 
 present at the battle . your own chance of pardon would , he think , be 
 great if you have fight less stoutly , but you have mark yourself 
 as a dangerous man , more especially as you have the love of many of the 
 common folk among the rebel . ' 

 the good old seaman stay with I until late in the night , listen to 
 my adventure , and narrate in return the simple gossip of the village , 
 which be of more interest to the absent wanderer than the rise and fall 
 of empire . before he leave he draw a great handful of silver piece 
 from his pouch , and go round amongst the prisoner , listen to their 
 want , and do what he could with rough sailor talk and drop coin 
 to lighten their trouble . there be a language in the kindly eye and 
 the honest brow which all man may understand ; and though the seaman 's 
 speech might have be in Greek , for all that they convey to the 
 Somersetshire peasant , yet they crowd round he as he depart and 
 call blessing upon his head . I feel as though he have bring a whiff 
 of his own pure ocean breeze into our close and noisome prison , and 
 leave we the sweet and the healthier . 

 late in August the judge start from London upon that wicked journey 
 which blight the life and the home of so many , and hath leave a 
 memory in the county through which they pass which shall never fade 
 while a father can speak to a son . we hear report of they from day to 
 day , for the guard take pleasure in detail they with many coarse and 
 foul jest , that we might know what be in store for we , and lose none 
 of what they call the pleasure of anticipation . at Winchester the 
 sainted and honour Lady Alice Lisle be sentence by Chief Justice 
 Jeffreys to be burn alive , and the exertion and prayer of her 
 friend could scarce prevail upon he to allow she the small boon of 
 the axe instead of the faggot . her graceful head be hew from her 
 body amidst the groan and the cry of a weeping multitude in the 
 market - place of the town . at Dorchester the slaughter be wholesale . 
 three hundred be condemn to death , and seventy - four be actually 
 execute , until the most loyal and tory of the country squire have to 
 complain of the universal presence of the dangle body . thence the 
 judge proceed to exeter and thence to Taunton , which they reach in 
 the first week of September , more like furious and ravenous beast which 
 have taste blood and can not quench their craving for slaughter , than 
 just - minded man , train to distinguish the various degree of guilt , or 
 to pick out the innocent and screen he from injustice . a rare field 
 be open for their cruelty , for in Taunton alone there lie a thousand 
 hapless prisoner , many of whom be so little train to express their 
 thought , and so hamper by the strange dialect in which they speak , 
 that they might have be bear dumb for all the chance they have of 
 make either judge or counsel understand the pleading which they 
 wish to lay before they . 

 it be on a Monday evening that the Lord Chief Justice make his entry . 
 from one of the window of the room in which we be confine I see he 
 pass . first ride the dragoon with their standard and kettledrum , then 
 the javelin - man with their halberd , and behind they the line of coach 
 full of the high dignitary of the law . last of all , draw by six 
 long - tail Flemish mare , come a great open coach , thickly crust 
 with gold , in which , recline amidst velvet cushion , sit the infamous 
 Judge , wrap in a cloak of crimson plush with a heavy white periwig 
 upon his head , which be so long that it drop down over his 
 shoulder . they say that he wear scarlet in order to strike terror into 
 the heart of the people , and that his court be for the same reason 
 drape in the colour of blood . as for himself , it hath ever be the 
 custom , since his wickedness hath come to be know to all man , to 
 picture he as a man whose expression and feature be as monstrous and 
 as hideous as be the mind behind they . this be by no mean the case . 
 on the contrary , he be a man who , in his young day , must have be 
 remarkable for his extreme beauty.(1 ) he be not , it be true , very old , 
 as year go , when I see he , but debauchery and low living have leave 
 their trace upon his countenance , without , however entirely destroy 
 the regularity and the beauty of his feature . he be dark , more like a 
 Spaniard than an Englishman , with black eye and olive complexion . his 
 expression be lofty and noble , but his temper be so easily aflame that 
 the slight cross or annoyance would set he rave like a madman , 
 with blaze eye and foam mouth . I have see he myself with the 
 froth upon his lip and his whole face twitch with passion , like 
 one who hath the fall sickness . yet his other emotion be under as 
 little control , for I have hear say that a very little would cause he 
 to sob and to weep , more especially when he have himself be slight by 
 those who be above he . he be , I believe , a man who have great power 
 either for good or for evil , but by pander to the dark side of 
 his nature and neglect the other , he bring himself to be as near 
 a fiend as it be possible for a man to be . it must indeed have be an 
 evil government where so vile and foul - mouthed a wretch be choose out 
 to hold the scale of justice . as he drive past , a Tory gentleman 
 riding by the side of his coach draw his attention to the face of 
 the prisoner look out at he . he glance up at they with a quick , 
 malicious gleam of his white tooth , then settle down again amongst the 
 cushion . I observe that as he pass not a hat be raise among the 
 crowd , and that even the rude soldier appear to look upon he half 
 in terror , half in disgust , as a lion might look upon some foul , 
 blood - suck bat which batten upon the prey which he have himself 
 strike down . 

 ( 1 ) the painting of Jeffreys in the National Portrait Gallery more 
 than bear out Micah Clarke 's remark . he be the handsome man in the 
 collection . 



 chapter XXXV . of the Devil in Wig and Gown 

 there be no delay in the work of slaughter . that very night the great 
 gallow be erect outside the White Hart inn . hour after hour we could 
 hear the blow of mallet and the sawing of beam , mingle with the 
 shouting and the ribald chorus of the Chief Justice 's suite , who be 
 carouse with the officer of the Tangiers regiment in the front room , 
 which overlook the gibbet . amongst the prisoner the night be pass 
 in prayer and meditation , the stout - hearted holding forth to their 
 weak brother , and exhort they to play the man , and to go to 
 their death in a fashion which should be an example to true protestant 
 throughout the world . the Puritan divine have be mostly string up 
 off - hand immediately after the battle , but a few be leave to sustain 
 the courage of their flock , and to show they the way upon the scaffold . 
 never have I see anything so admirable as the cool and cheerful bravery 
 wherewith these poor clown face their fate . their courage on the 
 battlefield pal before that which they show in the shamble of the 
 law . so amid the low murmur of prayer and appeal for mercy to God from 
 tongue which never yet ask mercy from man , the morning break , the 
 last morning which many of we be to spend upon earth . 

 the court should have open at nine , but my Lord Chief Justice be 
 indisposed , have sit up somewhat late with Colonel Kirke . it be 
 nearly eleven before the trumpeter and crier announce that he have 
 take his seat . one by one my fellow - prisoner be call out by name , 
 the more prominent be choose first . they go out from amongst we 
 amid hand - shaking and blessing , but we see and hear no more of they , 
 save that a sudden fierce rattle of kettledrum would rise up now and 
 again , which be , as our guard tell we , to drown any die word which 
 might fall from the sufferer and bear fruit in the breast of those who 
 hear they . with firm step and smile face the roll of martyr go 
 forth to their fate during the whole of that long autumn day , until the 
 rough soldier of the guard stand silent and awe in the presence of 
 a courage which they could not but recognise as high and nobler than 
 their own . folk may call it a trial that they receive , and a trial it 
 really be , but not in the sense that we englishman use it . it be but 
 be hale before a Judge , and insult before be drag to the 
 gibbet . the court - house be the thorny path which lead to the scaffold . 
 what use to put a witness up , when he be shout down , curse at , 
 and threaten by the Chief Justice , who bellow and swear until the 
 frightened burgher in Fore Street could hear he ? I have hear from 
 those who be there that day that he rave like a demoniac , and that 
 his black eye shine with a vivid vindictive brightness which be scarce 
 human . the jury shrink from he as from a venomous thing when he 
 turn his baleful glance upon they . at time , as I have be tell , his 
 sternness give place to a still more terrible merriment , and he would 
 lean back in his seat of justice and laugh until the tear hop down 
 upon his ermine . nearly a hundred be either execute or condemn to 
 death upon that opening day . 

 I have expect to be amongst the first of those call , and no doubt I 
 should have be so but for the exertion of Major Ogilvy . as it be , 
 the second day pass , but I still find myself overlook . on the 
 third and fourth day the slaughter be slacken , not on account of 
 any awakening grace on the part of the Judge , but because the great tory 
 landowner , and the chief supporter of the Government , have still some 
 bowel of compassion , which revolt at this butchery of defenceless 
 man . have it not be for the influence which these gentleman bring 
 to bear upon the Judge , I have no doubt at all that Jeffreys would have 
 hang the whole eleven hundred prisoner then confine in Taunton . as 
 it be , two hundred and fifty fell victim to this accursed monster 's 
 thirst for human blood . 

 on the eighth day of the assize there be but fifty of we leave in 
 the wool warehouse . for the last few day prisoner have be try 
 in batch of ten and twenty , but now the whole of we be take in 
 a drove , under escort , to the court - house , where as many as could be 
 squeeze in be range in the dock , while the rest be pen , like 
 calf in the market , in the body of the hall . the Judge recline in a 
 high chair , with a scarlet dais above he , while two other Judges , in 
 less elevated seat , be station on either side of he . on the right 
 hand be the jury - box , contain twelve carefully pick man -- tory 
 of the old school -- firm upholder of the doctrine of non - resistance and 
 the divine right of king . much care have be take by the Crown in 
 the choice of these man , and there be not one of they but would have 
 sentence his own father have there be so much as a suspicion that he 
 lean to Presbyterianism or to Whiggery . just under the Judge be a 
 broad table , cover with green cloth and strew with paper . on 
 the right hand of this be a long array of Crown lawyer , grim , 
 ferret - face man , each with a sheaf of paper in his hand , which they 
 sniff through again and again , as though they be so many bloodhound 
 pick up the trail along which they be to hunt we down . on the other 
 side of the table sit a single fresh - faced young man , in silk gown and 
 wig , with a nervous , shuffle manner . this be the barrister , Master 
 Helstrop , whom the Crown in its clemency have allow we for our defence , 
 lest any should be bold enough to say that we have not have every fairness 
 in our trial . the remainder of the court be fill with the servant 
 of the Justices ' retinue and the soldier of the garrison , who use the 
 place as their common lounge , look on the whole thing as a mighty 
 cheap form of sport , and roar with laughter at the rude banter and 
 coarse pleasantry of his Lordship . 

 the clerk have gabble through the usual form that we , the prisoner 
 at the bar , have shake off the fear of God , have unlawfully and 
 traitorously assemble , and so onwards , the Lord Justice proceed to 
 take matter into his own hand , as be his will not . 

 ' I trust that we shall come well out of this ! ' he break out . ' I 
 trust that no judgment will fall upon this building ! be ever so much 
 wickedness fit into one court - house before ? who ever see such an 
 array of villainous face ? ah , rogue , I see a rope ready for every 
 one of ye ! art not afraid of judgment ? art not afraid of hell - fire ? you 
 grey - bearded rascal in the corner , how come it that you have not have 
 more of the grace of God in you than to take up arm against your most 
 gracious and love sovereign ? ' 

 ' I have follow the guidance of my conscience , my Lord , ' say the 
 venerable cloth - worker of Wellington , to whom he speak . 

 ' ha , your conscience ! ' howl Jeffreys . ' a ranter with a conscience ! 
 where have your conscience be these two month back , you villain and 
 rogue ? your conscience will stand you in little stead , sirrah , when 
 you be dance on nothing with a rope round your neck . be ever such 
 wickedness ? who ever hear such effrontery ? and you , you great hulking 
 rebel , have you not grace enough to cast your eye down , but must need 
 look justice in the face as though you be an honest man ? be you not 
 afeare , sirrah ? do you not see death close upon you ? ' 

 ' I have see that before now , my Lord , and I be not afeare , ' I 
 answer . 

 ' Generation of viper ! ' he cry , throw up his hand . ' the good of 
 father ! the kind of king ! see that my word be place upon the 
 record , clerk ! the most indulgent of parent ! but wayward child 
 must , with all kindness , be flog into obedience . here he break into 
 a savage grin . ' the King will save your own natural parent all far 
 care on your account . if they have wish to keep ye , they should have 
 bring ye up in well principle . rogue , we shall be merciful to 
 ye -- oh , merciful , merciful ! how many be here , recorder ? ' 

 ' fifty and one , my Lord . ' 

 ' oh , sink of villainy ! fifty and one as arrant knave as ever lie on 
 a hurdle ! oh , what a mass of corruption have we here ! who defend the 
 villain ? ' 

 ' I defend the prisoner , your lordship , ' reply the young lawyer . 

 ' Master Helstrop , Master Helstrop ! ' cry Jeffreys , shake his great 
 wig until the powder fly out of it ; ' you be in all these dirty case , 
 Master Helstrop . you might find yourself in a parlous condition , Master 
 Helstrop . I think sometimes that I see you yourself in the dock , Master 
 Helstrop . you may yourself soon need the help of a gentleman of the long 
 robe , Master Helstrop . oh , have a care ! have a care ! ' 

 ' the brief be from the Crown , your lordship , ' the lawyer answer , in a 
 quavering voice . 

 ' must I be answer back , then ! ' roar Jeffreys , his black eye blaze 
 with the rage of a demon . ' be I to be insult in my own court ? be every 
 five - groat piece of a pleader , because he chance to have a wig and a 
 gown , to browbeat the Lord Justice , and to fly in the face of the ruling 
 of the Court ? oh , Master Helstrop , I fear that I shall live to see some 
 evil come upon you ! ' 

 ' I crave your Lordship 's pardon ! ' cry the faint - hearted barrister , 
 with his face the colour of his brief . 

 ' keep a guard upon your word and upon your action ? ' Jeffreys answer , 
 in a menacing voice . ' see that you be not too zealous in the cause 
 of the scum of the earth . how now , then ? what do these one and fifty 
 villain desire to say for themselves ? what be their lie ? gentleman of 
 the jury , I beg that ye will take particular notice of the cut - throat 
 face of these man . ' tis well that Colonel Kirke hath afford the Court 
 a sufficient guard , for neither justice nor the Church be safe at their 
 hand . ' 

 ' forty of they desire to plead guilty to the charge of take up arm 
 against the king , ' reply our barrister . 

 ' ah ! ' roar the Judge . ' be ever such unparalleled impudence ? be there 
 ever such brazen effrontery ? guilty , quotha ! have they express their 
 repentance for this sin against a most kind and long - suffer monarch ! 
 put down those word on the record , clerk ! ' 

 ' they have refuse to express repentance , your lordship ! ' reply the 
 counsel for the defence . 

 ' oh , the parricide ! oh , the shameless rogue ! ' cry the Judge . ' put 
 the forty together on this side of the enclosure . oh , gentleman , have ye 
 ever see such a concentration of vice ? see how baseness and wickedness 
 can stand with head erect ! oh , hardened monster ! but the other eleven . 
 how can they expect we to believe this transparent falsehood -- this 
 palpable device ? how can they foist it upon the Court ? ' 

 ' my Lord , their defence hath not yet be advance ! ' stammer Master 
 Helstrop . 

 ' I can sniff a lie before it be utter , ' roar the Judge , by no mean 
 abash . ' I can read it as quick as ye can think it . come , come , the 
 Court 's time be precious . put forward a defence , or seat yourself , and 
 let judgment be pass . ' 

 ' these man , my Lord , ' say the counsel , who be tremble until the 
 parchment rattle in his hand . ' these eleven man , my lord-- ' 

 ' eleven devil , my Lord , ' interrupt Jeffreys . 

 ' they be innocent peasant , my Lord , who love God and the king , and 
 have in no wise mingle themselves in this recent business . they have 
 be drag from their home , my Lord , not because there be suspicion 
 against they , but because they could not satisfy the greed of certain 
 common soldier who be balk of plunder in-- ' 

 ' oh , shame , shame ! ' cry Jeffreys , in a voice of thunder . ' oh , 
 threefold shame , Master Helstrop ! be you not content with bolster 
 up rebel , but you must go out of your way to slander the king 's troop ? 
 what be this world come to ? what , in a word , be the defence of these 
 rogue ? ' 

 ' an alibi , your Lordship . ' 

 ' ha ! the common plea of every scoundrel . have they witness ? ' 

 ' we have here a list of forty witness , your Lordship . they be wait 
 below , many of they have come great distance , and with much toil and 
 trouble . ' 

 ' who be they ? what be they ? ' cry Jeffreys . 

 ' they be country folk , your Lordship . cottager and farmer , the 
 neighbour of these poor man , who know they well , and can speak as to 
 their doing . ' 

 ' cottager and farmer ! ' the Judge shout . ' why , then , they be draw 
 from the very class from which these man come . would you have we believe 
 the oath of those who be themselves whig , Presbyterians , Somersetshire 
 ranter , the pothouse companion of the man whom we be try ? I 
 warrant they have arrange it all snugly over their beer -- snugly , 
 snugly , the rogue ! ' 

 ' will you not hear the witness , your lordship ? ' cry our counsel , 
 sham into some little sense of manhood by this outrage . 

 ' not a word from they , sirrah , ' say Jeffreys . ' it be a question whether 
 my duty towards my kind master the King -- write down " kind master , " 
 clerk -- doth not warrant I in place all your witness in the dock as 
 the aider and abettor of treason . ' 

 ' if it please your lordship , ' cry one of the prisoner , ' I have for 
 witness Mr. Johnson , of Nether Stowey , who be a good tory , and also 
 Mr. Shepperton , the clergyman . ' 

 ' the more shame to they to appear in such a cause , ' reply Jeffreys . 
 ' what be we to say , gentleman of the jury , when we see county gentry 
 and the clergy of the Established Church support treason and 
 rebellion in this fashion ? surely the last day be at hand ! you be a 
 most malignant and dangerous Whig to have so far draw they from their 
 duty . ' 

 ' but hear I , my Lord ! ' cry one of the prisoner . 

 ' hear you , you bellow calf ! ' shout the Judge . ' we can hear naught 
 else . do you think that you be back in your conventicle , that you 
 should dare to raise your voice in such a fashion ? hear you , quotha ! we 
 shall hear you at the end of a rope , ere many day . ' 

 ' we scarce think , your lordship , ' say one of the Crown lawyer , 
 spring to his foot amid a great rustling of paper , ' we scarce think 
 that it be necessary for the Crown to state any case . we have already 
 hear the whole tale of this most damnable and execrable attempt many 
 time over . the man in the dock before your Lordship have for the most 
 part confess to their guilt , and of those who hold out there be not 
 one who have give we any reason to believe that he be innocent of 
 the foul crime lay to his charge . the gentleman of the long robe be 
 therefore unanimously of opinion that the jury may at once be require 
 to pronounce a single verdict upon the whole of the prisoner . ' 

 ' which is-- ? ' ask Jeffreys , glance round at the foreman-- 

 ' guilty , your lordship , ' say he , with a grin , while his brother juryman 
 nod their head and laugh to one another . 

 ' of course , of course ! guilty as Judas Iscariot ! ' cry the Judge , 
 look down with exultant eye at the throng of peasant and burgher 
 before he . ' move they a little forwards , usher , that I may see they 
 to more advantage . oh , ye cunning one ! be ye not take ? be ye not 
 compass around ? where now can ye fly ? do ye not see hell opening 
 at your foot ? eh ? be ye not afraid ? oh , short , short shall be your 
 shrift ! ' the very devil seem to be in the man , for as he speak he 
 writhe with unholy laughter , and drum his hand upon the red cushion 
 in front of he . I glance round at my companion , but their face be 
 all as though they have be chisel out of marble . if he have hop to 
 see a moist eye or a quivering lip , the satisfaction be deny he . 

 ' have I my way , ' say he , ' there be not one of ye but should swing for 
 it . Aye , and if I have my way , some of those whose stomach be too nice 
 for this work , and who profess to serve the King with their lip while 
 they intercede for his bad enemy , should themselves have cause to 
 remember Taunton assize . oh , most ungrateful rebel ! have ye not 
 hear how your most soft - hearted and compassionate monarch , the good of 
 man -- put it down in the record , clerk -- on the intercession of that great 
 and charitable statesman , Lord Sunderland -- mark it down , clerk -- hath 
 have pity on ye ? hath it not melt ye ? hath it not make ye loathe 
 yourself ? I declare , when I think of it'--here , with a sudden catching 
 of the breath , he burst out a - sobbing , the tear run down his 
 cheeks--'when I think of it , the christian forbearance , the ineffable 
 mercy , it doth bring forcibly to my mind that great Judge before whom 
 all of we -- even I -- shall one day have to render an account . shall I 
 repeat it , clerk , or have you it down ? ' 

 ' I have it down , your Lordship . ' 

 ' then write " sob " in the margin . ' tis well that the King should 
 know our opinion on such matter . know , then , you most traitorous and 
 unnatural rebel , that this good father whom ye have spurn have step 
 in between yourself and the law which ye have offend . at his 
 command we withhold from ye the chastisement which ye have merit . 
 if ye can indeed pray , and if your soul - curse conventicle have not 
 drive all grace out of ye , drop on your knee and offer up thank when 
 I tell ye that he hath ordain that ye shall all have a free pardon . ' 
 here the Judge rise from his seat as though about to descend from the 
 tribunal , and we gaze upon each other in the utmost astonishment at 
 this most unlooke - for end to the trial . the soldier and lawyer be 
 equally amazed , while a hum of joy and applause rise up from the few 
 country folk who have dare to venture within the accursed precinct . 

 ' this pardon , however , ' continue Jeffreys , turn round with a 
 malicious smile upon his face , ' be couple with certain condition and 
 limitation . ye shall all be remove from here to Poole , in chain , 
 where ye shall find a vessel await ye . with other ye shall be stow 
 away in the hold of the say vessel , and convey at the King 's expense 
 to the Plantations , there to be sell as slave . God send ye master who 
 will know by the free use of wood and leather to soften your stubborn 
 thought and incline your mind to well thing . ' he be again about to 
 withdraw , when one of the Crown lawyer whisper something across to 
 he . 

 ' well think of , coz , ' cry the Judge . ' I have forget . bring back the 
 prisoner , usher ! perhaps ye think that by the Plantations I mean his 
 Majesty 's american dominion . unhappily , there be too many of your 
 breed in that part already . Ye would fall among friend who might 
 strengthen ye in your evil course , and so risk your salvation . to send 
 ye there would be to add one brand to another and yet hope to put 
 out the fire . by the Plantations , therefore , I mean Barbadoes and the 
 Indies , where ye shall live with the other slave , whose skin may be 
 blacker than your , but I dare warrant that their soul be more white . ' 
 with this concluding speech the trial end , and we be lead back 
 through the crowded street to the prison from which we have be 
 bring . on either side of the street , as we pass , we could see 
 the limb of former companion dangle in the wind , and their head 
 grinning at we from the top of pole and pike . no savage country in 
 the heart of heathen Africa could have present a more dreadful sight 
 than do the old english town of Taunton when Jeffreys and Kirke have 
 the ordering of it . there be death in the air , and the townsfolk creep 
 silently about , scarcely dare to wear black for those whom they have 
 love and lose , lest it should be twist into an act of treason . 

 we be scarce back in the wool - house once more when a file of 
 guard with a sergeant enter , escort a long , pale - face man with 
 protrude tooth , whose bright blue coat and white silk breech , 
 gold - head sword , and glance shoe - buckle , proclaim he to be one 
 of those London exquisite whom interest or curiosity have bring down 
 to the scene of the rebellion . he trip along upon his tiptoe like a 
 french dancing - master , wave his scented kerchief in front of his 
 thin high nose , and inhale aromatic salt from a blue phial which he 
 carry in his left hand . 

 ' by the Lard ! ' he cry , ' but the stench of these filthy wretch be 
 enough to stap one 's breath . it be , by the Lard ! smite my vital if 
 I would venture among they if I be not a very rake hell . be there a 
 danger of prison fever , sergeant ? heh ? ' 

 ' they be all sound as roach , your honour , ' say the under - officer , 
 touch his cap . 

 ' heh , heh ! ' cry the exquisite , with a shrill treble laugh . ' it be 
 not often ye have a visit from a person of quality , I will warrant . it 
 be business , sergeant , business ! " Auri sacrum fames"--you remember what 
 Virgilius Maro say , sergeant ? ' 

 ' never hear the gentleman speak , sir -- at least not to my knowledge , 
 sir , ' say the sergeant . 

 ' heh , heh ! never hear he speak , heh ? that will do for Slaughter 's , 
 sergeant . that will set they all in a titter at Slaughter 's . pink my 
 soul ! but when I venture on a story the folk complain that they can not 
 get serve , for the drawer laugh until there be no work to be get out 
 of they . oh , lie I bleed , but these be a filthy and most ungodly 
 crew ! let the musqueteer stand close , sergeant , lest they fly at I . ' 

 ' we shall see to that , your honour . ' 

 ' I have a grant of a dozen of they , and Captain Pogram hath offer I 
 twelve pound a head . but they must be brawny rogue -- strong and brawny , 
 for the voyage kill many , sergeant , and the climate doth also tell upon 
 they . now here be one whom I must have . yes , in very truth he be a 
 young man , and hath much life in he and much strength . tick he off , 
 sergeant , tick he off ! ' 

 ' his name be Clarke , ' say the soldier . ' I have mark he down . ' 

 ' if this be the clerk I would I have a parson to match he , ' cry the 
 fop , sniff at his bottle . ' do you see the pleasantry , sergeant . heh , 
 heh ! do your sluggish mind rise to the occasion ? strike I purple , but 
 I be in excellent fettle ! there be yonder man with the brown face , you 
 can mark he down . and the young man beside he , also . tick he off . ha , 
 he wave his hand towards I ! stand firm , sergeant ! where be my salt ? 
 what be it , man , what be it ? ' 

 ' if it plaize your han'r , ' say the young peasant , ' if so be as you 
 have choose I to be of a pairty , I trust that you will allow my vaither 
 yander to go with we also . ' 

 ' Pshaw , pshaw ! ' cry the fop , ' you be beyond reason , you be indeed ! 
 who ever hear of such a thing ? honour forbid it ! how could I foist 
 an old man upon mine honest friend , Captain Pogram . Fie , fie ! Split 
 I asunder if he would not say that I have chouse he ! there be yonder 
 lusty fellow with the red head , sergeant ! the black will think he be 
 a - fire . those , and these six stout yokel , will make up my dozen . ' 

 ' you have indeed the pick of they , ' say the sergeant . 

 ' aye , sink I , but I have a quick eye for horse , man , or woman ! I will 
 pick the good of a batch with most . twelve twelve , close on a hundred 
 and fifty piece , sergeant , and all for a few word , my friend , all for 
 a few word . I do but send my wife , a demme handsome woman , mark you , 
 and dress in the mode , to my good friend the secretary to ask for some 
 rebel . " how many ? " say he . " a dozen will do , " say she . it be all 
 do in a penstroke . what a cursed fool she be not to have ask for a 
 hundred ! but what be this , sergeant , what be this ? ' 

 a small , brisk , pippin - face fellow in a riding - coat and high boot have 
 come clank into the wool - house with much assurance and authority , 
 with a great old - fashioned sword trail behind he , and a riding - whip 
 switching in his hand . 

 ' Morning , sergeant ! ' say he , in a loud , overbearing voice . ' you may 
 have hear my name ? I be Master John Wooton , of Langmere House , near 
 Dulverton , who bestir himself so for the king , and hath be term 
 by Mr. Godolphin , in the House of Commons , one of the local pillar of 
 the State . those be his word . fine , be they not ? pillar , mark ye , 
 the conceit be that the State be , as it be , a palace or a temple , 
 and the loyal man so many pillar , amongst whom I also be one . I be a 
 local pillar . I have receive a Royal permit , sergeant , to choose from 
 amongst your prisoner ten sturdy rogue whom I may sell as a reward 
 to I for my exertion . draw they up , therefore , that I may make my 
 choice ! ' 

 ' then , sir , we be upon the same errand , ' quoth the Londoner , bow 
 with his hand over his heart , until his sword seem to point straight 
 up to the ceiling . ' the honourable George Dawnish , at your service ! your 
 very humble and devoted servant , sir ! your to command in any or 
 all way . it be a real joy and privilege to I , sir , to make your 
 distinguish acquaintance . Hem ! ' 

 the country squire appear to be somewhat take aback at this shower 
 of London compliment . ' Ahem , sir ! yes , sir ! ' say he , bob his head . 
 ' glad to see you , sir ! most damnably so ! but these man , sergeant ? time 
 press , for to - morrow be Shepton market , and I would fain see my old 
 twenty - score boar once more before he be sell . there be a beefy one . 
 I will have he . ' 

 ' Ged , I have forestall you , ' cry the courtier . ' sink I , but it give 
 I real pain . he be mine . ' 

 ' then this , ' say the other , point with his whip . 

 ' he be mine , too . heh , heh , heh ! strike I stiff , but this be too 
 funny ! ' 

 ' Od 's wound ! how many be yours ! ' cry the Dulverton squire . 

 ' a dozen . Heh , heh ! a round dozen . all those who stand upon this side . 
 pink I , but I have get the good of you there ! the early bird -- you know 
 the old saw ! ' 

 ' it be a disgrace , ' the squire cry hotly . ' a shame and a disgrace . we 
 must need fight for the King and risk our skin , and then when all be 
 do , down come a drove of lacquey in waiting , and snap up the picking 
 before their better be serve . ' 

 ' Lacqueys in waiting , sir ! ' shriek the exquisite . ' s'death , sir ! this 
 toucheth mine honour very nearly ! I have see blood flow , yes , sir , and 
 wound gape on less provocation . Retract , sir , retract ! ' 

 ' away , you clothe - pole ! ' cry the other contemptuously . ' you be come 
 like the other bird of carrion when the fight be o'er . have you be 
 name in full Parliament ? be you a local pillar ? away , away , you 
 tailor 's dummy ! ' 

 ' you insolent clodhopper ! ' cry the fop . ' you most foul - mouthed 
 bumpkin ! the only local pillar that you have ever deserve to make 
 acquaintance with be the whipping - post . ha , sergeant , he lay his 
 hand upon his sword ! stop he , sergeant , stop he , or I may do he an 
 injury . ' 

 ' nay , gentleman , ' cry the under officer . ' this quarrel must not 
 continue here . we must have no brawling within the prison . yet there be 
 a level turf without , and as fine elbow - room as a gentleman could wish 
 for a breather . ' 

 this proposal do not appear to commend itself to either of the angry 
 gentleman , who proceed to exchange the length of their sword , and to 
 promise that each should hear from the other before sunset . our owner , 
 as I may call he , the fop , take his departure at last , and the country 
 squire have choose the next ton swagger off , curse the courtier , 
 the Londoners , the sergeant , the prisoner , and above all , the 
 ingratitude of the government which have make he so small a return 
 for his exertion . this be but the first of many such scene , for the 
 Government , in endeavour to satisfy the claim of its supporter , have 
 promise many more than there be prisoner . I be grieve to say that 
 I have see not only man , but even my own countrywoman , and lady of 
 title to boot , wring their hand and bewail themselves because 
 they be unable to get any of the poor Somersetshire folk to sell as 
 slave . indeed , it be only with difficulty that they could be make 
 to see that their claim upon Government do not give they the right of 
 seize any burgher or peasant who might come in their way , and ship 
 he right off for the Plantations . 

 well , my dear grandchild , from night to night through this long and 
 weary winter I have take you back with I into the past , and make you 
 see scene the player in which be all beneath the turf , save 
 that perhaps here and there some greybeard like myself may have a 
 recollection of they . I understand that you , Joseph , have every morning 
 set down upon paper that which I have narrate the night before . it be 
 as well that you should do so , for your own child and your child 's 
 child may find it of interest , and even perhaps take a pride in 
 hear that their ancestor play a part in such scene . but now 
 the spring be come , and the green be bare of snow , so that there be 
 well thing for you to do than to sit listen to the story of 
 a garrulous old man . Nay , nay , you shake your head , but indeed those 
 young limb want exercise and strengthen and knit together , 
 which can never come from sit toasting round the blaze . besides , my 
 story draw quickly to an end now , for I have never intend to tell you 
 more than the event connect with the western rising . if the closing 
 part hath be of the dreariest , and if all doth not wind up with 
 the ringing of bell and the joining of hand , like the tale in the 
 chap - book , you must blame history and not I . for Truth be a stern 
 mistress , and when one hath once start off with her one must follow 
 on after the jade , though she lead in flat defiance of all the rule and 
 condition which would fain turn that tangle wilderness the world into 
 the trim dutch garden of the story - teller . 

 three day after our trial we be draw up in North Street in front 
 of the Castle with other from the other prison who be to share our 
 fate . we be place four abreast , with a rope connect each rank , 
 and of these rank I count fifty , which would bring our total to two 
 hundred . on each side of we ride dragoon , and in front and behind be 
 company of musqueteer to prevent any attempt at rescue or escape . 
 in this order we set off upon the tenth day of September , amidst the 
 weeping and wail of the townsfolk , many of whom see their son or 
 brother march off into exile without their be able to exchange a 
 last word or embrace with they . some of these poor folk , doddering old 
 man and wrinkle , decrepit woman , toil for mile after we down the 
 high - road , until the rearguard of foot face round upon they , and drive 
 they away with curse and blow from their ramrod . 

 that day we make our way through Yeovil and Sherborne , and on the morrow 
 proceed over the North Downs as far as Blandford , where we be pen 
 together like cattle and leave for the night . on the third day we 
 resume our march through Wimbourne and a line of pretty dorsetshire 
 village -- the last english village which most of we be destine to 
 see for many a long year to come . late in the afternoon the spar and 
 rigging of the shipping in Poole Harbour rise up before we , and in 
 another hour we have descend the steep and craggy path which lead to 
 the town . here we be draw up upon the quay opposite the broad - deck , 
 heavy - spar brig which be destine to carry we into slavery . through 
 all this march we meet with the great kindness from the common people , 
 who flock out from their cottage with fruit and with milk , which 
 they divide amongst we . at other place , at , the risk of their life , 
 dissent minister come forth and stand by the wayside , bless we as 
 we pass , in spite of the rough jeer and oath of the soldier . 

 we be march aboard and lead below by the mate of the vessel , a tall 
 red - faced seaman with ear - ring in his ear , while the captain stand on 
 the poop with his leg apart and a pipe in his mouth , check we off 
 one by one by mean of a list which he hold in his hand . as he look 
 at the sturdy build and rustic health of the peasant , which even their 
 long confinement have be unable to break down , his eye glisten , and 
 he rub his big red hand together with delight . 

 ' show they down , Jem ! ' he keep shout to the mate . ' stow they safe , 
 Jem ! there be lodging for a duchess down there , s'help I , there be 
 lodging for a duchess ! pack them away ! ' 

 one by one we pass before the delighted captain , and down the steep 
 ladder which lead into the hold . here we be lead along a narrow passage , 
 on either side of which open the stall which be prepare for we . as 
 each man come opposite to the one set aside for he he be throw into 
 it by the brawny mate , and fasten down with anklet of iron by the 
 seaman armourer in attendance . it be dark before we be all secure , 
 but the captain come round with a lanthorn to satisfy himself that all 
 his property be really safe . I could hear the mate and he reckon 
 the value of each prisoner , and count what he would fetch in the 
 barbadoe market . 

 ' have you serve out their fodder , Jem ? ' he ask , flash his light 
 into each stall in turn . ' have you see that they have their ration ? ' 

 ' a rye bread loaf and a pint o ' water , ' answer the mate . 

 ' fit for a duchess , s'help I ! ' cry the captain . ' look to this one , 
 Jem . he be a lusty rogue . look to his great hand . he might work for 
 year in the rice - swamp ere the land crab have the picking of he . ' 

 ' aye , we will have smart bidding amid the settler for this lot . ' cod , 
 captain , but you have make a bargain of it ! Od 's bud ! you have do 
 these London fool to some purpose . ' 

 ' what be this ? ' roar the captain . ' here be one who hath not touch 
 his allowance . how now , sirrah , art too dainty in the stomach to eat 
 what your better have eat before you ? ' 

 ' I have no hairt for food , zur , ' the prisoner answer . 

 ' what , you must have your whim and fancy ! you must pick and you must 
 choose ! I tell you , sirrah , that you be mine , body and soul ! twelve 
 good piece I pay for you , and now , forsooth , I be to be tell that you 
 will not eat ! turn to it at this instant , you saucy rogue , or I shall 
 have you trice to the triangle ! ' 

 ' here be another , ' say the mate , ' who sit ever with his head sink upon 
 his breast without spirit or life . ' 

 ' mutinous , obstinate dog ! ' cry the captain . ' what ail you then ? why 
 have you a face like an underwriter in a tempest ? ' 

 ' if it plaize you , zur , ' the prisoner answer , ' oi do but think o ' m ' 
 ould mother at Wellington , and woonder who will kape she now that oi'm 
 go ! ' 

 ' and what be that to I ? ' shout the brutal seaman . ' how can you arrive 
 at your journey 's end sound and hearty if you sit like a sick fowl upon 
 a perch ? laugh , man , and be merry , or I will give you something to weep 
 for . out on you , you chicken - hearted swab , to sulk and fret like a babe 
 new wean ! have you not all that heart could desire ? give he a touch 
 with the rope's - end , Jem , if ever you do observe he fret . it be but 
 to spite we that he doth it . ' 

 ' if it please your honour , ' say a seaman , come hurriedly down from 
 the deck , ' there be a stranger upon the poop who will have speech with 
 your honour . ' 

 ' what manner of man , sirrah ? ' 

 ' surely he be a person of quality , your honour . he be as free wi ' his 
 word as though he be the captain o ' the ship . the boatswain do but 
 jog against he , and he swear so woundily at he and star at he so , 
 wi ' een like a tiger - cat , that Job Harrison say we have ship the 
 devil himsel . ' the man do not like the look of he , your honour ! ' 

 ' who the plague can this spark be ? ' say the skipper . ' go on deck , Jem , 
 and tell he that I be count my live stock , and that I shall be with 
 he anon . ' 

 ' Nay , your honour ! there will trouble come of it unless you come up . he 
 swear that he will not bear to be put off , and that he must see you on 
 the instant . ' 

 ' curse his blood , whoever he be ! ' growl the seaman . ' every cock on 
 his own dunghill . what doth the rogue mean ? be he the Lord High Privy 
 Seal , I would have he to know that I be lord of my own quarter - deck ! ' 
 so say , with many snort of indignation , the mate and the captain 
 withdraw together up the ladder , bang the heavy hatchway down as 
 they pass through . 

 a single oil - lamp swinging from a beam in the centre of the gangway 
 which lead between the row of cell be the only light which be 
 vouchsafe we . by its yellow , murky glimmer we could dimly see the great 
 wooden rib of the vessel , arch up on either side of we , and cross 
 by the huge beam which hold the deck . a grievous stench from foul bilge 
 water poison the close , heavy air . every now and then , with a squeak 
 and a clutter , a rat would dart across the little zone of light and 
 vanish in the gloom upon the further side . heavy breathe all round 
 I show that my companion , weary out by their journey and their 
 suffering , have drop into a slumber . from time to time one could hear 
 the dismal clank of fetter , and the start and incatche of the breath , 
 as some poor peasant , fresh from dream of his humble homestead amid the 
 grove of the Mendips , awake of a sudden to see the great wooden coffin 
 around he , and to breathe the venomous air of the prison ship . 

 I lay long awake full of thought both for myself and for the poor soul 
 around I . at last , however , the measured swash of the water against 
 the side of the vessel and the slight rise and fall have lull I into 
 a sleep , from which I be suddenly arouse by the flashing of a light 
 in my eye . sit up , I find several sailor gather about I , and 
 a tall man with a black cloak swathe round he swing a lanthorn over 
 I . 

 ' that be the man , ' he say . 

 ' come , mate , you be to come on deck ! ' say the seaman armourer . with a 
 few blow from his hammer he knock the iron from my foot . 

 ' follow I ! ' say the tall stranger , and lead the way up the hatchway 
 ladder . it be heavenly to come out into the pure air once more . the 
 star be shin brightly overhead . a fresh breeze blow from the 
 shore , and hum a pleasant tune among the cordage . close beside we 
 the light of the town gleam yellow and cheery . beyond , the moon be 
 peep over the Bournemouth hill . 

 ' this way , sir , ' say the sailor , ' right aft into the cabin , sir . ' 

 still follow my guide , I find myself in the low cabin of the brig . 
 a square shin table stand in the centre , with a bright swing 
 lamp above it . at the further end in the glare of the light sit the 
 captain -- his face shin with greed and expectation . on the table stand 
 a small pile of gold piece , a rum - flask , glass , a tobacco - box , and 
 two long pipe . 

 ' my compliment to you , Captain Clarke , ' say the skipper , bob his 
 round bristling head . ' an honest seaman 's compliment to you . it seem 
 that we be not to be shipmate this voyage , after all . ' 

 ' Captain Micah Clarke must do a voyage of his own , ' say the stranger . 

 at the sound of his voice I spring round in amazement . ' Good Heavens ! ' I 
 cry , ' Saxon ! ' 

 ' you have nick it , ' say he , throw down his mantle and show the 
 well - know face and figure of the soldier of fortune . ' Zounds , man ! if 
 you can pick I out of the Solent , I suppose that I may pick you out of 
 this accursed rat - trap in which I find you . tie and tie , as we say at 
 the green table . in truth , I be huff with you when last we part , 
 but I have have you in my mind for all that . ' 

 ' a seat and a glass , Captain Clarke , ' cry the skipper . ' Od 's bud ! I 
 should think that you would be glad to raise your little finger and wet 
 your whistle after what you have go through . ' 

 I seat myself by the table with my brain in a whirl . ' this be more 
 than I can fathom , ' say I. ' what be the meaning of it , and how come it 
 about ? ' 

 ' for my own part , the meaning be as clear as the glass of my binnacle , ' 
 quoth the seaman . ' your good friend Colonel Saxon , as I understand his 
 name to be , have offer I as much as I could hope to gain by sell 
 you in the Indies . sink it , I may be rough and ready , but my heart be in 
 the right place ! aye , aye ! I would not maroon a man if I could set he 
 free . but we have all to look for ourselves , and trade be dull . ' 

 ' then I be free ! ' say I. 

 ' you be free , ' he answer . ' there be your purchase - money upon the 
 table . you can go where you will , save only upon the land of England , 
 where you be still an outlaw under sentence . ' 

 ' how have you do this , Saxon ? ' I ask . ' be you not afraid for 
 yourself ? ' 

 ' Ho , ho ! ' laugh the old soldier . ' I be a free man , my lad ! I hold my 
 pardon , and care not a maravedi for spy or informer . who should I meet 
 but Colonel Kirke a day or so back . yes , lad ! I meet he in the street , 
 and I cock my hat in his face . the villain lay his hand upon his 
 hilt , and I should have out bilbo and send his soul to hell have they not 
 come between we . I care not the ash of this pipe for Jeffreys or any 
 other of they . I can snap this finger and thumb at they , so ! they would 
 rather see Decimus Saxon 's back than his face , I promise ye ! ' 

 ' but how come this about ? ' I ask . 

 ' why , marry , it be no mystery . cunning old bird be not to be catch 
 with chaff . when I leave you I make for a certain inn where I could count 
 upon find a friend . there I lie by for a while , en cachette , as the 
 Messieurs call it , while I could work out the plan that be in my head . 
 Donner wetter ! but I get a fright from that old seaman friend of your , 
 who should be sell as a picture , for he be of little use as a man . well , 
 I bethink I early in the affair of your visit to Badminton , and of 
 the Duke of B. we shall mention no name , but you can follow my meaning . 
 to he I send a messenger , to the effect that I purpose to purchase my 
 own pardon by let out all that I know concern his double dealing 
 with the rebel . the message be carry to he secretly , and his 
 answer be that I should meet he at a certain spot by night . I send my 
 messenger instead of myself , and he be find in the morning stiff and 
 stark , with more hole in his doublet than ever the tailor make . on 
 this I send again , raise my demand , and insist upon a speedy 
 settlement . he ask my condition . I reply , a free pardon and a 
 command for myself . for you , money enough to land you safely in some 
 foreign country where you can pursue the noble profession of arm . I get 
 they both , though it be like draw tooth from his head . his name hath 
 much power at Court just now , and the King can refuse he nothing . I 
 have my pardon and a command of troop in New England . for you I have 
 two hundred piece , of which thirty have be pay in ransom to the 
 captain , while twenty be due to I for my disbursement over the 
 matter . in this bag you will find the odd hundred and fifty , of which 
 you will pay fifteen to the fisherman who have promise to see you safe 
 to flush . ' 

 I be , as you may readily believe , my dear child , bewilder by this 
 sudden and most unlooke - for turn which event have take . when Saxon have 
 cease to speak I sit as one stun , try to realise what he have say 
 to I . there come a thought into my head , however , which chill the 
 glow of hope and of happiness which have spring up in I at the thought 
 of recover my freedom . my presence have be a support and a comfort 
 to my unhappy companion . would it not be a cruel thing to leave they in 
 their distress ? there be not one of they who do not look to I in his 
 trouble , and to the good of my poor power I have befriend and console 
 they . how could I desert they now ? 

 ' I be much beholden to you , Saxon , ' I say at last , speak slowly and 
 with some difficulty , for the word be hard to utter . ' but I fear that 
 your pain have be throw away . these poor country folk have none to 
 look after or assist they . they be as simple as babe , and as little 
 fit to be land in a strange country . I can not find it in my heart 
 to leave they ! ' 

 Saxon burst out laugh , and lean back in his seat with his long leg 
 stretch straight out and his hand in his breech pocket . 

 ' this be too much ! ' he say at last . ' I see many difficulty in my way , 
 yet I do not foresee this one . you be in very truth the most contrary 
 man that ever stand in neat 's leather . you have ever some outlandish 
 reason for jib and shy like a hot - blooded , half - break colt . yet 
 I think that I can overcome these strange scruple of yours by a little 
 persuasion . ' 

 ' as to the prisoner , Captain Clarke , ' say the seaman , ' I will be as good 
 as a father to they . s'help I , I will , on the word of an honest sailor ! 
 if you should choose to lay out a trifle of twenty piece upon their 
 comfort , I shall see that their food be such as mayhap many of they 
 never get at their own table . they shall come on deck , too , in watch , 
 and have an hour or two o ' fresh air in the day . I can not say fair ! ' 

 ' a word or two with you on deck ! ' say Saxon . he walk out of the cabin 
 and I follow he to the far end of the poop , where we stand lean 
 against the bulwark . one by one the light have go out in the town , 
 until the black ocean beat against a blacker shore . 

 ' you need not have any fear of the future of the prisoner , ' he say , 
 in a low whisper . ' they be not bind for the barbadoe , nor will this 
 skinflint of a captain have the selling of they , for all that he be so 
 cocksure . if he can bring his own skin out of the business , it will be 
 more than I expect . he hath a man aboard his ship who would think no 
 more of give he a tilt over the side than I should . ' 

 ' what mean you , Saxon ? ' I cry . 

 ' Hast ever hear of a man name Marot ? ' 

 ' Hector Marot ! yes , surely I know he well . a highwayman he be , but a 
 mighty stout man with a kind heart beneath a thief 's jacket . ' 

 ' the same . he be as you say a stout man and a resolute swordsman , though 
 from what I have see of his play he be weak in stoccado , and perhaps 
 somewhat too much attach to the edge , and doth not give prominence 
 enough to the point , in which respect he neglect the advice and 
 teaching of the most noteworthy fencer in Europe . well , well , folk 
 differ on this as on every other subject ! yet it seem to I that I 
 would soon be carry off the field after use my weapon secundum 
 artem , than walk off unscathed after break the law d'escrime . 
 Quarte , tierce , and saccoon , say I , and the devil take your estramacon 
 and passado ! ' 

 ' but what of Marot ? ' I ask impatiently . 

 ' he be aboard , ' say Saxon . ' it appear that he be much disturb in 
 his mind over the cruelty which be inflict on the country folk 
 after the battle at Bridgewater . be a man of a somewhat stern and 
 fierce turn of mind , his disapproval do vent itself in action rather 
 than word . soldier be find here and there over the countryside 
 pistol or stab , and no trace leave of their assailant . a dozen or 
 more be cut off in this way , and soon it come to be whisper about 
 that Marot the highwayman be the man that do it , and the chase become 
 hot at his heel . ' 

 ' well , and what then ? ' I ask , for Saxon have stop to light his pipe 
 at the same old metal tinder - box which he have use when first I meet 
 he . when I picture Saxon to myself it be usually of that moment that I 
 think , when the red glow beat upon his hard , eager , hawk - like face , and 
 show up the thousand little seam and wrinkle which time and care have 
 imprint upon his brown , weather - beat skin . sometimes in my dream 
 that face in the darkness come back to I , and his half - close eyelid 
 and shift , blinky eye be turn towards I in his sidelong fashion , 
 until I find myself sit up and hold out my hand into empty space , 
 half expect to feel another thin sinewy hand close round it . a bad 
 man he be in many way , my dear , cunning and wily , with little scruple 
 or conscience ; and yet so strange a thing be human nature , and so 
 difficult be it for we to control our feeling , that my heart warm when 
 I think of he , and that fifty year have increase rather than weaken 
 the kindliness which I hear to he . 

 ' I have hear , ' quoth he , puff slowly at his pipe , ' that Marot be a 
 man of this kidney , and also that he be so compass round that he be 
 in peril of capture . I seek he out , therefore , and hold council with 
 he . his mare , it seem , have be slay by some chance shot , and as he 
 be much attach to the brute , the accident make he more savage and 
 more dangerous than ever . he have no heart , he say , to continue in his 
 old trade . indeed , he be ripe for anything -- the very stuff out of which 
 useful tool be make . I find that in his youth he have have a training 
 for the sea . when I hear that , I see my way in the snap of a petronel . ' 

 ' what then ? ' I ask . ' I be still in the dark . ' 

 ' Nay , it be surely plain enough to you now . Marot 's end be to baffle 
 his pursuer and to benefit the exile . how could he do this well than 
 by engage as a seaman aboard this brig , the _ Dorothy Fox _ , and sailing 
 away from England in she ? there be but thirty of a crew . below hatch 
 be close on two hundred man , who , simple as they may be , be , as you 
 and I know , second to none in the cut - and - thrust work , without order or 
 discipline , which will be need in such an affair . Marot have but to go 
 down amongst they some dark night , knock off their anklet , and fit they 
 up with a few stanchion or cudgel . Ho , ho , Micah ! what think you ? the 
 planter may dig their plantation themselves for all the help they be 
 like to get from West countryman this bout . ' 

 ' it be , indeed , a well - conceive plan , ' say I. ' it be a pity , Saxon , 
 that your ready wit and quick invention hath not have a fair field . you 
 be , we I know well , as fit to command army and to order campaign as 
 any man that ever bear a truncheon . ' 

 ' Mark ye there ! ' whisper Saxon , grasp I by the arm . ' see where 
 the moonlight fall beside the hatchway ! do you not see that short squat 
 seaman who stand alone , lose in thought , with his head sink upon his 
 breast ? it be Marot ! I tell you that if I be Captain Pogram I would 
 rather have the devil himself , horn , hoof , and tail , for my first 
 mate and bunk companion , than have that man aboard my ship . you need not 
 concern yourself about the prisoner , Micah . their future be decide . ' 

 ' then , Saxon , ' I answer , ' it only remain for I to thank you , and to 
 accept the mean of safety which you have place within my reach . ' 

 ' speak like a man , ' say he ; ' be there aught which I may do for thee in 
 England ? though , by the Mass , I may not be here very long myself , for , 
 as I understand , I be to be entrust with the command of an expedition 
 that be fit out against the Indians , who have ravage the 
 plantation of our settler . it will be good to get to some profitable 
 employment , for such a war , without either fighting or plunder , I have 
 never see . I give you my word that I have scarce finger silver since 
 the beginning of it . I would not for the sacking of London go through 
 with it again . ' 

 ' there be a friend whom Sir Gervas Jerome do commend to my care , ' I 
 remark ; ' I have , however , already take measure to have his wish 
 carry out . there be naught else save to assure all in Havant that a 
 King who hath batten upon his subject , as this one of ours hath do , 
 be not one who be like to keep his seat very long upon the throne of 
 England . when he fall I shall return , and perhaps it may be soon than 
 folk think . ' 

 ' these doing in the West have indeed stir up much ill - feeling all 
 over the country , ' say my companion . ' on all hand I hear that there be 
 more hatred of the King and of his minister than before the outbreak . 
 what ho , Captain Pogram , this way ! we have settle the matter , and my 
 friend be willing to go . ' 

 ' I think he would tack round , ' the captain say , stagger towards we 
 with a gait which show that he have make the rum bottle his companion 
 since we have leave he . ' s'help I , I be sure of it ! though , by the 
 Mass , I do not wonder that he think twice before leave the _ Dorothy 
 Fox _ , for she be fit up fit for a duchess , s'help I ! where be your 
 boat ? ' 

 ' alongside , ' reply Saxon ; ' my friend join with I in hop that you , 
 Captain Pogram , will have a pleasant and profitable voyage . ' 

 ' I be cursedly beholden to he , ' say the captain , with a flourish of 
 his three - cornered hat . 

 ' also that you will reach Barbadoes in safety . ' 

 ' little doubt of that ! ' quoth the captain . 

 ' and that you will dispose of your ware in a manner which will repay 
 you for your charity and humanity . ' 

 ' Nay , these be handsome word , ' cry the captain . ' Sir , I be your 
 debtor . ' 

 a fishing - boat be lie alongside the brig . by the murky light of the 
 poop lantern I could see the figure upon her deck , and the great brown 
 sail all ready for hoisting . I climb the bulwark and set my foot upon 
 the rope - ladder which lead down to she . 

 ' good - bye , Decimus ! ' say I. 

 ' good - bye , my lad ! you have your piece all safe ? ' 

 ' I have they . ' 

 ' then I have one other present to make you . it be bring to I by a 
 sergeant of the Royal Horse . it be that , Micah , on which you must now 
 depend for food , lodging , raiment , and all which you would have . it 
 be that to which a brave man can always look for his living . it be the 
 knife wherewith you can open the world 's oyster . see , lad , it be your 
 sword ! ' 

 ' the old sword ! my father 's sword ! ' I cry in delight , as Saxon draw 
 from under his mantle and hand to I the discolour , old - fashioned 
 leathern sheath with the heavy brass hilt which I know so well . 

 ' you be now , ' say he , ' one of the old and honourable guild of soldier 
 of fortune . while the Turk be still snarl at the gate of Vienna 
 there will ever be work for strong arm and brave heart . you will find 
 that among these wandering , fight man , draw from all clime and 
 nation , the name of Englishman stand high . well I know that it will 
 stand none the low for your have join the brotherhood . I would 
 that I could come with you , but I be promise pay and position which it 
 would be ill to set aside . Farewell , lad , and may fortune go with you ! ' 

 I press the rough soldier 's horny hand , and descend into the 
 fishing - boat . the rope that hold we be cast off , the sail mount up , 
 and the boat shoot out across the bay . onward she go and on , through 
 the gathering gloom -- a gloom as dark and impenetrable as the future 
 towards which my life 's bark be drive . soon the long rise and fall 
 tell we that we be over the harbour bar and out in the open channel . 
 on the land , scatter twinkle light at long stretch mark the 
 line of the coast . as I gaze backwards a cloud trail off from the 
 moon , and I see the hard line of the brig 's rigging stand out against 
 the white cold disk . by the shroud stand the veteran , hold to a 
 rope with one hand , and wave the other in farewell and encouragement . 
 another groat cloud blur out the light , and that lean sinewy figure 
 with its long extended arm be the last which I see for a weary time of 
 the dear country where I be bear and breed . 



 chapter xxxvi . of the end of it all 

 and so , my dear child , I come to the end of the history of a 
 failure -- a brave failure and a noble one , but a failure none the less . 
 in three more year England be to come to herself , to tear the fetter 
 from her free limb , and to send James and his poisonous brood fly 
 from her shore even as I be fly then . we have make the error of 
 be before our time . yet there come day when folk think kindly of 
 the lad who have fight so stoutly in the West , and when their limb , 
 gather from many a hangman 's pit and waste place , be bear amid the 
 silent sorrow of a nation to the pretty country burial - ground where 
 they would have choose to lie . there , within the sound of the bell which 
 from infancy have call they to prayer , beneath the turf over which they 
 have wander , under the shadow of those Mendip and Quantock Hills which 
 they love so well , these brave heart lie still and peaceful , like 
 tired child in the bosom of their mother . requiescant - requiescant in 
 pace ! 

 not another word about myself , dear child . this narrative doth 
 already bristle with I be , as though it be an Argus which be a flash 
 of wit , though I doubt if ye will understand it . I set myself to tell ye 
 the tale of the war in the West , and that tale ye have hear , nor will 
 I be coax or cajole into one word far . ah ! ye know well how 
 garrulous the old man be , and that if you could but get to flush with 
 he he would take ye to the war of the Empire , to William 's Court , and 
 to the second invasion of the West , which have a well outcome than the 
 first . but not an inch far will I budge . on to the green , ye young 
 rogue ! have ye not other limb to exercise besides your ear , that ye 
 should be so fond of squat round grandad 's chair ? if I be spar to 
 next winter , and if the rheumatiz keep away , it be like that I may take 
 up once more the break thread of my story . 

 of the other I can only tell ye what I know . some slip out of my 
 ken entirely . of other I have hear vague and incomplete account . 
 the leader of the insurrection get off much more lightly than their 
 follower , for they find that the passion of greed be even strong 
 than the passion of cruelty . Grey , Buyse , Wade , and other buy 
 themselves free at the price of all their possession . Ferguson escape . 
 Monmouth be execute on Tower Hill , and show in his last moment 
 some faint trace of that spirit which spurt up now and again from his 
 feeble nature , like the momentary flash of an expire fire . 

 my father and my mother live to see the protestant religion regain its 
 place once more , and to see England become the champion of the reform 
 faith upon the continent . three year later I find they in Havant much 
 as I have leave they , save that there be more silver hair amongst the 
 brown braid tress of my mother , and that my father 's great shoulder 
 be a trifle bow and his brow furrow with the line of care . hand 
 in hand they pass onwards down life 's journey , the Puritan and the 
 Church woman , and I have never despair of the healing of religious 
 feud in England since I have see how easy it be for two folk to retain 
 the strong belief in their own creed , and yet to bear the heartiest 
 love and respect for the professor of another . the day may come when 
 the Church and the Chapel may be as a young and an eld brother , 
 each work to one end , and each joy in the other 's success . let 
 the contest between they be not with pike and pistol , not with court and 
 prison ; but let the strife be which shall lead the high life , which 
 shall take the broad view , which shall boast the happy and good 
 care - for poor . then their rivalry shall be not a curse , but a blessing 
 to this land of England . 

 Reuben Lockarby be ill for many month , but when he at last recover 
 he find a pardon await he through the interest of Major Ogilvy . 
 after a time , when the trouble be all blow over , he marry the 
 daughter of Mayor Timewell , and he still live in Taunton , a well - to - do 
 and prosperous citizen . thirty year ago there be a little Micah 
 Lockarby , and now I be tell that there be another , the son of the first , 
 who promise to be as arrant a little Roundhead as ever march to the 
 tuck of drum . 

 of Saxon I have hear more than once . so skilfully do he use his hold 
 over the Duke of Beaufort , that he be appoint through his interest to 
 the command of an expedition which have be send to chastise the savage 
 of Virginia , who have work great cruelty upon the settler . there 
 he do so out - ambush their ambush , and out - trick their most cunning 
 warrior , that he hath leave a great name among they , and be still 
 remember there by an indian word which signifieth ' the long - legged 
 wily one with the eye of a rat . ' have at last drive the tribe far 
 into the wilderness he be present with a tract of country for his 
 service , where he settle down . there he marry , and spend the rest of 
 his day in rear tobacco and in teach the principle of war to a 
 long line of gaunt and slab - side child . they tell I that a great 
 nation of exceed strength and of wondrous size promise some day to 
 rise up on the other side of the water . if this should indeed come to 
 pass , it may perhaps happen that these young Saxons or their child 
 may have a hand in the building of it . God grant that they may never 
 let their heart harden to the little isle of the sea , which be and must 
 ever be the cradle of their race . 

 Solomon Sprent marry and live for many year as happily as his 
 friend could wish . I have a letter from he when I be abroad , in which 
 he say that though his consort and he have start alone on the voyage 
 of wedlock , they be now accompany by a jolly - boat and a gig . one 
 winter 's night when the snow be on the ground he send down for my 
 father , who hurry up to his house . he find the old man sit up in 
 bed , with his flask of rumbo within reach , his tobacco - box beside he , 
 and a great brown Bible balance against his updrawn knee . he be 
 breathe heavily , and be in sore distress . 

 ' I have strain a plank , and have nine foot in the well , ' say he . ' it 
 come in quick than I can put it out . in truth , friend , I have not 
 be seaworthy this many a day , and it be time that I be condemn and 
 break up . ' 

 my father shake his head sadly as he mark his dusky face and laboured 
 breathing . ' how of your soul ? ' he ask . 

 ' aye ! ' say Solomon , ' that be a cargo that we carry under our hatch , 
 though we can not see it , and have no hand in the stowing of it . I have be 
 overhaul the sailing order here , and the ten article of war , but I 
 can not find that I have go so far out of my course that I may not hope to 
 come into the channel again . ' 

 ' trust not in yourself , but in Christ , ' say my father . 

 ' he be the pilot , in course , ' reply the old seaman . ' when I have a 
 pilot aboard o ' my ship , however , it be my way always to keep my own 
 weather eye open , d'ye see , and so I will do now . the pilot do not think 
 none the bad of ye for it . so I will throw my own lead line , though I 
 hear as how there be no sounding in the ocean of God 's mercy . say , 
 friend , d'ye think this very body , this same hull o ' mine , will rise 
 again ? ' 

 ' so we be teach , ' my father answer . 

 ' I would know it anywhere from the tattoo mark , ' say Solomon . ' they be 
 do when I be with Sir Christopher in the West Indies , and I would be 
 sorry to part with they . for myself , d'ye see , I have never bear ill - will 
 to any one , not even to the dutch lubber , though I fight three war 
 wi ' they , and they carry off one of my spar , and be hang to they ! 
 if I have let daylight into a few of they , d'ye see , it be all in good 
 part and by way of duty . I have drink my share -- enough to sweeten my 
 bilge - water -- but there be few that have see I cranky in the 
 upper rigging or refuse to answer to my helm . I never draw pay or 
 prize - money that my mate in distress be not welcome to the half of it . 
 as to the Polls , the less say the well . I have be a true consort 
 to my Phoebe since she agree to look to I for signal . those be my 
 paper , all clear and aboveboard . if I be summon aft this very night by 
 the great Lord High Admiral of all , I be not afeare that he will clap I 
 into the bilbo , for though I be only a poor sailor man , I have get his 
 promise in this here book , and I be not afraid of his go back from 
 it . ' 

 my father sit with the old man for some hour and do all that he could 
 to comfort and assist he , for it be clear that he be sink rapidly . 
 when he at last leave he , with his faithful wife beside he , he grasp 
 the brown but waste hand which lie above the clothe . 

 ' I will see you again soon , ' he say . 

 ' yes . in the latitude of heaven , ' reply the die seaman . his 
 foreboding be right , for in the early hour of the morning his wife , 
 bend over he , see a bright smile upon his tan , weather - beat 
 face . raise himself upon his pillow he touch his forelock , as be 
 the habit of sailor - man , and so sink slowly and peacefully back into the 
 long sleep which wake when the night have cease to be . 

 you will ask I doubtless what become of Hector Marot and of the strange 
 shipload which have set sail from Poole Harbour . there be never a word 
 hear of they again , unless indeed a story which be spread some month 
 afterwards by Captain Elias Hopkins , of the Bristol ship _ caroline _ , may 
 be take as bear upon their fate . for Captain Hopkins relate that , 
 be on his homeward voyage from our settlement , he chance to meet 
 with thick fog and a head wind in the neighbourhood of the great cod 
 bank . one night as he be beat about , with the weather so thick that 
 he could scarce see the truck of his own mast , a most strange passage 
 befell he . for as he and other stand upon the deck , they hear to 
 their astonishment the sound of many voice join in a great chorus , 
 which be at first faint and distant , but which presently wax and 
 increase until it appear to pass within a stone - throw of his vessel , 
 when it slowly die away once more and be lose in the distance . there 
 be some among the crew who set the matter down as the doing of the 
 evil one , but , as Captain Elias Hopkins be will not to remark , it be a 
 strange thing that the foul fiend should choose west - country hymn for 
 his nightly exercise , and stranger still that the dweller in the pit 
 should sing with a strong Somersetshire burr . for myself , I have little 
 doubt that it be indeed the _ Dorothy Fox _ which have sweep past in the 
 fog , and that the prisoner , have win their freedom , be celebrate 
 their delivery in true puritan style . whether they be drive on to the 
 rocky coast of Labrador , or whether they find a home in some desolate 
 land whence no kingly cruelty could harry they , be what must remain for 
 ever unknown . 

 Zachariah Palmer live for many year , a venerable and honour old man , 
 before he , too , be call to his father . a sweet and simple village 
 philosopher he be , with a child 's heart in his aged breast . the very 
 thought of he be to I as the smell of violet ; for if in my view of 
 life and in my hope of the future I differ somewhat from the hard and 
 gloomy teaching of my father , I know that I owe it to the wise word 
 and kindly training of the carpenter . if , as he be himself will not to 
 say , deed be everything in this world and dogma be nothing , then his 
 sinless , blameless life might be a pattern to you and to all . may the 
 dust lie light upon he ! 

 one word of another friend -- the last mention , but not the least 
 value . when Dutch William have be ten year upon the english throne 
 there be still to be see in the field by my father 's house a tall , 
 strong - boned horse , whose grey skin be fleck with dash of white . 
 and it be ever observe that , should the soldier be pass from 
 Portsmouth , or should the clank of trumpet or the rattle of drum break 
 upon his ear , he would arch his old neck , throw out his grey - streak 
 tail , and raise his stiff knee in a pompous and pedantic canter . the 
 country folk would stop to watch these antic of the old horse , and then 
 the chance be that one of they would tell the rest how that charger 
 have bear one of their own village lad to the war , and how , when the 
 rider have to fly the country , a kindly sergeant in the King 's troop 
 have bring the steed as a remembrance of he to his father at home . so 
 Covenant pass the last year of his life , a veteran among steed , well 
 feed and care for , and much give , mayhap , to tell in equine language 
 to all the poor , silly country steed the wonderful passage which have 
 befall he in the West . 



 APPENDIX 


 Note a.--hatre of learn among the Puritans . 

 in spite of the presence in their rank of such ripe scholar as John 
 Milton , Colonel Hutchinson , and other , there be among the independent 
 and Anabaptists a profound distrust of learning , which be comment upon 
 by writer of all shade of politic . Dr. South in his sermon remark 
 that ' all learning be cry down , so that with they the good preacher 
 be such as could not read , and the good divine such as could not 
 write . in all their preachment they so highly pretended to the Spirit , 
 that some of they could hardly spell a letter . to be blind with they be 
 a proper qualification of a spiritual guide , and to be book - learn , as 
 they call it , and to be irreligious , be almost convertible term . 
 none save tradesman and mechanic be allow to have the Spirit , and 
 those only be account like St. Paul who could work with their hand , 
 and be able to make a pulpit before preach in it . ' 

 in the collection of loyal ballad reprint in 1731 , the Royalist bard 
 harp upon the same characteristic : 

           ' we will down with university 
             where learning be profess , 
            because they practise and maintain 
             the language of the beast . 
            we will drive the doctor out of door , 
             and part , whate'er they be , 
            we will cry all part and learn down , 
             and heigh , then up go we ! ' 


 note B.--On the Speed of Couriers . 

 it be difficult for we in these day of steam and electricity to realise 
 how long it take to despatch a message in the seventeenth century , even 
 when the occasion be most pressing . thus , Monmouth land at Lyme on 
 the morning of Thursday , the 11th of June . Gregory Alford , the Tory 
 mayor of Lyme , instantly flee to Honiton , whence he despatch a 
 messenger to the Privy Council . yet it be five o'clock in the morning 
 of Saturday , the 13th , before the news reach London , though the 
 distance be but 156 mile . 


 note c.--on the Claims of the Lender of a horse . 

 the difficulty touch upon by Decimus Saxon , as to the claim of the 
 lender of a horse upon the booty gain by the rider , be one frequently 
 discuss by writer of that date upon the usage of war . one 
 distinguish authority say : Praefectus turmae equitum Hispanorum , cum 
 proelio tuba caneret , unum ex equitibus suae turmae obvium habuit ; qui 
 questus est quod paucis ante diebus equum suum in certamine amiserat , 
 propter quod non poterat imminenti proelio interesse ; unde jussit 
 Praefectus ut unum ex suis equis conscenderet et ipsum comitaretur . 
 Miles , equo conscenso , inter fugandum hoste , incidit in ipsum ducem 
 hostilis exercitus , quem cepit et consignavit Duci exercitus Hispani , 
 qui a captivo vicena aureorum millia est consequutus . Dicebat Praefectus 
 partem pretii huju redemptionis sibi debere , quod miles equo suo 
 dimicaverat , qui alias proelio interesse non potuit . Petrinus Bellus 
 affirmat se , cum esset Bruxellis in curia Hispaniarum Regis de hac 
 quaestione consultum , et censuisse , pro Praefecto facere aequitatem quae 
 praecipue respicitur inter milites , quorum controversiae ex aequo et 
 bono dirimendae sunt ; unde ultra conventa quis obligatur ad i d quod 
 alterum alteri prasstare oportet . ' the case , it appear , ultimately go 
 against the horse - lending praefect . 


 note D.--On the Pronunciation of Exquisites . 

 the substitution of the a for the o be a common affectation in 
 the speech of the fop of the period , as may be find in Vanbrugh 's 
 _ relapse _ . the notorious Titus Oates , in his effort to be in the mode , 
 push this trick to excess , and his cry of ' Oh Lard ! Oh Lard ! ' be 
 familiar sound in Westminster Hall at the time when the Salamanca 
 doctor be at the flood of his fortune . 


 note e.--hour - glass in pulpit . 

 in those day it be customary to have an hour - glass station in 
 a frame of iron at the side of the pulpit , and visible to the whole 
 congregation . it be turn up as soon as the text be announce , and a 
 minister earn a name as a lazy preacher if he do not hold out until 
 the sand have cease to run . if , on the other hand , he exceed that 
 limit , his audience would signify by gape and yawn that they have 
 have as much spiritual food as they could digest . Sir Roger L'Estrange 
 ( _ fable _ , Part II . Fab . 262 ) tell of a notorious spin - text who , have 
 exhaust his glass and be half - way through a second one , be at 
 last arrest in his career by a valiant sexton , who rise and depart , 
 remark as he do so , ' pray , sir , be pleased when you have do to 
 leave the key under the door . ' 


 note f.--disturbance at the old Gast House of Little Burton . 

 the circumstance refer to by the Mayor of Taunton in his allusion 
 to the Drummer of Tedsworth be probably too well known to require 
 elucidation . the haunting of the old Gast House at Burton would , 
 however , be fresh at that time in the mind of Somersetshire folk , 
 occur as it do in 1677 . some short account from document of that 
 date may be of interest . 

 ' the first night that I be there , with Hugh Mellmore and Edward Smith , 
 they hear as it be the washing of water over their head . then , 
 take the candle and go up the stair , there be a wet cloth throw 
 at they , but it fall on the stair . they , go up far , there be 
 another throw as before . and when they be come up into the chamber 
 there stand a bowl of water , look white , as though soap have be use 
 in it . the bowl just before be in the kitchen , and could not be carry 
 up but through the room where they be . the next thing be a terrible 
 noise , like a clap of thunder , and shortly afterwards they hear a great 
 scratch about the bedstead , and after that great knock with a 
 hammer against the bed' - head , so that the two maid that be in bed 
 cry out for help . then they run up the stair , and there lie the 
 hammer on the bed , and on the bed' - head there be near a thousand 
 print of the hammer . the maid say that they be scratch and 
 pinch with a hand which have exceed long nail . 

 ' the second night that James Sherring and Thomas Hillary be there , 
 James Sherring sit down in the chimney to fill a pipe of tobacco . he 
 use the tong to lift a coal to light his pipe , and by - and - by the tong 
 be draw up the stair and be cast upon the bed . the same night one 
 of the maid leave her shoe by the fire , and they be carry up into 
 the chamber , and the old man 's bring down and set in their place . 
 as they be go upstairs there be many thing throw at they which 
 be just before in the low room , and when they go down the stair the 
 old man 's breech be throw down after they . 

 ' on another night a saddle do come into the house from a pin in the 
 entry , and do hop about the place from table to table . it be very 
 troublesome to they , until they break it into small piece and throw 
 it out into the roadway . so for some week the haunting continue , 
 with rapping , scratch , movement of heavy article , and many other 
 strange thing , as be attest by all who be in the village , until at 
 last they cease as suddenly as they have begin . ' 


 note g.--monmouth 's progress in the West . 

 during his triumphal progress through the western shire , some year 
 before the rebellion , Monmouth first venture to exhibit upon his 
 escutcheon the lion of England and the lily of France , without the 
 baton sinister . a still more ominous sign be that he venture to touch 
 for the king 's evil . the appended letter , extract from the collection 
 of tract in the British Museum , may be of interest as first - hand 
 evidence of the occasional efficacy of that curious ceremony . 

 ' his grace the Duke of Monmouth honour in his progress in the West of 
 England , in an account of an extraordinary cure of the king 's evil . 

 ' give in a letter from Crewkhorn , in Somerset , from the minister of the 
 parish and many other . 

 ' we , whose name be underwritten , do certify the miraculous cure of 
 a girl of this town , about twenty , by name Elizabeth Parcet , a poor 
 widow 's daughter , who hath languish under sad affliction from that 
 distemper of the king 's evil term the joint evil , be say to be 
 the bad evil . for about ten or twelve year ' time she have in her right 
 hand four running wound , one on the inside , three on the back of her 
 hand , as well as two more in the same arm , one above her hand - wrist , 
 the other above the bending of her arm . she have betwixt her arm - pit a 
 swollen bunch , which the doctor say feed those six run wound . she 
 have the same distemper also on her left eye , so she be almost blind . 
 her mother , despair of preserve her sight , and be not of ability 
 to send she to London to be touch by the king , be miserably poor , 
 have many poor child , and this girl not be able to work , her 
 mother , desirous to have her daughter cure , send to the chirurgeon for 
 help , who tamper with it for some time , but could do no good . she 
 go likewise ten or eleven mile to a seventh son , but all in vain . no 
 visible hope remain , and she expect nothing but the grave . 

 ' but now , in this the girl 's great extremity , God , the great physician , 
 dictate to she , then languish in her miserable , hopeless condition , 
 what course to take and what to do for a cure , which be to go and touch 
 the Duke of Monmouth . the girl tell her mother that , if she could 
 but touch the Duke she would be well . the mother reprove she for her 
 foolish conceit , but the girl do often persuade her mother to go to 
 Lackington to the Duke , who then lie with Mr. Speaks . " certainly , " say 
 she , " I should be well if I could touch he . " the mother slight these 
 press request , but the more she slight and reprove , the more 
 earnest the girl be for it . a few day after , the girl have notice 
 that Sir John Sydenham intend to treat the Duke at White Lodge in 
 Henton Park , this girl with many of her neighbour go to the say 
 park . she be there timely wait the Duke 's come . when first she 
 observe the Duke she press in among a crowd of people and catch 
 he by the hand , his glove be on , and she likewise have a glove to 
 cover her wound . she not be herewith satisfied at the first attempt 
 of touch his glove only , but her mind be she must touch some part 
 of his bare skin , she , weigh his come forth , intend a second 
 attempt . the poor girl , thus between hope and fear , wait his motion . 
 on a sudden there be news of the Duke 's come on , which she to be 
 prepared rent off her glove , that be clung to the sore , in such haste 
 that she break her glove , and bring away not only the sore but the 
 skin . the Duke 's glove , as Providence would have it , the upper part hung 
 down , so that his hand - wrist be bare . she press on , and catch he 
 by the bare hand - wrist with her run hand , cry , " God bless your 
 highness ! " and the Duke say " God bless you ! " the girl , not a little 
 transport at her good success , come and assure her friend that she 
 would now be well . she come home to her mother in great joy , and tell 
 she that she have touch the Duke 's hand . the mother , hear what she 
 have do , reprove she sharply for her boldness , ask how she durst 
 do such a thing , and threaten to beat she for it . she cry out , " oh , 
 mother , I shall be well again , and heal of my wound ! " and as God 
 Almighty would have it , to the wonder and admiration of all , the six 
 wound be speedily dry up , the eye become perfectly well , and the 
 girl be in good health . all which have be discover to we by the 
 mother and daughter , and by neighbour that know she . 

 ' Henry Clark , minister ; Captain James Bale , & c & c. whoever doubt the 
 truth of this relation may see the original under the hand of the 
 person mention at the Amsterdam Coffee House , Bartholomew Lane , Royal 
 Exchange . ' 

 in spite of the uncouth verbiage of the old narrative , there be a touch 
 of human pathos about it which make it worthy of reproduction . 


 note h.--monmouth 's Contention of Legitimacy . 

 Sir Patrick Hume , relate a talk with Monmouth before his expedition , 
 say : ' I urge if he consider himself as lawful son of King Charles , 
 late deceased . he say he do . I ask he if he be able to make out 
 and prove the marriage of his mother to King Charles , and whether he 
 intend to lay claim to the crown . he answer that he have be able 
 lately to prove the marriage , and if some person be not lately dead , 
 of which he would inform himself , he would yet be able to prove it . 
 as for his claim the crown , he intend not to do it unless it be 
 advise to be do by those who should concern themselves and join for 
 the delivery of the nation . ' 

 it may be remark that in Monmouth 's commission to be general , date 
 April 1668 , he be style ' our most entirely beloved and natural son . ' 
 again , in a commission for the government of Hull , April 1673 , he be 
 ' our well - belove natural son . ' 


 note i.--dragooner and Chargers . 

 the dragoon , be really mount infantry , be provide with very 
 inferior animal to the real cavalry . from a letter of Cromwell 's 
 ( ' Squire Correspondence , ' April 3 , 1643 ) , it will be see that a 
 dragooner be worth twenty piece , while a charger could not be obtain 
 under sixty . 

 note j.--battle of Sedgemoor . 

 a curious little sidelight upon the battle be afford by the two 
 follow letter exhibit to the Royal Archaeological Institute by the 
 Rev. C. W. Bingham . 

 ' to Mrs. Chaffin at Chettle House . ' 

 ' Monday , about ye forenoon , July 6 , 1685 . ' 

 ' my dearest creature,--this morning about one o'clock the rebbell fall 
 upon we whil we be in our tent in King 's Sedgemoor , with their 
 whole army .... we have kill and take at least 1000 of they . they be 
 flee into Bridgewater . it be say that we have take all their cannon , 
 but sure it be that most be , if all be not . a coat with star on ' t be 
 take . '' tis run through the back . by some ' tis thought that the Duke 
 rebbell have it on and be kill , but most doe think that a servant wear 
 it . I wish he be call , that the war may be end . it be think 
 he will never be able to make his man fight again . I thank God I be very 
 well without the least hurt , soe be our dorsetshire friend . Prythee 
 let Biddy know this by the first opportunity . I be thyne onely deare , 
 TOSSEY . ' 

 BRIDGEWATER : July 7 , 1685 . 

 ' we have totally rout the enemy of God and the king , and can not hear 
 of fifty man together of the whole rebel army . we pick they up every 
 houre in cornfield and ditch . Williams , the late Duke 's valet de 
 chambre , be take , who give a very ingenious account of the whole 
 affair , which be too long to write . the last word that he say to he 
 be at the time when his army flee , that he be undo and must shift 
 for himself . we think to march with the General this day to Wells , on 
 his way homeward . at present he be 3 mile off at the camp , soe I can not 
 certainly tell whether he intend for Wells . I shall be home certainly 
 on Saturday at farth . I believe my deare Nan would for 500 pound 
 that her Tossey have serve the King to the end of the war . 

 I be thyne , my deare childe , for ever . ' 


 note K.--Lord Grey and the Horse at Sedgemoor . 

 it be only fair to state that Ferguson be hold by many to have be 
 as doughty a soldier as he be zealous in religion . his own account of 
 Sedgemoor be interesting , as show what be think by those who be 
 actually engage on the cause of their failure . 

 ' now besides these two troop , whose officer though they have no great 
 skill yet have courage enough to have do something honourably , have they 
 not for want of a guide meet with the aforesaid obstruction , there be 
 no one of all the rest of our troop that ever advance to charge or 
 approach as near to the enemy as to give or receive a wound . Mr. 
 Hacker , one of our captain , come no soon within view of their camp 
 than he villainously fire a pistol to give they notice of our approach , 
 and then forsook his charge and ride oft with all the speed he could , to 
 take the benefit of a proclamation emit by the king , offer pardon 
 to all such as should return home within such a time . and this he 
 plead at his tryal , but be answer by Jeffreys " that he above all 
 other man deserve to be hang , and that for his treachery to Monmouth 
 as well as his treason to the king . " and though no other of our officer 
 act so villainously , yet they be useless and unserviceable , as never 
 once attempt to charge , nor so much as keep their man in a body . 
 and I dare affirm that if our horse have never fire a pistol , but only 
 stand in a posture to have give jealousy and apprehension to the enemy , 
 our foot alone would have carry the day and be triumphant . but our 
 horse standing scatter and disunite , and fly upon every approach 
 of a squadron of theirs , command by Oglethorpe , give that body of 
 their cavalry an advantage , after they have hover up and down in the 
 field without think it necessary to attack those whom their own fear 
 have disperse , to fall in at last in the rear of our battalion , and to 
 wrest that victory out of their hand which they be grasp at , and 
 stand almost possessed of . nor be that party of their horse above 
 three hundred at most , whereas we have more than enough have they have any 
 courage , and be command by a gallant man , to have attack they 
 with ease both in front and flank . these thing I can declare with 
 more certainty , because I be a doleful spectator of they ; for have 
 contrary to my custom leave attend upon the Duke , who advance with 
 the foot , I betook myself to the horse , because the first of that 
 morning 's action be expect from they , which be to break in and 
 disorder the enemy 's camp . against the time that our battalion should 
 come up , I endeavour whatsoever I be capable of perform , for I 
 not only strike at several trooper who have forsake their station , but 
 upbraided diver of the captain for be want in their duty . but I 
 speak with great warmth to my Lord Grey , and conjure he to charge , and 
 not suffer the victory , which our foot have in a manner take hold of , 
 to be ravish from we . but instead of hearken , he not only as an 
 unworthy man and cowardly poltroon desert that part of the field and 
 forsook his command , but ride with the utmost speed to the Duke , tell 
 he that all be lose and it be more than time to shift for himself . 
 Wherebye , as an addition to all the mischief he have be the occasion 
 of before , he draw the easy and unfortunate gentleman to leave the 
 battalion while they be courageously dispute on which side the 
 victory should fall . and this fall most unhappily out , while a certain 
 person be endeavour to find out the Duke to have beg of he to 
 come and charge at the head of his own troop . however , this I dare 
 affirm , that if the Duke have be but master of two hundred horse , 
 well mount , completely armed , personally valiant , and command 
 by experienced officer , they would have be victorious . this be 
 acknowledge by our enemy , who have often confess they be ready 
 to fly through the impression make upon they by our foot , and must have 
 be beat have our horse do their part , and not tamely look on 
 till their cavalry retrieve the day by fall into the rear of our 
 battalion . nor be the fault in the private man , who have courage 
 to have follow their leader , but it be in those who lead they , 
 particularly my Lord Grey , in whom , if cowardice may be call 
 treachery , we may safely charge he with betray our cause . ' 

 Extract from MS . of Dr. Ferguson , quote in ' Ferguson the plotter , ' an 
 interesting work by his immediate descendant , an advocate of Edinburgh . 


 note l.--monmouth 's Attitude after Capture . 

 the following letter , write by Monmouth to the Queen from the Tower , 
 be indicative of his abject state of mind . 

 ' madam,--i would not take the boldness of writing to your Majesty till 
 I have show the King how I do abhor the thing that I have do , and how 
 much I desire to live to serve he . I hope , madam , by what I have say 
 to the King to - day will satisfy how sincere I be , and how much I detest 
 all those people who have bring I to this . have do this , madam , 
 I think I be in a fitt condition to beg your intercession , which I be 
 sure you never refuse to the distressed , and I be sure , madam , that I 
 be an object of your pity , have be cousene and cheat into this 
 horrid business . do I wish , madam , to live for live sake I would 
 never give you this trouble , but it be to have life to serve the 
 King , which I be able to doe , and will doe beyond what I can express . 
 therefore , madam , upon such an account as I may take the boldness to 
 press you and beg of you to intersaid for I , for I be sure , madam , the 
 King will hearken to you . your prair can never be refuse , especially 
 when it be beg for a life only to serve the king . I hope , madam , by 
 the King 's generosity and goodness , and your intercession , I may hope 
 for my life which if I have shall be ever employ in show to your 
 Majesty all the sense immaginable of gratitude , and in serve of the 
 King like a true subject . and ever be your Majesty 's most dutiful and 
 obedient servant , MONMOUTH . ' 

 the END 
