 








  the Lost World 

  CHAPTER I 

  " there be Heroisms all round we " 

 Mr. Hungerton , her father , really be the most tactless person upon 
 earth , - a fluffy , feathery , untidy cockatoo of a man , perfectly 
 good - natured , but absolutely center upon his own silly self . if 
 anything could have drive I from Gladys , it would have be the 
 thought of such a father - in - law . I be convinced that he really 
 believe in his heart that I come round to the Chestnuts three day a 
 week for the pleasure of his company , and very especially to hear his 
 view upon bimetallism , a subject upon which he be by way of be an 
 authority . 

 for an hour or more that evening I listen to his monotonous chirrup 
 about bad money drive out good , the token value of silver , the 
 depreciation of the rupee , and the true standard of exchange . 

 " suppose , " he cry with feeble violence , " that all the debt in the 
 world be call up simultaneously , and immediate payment insist 
 upon , - what under our present condition would happen then ? " 

 I give the self - evident answer that I should be a ruin man , upon 
 which he jump from his chair , reprove I for my habitual levity , 
 which make it impossible for he to discuss any reasonable subject in 
 my presence , and bounce off out of the room to dress for a Masonic 
 meeting . 

 at last I be alone with Gladys , and the moment of Fate have come ! all 
 that evening I have feel like the soldier who await the signal which 
 will send he on a forlorn hope ; hope of victory and fear of repulse 
 alternating in his mind . 

 she sit with that proud , delicate profile of her outline against the 
 red curtain . how beautiful she be ! and yet how aloof ! we have be 
 friend , quite good friend ; but never could I get beyond the same 
 comradeship which I might have establish with one of my 
 fellow - reporter upon the Gazette , - perfectly frank , perfectly kindly , 
 and perfectly unsexual . my instinct be all against a woman be too 
 frank and at her ease with I . it be no compliment to a man . where 
 the real sex feeling begin , timidity and distrust be its companion , 
 heritage from old wicked day when love and violence go often hand in 
 hand . the bent head , the avert eye , the falter voice , the wincing 
 figure - these , and not the unshrinke gaze and frank reply , be the 
 true signal of passion . even in my short life I have learn as much 
 as that - or have inherit it in that race memory which we call instinct . 

 Gladys be full of every womanly quality . some judge she to be cold 
 and hard ; but such a thought be treason . that delicately bronze 
 skin , almost oriental in its coloring , that raven hair , the large 
 liquid eye , the full but exquisite lip , - all the stigmata of passion 
 be there . but I be sadly conscious that up to now I have never find 
 the secret of draw it forth . however , come what might , I should 
 have do with suspense and bring matter to a head to - night . she 
 could but refuse I , and well be a repulsed lover than an accepted 
 brother . 

 so far my thought have carry I , and I be about to break the long 
 and uneasy silence , when two critical , dark eye look round at I , 
 and the proud head be shake in smile reproof . " I have a 
 presentiment that you be go to propose , Ned . I do wish you 
 would not ; for thing be so much nice as they be . " 

 I draw my chair a little nearer . " now , how do you know that I be 
 go to propose ? " I ask in genuine wonder . 

 " do not   woman always know ? do you suppose any woman in the world be 
 ever take unawares ? but - oh , Ned , our friendship have be so good and 
 so pleasant ! what a pity to spoil it ! do not   you feel how splendid it 
 be that a young man and a young woman should be able to talk face to 
 face as we have talk ? " 

 " I do not   know , Gladys . you see , I can talk face to face with - with the 
 station - master . " I can not   imagine how that official come into the 
 matter ; but in he trot , and set we both laugh . " that do not 
 satisfy I in the least . I want my arm round you , and your head on my 
 breast , and - oh , Gladys , I want - - " 

 she have spring from her chair , as she see sign that I propose to 
 demonstrate some of my want . " you have   spoil everything , Ned , " she 
 say . " it be all so beautiful and natural until this kind of thing 
 come in ! it be such a pity ! why can not   you control yourself ? " 

 " I do not   invent it , " I plead . " it be nature . it be love . " 

 " well , perhaps if both love , it may be different . I have never feel 
 it . " 

 " but you must - you , with your beauty , with your soul ! oh , Gladys , you 
 be make for love ! you must love ! " 

 " one must wait till it come . " 

 " but why can not   you love I , Gladys ? be it my appearance , or what ? " 

 she do unbend a little . she put forward a hand - such a gracious , 
 stoop attitude it be - and she press back my head . then she 
 look into my upturned face with a very wistful smile . 

 " no it be not   that , " she say at last . " you be not a conceited boy by 
 nature , and so I can safely tell you it be not that . it be deep . " 

 " my character ? " 

 she nod severely . 

 " what can I do to mend it ? do sit down and talk it over . no , really , 
 I will not   if you will only sit down ! " 

 she look at I with a wonder distrust which be much more to my 
 mind than her whole - hearted confidence . how primitive and bestial it 
 look when you put it down in black and white ! - and perhaps after all 
 it be only a feeling peculiar to myself . anyhow , she sit down . 

 " now tell I what be amiss with I ? " 

 " I be in love with somebody else , " say she . 

 it be my turn to jump out of my chair . 

 " it be nobody in particular , " she explain , laugh at the expression 
 of my face : " only an ideal . I have   never meet the kind of man I mean . " 

 " tell I about he . what do he look like ? " 

 " oh , he might look very much like you . " 

 " how dear of you to say that ! well , what be it that he do that I 
 do not   do ? just say the word , - teetotal , vegetarian , aeronaut , 
 theosophist , superman . I will have a try at it , Gladys , if you will only 
 give I an idea what would please you . " 

 she laugh at the elasticity of my character . " well , in the first 
 place , I do not   think my ideal would speak like that , " say she . " he 
 would be a hard , stern man , not so ready to adapt himself to a 
 silly girl 's whim . but , above all , he must be a man who could do , who 
 could act , who could look death in the face and have no fear of he , a 
 man of great deed and strange experience . it be never a man that I 
 should love , but always the glory he have win ; for they would be 
 reflect upon I . think of Richard Burton ! when I read his wife 's 
 life of he I could so understand her love ! and Lady Stanley ! do you 
 ever read the wonderful last chapter of that book about her husband ? 
 these be the sort of man that a woman could worship with all her soul , 
 and yet be the great , not the less , on account of her love , honor 
 by all the world as the inspirer of noble deed . " 

 she look so beautiful in her enthusiasm that I nearly bring down 
 the whole level of the interview . I grip myself hard , and go on 
 with the argument . 

 " we can not   all be Stanleys and Burtons , " say I ; " besides , we do not   get 
 the chance , - at least , I never have the chance . if I do , I should try 
 to take it . " 

 " but chance be all around you . it be the mark of the kind of man I 
 mean that he make his own chance . you can not   hold he back . I have 
 never meet he , and yet I seem to know he so well . there be heroism 
 all round we wait to be do . it be for man to do they , and for 
 woman to reserve their love as a reward for such man . look at that 
 young Frenchman who go up last week in a balloon . it be blow a 
 gale of wind ; but because he be announce to go he insist on 
 start . the wind blow he fifteen hundred mile in twenty - four 
 hour , and he fall in the middle of Russia . that be the kind of man I 
 mean . think of the woman he love , and how other woman must have 
 envy she ! that be what I should like to be , - envy for my man . " 

 " I would have do it to please you . " 

 " but you should not   do it merely to please I . you should do it because 
 you can not   help yourself , because it be natural to you , because the man 
 in you be cry out for heroic expression . now , when you describe 
 the Wigan coal explosion last month , could you not have go down and 
 help those people , in spite of the choke - damp ? " 

 " I do . " 

 " you never say so . " 

 " there be nothing worth buck about . " 

 " I do not   know . " she look at I with rather more interest . " that 
 be brave of you . " 

 " I have to . if you want to write good copy , you must be where the 
 thing be . " 

 " what a prosaic motive ! it seem to take all the romance out of it . 
 but , still , whatever your motive , I be glad that you go down that 
 mine . " she give I her hand ; but with such sweetness and dignity that 
 I could only stoop and kiss it . " I dare say I be merely a foolish 
 woman with a young girl 's fancy . and yet it be so real with I , so 
 entirely part of my very self , that I can not help act upon it . if I 
 marry , I do want to marry a famous man ! " 

 " why should you not ? " I cry . " it be woman like you who brace man up . 
 give I a chance , and see if I will take it ! besides , as you say , man 
 ought to make their own chance , and not wait until they be give . 
 look at Clive - just a clerk , and he conquer India ! by George ! I will 
 do something in the world yet ! " 

 she laugh at my sudden irish effervescence . " why not ? " she say . 
 " you have everything a man could have , - youth , health , strength , 
 education , energy . I be sorry you speak . and now I be glad - so 
 glad - if it waken these thought in you ! " 

 " and if I do - - " 

 her dear hand rest like warm velvet upon my lip . " not another word , 
 Sir ! you should have be at the office for evening duty half an hour 
 ago ; only I have not   the heart to remind you . some day , perhaps , when 
 you have win your place in the world , we shall talk it over again . " 

 and so it be that I find myself that foggy November evening pursue 
 the Camberwell tram with my heart glow within I , and with the eager 
 determination that not another day should elapse before I should find 
 some deed which be worthy of my lady . but who - who in all this wide 
 world could ever have imagine the incredible shape which that deed be 
 to take , or the strange step by which I be lead to the doing of it ? 

 and , after all , this opening chapter will seem to the reader to have 
 nothing to do with my narrative ; and yet there would have be no 
 narrative without it , for it be only when a man go out into the world 
 with the thought that there be heroism all round he , and with the 
 desire all alive in his heart to follow any which may come within sight 
 of he , that he break away as I do from the life he know , and 
 venture forth into the wonderful mystic twilight land where lie the 
 great adventure and the great reward . behold I , then , at the office 
 of the Daily Gazette , on the staff of which I be a most insignificant 
 unit , with the settle determination that very night , if possible , to 
 find the quest which should be worthy of my Gladys ! be it hardness , 
 be it selfishness , that she should ask I to risk my life for her own 
 glorification ? such thought may come to middle age ; but never to 
 ardent three - and - twenty in the fever of his first love . 




  CHAPTER II 

  " try your Luck with Professor Challenger " 

 I always like McArdle , the crab , old , round - back , red - head news 
 editor , and I rather hop that he like I . of course , Beaumont be 
 the real boss ; but he live in the rarefied atmosphere of some olympian 
 height from which he could distinguish nothing small than an 
 international crisis or a split in the Cabinet . sometimes we see he 
 pass in lonely majesty to his inner sanctum , with his eye star 
 vaguely and his mind hover over the Balkans or the Persian Gulf . he 
 be above and beyond we . but McArdle be his first lieutenant , and it 
 be he that we know . the old man nod as I enter the room , and he 
 push his spectacle far up on his bald forehead . 

 " well , Mr. Malone , from all I hear , you seem to be do very well , " 
 say he in his kindly Scotch accent . 

 I thank he . 

 " the colliery explosion be excellent . so be the Southwark fire . you 
 have the true descreeptive touch . what do you want to see I about ? " 

 " to ask a favor . " 

 he look alarmed , and his eye shun mine . " Tut , tut ! what be it ? " 

 " do you think , Sir , that you could possibly send I on some mission for 
 the paper ? I would do my good to put it through and get you some good 
 copy . " 

 " what sort of meesion have you in your mind , Mr. Malone ? " 

 " well , Sir , anything that have adventure and danger in it . I really 
 would do my very well . the more difficult it be , the well it would 
 suit I . " 

 " you seem very anxious to lose your life . " 

 " to justify my life , Sir . " 

 " dear I , Mr. Malone , this be very - very exalted . I be afraid the day 
 for this sort of thing be rather past . the expense of the ' special 
 meesion ' business hardly justify the result , and , of course , in any 
 case it would only be an experienced man with a name that would command 
 public confidence who would get such an order . the big blank space in 
 the map be all be fill in , and there be no room for romance 
 anywhere . wait a bit , though ! " he add , with a sudden smile upon his 
 face . " talk of the blank space of the map give I an idea . what 
 about expose a fraud - a modern Munchausen - and make he 
 rideeculous ? you could show he up as the liar that he be ! eh , man , 
 it would be fine . how do it appeal to you ? " 

 " anything - anywhere - I care nothing . " 

 McArdle be plunge in thought for some minute . 

 " I wonder whether you could get on friendly - or at least on talk 
 term with the fellow , " he say , at last . " you seem to have a sort of 
 genius for establish relation with people - seempathy , I suppose , or 
 animal magnetism , or youthful vitality , or something . I be conscious 
 of it myself . " 

 " you be very good , sir . " 

 " so why should you not try your luck with Professor Challenger , of 
 Enmore Park ? " 

 I dare say I look a little startled . 

 " Challenger ! " I cry . " Professor Challenger , the famous zoologist ! 
 be not   he the man who break the skull of Blundell , of the Telegraph ? " 

 the news editor smile grimly . 

 " do you mind ? do not   you say it be adventure you be after ? " 

 " it be all in the way of business , sir , " I answer . 

 " exactly . I do not   suppose he can always be so violent as that . I be 
 think that Blundell get he at the wrong moment , maybe , or in the 
 wrong fashion . you may have well luck , or more tact in handle he . 
 there be something in your line there , I be sure , and the Gazette should 
 work it . " 

 " I really know nothing about he , " say I. " I only remember his name 
 in connection with the police - court proceeding , for strike Blundell . " 

 " I have a few note for your guidance , Mr. Malone . I have   have my eye on 
 the Professor for some little time . " he take a paper from a drawer . 
 " here be a summary of his record . I give it you briefly : - 

 " ' Challenger , George Edward . bear : Largs , N. B. , 1863 . Educ . : Largs 
 Academy ; Edinburgh University . British Museum Assistant , 1892 . 
 Assistant - Keeper of Comparative Anthropology Department , 1893 . 
 resign after acrimonious correspondence same year . winner of 
 Crayston Medal for Zoological Research . Foreign Member of ' - well , 
 quite a lot of thing , about two inch of small type - ' Societe Belge , 
 American Academy of Sciences , La Plata , etc . , etc . Ex - President 
 Palaeontological Society . Section H , British Association ' - so on , so 
 on ! - ' Publications : " some Observations upon a Series of Kalmuck 
 Skulls " ; " Outlines of Vertebrate Evolution " ; and numerous paper , 
 include " the underlying fallacy of Weissmannism , " which cause heated 
 discussion at the Zoological Congress of Vienna . recreation : walk , 
 Alpine climb . address : Enmore Park , Kensington , W. ' 

 " there , take it with you . I have   nothing more for you to - night . " 

 I pocket the slip of paper . 

 " one moment , sir , " I say , as I realize that it be a pink bald head , 
 and not a red face , which be front I . " I be not very clear yet 
 why I be to interview this gentleman . what have he do ? " 

 the face flash back again . 

 " go to South America on a solitary expedeetion two year ago . come 
 back last year . have undoubtedly be to South America , but refuse to 
 say exactly where . begin to tell his adventure in a vague way , but 
 somebody start to pick hole , and he just shut up like an oyster . 
 something wonderful happen - or the man 's a champion liar , which be 
 the more probable supposeetion . have some damage photograph , say to 
 be fake . got so touchy that he assault anyone who ask question , 
 and heave reporter down the stair . in my opinion he be just a 
 homicidal megalomaniac with a turn for science . that be your man , Mr. 
 Malone . now , off you run , and see what you can make of he . you be 
 big enough to look after yourself . anyway , you be all safe . 
 employer ' Liability Act , you know . " 

 a grin red face turn once more into a pink oval , fringe with 
 gingery fluff ; the interview be at an end . 

 I walk across to the Savage Club , but instead of turn into it I 
 lean upon the railing of Adelphi Terrace and gaze thoughtfully for 
 a long time at the brown , oily river . I can always think most sanely 
 and clearly in the open air . I take out the list of Professor 
 Challenger 's exploit , and I read it over under the electric lamp . 
 then I have what I can only regard as an inspiration . as a Pressman , I 
 feel sure from what I have be tell that I could never hope to get into 
 touch with this cantankerous Professor . but these recrimination , 
 twice mention in his skeleton biography , could only mean that he be 
 a fanatic in science . be there not an exposed margin there upon which 
 he might be accessible ? I would try . 

 I enter the club . it be just after eleven , and the big room be 
 fairly full , though the rush have not yet set in . I notice a tall , 
 thin , angular man seat in an arm - chair by the fire . he turn as I 
 draw my chair up to he . it be the man of all other whom I should 
 have choose - Tarp Henry , of the staff of Nature , a thin , dry , leathery 
 creature , who be full , to those who know he , of kindly humanity . I 
 plunge instantly into my subject . 

 " what do you know of Professor Challenger ? " 

 " Challenger ? " he gather his brow in scientific disapproval . 
 " Challenger be the man who come with some cock - and - bull story from 
 South America . " 

 " what story ? " 

 " oh , it be rank nonsense about some queer animal he have discover . 
 I believe he have retract since . anyhow , he have suppress it all . 
 he give an interview to Reuter 's , and there be such a howl that he see 
 it would not   do . it be a discreditable business . there be one or 
 two folk who be inclined to take he seriously , but he soon choke 
 they off . " 

 " how ? " 

 " well , by his insufferable rudeness and impossible behavior . there be 
 poor old Wadley , of the Zoological Institute . Wadley send a message : 
 ' the President of the Zoological Institute present his compliment to 
 Professor Challenger , and would take it as a personal favor if he would 
 do they the honor to come to their next meeting . ' the answer be 
 unprintable . " 

 " you do not   say ? " 

 " well , a bowdlerize version of it would run : ' Professor Challenger 
 present his compliment to the President of the Zoological Institute , 
 and would take it as a personal favor if he would go to the devil . ' " 

 " Good Lord ! " 

 " yes , I expect that be what old Wadley say . I remember his wail at the 
 meeting , which begin : ' in fifty year experience of scientific 
 intercourse - - ' it quite break the old man up . " 

 " anything more about Challenger ? " 

 " well , I be a bacteriologist , you know . I live in a 
 nine - hundred - diameter microscope . I can hardly claim to take serious 
 notice of anything that I can see with my naked eye . I be a 
 frontiersman from the extreme edge of the Knowable , and I feel quite 
 out of place when I leave my study and come into touch with all you 
 great , rough , hulk creature . I be too detached to talk scandal , and 
 yet at scientific conversazione I have hear something of Challenger , 
 for he be one of those man whom nobody can ignore . he be as clever as 
 they make them - a full - charge battery of force and vitality , but a 
 quarrelsome , ill - condition faddist , and unscrupulous at that . he have 
 go the length of fake some photograph over the South american 
 business . " 

 " you say he be a faddist . what be his particular fad ? " 

 " he have a thousand , but the late be something about Weissmann and 
 Evolution . he have a fearful row about it in Vienna , I believe . " 

 " can not   you tell I the point ? " 

 " not at the moment , but a translation of the proceeding exist . we 
 have it file at the office . would you care to come ? " 

 " it be just what I want . I have to interview the fellow , and I need 
 some lead up to he . it be really awfully good of you to give I a 
 lift . I will go with you now , if it be not too late . " 


 half an hour later I be seat in the newspaper office with a huge 
 tome in front of I , which have be open at the article " Weissmann 
 versus Darwin , " with the sub head , " spirited Protest at Vienna . 
 Lively Proceedings . " my scientific education have be somewhat 
 neglect , I be unable to follow the whole argument , but it be 
 evident that the English Professor have handle his subject in a very 
 aggressive fashion , and have thoroughly annoy his Continental 
 colleague . " protest , " " Uproar , " and " general appeal to the Chairman " 
 be three of the first bracket which catch my eye . Most of the 
 matter might have be write in Chinese for any definite meaning that 
 it convey to my brain . 

 " I wish you could translate it into English for I , " I say , 
 pathetically , to my help - mate . 

 " well , it be a translation . " 

 " then I would well try my luck with the original . " 

 " it be certainly rather deep for a layman . " 

 " if I could only get a single good , meaty sentence which seem to 
 convey some sort of definite human idea , it would serve my turn . ah , 
 yes , this one will do . I seem in a vague way almost to understand it . 
 I will copy it out . this shall be my link with the terrible Professor . " 

 " nothing else I can do ? " 

 " well , yes ; I propose to write to he . if I could frame the letter 
 here , and use your address it would give atmosphere . " 

 " we will have the fellow round here make a row and break the 
 furniture . " 

 " no , no ; you will see the letter - nothing contentious , I assure you . " 

 " well , that be my chair and desk . you will find paper there . I would like to 
 censor it before it go . " 

 it take some doing , but I flatter myself that it be not   such a bad job 
 when it be finish . I read it aloud to the critical bacteriologist 
 with some pride in my handiwork . 


 " DEAR PROFESSOR CHALLENGER , " it say , " as a humble student of Nature , I 
 have always take the most profound interest in your speculation as to 
 the difference between Darwin and Weissmann . I have recently have 
 occasion to refresh my memory by re - reading - - " 


 " you infernal liar ! " murmur Tarp Henry . 


  - " by re - read your masterly address at Vienna . that lucid and 
 admirable statement seem to be the last word in the matter . there be 
 one sentence in it , however - namely : ' I protest strongly against the 
 insufferable and entirely dogmatic assertion that each separate i d be a 
 microcosm possessed of an historical architecture elaborate slowly 
 through the series of generation . ' have you no desire , in view of 
 later research , to modify this statement ? do you not think that it be 
 over - accentuate ? with your permission , I would ask the favor of an 
 interview , as I feel strongly upon the subject , and have certain 
 suggestion which I could only elaborate in a personal conversation . 
 with your consent , I trust to have the honor of call at eleven 
 o'clock the day after to - morrow   Wednesday   morning . 

 " I remain , Sir , with assurance of profound respect , your very truly , 

 EDWARD D. MALONE . " 


 " how be that ? " I ask , triumphantly . 

 " well if your conscience can stand it - - " 

 " it have never fail I yet . " 

 " but what do you mean to do ? " 

 " to get there . once I be in his room I may see some opening . I may 
 even go the length of open confession . if he be a sportsman he will be 
 tickle . " 

 " Tickled , indeed ! he be much more likely to do the tickling . chain 
 mail , or an american football suit - that be what you will want . well , 
 good - bye . I will have the answer for you here on Wednesday morning - if 
 he ever deign to answer you . he be a violent , dangerous , cantankerous 
 character , hat by everyone who come across he , and the butt of the 
 student , so far as they dare take a liberty with he . perhaps it 
 would be good for you if you never hear from the fellow at all . " 




  CHAPTER III 

  " he be a perfectly impossible Person " 

 my friend 's fear or hope be not destine to be realize . when I 
 call on Wednesday there be a letter with the West Kensington 
 postmark upon it , and my name scrawl across the envelope in a 
 handwriting which look like a barb - wire railing . the content be 
 as follow : - 


  " ENMORE PARK , W. 

 " SIR , - I have duly receive your note , in which you claim to endorse my 
 view , although I be not aware that they be dependent upon endorsement 
 either from you or anyone else . you have venture to use the word 
 ' speculation ' with regard to my statement upon the subject of 
 Darwinism , and I would call your attention to the fact that such a word 
 in such a connection be offensive to a degree . the context convince 
 I , however , that you have sin rather through ignorance and 
 tactlessness than through malice , so I be content to pass the matter 
 by . you quote an isolated sentence from my lecture , and appear to have 
 some difficulty in understand it . I should have think that only a 
 sub - human intelligence could have fail to grasp the point , but if it 
 really need amplification I shall consent to see you at the hour 
 name , though visit and visitor of every sort be exceed 
 distasteful to I . as to your suggestion that I may modify my opinion , 
 I would have you know that it be not my habit to do so after a 
 deliberate expression of my mature view . you will kindly show the 
 envelope of this letter to my man , Austin , when you call , as he have to 
 take every precaution to shield I from the intrusive rascal who call 
 themselves ' journalist . ' 

  " your faithfully , 
  " GEORGE EDWARD CHALLENGER . " 


 this be the letter that I read aloud to Tarp Henry , who have come down 
 early to hear the result of my venture . his only remark be , " there be 
 some new stuff , cuticura or something , which be well than arnica . " 
 some people have such extraordinary notion of humor . 

 it be nearly half - past ten before I have receive my message , but a 
 taxicab take I round in good time for my appointment . it be an 
 impose porticoed house at which we stop , and the heavily - curtain 
 window give every indication of wealth upon the part of this 
 formidable Professor . the door be open by an odd , swarthy , dry - up 
 person of uncertain age , with a dark pilot jacket and brown leather 
 gaiter . I find afterwards that he be the chauffeur , who fill the 
 gap leave by a succession of fugitive butler . he look I up and 
 down with a search light blue eye . 

 " expect ? " he ask . 

 " an appointment . " 

 " got your letter ? " 

 I produce the envelope . 

 " right ! " he seem to be a person of few word . follow he down 
 the passage I be suddenly interrupt by a small woman , who step 
 out from what prove to be the dining - room door . she be a bright , 
 vivacious , dark - eyed lady , more french than English in her type . 

 " one moment , " she say . " you can wait , Austin . step in here , sir . 
 may I ask if you have meet my husband before ? " 

 " no , madam , I have not have the honor . " 

 " then I apologize to you in advance . I must tell you that he be a 
 perfectly impossible person - absolutely impossible . if you be 
 forewarned you will be the more ready to make allowance . " 

 " it be most considerate of you , madam . " 

 " get quickly out of the room if he seem inclined to be violent . do not 
 wait to argue with he . several people have be injure through do 
 that . afterwards there be a public scandal and it reflect upon I and 
 all of we . I suppose it be not   about South America you want to see 
 he ? " 

 I could not lie to a lady . 

 " dear I ! that be his most dangerous subject . you will not   believe a 
 word he say - I be sure I do not   wonder . but do not   tell he so , for it 
 make he very violent . pretend to believe he , and you may get 
 through all right . remember he believe it himself . of that you may 
 be assure . a more honest man never live . do not   wait any long or 
 he may suspect . if you find he dangerous - really dangerous - re the 
 bell and hold he off until I come . even at his bad I can usually 
 control he . " 

 with these encouraging word the lady hand I over to the taciturn 
 Austin , who have wait like a bronze statue of discretion during our 
 short interview , and I be conduct to the end of the passage . there 
 be a tap at a door , a bull 's bellow from within , and I be face to 
 face with the Professor . 

 he sit in a rotate chair behind a broad table , which be cover with 
 book , map , and diagram . as I enter , his seat spin round to face 
 I . his appearance make I gasp . I be prepare for something 
 strange , but not for so overpower a personality as this . it be his 
 size which take one 's breath away - his size and his impose presence . 
 his head be enormous , the large I have ever see upon a human being . 
 I be sure that his top - hat , have I ever venture to don it , would have 
 slip over I entirely and rest on my shoulder . he have the face 
 and beard which I associate with an assyrian bull ; the former florid , 
 the latter so black as almost to have a suspicion of blue , spade - shaped 
 and ripple down over his chest . the hair be peculiar , plaster 
 down in front in a long , curve wisp over his massive forehead . the 
 eye be blue - gray under great black tuft , very clear , very critical , 
 and very masterful . a huge spread of shoulder and a chest like a 
 barrel be the other part of he which appear above the table , save 
 for two enormous hand cover with long black hair . this and a 
 bellowing , roaring , rumble voice make up my first impression of the 
 notorious Professor Challenger . 

 " well ? " say he , with a most insolent stare . " what now ? " 

 I must keep up my deception for at least a little time long , 
 otherwise here be evidently an end of the interview . 

 " you be good enough to give I an appointment , sir , " say I , humbly , 
 produce his envelope . 

 he take my letter from his desk and lay it out before he . 

 " oh , you be the young person who can not understand plain English , be 
 you ? my general conclusion you be good enough to approve , as I 
 understand ? " 

 " entirely , sir - entirely ! " I be very emphatic . 

 " dear I ! that strengthen my position very much , do it not ? your 
 age and appearance make your support doubly valuable . well , at least 
 you be well than that herd of swine in Vienna , whose gregarious 
 grunt be , however , not more offensive than the isolated effort of the 
 british hog . " he glare at I as the present representative of the 
 beast . 

 " they seem to have behave abominably , " say I. 

 " I assure you that I can fight my own battle , and that I have no 
 possible need of your sympathy . put I alone , sir , and with my back to 
 the wall . G. E. C. be happiest then . well , sir , let we do what we can 
 to curtail this visit , which can hardly be agreeable to you , and be 
 inexpressibly irksome to I . you have , as I have be lead to believe , 
 some comment to make upon the proposition which I advance in my 
 thesis . " 

 there be a brutal directness about his method which make evasion 
 difficult . I must still make play and wait for a well opening . it 
 have seem simple enough at a distance . oh , my irish wit , could they 
 not help I now , when I need help so sorely ? he transfix I with 
 two sharp , steely eye . " come , come ! " he rumble . 

 " I be , of course , a mere student , " say I , with a fatuous smile , 
 " hardly more , I might say , than an earnest inquirer . at the same time , 
 it seem to I that you be a little severe upon Weissmann in this 
 matter . have not the general evidence since that date tend to - well , 
 to strengthen his position ? " 

 " what evidence ? " he speak with a menacing calm . 

 " well , of course , I be aware that there be not any what you might call 
 definite evidence . I allude merely to the trend of modern thought and 
 the general scientific point of view , if I might so express it . " 

 he lean forward with great earnestness . 

 " I suppose you be aware , " say he , check off point upon his 
 finger , " that the cranial index be a constant factor ? " 

 " naturally , " say I. 

 " and that telegony be still sub judice ? " 

 " undoubtedly . " 

 " and that the germ plasm be different from the parthenogenetic egg ? " 

 " why , surely ! " I cry , and glory in my own audacity . 

 " but what do that prove ? " he ask , in a gentle , persuasive voice . 

 " ah , what indeed ? " I murmur . " what do it prove ? " 

 " shall I tell you ? " he coo . 

 " pray do . " 

 " it prove , " he roar , with a sudden blast of fury , " that you be the 
 damnedest imposter in London - a vile , crawl journalist , who have no 
 more science than he have decency in his composition ! " 

 he have spring to his foot with a mad rage in his eye . even at that 
 moment of tension I find time for amazement at the discovery that he 
 be quite a short man , his head not high than my shoulder - a stunt 
 Hercules whose tremendous vitality have all run to depth , breadth , and 
 brain . 

 " Gibberish ! " he cry , lean forward , with his finger on the table 
 and his face project . " that be what I have be talk to you , 
 sir - scientific gibberish ! do you think you could match cunning with 
 I - you with your walnut of a brain ? you think you be omnipotent , you 
 infernal scribbler , do not   you ? that your praise can make a man and 
 your blame can break he ? we must all bow to you , and try to get a 
 favorable word , must we ? this man shall have a leg up , and this man 
 shall have a dressing down ! creep vermin , I know you ! you have   get 
 out of your station . time be when your ear be clip . you have 
 lose your sense of proportion . Swollen gas - bag ! I will keep you in 
 your proper place . yes , sir , you have not   get over G. E. C. there be 
 one man who be still your master . he warn you off , but if you will 
 come , by the Lord you do it at your own risk . Forfeit , my good Mr. 
 Malone , I claim forfeit ! you have play a rather dangerous game , and 
 it strike I that you have lose it . " 

 " look here , sir , " say I , back to the door and open it ; " you can 
 be as abusive as you like . but there be a limit . you shall not 
 assault I . " 

 " shall I not ? " he be slowly advance in a peculiarly menacing way , 
 but he stop now and put his big hand into the side - pocket of a 
 rather boyish short jacket which he wear . " I have throw several of 
 you out of the house . you will be the fourth or fifth . three pound 
 fifteen each - that be how it average . expensive , but very necessary . 
 now , sir , why should you not follow your brother ? I rather think you 
 must . " he resume his unpleasant and stealthy advance , point his 
 toe as he walk , like a dancing master . 

 I could have bolt for the hall door , but it would have be too 
 ignominious . besides , a little glow of righteous anger be spring 
 up within I . I have be hopelessly in the wrong before , but this 
 man 's menace be put I in the right . 

 " I will trouble you to keep your hand off , sir . I will not stand it . " 

 " dear I ! " his black moustache lift and a white fang twinkle in a 
 sneer . " you will not   stand it , eh ? " 

 " do not   be such a fool , Professor ! " I cry . " what can you hope for ? 
 I be fifteen stone , as hard as nail , and play center three - quarter 
 every Saturday for the London Irish . I be not the man - - " 

 it be at that moment that he rush I . it be lucky that I have 
 open the door , or we should have go through it . we do a 
 Catharine - wheel together down the passage . somehow we gather up a 
 chair upon our way , and bound on with it towards the street . my 
 mouth be full of his beard , our arm be lock , our body 
 intertwine , and that infernal chair radiate its leg all round we . 
 the watchful Austin have throw open the hall door . we go with a back 
 somersault down the front step . I have see the two Macs attempt 
 something of the kind at the hall , but it appear to take some 
 practise to do it without hurt oneself . the chair go to matchwood 
 at the bottom , and we roll apart into the gutter . he spring to his 
 foot , wave his fist and wheeze like an asthmatic . 

 " have enough ? " he pant . 

 " you infernal bully ! " I cry , as I gather myself together . 

 then and there we should have try the thing out , for he be 
 effervesce with fight , but fortunately I be rescue from an odious 
 situation . a policeman be beside we , his notebook in his hand . 

 " what be all this ? you ought to be ashamed " say the policeman . it be 
 the most rational remark which I have hear in Enmore Park . " well , " he 
 insist , turn to I , " what be it , then ? " 

 " this man attack I , " say I. 

 " do you attack he ? " ask the policeman . 

 the Professor breathe hard and say nothing . 

 " it be not the first time , either , " say the policeman , severely , 
 shake his head . " you be in trouble last month for the same thing . 
 you have   blacken this young man 's eye . do you give he in charge , sir ? " 

 I relent . 

 " no , " say I , " I do not . " 

 " what be that ? " say the policeman . 

 " I be to blame myself . I intrude upon he . he give I fair warning . " 

 the policeman snap up his notebook . 

 " do not   let we have any more such going - on , " say he . " now , then ! 
 move on , there , move on ! " this to a butcher 's boy , a maid , and one or 
 two loafer who have collect . he clump heavily down the street , 
 drive this little flock before he . the Professor look at I , and 
 there be something humorous at the back of his eye . 

 " come in ! " say he . " I have   not do with you yet . " 

 the speech have a sinister sound , but I follow he none the less into 
 the house . the man - servant , Austin , like a wooden image , close the 
 door behind we . 




  CHAPTER IV 

  " it be just the very big thing in the World " 

 hardly be it shut when Mrs. Challenger dart out from the 
 dining - room . the small woman be in a furious temper . she bar she 
 husband 's way like an enraged chicken in front of a bulldog . it be 
 evident that she have see my exit , but have not observe my return . 

 " you brute , George ! " she scream . " you have   hurt that nice young man . " 

 he jerk backwards with his thumb . 

 " here he be , safe and sound behind I . " 

 she be confused , but not unduly so . 

 " I be so sorry , I do not   see you . " 

 " I assure you , madam , that it be all right . " 

 " he have mark your poor face ! oh , George , what a brute you be ! 
 nothing but scandal from one end of the week to the other . everyone 
 hat and make fun of you . you have   finish my patience . this end 
 it . " 

 " dirty linen , " he rumble . 

 " it be not a secret , " she cry . " do you suppose that the whole 
 street - the whole of London , for that matter - - get away , Austin , we 
 do not   want you here . do you suppose they do not   all talk about you ? 
 where be your dignity ? you , a man who should have be Regius 
 Professor at a great University with a thousand student all revere 
 you . where be your dignity , George ? " 

 " how about your , my dear ? " 

 " you try I too much . a ruffian - a common brawl ruffian - that be 
 what you have become . " 

 " be good , Jessie . " 

 " a roaring , rag bully ! " 

 " that be do it ! Stool of penance ! " say he . 

 to my amazement he stoop , pick she up , and place she sit upon 
 a high pedestal of black marble in the angle of the hall . it be at 
 least seven foot high , and so thin that she could hardly balance upon 
 it . a more absurd object than she present cock up there with she 
 face convulse with anger , her foot dangle , and her body rigid for 
 fear of an upset , I could not imagine . 

 " let I down ! " she wail . 

 " say ' please . ' " 

 " you brute , George ! let I down this instant ! " 

 " come into the study , Mr. Malone . " 

 " really , sir - - ! " say I , look at the lady . 

 " here 's Mr. Malone plead for you , Jessie . say ' please , ' and down 
 you come . " 

 " oh , you brute ! please ! please ! " 

 he take she down as if she have be a canary . 

 " you must behave yourself , dear . Mr. Malone be a Pressman . he will 
 have it all in his rag to - morrow , and sell an extra dozen among our 
 neighbor . ' strange story of high life ' - you feel fairly high on that 
 pedestal , do you not ? then a sub - title , ' glimpse of a singular 
 menage . ' he be a foul feeder , be Mr. Malone , a carrion eater , like all 
 of his kind - porcus ex grege diaboli - a swine from the devil 's herd . 
 that be it , Malone - what ? " 

 " you be really intolerable ! " say I , hotly . 

 he bellow with laughter . 

 " we shall have a coalition presently , " he boom , look from his wife 
 to I and puff out his enormous chest . then , suddenly alter his 
 tone , " excuse this frivolous family badinage , Mr. Malone . I call you 
 back for some more serious purpose than to mix you up with our little 
 domestic pleasantry . run away , little woman , and do not   fret . " he 
 place a huge hand upon each of her shoulder . " all that you say be 
 perfectly true . I should be a well man if I do what you advise , but 
 I should not   be quite George Edward Challenger . there be plenty of 
 well man , my dear , but only one G. E. C. so make the good of he . " 
 he suddenly give she a resounding kiss , which embarrass I even more 
 than his violence have do . " now , Mr. Malone , " he continue , with a 
 great accession of dignity , " this way , if you please . " 

 we re - enter the room which we have leave so tumultuously ten minute 
 before . the Professor close the door carefully behind we , motion I 
 into an arm - chair , and push a cigar - box under my nose . 

 " Real San Juan Colorado , " he say . " excitable people like you be the 
 well for narcotic . Heavens ! do not   bite it ! cut - and cut with 
 reverence ! now lean back , and listen attentively to whatever I may 
 care to say to you . if any remark should occur to you , you can reserve 
 it for some more opportune time . 

 " first of all , as to your return to my house after your most 
 justifiable expulsion " - he protrude his beard , and star at I as one 
 who challenge and invite contradiction - " after , as I say , your 
 well - merit expulsion . the reason lie in your answer to that most 
 officious policeman , in which I seem to discern some glimmering of 
 good feeling upon your part - more , at any rate , than I be accustom to 
 associate with your profession . in admit that the fault of the 
 incident lie with you , you give some evidence of a certain mental 
 detachment and breadth of view which attract my favorable notice . 
 the sub - specie of the human race to which you unfortunately belong have 
 always be below my mental horizon . your word bring you suddenly 
 above it . you swam up into my serious notice . for this reason I ask 
 you to return with I , as I be minded to make your further 
 acquaintance . you will kindly deposit your ash in the small japanese 
 tray on the bamboo table which stand at your left elbow . " 

 all this he boom forth like a professor address his class . he have 
 swing round his revolve chair so as to face I , and he sit all puff 
 out like an enormous bull - frog , his head lay back and his eye 
 half - cover by supercilious lid . now he suddenly turn himself 
 sideways , and all I could see of he be tangle hair with a red , 
 protrude ear . he be scratch about among the litter of paper 
 upon his desk . he face I presently with what look like a very 
 tattere sketch - book in his hand . 

 " I be go to talk to you about South America , " say he . " no comment 
 if you please . first of all , I wish you to understand that nothing I 
 tell you now be to be repeat in any public way unless you have my 
 express permission . that permission will , in all human probability , 
 never be give . be that clear ? " 

 " it be very hard , " say I. " surely a judicious account - - " 

 he replace the notebook upon the table . 

 " that end it , " say he . " I wish you a very good morning . " 

 " no , no ! " I cry . " I submit to any condition . so far as I can see , 
 I have no choice . " 

 " none in the world , " say he . 

 " well , then , I promise . " 

 " word of honor ? " 

 " word of honor . " 

 he look at I with doubt in his insolent eye . 

 " after all , what do I know about your honor ? " say he . 

 " upon my word , sir , " I cry , angrily , " you take very great liberty ! 
 I have never be so insult in my life . " 

 he seem more interested than annoy at my outbreak . 

 " round - headed , " he mutter . " Brachycephalic , gray - eye , black - haired , 
 with suggestion of the negroid . celtic , I presume ? " 

 " I be an Irishman , sir . " 

 " Irish Irish ? " 

 " yes , sir . " 

 " that , of course , explain it . let I see ; you have give I your 
 promise that my confidence will be respect ? that confidence , I may 
 say , will be far from complete . but I be prepared to give you a few 
 indication which will be of interest . in the first place , you be 
 probably aware that two year ago I make a journey to South 
 America - one which will be classical in the scientific history of the 
 world ? the object of my journey be to verify some conclusion of 
 Wallace and of Bates , which could only be do by observe their 
 report fact under the same condition in which they have themselves 
 note they . if my expedition have no other result it would still have 
 be noteworthy , but a curious incident occur to I while there 
 which open up an entirely fresh line of inquiry . 

 " you be aware - or probably , in this half - educate age , you be not 
 aware - that the country round some part of the Amazon be still only 
 partially explore , and that a great number of tributary , some of 
 they entirely uncharted , run into the main river . it be my business 
 to visit this little - know back - country and to examine its fauna , which 
 furnish I with the material for several chapter for that great and 
 monumental work upon zoology which will be my life 's justification . I 
 be return , my work accomplish , when I have occasion to spend a 
 night at a small indian village at a point where a certain 
 tributary - the name and position of which I withhold - open into the 
 main river . the native be Cucama Indians , an amiable but degrade 
 race , with mental power hardly superior to the average Londoner . I 
 have effect some cure among they upon my way up the river , and have 
 impress they considerably with my personality , so that I be not 
 surprised to find myself eagerly await upon my return . I gather 
 from their sign that someone have urgent need of my medical service , 
 and I follow the chief to one of his hut . when I enter I find 
 that the sufferer to whose aid I have be summon have that instant 
 expire . he be , to my surprise , no Indian , but a white man ; indeed , I 
 may say a very white man , for he be flaxen - haired and have some 
 characteristic of an albino . he be clothe in rag , be very emaciated , 
 and bear every trace of prolonged hardship . so far as I could 
 understand the account of the native , he be a complete stranger to 
 they , and have come upon their village through the wood alone and in 
 the last stage of exhaustion . 

 " the man 's knapsack lie beside the couch , and I examine the content . 
 his name be write upon a tab within it - Maple White , Lake Avenue , 
 Detroit , Michigan . it be a name to which I be prepared always to lift 
 my hat . it be not too much to say that it will rank level with my own 
 when the final credit of this business come to be apportion . 

 " from the content of the knapsack it be evident that this man have 
 be an artist and poet in search of effect . there be scrap of 
 verse . I do not profess to be a judge of such thing , but they 
 appear to I to be singularly want in merit . there be also some 
 rather commonplace picture of river scenery , a paint - box , a box of 
 colored chalk , some brush , that curved bone which lie upon my 
 inkstand , a volume of Baxter 's ' Moths and Butterflies , ' a cheap 
 revolver , and a few cartridge . of personal equipment he either have 
 none or he have lose it in his journey . such be the total effect of 
 this strange American Bohemian . 

 " I be turn away from he when I observe that something project 
 from the front of his ragged jacket . it be this sketch - book , which 
 be as dilapidate then as you see it now . indeed , I can assure you 
 that a first folio of Shakespeare could not be treat with great 
 reverence than this relic have be since it come into my possession . I 
 hand it to you now , and I ask you to take it page by page and to 
 examine the content . " 

 he help himself to a cigar and lean back with a fiercely critical 
 pair of eye , take note of the effect which this document would 
 produce . 

 I have open the volume with some expectation of a revelation , though 
 of what nature I could not imagine . the first page be disappointing , 
 however , as it contain nothing but the picture of a very fat man in a 
 pea - jacket , with the legend , " Jimmy Colver on the Mail - boat , " write 
 beneath it . there follow several page which be fill with small 
 sketch of Indians and their way . then come a picture of a cheerful 
 and corpulent ecclesiastic in a shovel hat , sit opposite a very 
 thin European , and the inscription : " lunch with Fra Cristofero at 
 Rosario . " study of woman and baby account for several more 
 page , and then there be an unbroken series of animal drawing with 
 such explanation as " Manatee upon Sandbank , " " Turtles and their egg , " 
 " Black Ajouti under a Miriti Palm " - the matter disclose some sort of 
 pig - like animal ; and finally come a double page of study of 
 long - snouted and very unpleasant saurian . I could make nothing of it , 
 and say so to the Professor . 

 " surely these be only crocodile ? " 

 " Alligators ! alligator ! there be hardly such a thing as a true 
 crocodile in South America . the distinction between they - - " 

 " I mean that I could see nothing unusual - nothing to justify what you 
 have say . " 

 he smile serenely . 

 " try the next page , " say he . 

 I be still unable to sympathize . it be a full - page sketch of a 
 landscape roughly tint in color - the kind of painting which an 
 open - air artist take as a guide to a future more elaborate effort . 
 there be a pale - green foreground of feathery vegetation , which slop 
 upward and end in a line of cliff dark red in color , and curiously 
 rib like some basaltic formation which I have see . they extend 
 in an unbroken wall right across the background . at one point be an 
 isolate pyramidal rock , crown by a great tree , which appear to be 
 separate by a cleft from the main crag . behind it all , a blue 
 tropical sky . a thin green line of vegetation fringe the summit of 
 the ruddy cliff . 

 " well ? " he ask . 

 " it be no doubt a curious formation , " say I " but I be not geologist 
 enough to say that it be wonderful . " 

 " wonderful ! " he repeat . " it be unique . it be incredible . no one on 
 earth have ever dream of such a possibility . now the next . " 

 I turn it over , and give an exclamation of surprise . there be a 
 full - page picture of the most extraordinary creature that I have ever 
 see . it be the wild dream of an opium smoker , a vision of delirium . 
 the head be like that of a fowl , the body that of a bloated lizard , 
 the trail tail be furnish with upward - turn spike , and the 
 curved back be edge with a high serrate fringe , which look like a 
 dozen cock ' wattle place behind each other . in front of this 
 creature be an absurd mannikin , or dwarf , in human form , who stand 
 star at it . 

 " well , what do you think of that ? " cry the Professor , rub his 
 hand with an air of triumph . 

 " it be monstrous - grotesque . " 

 " but what make he draw such an animal ? " 

 " trade gin , I should think . " 

 " oh , that be the good explanation you can give , be it ? " 

 " well , sir , what be yours ? " 

 " the obvious one that the creature exist . that be actually sketch 
 from the life . " 

 I should have laugh only that I have a vision of our do another 
 Catharine - wheel down the passage . 

 " no doubt , " say I , " no doubt , " as one humor an imbecile . " I confess , 
 however , " I add , " that this tiny human figure puzzle I . if it be 
 an indian we could set it down as evidence of some pigmy race in 
 America , but it appear to be a European in a sun - hat . " 

 the Professor snort like an angry buffalo . " you really touch the 
 limit , " say he . " you enlarge my view of the possible . cerebral 
 paresis ! mental inertia ! wonderful ! " 

 he be too absurd to make I angry . indeed , it be a waste of energy , 
 for if you be go to be angry with this man you would be angry all 
 the time . I content myself with smile wearily . " it strike I that 
 the man be small , " say I. 

 " look here ! " he cry , lean forward and dab a great hairy 
 sausage of a finger on to the picture . " you see that plant behind the 
 animal ; I suppose you think it be a dandelion or a Brussels 
 sprout - what ? well , it be a vegetable ivory palm , and they run to 
 about fifty or sixty foot . do not   you see that the man be put in for a 
 purpose ? he could not   really have stand in front of that brute and 
 live to draw it . he sketch himself in to give a scale of height . 
 he be , we will say , over five foot high . the tree be ten time 
 big , which be what one would expect . " 

 " good heaven ! " I cry . " then you think the beast be - - why , 
 Charing Cross station would hardly make a kennel for such a brute ! " 

 " apart from exaggeration , he be certainly a well - grow speciman , " say 
 the Professor , complacently . 

 " but , " I cry , ' surely the whole experience of the human race be not 
 to be set aside on account of a single sketch " - I have turn over the 
 leaf and ascertain that there be nothing more in the book - " a 
 single sketch by a wandering american artist who may have do it under 
 hashish , or in the delirium of fever , or simply in order to gratify a 
 freakish imagination . you can not , as a man of science , defend such a 
 position as that . " 

 for answer the Professor take a book down from a shelf . 

 " this be an excellent monograph by my gifted friend , Ray Lankester ! " 
 say he . " there be an illustration here which would interest you . ah , 
 yes , here it be ! the inscription beneath it run : ' probable 
 appearance in life of the Jurassic Dinosaur Stegosaurus . the hind leg 
 alone be twice as tall as a full - grow man . ' well , what do you make of 
 that ? " 

 he hand I the open book . I start as I look at the picture . in 
 this reconstructed animal of a dead world there be certainly a very 
 great resemblance to the sketch of the unknown artist . 

 " that be certainly remarkable , " say I. 

 " but you will not   admit that it be final ? " 

 " surely it might be a coincidence , or this American may have see a 
 picture of the kind and carry it in his memory . it would be likely 
 to recur to a man in a delirium . " 

 " very good , " say the Professor , indulgently ; " we leave it at that . I 
 will now ask you to look at this bone . " he hand over the one which he 
 have already describe as part of the dead man 's possession . it be 
 about six inch long , and thick than my thumb , with some indication 
 of dry cartilage at one end of it . 

 " to what know creature do that bone belong ? " ask the Professor . 

 I examine it with care and try to recall some half - forget 
 knowledge . 

 " it might be a very thick human collar - bone , " I say . 

 my companion wave his hand in contemptuous deprecation . 

 " the human collar - bone be curve . this be straight . there be a groove 
 upon its surface show that a great tendon play across it , which 
 could not be the case with a clavicle . " 

 " then I must confess that I do not   know what it be . " 

 " you need not be ashamed to expose your ignorance , for I do not   suppose 
 the whole South Kensington staff could give a name to it . " he take a 
 little bone the size of a bean out of a pill - box . " so far as I be a 
 judge this human bone be the analogue of the one which you hold in your 
 hand . that will give you some idea of the size of the creature . you 
 will observe from the cartilage that this be no fossil speciman , but 
 recent . what do you say to that ? " 

 " surely in an elephant - - " 

 he wince as if in pain . 

 " do not ! do not   talk of elephant in South America . even in these day 
 of Board school - - " 

 " well , " I interrupt , " any large south american animal - a tapir , for 
 example . " 

 " you may take it , young man , that I be verse in the element of my 
 business . this be not a conceivable bone either of a tapir or of any 
 other creature know to zoology . it belong to a very large , a very 
 strong , and , by all analogy , a very fierce animal which exist upon the 
 face of the earth , but have not yet come under the notice of science . 
 you be still unconvinced ? " 

 " I be at least deeply interested . " 

 " then your case be not hopeless . I feel that there be reason lurk 
 in you somewhere , so we will patiently grope round for it . we will now 
 leave the dead american and proceed with my narrative . you can imagine 
 that I could hardly come away from the Amazon without probe deeply 
 into the matter . there be indication as to the direction from which 
 the dead traveler have come . indian legend would alone have be my 
 guide , for I find that rumor of a strange land be common among all 
 the riverine tribe . you have hear , no doubt , of Curupuri ? " 

 " never . " 

 " Curupuri be the spirit of the wood , something terrible , something 
 malevolent , something to be avoid . none can describe its shape or 
 nature , but it be a word of terror along the Amazon . now all tribe 
 agree as to the direction in which Curupuri live . it be the same 
 direction from which the American have come . something terrible lay 
 that way . it be my business to find out what it be . " 

 " what do you do ? " my flippancy be all go . this massive man 
 compel one 's attention and respect . 

 " I overcome the extreme reluctance of the native - a reluctance which 
 extend even to talk upon the subject - and by judicious persuasion and 
 gift , aid , I will admit , by some threat of coercion , I get two of 
 they to act as guide . after many adventure which I need not 
 describe , and after travel a distance which I will not mention , in a 
 direction which I withhold , we come at last to a tract of country which 
 have never be describe , nor , indeed , visit save by my unfortunate 
 predecessor . would you kindly look at this ? " 

 he hand I a photograph - half - plate size . 

 " the unsatisfactory appearance of it be due to the fact , " say he , 
 " that on descend the river the boat be upset and the case which 
 contain the undeveloped film be break , with disastrous result . 
 nearly all of they be totally ruin - an irreparable loss . this be 
 one of the few which partially escape . this explanation of 
 deficiency or abnormality you will kindly accept . there be talk 
 of fake . I be not in a mood to argue such a point . " 

 the photograph be certainly very off - color . an unkind critic might 
 easily have misinterpret that dim surface . it be a dull gray 
 landscape , and as I gradually decipher the detail of it I realize 
 that it represent a long and enormously high line of cliff exactly 
 like an immense cataract see in the distance , with a sloping , 
 tree - clothe plain in the foreground . 

 " I believe it be the same place as the paint picture , " say I. 

 " it be the same place , " the Professor answer . " I find trace of the 
 fellow 's camp . now look at this . " 

 it be a near view of the same scene , though the photograph be 
 extremely defective . I could distinctly see the isolate , tree - crown 
 pinnacle of rock which be detach from the crag . 

 " I have no doubt of it at all , " say I. 

 " well , that be something gain , " say he . " we progress , do we not ? 
 now , will you please look at the top of that rocky pinnacle ? do you 
 observe something there ? " 

 " an enormous tree . " 

 " but on the tree ? " 

 " a large bird , " say I. 

 he hand I a lens . 

 " yes , " I say , peer through it , " a large bird stand on the tree . 
 it appear to have a considerable beak . I should say it be a pelican . " 

 " I can not congratulate you upon your eyesight , " say the Professor . 
 " it be not a pelican , nor , indeed , be it a bird . it may interest you 
 to know that I succeed in shoot that particular speciman . it be 
 the only absolute proof of my experience which I be able to bring 
 away with I . " 

 " you have it , then ? " here at last be tangible corroboration . 

 " I have it . it be unfortunately lose with so much else in the same 
 boat accident which ruin my photograph . I clutch at it as it 
 disappear in the swirl of the rapid , and part of its wing be leave 
 in my hand . I be insensible when wash ashore , but the miserable 
 remnant of my superb speciman be still intact ; I now lie it before 
 you . " 

 from a drawer he produce what seem to I to be the upper portion of 
 the wing of a large bat . it be at least two foot in length , a curved 
 bone , with a membranous veil beneath it . 

 " a monstrous bat ! " I suggest . 

 " nothing of the sort , " say the Professor , severely . " live , as I do , 
 in an educated and scientific atmosphere , I could not have conceive 
 that the first principle of zoology be so little known . be it 
 possible that you do not know the elementary fact in comparative 
 anatomy , that the wing of a bird be really the forearm , while the wing 
 of a bat consist of three elongate finger with membrane between ? 
 now , in this case , the bone be certainly not the forearm , and you can 
 see for yourself that this be a single membrane hang upon a single 
 bone , and therefore that it can not belong to a bat . but if it be 
 neither bird nor bat , what be it ? " 

 my small stock of knowledge be exhaust . 

 " I really do not know , " say I. 

 he open the standard work to which he have already refer I . 

 " here , " say he , point to the picture of an extraordinary flying 
 monster , " be an excellent reproduction of the dimorphodon , or 
 pterodactyl , a fly reptile of the Jurassic period . on the next page 
 be a diagram of the mechanism of its wing . kindly compare it with the 
 speciman in your hand . " 

 a wave of amazement pass over I as I look . I be convince . 
 there could be no get away from it . the cumulative proof be 
 overwhelming . the sketch , the photograph , the narrative , and now the 
 actual speciman - the evidence be complete . I say so - I say so 
 warmly , for I feel that the Professor be an ill - use man . he lean 
 back in his chair with droop eyelid and a tolerant smile , bask 
 in this sudden gleam of sunshine . 

 " it be just the very big thing that I ever hear of ! " say I , though 
 it be my journalistic rather than my scientific enthusiasm that be 
 rouse . " it be colossal . you be a Columbus of science who have 
 discover a lost world . I be awfully sorry if I seem to doubt you . 
 it be all so unthinkable . but I understand evidence when I see it , 
 and this should be good enough for anyone . " 

 the Professor purr with satisfaction . 

 " and then , sir , what do you do next ? " 

 " it be the wet season , Mr. Malone , and my store be exhaust . I 
 explore some portion of this huge cliff , but I be unable to find any 
 way to scale it . the pyramidal rock upon which I see and shoot the 
 pterodactyl be more accessible . be something of a cragsman , I do 
 manage to get half way to the top of that . from that height I have a 
 well idea of the plateau upon the top of the crag . it appear to 
 be very large ; neither to east nor to west could I see any end to the 
 vista of green - cap cliff . below , it be a swampy , jungly region , 
 full of snake , insect , and fever . it be a natural protection to this 
 singular country . " 

 " do you see any other trace of life ? " 

 " no , sir , I do not ; but during the week that we lay encamped at the 
 base of the cliff we hear some very strange noise from above . " 

 " but the creature that the american drew ? how do you account for that ? " 

 " we can only suppose that he must have make his way to the summit and 
 see it there . we know , therefore , that there be a way up . we know 
 equally that it must be a very difficult one , otherwise the creature 
 would have come down and overrun the surround country . surely that 
 be clear ? " 

 " but how do they come to be there ? " 

 " I do not think that the problem be a very obscure one , " say the 
 Professor ; " there can only be one explanation . South America be , as 
 you may have hear , a granite continent . at this single point in the 
 interior there have be , in some far distant age , a great , sudden 
 volcanic upheaval . these cliff , I may remark , be basaltic , and 
 therefore plutonic . an area , as large perhaps as Sussex , have be 
 lift up en bloc with all its live content , and cut off by 
 perpendicular precipice of a hardness which defy erosion from all 
 the rest of the continent . what be the result ? why , the ordinary law 
 of Nature be suspend . the various check which influence the 
 struggle for existence in the world at large be all neutralize or 
 alter . creature survive which would otherwise disappear . you will 
 observe that both the pterodactyl and the stegosaurus be Jurassic , and 
 therefore of a great age in the order of life . they have be 
 artificially conserve by those strange accidental condition . " 

 " but surely your evidence be conclusive . you have only to lay it 
 before the proper authority . " 

 " so in my simplicity , I have imagine , " say the Professor , bitterly . 
 " I can only tell you that it be not so , that I be meet at every turn 
 by incredulity , bear partly of stupidity and partly of jealousy . it be 
 not my nature , sir , to cringe to any man , or to seek to prove a fact if 
 my word have be doubt . after the first I have not condescend to 
 show such corroborative proof as I possess . the subject become 
 hateful to I - I would not speak of it . when man like yourself , who 
 represent the foolish curiosity of the public , come to disturb my 
 privacy I be unable to meet they with dignified reserve . by nature I 
 be , I admit , somewhat fiery , and under provocation I be inclined to be 
 violent . I fear you may have remark it . " 

 I nurse my eye and be silent . 

 " my wife have frequently remonstrate with I upon the subject , and yet 
 I fancy that any man of honor would feel the same . to - night , however , 
 I propose to give an extreme example of the control of the will over 
 the emotion . I invite you to be present at the exhibition . " he 
 hand I a card from his desk . " you will perceive that Mr. Percival 
 Waldron , a naturalist of some popular repute , be announce to lecture 
 at eight - thirty at the Zoological Institute 's Hall upon ' the Record of 
 the Ages . ' I have be specially invite to be present upon the 
 platform , and to move a vote of thank to the lecturer . while do 
 so , I shall make it my business , with infinite tact and delicacy , to 
 throw out a few remark which may arouse the interest of the audience 
 and cause some of they to desire to go more deeply into the matter . 
 nothing contentious , you understand , but only an indication that there 
 be great deep beyond . I shall hold myself strongly in leash , and 
 see whether by this self - restraint I attain a more favorable result . " 

 " and I may come ? " I ask eagerly . 

 " why , surely , " he answer , cordially . he have an enormously massive 
 genial manner , which be almost as overpower as his violence . his 
 smile of benevolence be a wonderful thing , when his cheek would 
 suddenly bunch into two red apple , between his half - close eye and 
 his great black beard . " by all mean , come . it will be a comfort to 
 I to know that I have one ally in the hall , however inefficient and 
 ignorant of the subject he may be . I fancy there will be a large 
 audience , for Waldron , though an absolute charlatan , have a considerable 
 popular following . now , Mr. Malone , I have give you rather more of my 
 time than I have intend . the individual must not monopolize what be 
 mean for the world . I shall be pleased to see you at the lecture 
 to - night . in the meantime , you will understand that no public use be 
 to be make of any of the material that I have give you . " 

 " but Mr. McArdle - my news editor , you know - will want to know what I 
 have do . " 

 " tell he what you like . you can say , among other thing , that if he 
 send anyone else to intrude upon I I shall call upon he with a 
 riding - whip . but I leave it to you that nothing of all this appear in 
 print . very good . then the Zoological Institute 's Hall at 
 eight - thirty to - night . " I have a last impression of red cheek , blue 
 ripple beard , and intolerant eye , as he wave I out of the room . 




  CHAPTER V 

  " question ! " 

 what with the physical shock incidental to my first interview with 
 Professor Challenger and the mental one which accompany the second , 
 I be a somewhat demoralized journalist by the time I find myself in 
 Enmore Park once more . in my ache head the one thought be throb 
 that there really be truth in this man 's story , that it be of 
 tremendous consequence , and that it would work up into inconceivable 
 copy for the Gazette when I could obtain permission to use it . a 
 taxicab be wait at the end of the road , so I spring into it and 
 drive down to the office . McArdle be at his post as usual . 

 " well , " he cry , expectantly , " what may it run to ? I be think , 
 young man , you have be in the war . do not   tell I that he assault 
 you . " 

 " we have a little difference at first . " 

 " what a man it be ! what do you do ? " 

 " well , he become more reasonable and we have a chat . but I get nothing 
 out of he - nothing for publication . " 

 " I be not so sure about that . you get a black eye out of he , and 
 that be for publication . we can not   have this reign of terror , Mr. 
 Malone . we must bring the man to his bearing . I will have a leaderette 
 on he to - morrow that will raise a blister . just give I the material 
 and I will engage to brand the fellow for ever . professor 
 Munchausen - how be that for an inset headline ? Sir John Mandeville 
 redivivus - Cagliostro - all the imposter and bully in history . I will 
 show he up for the fraud he be . " 

 " I would not   do that , sir . " 

 " why not ? " 

 " because he be not a fraud at all . " 

 " what ! " roar McArdle . " you do not   mean to say you really believe this 
 stuff of his about mammoth and mastodon and great sea sairpent ? " 

 " well , I do not   know about that . I do not   think he make any claim of 
 that kind . but I do believe he have get something new . " 

 " then for Heaven 's sake , man , write it up ! " 

 " I be long to , but all I know he give I in confidence and on 
 condition that I do not . " I condense into a few sentence the 
 Professor 's narrative . " that be how it stand . " 

 McArdle look deeply incredulous . 

 " well , Mr. Malone , " he say at last , " about this scientific meeting 
 to - night ; there can be no privacy about that , anyhow . I do not   suppose 
 any paper will want to report it , for Waldron have be report already 
 a dozen time , and no one be aware that Challenger will speak . we may 
 get a scoop , if we be lucky . you will be there in any case , so you will 
 just give we a pretty full report . I will keep space up to midnight . " 

 my day be a busy one , and I have an early dinner at the Savage Club 
 with Tarp Henry , to whom I give some account of my adventure . he 
 listen with a sceptical smile on his gaunt face , and roar with 
 laughter on hear that the Professor have convince I . 

 " my dear chap , thing do not   happen like that in real life . People 
 do not   stumble upon enormous discovery and then lose their evidence . 
 leave that to the novelist . the fellow be as full of trick as the 
 monkey - house at the Zoo . it be all bosh . " 

 " but the american poet ? " 

 " he never exist . " 

 " I see his sketch - book . " 

 " Challenger 's sketch - book . " 

 " you think he draw that animal ? " 

 " of course he do . who else ? " 

 " well , then , the photograph ? " 

 " there be nothing in the photograph . by your own admission you only 
 see a bird . " 

 " a pterodactyl . " 

 " that be what he say . he put the pterodactyl into your head . " 

 " well , then , the bone ? " 

 " first one out of an irish stew . second one vamp up for the 
 occasion . if you be clever and know your business you can fake a bone 
 as easily as you can a photograph . " 

 I begin to feel uneasy . perhaps , after all , I have be premature in my 
 acquiescence . then I have a sudden happy thought . 

 " will you come to the meeting ? " I ask . 

 Tarp Henry look thoughtful . 

 " he be not a popular person , the genial Challenger , " say he . " a lot 
 of people have account to settle with he . I should say he be about 
 the well - hat man in London . if the medical student turn out there 
 will be no end of a rag . I do not   want to get into a bear - garden . " 

 " you might at least do he the justice to hear he state his own case . " 

 " well , perhaps it be only fair . all right . I be your man for the 
 evening . " 

 when we arrive at the hall we find a much great concourse than I 
 have expect . a line of electric brougham discharge their little 
 cargo of white - bearded professor , while the dark stream of humbler 
 pedestrian , who crowd through the arched door - way , show that the 
 audience would be popular as well as scientific . indeed , it become 
 evident to we as soon as we have take our seat that a youthful and 
 even boyish spirit be abroad in the gallery and the back portion of 
 the hall . look behind I , I could see row of face of the familiar 
 medical student type . apparently the great hospital have each send 
 down their contingent . the behavior of the audience at present be 
 good - humor , but mischievous . scrap of popular song be chorus 
 with an enthusiasm which be a strange prelude to a scientific lecture , 
 and there be already a tendency to personal chaff which promise a 
 jovial evening to other , however embarrass it might be to the 
 recipient of these dubious honor . 

 thus , when old Doctor Meldrum , with his well - know curly - brim 
 opera - hat , appear upon the platform , there be such a universal query 
 of " where do you get that tile ? " that he hurriedly remove it , and 
 conceal it furtively under his chair . when gouty Professor Wadley 
 limp down to his seat there be general affectionate inquiry from 
 all part of the hall as to the exact state of his poor toe , which 
 cause he obvious embarrassment . the great demonstration of all , 
 however , be at the entrance of my new acquaintance , Professor 
 Challenger , when he pass down to take his place at the extreme end of 
 the front row of the platform . such a yell of welcome break forth when 
 his black beard first protrude round the corner that I begin to 
 suspect Tarp Henry be right in his surmise , and that this assemblage 
 be there not merely for the sake of the lecture , but because it have 
 get rumor abroad that the famous Professor would take part in the 
 proceeding . 

 there be some sympathetic laughter on his entrance among the front 
 bench of well - dress spectator , as though the demonstration of the 
 student in this instance be not unwelcome to they . that greeting 
 be , indeed , a frightful outburst of sound , the uproar of the carnivora 
 cage when the step of the bucket - bear keeper be hear in the 
 distance . there be an offensive tone in it , perhaps , and yet in the 
 main it strike I as mere riotous outcry , the noisy reception of one 
 who amuse and interested they , rather than of one they dislike or 
 despise . Challenger smile with weary and tolerant contempt , as a 
 kindly man would meet the yapping of a litter of puppy . he sit 
 slowly down , blow out his chest , pass his hand caressingly down his 
 beard , and look with droop eyelid and supercilious eye at the 
 crowd hall before he . the uproar of his advent have not yet die 
 away when Professor Ronald Murray , the chairman , and Mr. Waldron , the 
 lecturer , thread their way to the front , and the proceeding begin . 

 Professor Murray will , I be sure , excuse I if I say that he have the 
 common fault of most englishman of be inaudible . why on earth 
 people who have something to say which be worth hearing should not take 
 the slight trouble to learn how to make it hear be one of the strange 
 mystery of modern life . their method be as reasonable as to try to 
 pour some precious stuff from the spring to the reservoir through a 
 non - conducting pipe , which could by the least effort be open . 
 Professor Murray make several profound remark to his white tie and to 
 the water - carafe upon the table , with a humorous , twinkle aside to 
 the silver candlestick upon his right . then he sit down , and Mr. 
 Waldron , the famous popular lecturer , rise amid a general murmur of 
 applause . he be a stern , gaunt man , with a harsh voice , and an 
 aggressive manner , but he have the merit of know how to assimilate 
 the idea of other man , and to pass they on in a way which be 
 intelligible and even interesting to the lie public , with a happy knack 
 of be funny about the most unlikely object , so that the precession 
 of the Equinox or the formation of a vertebrate become a highly 
 humorous process as treat by he . 

 it be a bird's - eye view of creation , as interpret by science , which , 
 in language always clear and sometimes picturesque , he unfold before 
 we . he tell we of the globe , a huge mass of flame gas , flare 
 through the heaven . then he picture the solidification , the cooling , 
 the wrinkling which form the mountain , the steam which turn to 
 water , the slow preparation of the stage upon which be to be play 
 the inexplicable drama of life . on the origin of life itself he be 
 discreetly vague . that the germ of it could hardly have survive the 
 original roasting be , he declare , fairly certain . therefore it have 
 come later . have it build itself out of the cool , inorganic element 
 of the globe ? very likely . have the germ of it arrive from outside 
 upon a meteor ? it be hardly conceivable . on the whole , the wise 
 man be the least dogmatic upon the point . we could not - or at least 
 we have not succeed up to date in make organic life in our 
 laboratory out of inorganic material . the gulf between the dead and 
 the living be something which our chemistry could not as yet bridge . 
 but there be a high and subtler chemistry of Nature , which , work 
 with great force over long epoch , might well produce result which 
 be impossible for we . there the matter must be leave . 

 this bring the lecturer to the great ladder of animal life , begin 
 low down in mollusc and feeble sea creature , then up ring by rung 
 through reptile and fish , till at last we come to a kangaroo - rat , a 
 creature which bring forth its young alive , the direct ancestor of 
 all mammal , and presumably , therefore , of everyone in the audience . 
  " no , no , " from a sceptical student in the back row .   if the young 
 gentleman in the red tie who cry " no , no , " and who presumably claim 
 to have be hatch out of an egg , would wait upon he after the 
 lecture , he would be glad to see such a curiosity .   Laughter .   it be 
 strange to think that the climax of all the age - long process of Nature 
 have be the creation of that gentleman in the red tie . but have the 
 process stop ? be this gentleman to be take as the final type - the 
 be - all and end - all of development ? he hop that he would not hurt the 
 feeling of the gentleman in the red tie if he maintain that , 
 whatever virtue that gentleman might possess in private life , still 
 the vast process of the universe be not fully justify if they 
 be to end entirely in his production . Evolution be not a spend 
 force , but one still work , and even great achievement be in 
 store . 

 have thus , amid a general titter , play very prettily with his 
 interrupter , the lecturer go back to his picture of the past , the 
 drying of the sea , the emergence of the sand - bank , the sluggish , 
 viscous life which lie upon their margin , the overcrowded lagoon , the 
 tendency of the sea creature to take refuge upon the mud - flat , the 
 abundance of food await they , their consequent enormous growth . 
 " hence , lady and gentleman , " he add , " that frightful brood of 
 saurian which still affright our eye when see in the Wealden or in 
 the Solenhofen slate , but which be fortunately extinct long before 
 the first appearance of mankind upon this planet . " 

 " question ! " boom a voice from the platform . 

 Mr. Waldron be a strict disciplinarian with a gift of acid humor , as 
 exemplify upon the gentleman with the red tie , which make it perilous 
 to interrupt he . but this interjection appear to he so absurd that 
 he be at a loss how to deal with it . so look the Shakespearean who 
 be confront by a rancid Baconian , or the astronomer who be assail 
 by a flat - earth fanatic . he pause for a moment , and then , raise his 
 voice , repeat slowly the word : " which be extinct before the 
 come of man . " 

 " question ! " boom the voice once more . 

 Waldron look with amazement along the line of professor upon the 
 platform until his eye fall upon the figure of Challenger , who lean 
 back in his chair with closed eye and an amused expression , as if he 
 be smile in his sleep . 

 " I see ! " say Waldron , with a shrug . " it be my friend Professor 
 Challenger , " and amid laughter he renew his lecture as if this be a 
 final explanation and no more need be say . 

 but the incident be far from be close . whatever path the lecturer 
 take amid the wild of the past seem invariably to lead he to some 
 assertion as to extinct or prehistoric life which instantly bring the 
 same bull ' bellow from the Professor . the audience begin to 
 anticipate it and to roar with delight when it come . the pack 
 bench of student join in , and every time Challenger 's beard 
 open , before any sound could come forth , there be a yell of 
 " question ! " from a hundred voice , and an answer counter cry of 
 " Order ! " and " Shame ! " from as many more . Waldron , though a harden 
 lecturer and a strong man , become rattle . he hesitate , stammer , 
 repeat himself , get snarl in a long sentence , and finally turn 
 furiously upon the cause of his trouble . 

 " this be really intolerable ! " he cry , glare across the platform . 
 " I must ask you , Professor Challenger , to cease these ignorant and 
 unmannerly interruption . " 

 there be a hush over the hall , the student rigid with delight at 
 see the high god on Olympus quarrel among themselves . 
 Challenger lever his bulky figure slowly out of his chair . 

 " I must in turn ask you , Mr. Waldron , " he say , " to cease to make 
 assertion which be not in strict accordance with scientific fact . " 

 the word unloose a temp . " Shame ! shame ! " " give he a hearing ! " 
 " put he out ! " " shove he off the platform ! " " fair play ! " emerge 
 from a general roar of amusement or execration . the chairman be on 
 his foot flap both his hand and bleat excitedly . " Professor 
 Challenger - personal - views - later , " be the solid peak above his 
 cloud of inaudible mutter . the interrupter bow , smile , stroke his 
 beard , and relapse into his chair . Waldron , very flushed and warlike , 
 continue his observation . now and then , as he make an assertion , he 
 shoot a venomous glance at his opponent , who seem to be slumber 
 deeply , with the same broad , happy smile upon his face . 

 at last the lecture come to an end - I be inclined to think that it be 
 a premature one , as the peroration be hurry and disconnect . the 
 thread of the argument have be rudely break , and the audience be 
 restless and expectant . Waldron sit down , and , after a chirrup from 
 the chairman , Professor Challenger rise and advance to the edge of the 
 platform . in the interest of my paper I take down his speech verbatim . 

 " lady and Gentlemen , " he begin , amid a sustained interruption from 
 the back . " I beg pardon - Ladies , Gentlemen , and Children - I must 
 apologize , I have inadvertently omit a considerable section of this 
 audience "   tumult , during which the Professor stand with one hand 
 raise and his enormous head nod sympathetically , as if he be 
 bestow a pontifical blessing upon the crowd , " I have be select 
 to move a vote of thank to Mr. Waldron for the very picturesque and 
 imaginative address to which we have just listen . there be point 
 in it with which I disagree , and it have be my duty to indicate they 
 as they arise , but , none the less , Mr. Waldron have accomplish his 
 object well , that object be to give a simple and interesting account 
 of what he conceive to have be the history of our planet . popular 
 lecture be the easy to listen to , but Mr. Waldron "   here he beam 
 and blink at the lecturer   " will excuse I when I say that they be 
 necessarily both superficial and misleading , since they have to be 
 grade to the comprehension of an ignorant audience . "   Ironical 
 cheering .   " popular lecturer be in their nature parasitic . "   angry 
 gesture of protest from Mr. Waldron .   " they exploit for fame or cash 
 the work which have be do by their indigent and unknown brother . 
 one small new fact obtain in the laboratory , one brick build into 
 the temple of science , far outweigh any second - hand exposition which 
 pass an idle hour , but can leave no useful result behind it . I put 
 forward this obvious reflection , not out of any desire to disparage Mr. 
 Waldron in particular , but that you may not lose your sense of 
 proportion and mistake the acolyte for the high priest . "   at this point 
 Mr. Waldron whisper to the chairman , who half rise and say something 
 severely to his water - carafe .   " but enough of this ! "   Loud and 
 prolong cheer .   " let I pass to some subject of wide interest . 
 what be the particular point upon which I , as an original investigator , 
 have challenge our lecturer 's accuracy ? it be upon the permanence of 
 certain type of animal life upon the earth . I do not speak upon this 
 subject as an amateur , nor , I may add , as a popular lecturer , but I 
 speak as one whose scientific conscience compel he to adhere closely 
 to fact , when I say that Mr. Waldron be very wrong in suppose that 
 because he have never himself see a so - call prehistoric animal , 
 therefore these creature no long exist . they be indeed , as he have 
 say , our ancestor , but they be , if I may use the expression , our 
 contemporary ancestor , who can still be find with all their hideous 
 and formidable characteristic if one have but the energy and hardihood 
 to seek their haunt . creature which be suppose to be Jurassic , 
 monster who would hunt down and devour our large and fierce 
 mammal , still exist . "   cry of " Bosh ! " " prove it ! " " how do you know ? " 
 " question ! "   " how do I know , you ask I ? I know because I have visit 
 their secret haunt . I know because I have see some of they . " 
  applause , uproar , and a voice , " liar ! "   " be I a liar ? "   General 
 hearty and noisy assent .   " do I hear someone say that I be a liar ? 
 will the person who call I a liar kindly stand up that I may know 
 he ? "   a voice , " here he be , sir ! " and an inoffensive little person in 
 spectacle , struggle violently , be hold up among a group of 
 student .   " do you venture to call I a liar ? "   " no , sir , no ! " 
 shout the accuse , and disappear like a jack - in - the - box .   " if any 
 person in this hall dare to doubt my veracity , I shall be glad to have 
 a few word with he after the lecture . "   " liar ! "   " who say that ? " 
  again the inoffensive one plunge desperately , be elevate high into 
 the air .   " if I come down among you - - "   General chorus of " come , 
 love , come ! " which interrupt the proceeding for some moment , while 
 the chairman , stand up and wave both his arm , seem to be 
 conduct the music . the Professor , with his face flush , his 
 nostril dilate , and his beard bristling , be now in a proper Berserk 
 mood .   " every great discoverer have be meet with the same 
 incredulity - the sure brand of a generation of fool . when great fact 
 be lay before you , you have not the intuition , the imagination which 
 would help you to understand they . you can only throw mud at the man 
 who have risk their life to open new field to science . you 
 persecute the prophet ! Galileo ! Darwin , and I - - "   prolong 
 cheering and complete interruption . 

 all this be from my hurried note take at the time , which give little 
 notion of the absolute chaos to which the assembly have by this time 
 be reduce . so terrific be the uproar that several lady have 
 already beat a hurried retreat . Grave and reverend senior seem to 
 have catch the prevail spirit as badly as the student , and I see 
 white - bearded man rise and shake their fist at the obdurate 
 Professor . the whole great audience seethe and simmer like a 
 boiling pot . the Professor take a step forward and raise both his 
 hand . there be something so big and arresting and virile in the man 
 that the clatter and shout die gradually away before his commanding 
 gesture and his masterful eye . he seem to have a definite message . 
 they hush to hear it . 

 " I will not detain you , " he say . " it be not worth it . truth be 
 truth , and the noise of a number of foolish young man - and , I fear I 
 must add , of their equally foolish senior - can not affect the matter . 
 I claim that I have open a new field of science . you dispute it . " 
  Cheers .   " then I put you to the test . will you accredit one or more 
 of your own number to go out as your representative and test my 
 statement in your name ? " 

 Mr. Summerlee , the veteran Professor of Comparative Anatomy , rise among 
 the audience , a tall , thin , bitter man , with the wither aspect of a 
 theologian . he wish , he say , to ask Professor Challenger whether 
 the result to which he have allude in his remark have be obtain 
 during a journey to the headwater of the Amazon make by he two year 
 before . 

 Professor Challenger answer that they have . 

 Mr. Summerlee desire to know how it be that Professor Challenger 
 claim to have make discovery in those region which have be 
 overlook by Wallace , Bates , and other previous explorer of 
 establish scientific repute . 

 Professor Challenger answer that Mr. Summerlee appear to be 
 confuse the Amazon with the Thames ; that it be in reality a somewhat 
 large river ; that Mr. Summerlee might be interested to know that with 
 the Orinoco , which communicate with it , some fifty thousand mile of 
 country be open up , and that in so vast a space it be not 
 impossible for one person to find what another have miss . 

 Mr. Summerlee declare , with an acid smile , that he fully appreciate 
 the difference between the Thames and the Amazon , which lie in the fact 
 that any assertion about the former could be test , while about the 
 latter it could not . he would be oblige if Professor Challenger would 
 give the latitude and the longitude of the country in which prehistoric 
 animal be to be find . 

 Professor Challenger reply that he reserve such information for good 
 reason of his own , but would be prepare to give it with proper 
 precaution to a committee choose from the audience . would Mr. 
 Summerlee serve on such a committee and test his story in person ? 

 Mr. Summerlee : " yes , I will . "   great cheering . 

 Professor Challenger : " then I guarantee that I will place in your 
 hand such material as will enable you to find your way . it be only 
 right , however , since Mr. Summerlee go to check my statement that I 
 should have one or more with he who may check his . I will not 
 disguise from you that there be difficulty and danger . Mr. 
 Summerlee will need a young colleague . may I ask for volunteer ? " 

 it be thus that the great crisis of a man 's life spring out at he . 
 could I have imagine when I enter that hall that I be about to 
 pledge myself to a wilder adventure than have ever come to I in my 
 dream ? but Gladys - be it not the very opportunity of which she 
 speak ? Gladys would have tell I to go . I have spring to my foot . I 
 be speak , and yet I have prepare no word . Tarp Henry , my 
 companion , be pluck at my skirt and I hear he whispering , " sit 
 down , Malone ! do not   make a public ass of yourself . " at the same time I 
 be aware that a tall , thin man , with dark gingery hair , a few seat in 
 front of I , be also upon his foot . he glare back at I with hard 
 angry eye , but I refuse to give way . 

 " I will go , Mr. Chairman , " I keep repeat over and over again . 

 " Name ! name ! " cry the audience . 

 " my name be Edward Dunn Malone . I be the reporter of the Daily 
 Gazette . I claim to be an absolutely unprejudiced witness . " 

 " what be your name , sir ? " the chairman ask of my tall rival . 

 " I be Lord John Roxton . I have already be up the Amazon , I know all 
 the ground , and have special qualification for this investigation . " 

 " Lord John Roxton 's reputation as a sportsman and a traveler be , of 
 course , world - famous , " say the chairman ; " at the same time it would 
 certainly be as well to have a member of the Press upon such an 
 expedition . " 

 " then I move , " say Professor Challenger , " that both these gentleman be 
 elect , as representative of this meeting , to accompany Professor 
 Summerlee upon his journey to investigate and to report upon the truth 
 of my statement . " 

 and so , amid shout and cheer , our fate be decide , and I find 
 myself bear away in the human current which swirl towards the door , 
 with my mind half stun by the vast new project which have rise so 
 suddenly before it . as I emerge from the hall I be conscious for a 
 moment of a rush of laugh student - down the pavement , and of an arm 
 wield a heavy umbrella , which rise and fall in the midst of they . 
 then , amid a mixture of groan and cheer , Professor Challenger 's 
 electric brougham slide from the curb , and I find myself walk under 
 the silvery light of Regent Street , full of thought of Gladys and of 
 wonder as to my future . 

 suddenly there be a touch at my elbow . I turn , and find myself 
 look into the humorous , masterful eye of the tall , thin man who have 
 volunteer to be my companion on this strange quest . 

 " Mr. Malone , I understand , " say he . " we be to be companion - what ? 
 my room be just over the road , in the Albany . perhaps you would have 
 the kindness to spare I half an hour , for there be one or two thing 
 that I badly want to say to you . " 




  CHAPTER VI 

  " I be the Flail of the Lord " 

 Lord John Roxton and I turn down Vigo Street together and through the 
 dingy portal of the famous aristocratic rookery . at the end of a long 
 drab passage my new acquaintance push open a door and turn on an 
 electric switch . a number of lamp shin through tinted shade 
 bath the whole great room before we in a ruddy radiance . stand in 
 the doorway and glance round I , I have a general impression of 
 extraordinary comfort and elegance combine with an atmosphere of 
 masculine virility . everywhere there be mingle the luxury of the 
 wealthy man of taste and the careless untidiness of the bachelor . rich 
 fur and strange iridescent mat from some oriental bazaar be 
 scatter upon the floor . picture and print which even my 
 unpractised eye could recognize as be of great price and rarity 
 hang thick upon the wall . sketch of boxer , of ballet - girl , and of 
 racehorse alternate with a sensuous Fragonard , a martial Girardet , 
 and a dreamy Turner . but amid these varied ornament there be 
 scatter the trophy which bring back strongly to my recollection 
 the fact that Lord John Roxton be one of the great all - round sportsman 
 and athlete of his day . a dark - blue oar cross with a cherry - pink 
 one above his mantel - piece speak of the old Oxonian and Leander man , 
 while the foil and boxing - glove above and below they be the tool 
 of a man who have win supremacy with each . like a dado round the room 
 be the jut line of splendid heavy game - head , the good of their 
 sort from every quarter of the world , with the rare white rhinoceros of 
 the Lado Enclave droop its supercilious lip above they all . 

 in the center of the rich red carpet be a black and gold Louis Quinze 
 table , a lovely antique , now sacrilegiously desecrate with mark of 
 glass and the scar of cigar - stump . on it stand a silver tray of 
 smokable and a burnish spirit - stand , from which and an adjacent 
 siphon my silent host proceed to charge two high glass . have 
 indicate an arm - chair to I and place my refreshment near it , he 
 hand I a long , smooth Havana . then , seat himself opposite to I , 
 he look at I long and fixedly with his strange , twinkle , reckless 
 eye - eye of a cold light blue , the color of a glaci lake . 

 through the thin haze of my cigar - smoke I note the detail of a face 
 which be already familiar to I from many photograph - the 
 strongly - curve nose , the hollow , worn cheek , the dark , ruddy hair , 
 thin at the top , the crisp , virile moustache , the small , aggressive 
 tuft upon his project chin . something there be of Napoleon III . , 
 something of Don Quixote , and yet again something which be the essence 
 of the English country gentleman , the keen , alert , open - air lover of 
 dog and of horse . his skin be of a rich flower - pot red from sun and 
 wind . his eyebrow be tufte and overhanging , which give those 
 naturally cold eye an almost ferocious aspect , an impression which be 
 increase by his strong and furrowed brow . in figure he be spare , but 
 very strongly build - indeed , he have often prove that there be few 
 man in England capable of such sustained exertion . his height be a 
 little over six foot , but he seem short on account of a peculiar 
 rounding of the shoulder . such be the famous Lord John Roxton as he 
 sit opposite to I , bite hard upon his cigar and watch I steadily 
 in a long and embarrassing silence . 

 " well , " say he , at last , " we have   go and do it , young fellah my 
 lad . "   this curious phrase he pronounce as if it be all one 
 word - " young - fellah - me - lad . "   " yes , we have   take a jump , you an ' I . I 
 suppose , now , when you go into that room there be no such notion in 
 your head - what ? " 

 " no thought of it . " 

 " the same here . no thought of it . and here we be , up to our neck in 
 the tureen . why , I have   only be back three week from Uganda , and 
 take a place in Scotland , and sign the lease and all . pretty goin 's 
 on - what ? how do it hit you ? " 

 " well , it be all in the main line of my business . I be a journalist on 
 the Gazette . " 

 " of course - you say so when you take it on . by the way , I have   get a 
 small job for you , if you will help I . " 

 " with pleasure . " 

 " do not   mind takin ' a risk , do you ? " 

 " what be the risk ? " 

 " well , it be Ballinger - he be the risk . you have   hear of he ? " 

 " no . " 

 " why , young fellah , where have you live ? Sir John Ballinger be the 
 good gentleman jock in the north country . I could hold he on the flat 
 at my good , but over jump he be my master . well , it be an open secret 
 that when he be out of trainin ' he drink hard - strikin ' an average , he 
 call it . he get delirium on Toosday , and have be ragin ' like a devil 
 ever since . his room be above this . the doctor say that it be all up 
 with the old dear unless some food be get into he , but as he lie in 
 bed with a revolver on his coverlet , and swear he will put six of the 
 good through anyone that come near he , there be be a bit of a strike 
 among the serve - man . he be a hard nail , be Jack , and a dead shot , 
 too , but you can not   leave a Grand National winner to die like 
 that - what ? " 

 " what do you mean to do , then ? " I ask . 

 " well , my idea be that you and I could rush he . he may be dozin ' , 
 and at the bad he can only wing one of we , and the other should have 
 he . if we can get his bolster - cover round his arm and then ' phone up 
 a stomach - pump , we will give the old dear the supper of his life . " 

 it be a rather desperate business to come suddenly into one 's day 's 
 work . I do not   think that I be a particularly brave man . I have an 
 irish imagination which make the unknown and the untried more terrible 
 than they be . on the other hand , I be bring up with a horror of 
 cowardice and with a terror of such a stigma . I dare say that I could 
 throw myself over a precipice , like the Hun in the history book , if my 
 courage to do it be question , and yet it would surely be pride and 
 fear , rather than courage , which would be my inspiration . therefore , 
 although every nerve in my body shrink from the whisky - madden figure 
 which I picture in the room above , I still answer , in as careless a 
 voice as I could command , that I be ready to go . some further remark 
 of Lord Roxton 's about the danger only make I irritable . 

 " talk will not   make it any well , " say I. " come on . " 

 I rise from my chair and he from his . then with a little confidential 
 chuckle of laughter , he pat I two or three time on the chest , 
 finally push I back into my chair . 

 " all right , sonny my lad - you will do , " say he . I look up in surprise . 

 " I see after Jack Ballinger myself this mornin ' . he blow a hole in the 
 skirt of my kimono , bless his shaky old hand , but we get a jacket on 
 he , and he be to be all right in a week . I say , young fellah , I hope 
 you do not   mind - what ? you see , between you an ' I close - tile , I look 
 on this south american business as a mighty serious thing , and if I 
 have a pal with I I want a man I can bank on . so I size you down , 
 and I be bind to say that you come well out of it . you see , it be all 
 up to you and I , for this old Summerlee man will want dry - nursin ' from 
 the first . by the way , be you by any chance the Malone who be 
 expect to get his Rugby cap for Ireland ? " 

 " a reserve , perhaps . " 

 " I think I remember your face . why , I be there when you get that 
 try against Richmond - as fine a swervin ' run as I see the whole season . 
 I never miss a Rugby match if I can help it , for it be the manly 
 game we have leave . well , I do not   ask you in here just to talk sport . 
 we have   get to fix our business . here be the sailin 's , on the first 
 page of the Times . there be a Booth boat for Para next Wednesday week , 
 and if the Professor and you can work it , I think we should take 
 it - what ? very good , I will fix it with he . what about your outfit ? " 

 " my paper will see to that . " 

 " can you shoot ? " 

 " about average territorial standard . " 

 " Good Lord ! as bad as that ? it be the last thing you young fellahs 
 think of learnin ' . you be all bee without sting , so far as lookin ' 
 after the hive go . you will look silly , some o ' these day , when 
 someone come along an ' sneak the honey . but you will need to hold your 
 gun straight in South America , for , unless our friend the Professor be 
 a madman or a liar , we may see some queer thing before we get back . 
 what gun have you ? " 

 he cross to an oaken cupboard , and as he throw it open I catch a 
 glimpse of glisten row of parallel barrel , like the pipe of an 
 organ . 

 " I will see what I can spare you out of my own battery , " say he . 

 one by one he take out a succession of beautiful rifle , opening and 
 shut they with a snap and a clang , and then pat they as he put 
 they back into the rack as tenderly as a mother would fondle her 
 child . 

 " this be a Bland 's .577 axite express , " say he . " I get that big 
 fellow with it . " he glance up at the white rhinoceros . " ten more 
 yard , and he would would have add I to his collection . 

  ' on that conical bullet his one chance hang , 
  ' tis the weak one 's advantage fair . ' 

 hope you know your Gordon , for he be the poet of the horse and the gun 
 and the man that handle both . now , here be a useful tool - .470 , 
 telescopic sight , double ejector , point - blank up to three - fifty . 
 that be the rifle I use against the peruvian slave - driver three year 
 ago . I be the flail of the Lord up in those part , I may tell you , 
 though you will not   find it in any Blue - book . there be time , young 
 fellah , when every one of we must make a stand for human right and 
 justice , or you never feel clean again . that be why I make a little war 
 on my own . declare it myself , wag it myself , end it myself . each 
 of those nick be for a slave murderer - a good row of they - what ? that 
 big one be for Pedro Lopez , the king of they all , that I kill in a 
 backwater of the Putomayo River . now , here be something that would do 
 for you . " he take out a beautiful brown - and - silver rifle . " well 
 rubber at the stock , sharply sight , five cartridge to the clip . 
 you can trust your life to that . " he hand it to I and close the 
 door of his oak cabinet . 

 " by the way , " he continue , come back to his chair , " what do you know 
 of this Professor Challenger ? " 

 " I never see he till to - day . " 

 " well , neither do I. it be funny we should both sail under seal 
 order from a man we do not   know . he seem an uppish old bird . his 
 brother of science do not   seem too fond of he , either . how come you 
 to take an interest in the affair ? " 

 I tell he shortly my experience of the morning , and he listen 
 intently . then he draw out a map of South America and lay it on the 
 table . 

 " I believe every single word he say to you be the truth , " say he , 
 earnestly , " and , mind you , I have something to go on when I speak like 
 that . South America be a place I love , and I think , if you take it 
 right through from Darien to Fuego , it be the grand , rich , most 
 wonderful bit of earth upon this planet . People do not   know it yet , and 
 do not   realize what it may become . I have   be up an ' down it from end to 
 end , and have two dry season in those very part , as I tell you when I 
 speak of the war I make on the slave - dealer . well , when I be up 
 there I hear some yarn of the same kind - tradition of Indians and 
 the like , but with something behind they , no doubt . the more you know 
 of that country , young fellah , the more you would understand that 
 anythin ' be possible - anythin ' ! there be just some narrow 
 water - lane along which folk travel , and outside that it be all 
 darkness . now , down here in the Matto Grande " - he sweep his cigar over 
 a part of the map - " or up in this corner where three country meet , 
 nothing would surprise I . as that chap say to - night , there be 
 fifty - thousand mile of water - way runnin ' through a forest that be very 
 near the size of Europe . you and I could be as far away from each 
 other as Scotland be from Constantinople , and yet each of we be in the 
 same great brazilian forest . Man have just make a track here and a 
 scrape there in the maze . why , the river rise and fall the good part 
 of forty foot , and half the country be a morass that you can not   pass 
 over . why should not   something new and wonderful lie in such a country ? 
 and why should not   we be the man to find it out ? besides , " he add , 
 his queer , gaunt face shin with delight , " there be a sportin ' risk in 
 every mile of it . I be like an old golf - ball - I have   have all the white 
 paint knock off I long ago . life can whack I about now , and it 
 can not   leave a mark . but a sportin ' risk , young fellah , that be the salt 
 of existence . then it be worth livin ' again . we be all gettin ' a deal 
 too soft and dull and comfy . give I the great waste land and the 
 wide space , with a gun in my fist and something to look for that 's 
 worth findin ' . I have   try war and steeplechasin ' and aeroplane , but 
 this huntin ' of beast that look like a lobster - supper dream be a 
 brand - new sensation . " he chuckle with glee at the prospect . 

 perhaps I have dwell too long upon this new acquaintance , but he be to 
 be my comrade for many a day , and so I have try to set he down as I 
 first see he , with his quaint personality and his queer little trick 
 of speech and of thought . it be only the need of get in the 
 account of my meeting which draw I at last from his company . I leave 
 he seat amid his pink radiance , oil the lock of his favorite 
 rifle , while he still chuckle to himself at the thought of the 
 adventure which await we . it be very clear to I that if danger 
 lie before we I could not in all England have find a cool head or a 
 braver spirit with which to share they . 

 that night , weary as I be after the wonderful happening of the day , 
 I sit late with McArdle , the news editor , explain to he the whole 
 situation , which he think important enough to bring next morning 
 before the notice of Sir George Beaumont , the chief . it be agree 
 that I should write home full account of my adventure in the shape of 
 successive letter to McArdle , and that these should either be edit 
 for the Gazette as they arrive , or hold back to be publish later , 
 accord to the wish of Professor Challenger , since we could not yet 
 know what condition he might attach to those direction which should 
 guide we to the unknown land . in response to a telephone inquiry , we 
 receive nothing more definite than a fulmination against the Press , 
 end up with the remark that if we would notify our boat he would 
 hand we any direction which he might think it proper to give we at the 
 moment of start . a second question from we fail to elicit any 
 answer at all , save a plaintive bleat from his wife to the effect that 
 her husband be in a very violent temper already , and that she hop we 
 would do nothing to make it bad . a third attempt , later in the day , 
 provoke a terrific crash , and a subsequent message from the Central 
 Exchange that Professor Challenger 's receiver have be shatter . 
 after that we abandon all attempt at communication . 

 and now my patient reader , I can address you directly no long . from 
 now onwards   if , indeed , any continuation of this narrative should ever 
 reach you   it can only be through the paper which I represent . in the 
 hand of the editor I leave this account of the event which have lead 
 up to one of the most remarkable expedition of all time , so that if I 
 never return to England there shall be some record as to how the affair 
 come about . I be write these last line in the saloon of the Booth 
 liner Francisca , and they will go back by the pilot to the keeping of 
 Mr. McArdle . let I draw one last picture before I close the 
 notebook - a picture which be the last memory of the old country which I 
 bear away with I . it be a wet , foggy morning in the late spring ; a 
 thin , cold rain be fall . three shin mackintoshed figure be 
 walk down the quay , make for the gang - plank of the great liner 
 from which the blue - peter be fly . in front of they a porter push 
 a trolley pile high with trunk , wrap , and gun - case . Professor 
 Summerlee , a long , melancholy figure , walk with drag step and 
 droop head , as one who be already profoundly sorry for himself . 
 Lord John Roxton step briskly , and his thin , eager face beam forth 
 between his hunting - cap and his muffler . as for myself , I be glad to 
 have get the bustling day of preparation and the pang of leave - taking 
 behind I , and I have no doubt that I show it in my bearing . suddenly , 
 just as we reach the vessel , there be a shout behind we . it be 
 Professor Challenger , who have promise to see we off . he run after 
 we , a puffing , red - faced , irascible figure . 

 " no thank you , " say he ; " I should much prefer not to go aboard . I 
 have only a few word to say to you , and they can very well be say 
 where we be . I beg you not to imagine that I be in any way indebte 
 to you for make this journey . I would have you to understand that it 
 be a matter of perfect indifference to I , and I refuse to entertain 
 the most remote sense of personal obligation . truth be truth , and 
 nothing which you can report can affect it in any way , though it may 
 excite the emotion and allay the curiosity of a number of very 
 ineffectual people . my direction for your instruction and guidance 
 be in this seal envelope . you will open it when you reach a town 
 upon the Amazon which be call Manaos , but not until the date and hour 
 which be mark upon the outside . have I make myself clear ? I leave 
 the strict observance of my condition entirely to your honor . no , Mr. 
 Malone , I will place no restriction upon your correspondence , since the 
 ventilation of the fact be the object of your journey ; but I demand 
 that you shall give no particular as to your exact destination , and 
 that nothing be actually publish until your return . good - bye , sir . 
 you have do something to mitigate my feeling for the loathsome 
 profession to which you unhappily belong . good - bye , Lord John . 
 Science be , as I understand , a seal book to you ; but you may 
 congratulate yourself upon the hunting - field which await you . you 
 will , no doubt , have the opportunity of describe in the field how you 
 bring down the rocket dimorphodon . and good - bye to you also , 
 Professor Summerlee . if you be still capable of self - improvement , of 
 which I be frankly unconvinced , you will surely return to London a 
 wise man . " 

 so he turn upon his heel , and a minute later from the deck I could 
 see his short , squat figure bob about in the distance as he make 
 his way back to his train . well , we be well down Channel now . 
 there be the last bell for letter , and it be good - bye to the pilot . 
 we will be " down , hull - down , on the old trail " from now on . God bless 
 all we leave behind we , and send we safely back . 




  CHAPTER VII 

  " to - morrow we disappear into the unknown " 

 I will not bore those whom this narrative may reach by an account of 
 our luxurious voyage upon the Booth liner , nor will I tell of our 
 week 's stay at Para   save that I should wish to acknowledge the great 
 kindness of the Pereira da Pinta Company in help we to get together 
 our equipment . I will also allude very briefly to our river journey , 
 up a wide , slow - move , clay - tint stream , in a steamer which be 
 little small than that which have carry we across the Atlantic . 
 eventually we find ourselves through the narrow of Obidos and reach 
 the town of Manaos . here we be rescue from the limited attraction 
 of the local inn by Mr. Shortman , the representative of the british and 
 brazilian Trading Company . in his hospital Fazenda we spend our time 
 until the day when we be empower to open the letter of instruction 
 give to we by Professor Challenger . before I reach the surprising 
 event of that date I would desire to give a clear sketch of my 
 comrade in this enterprise , and of the associate whom we have already 
 gather together in South America . I speak freely , and I leave the 
 use of my material to your own discretion , Mr. McArdle , since it be 
 through your hand that this report must pass before it reach the 
 world . 

 the scientific attainment of Professor Summerlee be too well know 
 for I to trouble to recapitulate they . he be well equip for a 
 rough expedition of this sort than one would imagine at first sight . 
 his tall , gaunt , stringy figure be insensible to fatigue , and his dry , 
 half - sarcastic , and often wholly unsympathetic manner be uninfluence 
 by any change in his surrounding . though in his sixty - sixth year , I 
 have never hear he express any dissatisfaction at the occasional 
 hardship which we have have to encounter . I have regard his presence 
 as an encumbrance to the expedition , but , as a matter of fact , I be now 
 well convince that his power of endurance be as great as my own . in 
 temper he be naturally acid and sceptical . from the beginning he have 
 never conceal his belief that Professor Challenger be an absolute 
 fraud , that we be all embark upon an absurd wild - goose chase and 
 that we be likely to reap nothing but disappointment and danger in 
 South America , and correspond ridicule in England . such be the 
 view which , with much passionate distortion of his thin feature and 
 wagging of his thin , goat - like beard , he pour into our ear all the 
 way from Southampton to Manaos . since land from the boat he have 
 obtain some consolation from the beauty and variety of the insect and 
 bird life around he , for he be absolutely whole - hearted in his 
 devotion to science . he spend his day flit through the wood 
 with his shot - gun and his butterfly - net , and his evening in mount 
 the many specimen he have acquire . among his minor peculiarity be 
 that he be careless as to his attire , unclean in his person , 
 exceedingly absent - minded in his habit , and addict to smoke a 
 short briar pipe , which be seldom out of his mouth . he have be upon 
 several scientific expedition in his youth   he be with Robertson in 
 Papua , and the life of the camp and the canoe be nothing fresh to he . 

 Lord John Roxton have some point in common with Professor Summerlee , 
 and other in which they be the very antithesis to each other . he be 
 twenty year young , but have something of the same spare , scraggy 
 physique . as to his appearance , I have , as I recollect , describe it 
 in that portion of my narrative which I have leave behind I in London . 
 he be exceedingly neat and prim in his way , dress always with great 
 care in white drill suit and high brown mosquito - boot , and shave at 
 least once a day . like most man of action , he be laconic in speech , 
 and sink readily into his own thought , but he be always quick to 
 answer a question or join in a conversation , talk in a queer , jerky , 
 half - humorous fashion . his knowledge of the world , and very especially 
 of South America , be surprising , and he have a whole - hearted belief in 
 the possibility of our journey which be not to be dash by the 
 sneer of Professor Summerlee . he have a gentle voice and a quiet 
 manner , but behind his twinkle blue eye there lurk a capacity for 
 furious wrath and implacable resolution , the more dangerous because 
 they be hold in leash . he speak little of his own exploit in Brazil 
 and Peru , but it be a revelation to I to find the excitement which 
 be cause by his presence among the riverine native , who look upon 
 he as their champion and protector . the exploit of the Red Chief , as 
 they call he , have become legend among they , but the real fact , as 
 far as I could learn they , be amazing enough . 

 these be that Lord John have find himself some year before in that 
 no - man's - land which be form by the half - define frontier between 
 Peru , Brazil , and Columbia . in this great district the wild rubber 
 tree flourish , and have become , as in the Congo , a curse to the 
 native which can only be compare to their force labor under the 
 Spaniards upon the old silver mine of Darien . a handful of villainous 
 half - breed dominate the country , arm such Indians as would support 
 they , and turn the rest into slave , terrorize they with the most 
 inhuman torture in order to force they to gather the india - rubber , 
 which be then float down the river to Para . Lord John Roxton 
 expostulate on behalf of the wretched victim , and receive nothing 
 but threat and insult for his pain . he then formally declare war 
 against Pedro Lopez , the leader of the slave - driver , enrol a band 
 of runaway slave in his service , arm they , and conduct a campaign , 
 which end by his killing with his own hand the notorious half - breed 
 and break down the system which he represent . 

 no wonder that the ginger - head man with the silky voice and the free 
 and easy manner be now look upon with deep interest upon the bank 
 of the great south american river , though the feeling he inspire be 
 naturally mixed , since the gratitude of the native be equal by the 
 resentment of those who desire to exploit they . one useful result of 
 his former experience be that he could talk fluently in the Lingoa 
 Geral , which be the peculiar talk , one - third portuguese and two - third 
 Indian , which be current all over Brazil . 

 I have say before that Lord John Roxton be a South Americomaniac . he 
 could not speak of that great country without ardor , and this ardor be 
 infectious , for , ignorant as I be , he fix my attention and 
 stimulate my curiosity . how I wish I could reproduce the glamour of 
 his discourse , the peculiar mixture of accurate knowledge and of racy 
 imagination which give they their fascination , until even the 
 Professor 's cynical and sceptical smile would gradually vanish from his 
 thin face as he listen . he would tell the history of the mighty 
 river so rapidly explore   for some of the first conqueror of Peru 
 actually cross the entire continent upon its water , and yet so 
 unknown in regard to all that lie behind its ever - change bank . 

 " what be there ? " he would cry , point to the north . " wood and marsh 
 and unpenetrated jungle . who know what it may shelter ? and there to 
 the south ? a wilderness of swampy forest , where no white man have ever 
 be . the unknown be up against we on every side . outside the narrow 
 line of the river what do anyone know ? who will say what be 
 possible in such a country ? why should old man Challenger not be 
 right ? " at which direct defiance the stubborn sneer would reappear 
 upon Professor Summerlee 's face , and he would sit , shake his sardonic 
 head in unsympathetic silence , behind the cloud of his briar - root pipe . 


 so much , for the moment , for my two white companion , whose character 
 and limitation will be far expose , as surely as my own , as this 
 narrative proceed . but already we have enrol certain retainer who 
 may play no small part in what be to come . the first be a gigantic 
 negro name Zambo , who be a black Hercules , as willing as any horse , 
 and about as intelligent . he we enlist at Para , on the 
 recommendation of the steamship company , on whose vessel he have 
 learn to speak a halting English . 

 it be at Para also that we engage Gomez and Manuel , two half - breed 
 from up the river , just come down with a cargo of redwood . they be 
 swarthy fellow , bearded and fierce , as active and wiry as panther . 
 both of they have spend their life in those upper water of the Amazon 
 which we be about to explore , and it be this recommendation which 
 have cause Lord John to engage they . one of they , Gomez , have the 
 further advantage that he could speak excellent English . these man 
 be willing to act as our personal servant , to cook , to row , or to 
 make themselves useful in any way at a payment of fifteen dollar a 
 month . besides these , we have engage three Mojo Indians from Bolivia , 
 who be the most skilful at fishing and boat work of all the river 
 tribe . the chief of these we call Mojo , after his tribe , and the 
 other be know as Jose and Fernando . three white man , then , two 
 half - breed , one negro , and three Indians make up the personnel of the 
 little expedition which lie wait for its instruction at Manaos 
 before start upon its singular quest . 

 at last , after a weary week , the day have come and the hour . I ask you 
 to picture the shaded sitting - room of the Fazenda St. Ignatio , two 
 mile inland from the town of Manaos . outside lie the yellow , brassy 
 glare of the sunshine , with the shadow of the palm tree as black and 
 definite as the tree themselves . the air be calm , full of the 
 eternal hum of insect , a tropical chorus of many octave , from the 
 deep drone of the bee to the high , keen pipe of the mosquito . beyond 
 the veranda be a small clear garden , bound with cactus hedge and 
 adorn with clump of flower shrub , round which the great blue 
 butterfly and the tiny hum - bird flutter and dart in 
 crescent of sparkle light . within we be seat round the cane 
 table , on which lie a sealed envelope . inscribe upon it , in the 
 jagged handwriting of Professor Challenger , be the word : - 


 " instruction to Lord John Roxton and party . to be open at Manaos 
 upon July 15th , at 12 o'clock precisely . " 


 Lord John have place his watch upon the table beside he . 

 " we have seven more minute , " say he . " the old dear be very precise . " 

 Professor Summerlee give an acid smile as he pick up the envelope in 
 his gaunt hand . 

 " what can it possibly matter whether we open it now or in seven 
 minute ? " say he . " it be all part and parcel of the same system of 
 quackery and nonsense , for which I regret to say that the writer be 
 notorious . " 

 " oh , come , we must play the game accordin ' to rule , " say Lord John . 
 " it be old man Challenger 's show and we be here by his good will , so it 
 would be rotten bad form if we do not   follow his instruction to the 
 letter . " 

 " a pretty business it be ! " cry the Professor , bitterly . " it strike 
 I as preposterous in London , but I be bind to say that it seem even 
 more so upon close acquaintance . I do not   know what be inside this 
 envelope , but , unless it be something pretty definite , I shall be much 
 tempt to take the next down - river boat and catch the Bolivia at Para . 
 after all , I have some more responsible work in the world than to run 
 about disprove the assertion of a lunatic . now , Roxton , surely it 
 be time . " 

 " time it be , " say Lord John . " you can blow the whistle . " he take up 
 the envelope and cut it with his penknife . from it he draw a folded 
 sheet of paper . this he carefully open out and flatten on the 
 table . it be a blank sheet . he turn it over . again it be blank . 
 we look at each other in a bewildered silence , which be break by a 
 discordant burst of derisive laughter from Professor Summerlee . 

 " it be an open admission , " he cry . " what more do you want ? the 
 fellow be a self - confess humbug . we have only to return home and 
 report he as the brazen imposter that he be . " 

 " invisible ink ! " I suggest . 

 " I do not   think ! " say Lord Roxton , hold the paper to the light . 
 " no , young fellah my lad , there be no use deceive yourself . I will go 
 bail for it that nothing have ever be write upon this paper . " 

 " may I come in ? " boom a voice from the veranda . 

 the shadow of a squat figure have steal across the patch of sunlight . 
 that voice ! that monstrous breadth of shoulder ! we spring to our foot 
 with a gasp of astonishment as Challenger , in a round , boyish straw - hat 
 with a colored ribbon - Challenger , with his hand in his jacket - pocket 
 and his canvas shoe daintily point as he walk - appear in the 
 open space before we . he throw back his head , and there he stand in 
 the golden glow with all his old assyrian luxuriance of beard , all his 
 native insolence of droop eyelid and intolerant eye . 

 " I fear , " say he , take out his watch , " that I be a few minute too 
 late . when I give you this envelope I must confess that I have never 
 intend that you should open it , for it have be my fix intention to 
 be with you before the hour . the unfortunate delay can be apportion 
 between a blunder pilot and an intrusive sandbank . I fear that it 
 have give my colleague , Professor Summerlee , occasion to blaspheme . " 

 " I be bind to say , sir , " say Lord John , with some sternness of voice , 
 " that your turn up be a considerable relief to we , for our mission 
 seem to have come to a premature end . even now I can not   for the life 
 of I understand why you should have work it in so extraordinary a 
 manner . " 

 instead of answer , Professor Challenger enter , shake hand with 
 myself and Lord John , bow with ponderous insolence to Professor 
 Summerlee , and sink back into a basket - chair , which creak and sway 
 beneath his weight . 

 " be all ready for your journey ? " he ask . 

 " we can start to - morrow . " 

 " then so you shall . you need no chart of direction now , since you 
 will have the inestimable advantage of my own guidance . from the first 
 I have determine that I would myself preside over your investigation . 
 the most elaborate chart would , as you will readily admit , be a poor 
 substitute for my own intelligence and advice . as to the small ruse 
 which I play upon you in the matter of the envelope , it be clear 
 that , have I tell you all my intention , I should have be force to 
 resist unwelcome pressure to travel out with you . " 

 " not from I , sir ! " exclaim Professor Summerlee , heartily . " so long 
 as there be another ship upon the Atlantic . " 

 Challenger wave he away with his great hairy hand . 

 " your common sense will , I be sure , sustain my objection and realize 
 that it be well that I should direct my own movement and appear 
 only at the exact moment when my presence be need . that moment have 
 now arrive . you be in safe hand . you will not now fail to reach 
 your destination . from henceforth I take command of this expedition , 
 and I must ask you to complete your preparation to - night , so that we 
 may be able to make an early start in the morning . my time be of 
 value , and the same thing may be say , no doubt , in a less degree of 
 your own . I propose , therefore , that we push on as rapidly as 
 possible , until I have demonstrate what you have come to see . " 

 Lord John Roxton have charter a large steam launch , the Esmeralda , 
 which be to carry we up the river . so far as climate go , it be 
 immaterial what time we choose for our expedition , as the temperature 
 range from seventy - five to ninety degree both summer and winter , with 
 no appreciable difference in heat . in moisture , however , it be 
 otherwise ; from December to May be the period of the rain , and during 
 this time the river slowly rise until it attain a height of nearly 
 forty foot above its low - water mark . it flood the bank , extend in 
 great lagoon over a monstrous waste of country , and form a huge 
 district , call locally the Gapo , which be for the most part too 
 marshy for foot - travel and too shallow for boat . about June the 
 water begin to fall , and be at their low at October or November . 
 thus our expedition be at the time of the dry season , when the great 
 river and its tributary be more or less in a normal condition . 

 the current of the river be a slight one , the drop be not great 
 than eight inch in a mile . no stream could be more convenient for 
 navigation , since the prevail wind be south - east , and sailing boat 
 may make a continuous progress to the peruvian frontier , drop down 
 again with the current . in our own case the excellent engine of the 
 Esmeralda could disregard the sluggish flow of the stream , and we make 
 as rapid progress as if we be navigate a stagnant lake . for three 
 day we steam north - westward up a stream which even here , a thousand 
 mile from its mouth , be still so enormous that from its center the 
 two bank be mere shadow upon the distant skyline . on the fourth 
 day after leave Manaos we turn into a tributary which at its mouth 
 be little small than the main stream . it narrow rapidly , however , 
 and after two more day ' steaming we reach an indian village , where 
 the Professor insist that we should land , and that the Esmeralda 
 should be send back to Manaos . we should soon come upon rapid , he 
 explain , which would make its further use impossible . he add 
 privately that we be now approach the door of the unknown country , 
 and that the few whom we take into our confidence the well it would 
 be . to this end also he make each of we give our word of honor that we 
 would publish or say nothing which would give any exact clue as to the 
 whereabouts of our travel , while the servant be all solemnly swear 
 to the same effect . it be for this reason that I be compel to be 
 vague in my narrative , and I would warn my reader that in any map or 
 diagram which I may give the relation of place to each other may be 
 correct , but the point of the compass be carefully confused , so that 
 in no way can it be take as an actual guide to the country . Professor 
 Challenger 's reason for secrecy may be valid or not , but we have no 
 choice but to adopt they , for he be prepared to abandon the whole 
 expedition rather than modify the condition upon which he would guide 
 we . 

 it be August 2nd when we snap our last link with the outer world by 
 bidding farewell to the Esmeralda . since then four day have pass , 
 during which we have engage two large canoe from the Indians , make of 
 so light a material   skin over a bamboo framework   that we should be 
 able to carry they round any obstacle . these we have load with all 
 our effect , and have engage two additional Indians to help we in the 
 navigation . I understand that they be the very two - Ataca and Ipetu 
 by name - who accompany Professor Challenger upon his previous 
 journey . they appear to be terrify at the prospect of repeat 
 it , but the chief have patriarchal power in these country , and if the 
 bargain be good in his eye the clansman have little choice in the 
 matter . 

 so to - morrow we disappear into the unknown . this account I be 
 transmit down the river by canoe , and it may be our last word to 
 those who be interested in our fate . I have , accord to our 
 arrangement , address it to you , my dear Mr. McArdle , and I leave it 
 to your discretion to delete , alter , or do what you like with it . from 
 the assurance of Professor Challenger 's manner - and in spite of the 
 continue scepticism of Professor Summerlee - I have no doubt that our 
 leader will make good his statement , and that we be really on the eve 
 of some most remarkable experience . 




  CHAPTER VIII 

  " the Outlying Pickets of the New World " 

 our friend at home may well rejoice with we , for we be at our goal , 
 and up to a point , at least , we have show that the statement of 
 Professor Challenger can be verify . we have not , it be true , 
 ascend the plateau , but it lie before we , and even Professor 
 Summerlee be in a more chastened mood . not that he will for an instant 
 admit that his rival could be right , but he be less persistent in his 
 incessant objection , and have sink for the most part into an observant 
 silence . I must hark back , however , and continue my narrative from 
 where I drop it . we be send home one of our local Indians who 
 be injure , and I be commit this letter to his charge , with 
 considerable doubt in my mind as to whether it will ever come to hand . 

 when I write last we be about to leave the indian village where we 
 have be deposit by the Esmeralda . I have to begin my report by bad 
 news , for the first serious personal trouble   I pass over the incessant 
 bickering between the Professors   occur this evening , and might 
 have have a tragic ending . I have speak of our English - speak 
 half - breed , Gomez - a fine worker and a willing fellow , but afflict , I 
 fancy , with the vice of curiosity , which be common enough among such 
 man . on the last evening he seem to have hide himself near the hut in 
 which we be discuss our plan , and , be observe by our huge 
 negro Zambo , who be as faithful as a dog and have the hatred which all 
 his race bear to the half - breed , he be drag out and carry into 
 our presence . Gomez whip out his knife , however , and but for the 
 huge strength of his captor , which enable he to disarm he with one 
 hand , he would certainly have stab he . the matter have end in 
 reprimand , the opponent have be compel to shake hand , and there 
 be every hope that all will be well . as to the feud of the two 
 learn man , they be continuous and bitter . it must be admit that 
 Challenger be provocative in the last degree , but Summerlee have an acid 
 tongue , which make matter bad . last night Challenger say that he 
 never care to walk on the Thames Embankment and look up the river , as 
 it be always sad to see one 's own eventual goal . he be convince , of 
 course , that he be destine for Westminster Abbey . Summerlee rejoin , 
 however , with a sour smile , by say that he understand that Millbank 
 Prison have be pull down . Challenger 's conceit be too colossal to 
 allow he to be really annoyed . he only smile in his beard and 
 repeat " really ! really ! " in the pitying tone one would use to a 
 child . indeed , they be child both - the one wizene and 
 cantankerous , the other formidable and overbearing , yet each with a 
 brain which have put he in the front rank of his scientific age . 
 Brain , character , soul - only as one see more of life do one 
 understand how distinct be each . 

 the very next day we do actually make our start upon this remarkable 
 expedition . we find that all our possession fit very easily into 
 the two canoe , and we divide our personnel , six in each , take the 
 obvious precaution in the interest of peace of put one Professor 
 into each canoe . personally , I be with Challenger , who be in a 
 beatific humor , move about as one in a silent ecstasy and beam 
 benevolence from every feature . I have have some experience of he in 
 other mood , however , and shall be the less surprised when the 
 thunderstorm suddenly come up amidst the sunshine . if it be 
 impossible to be at your ease , it be equally impossible to be dull in 
 his company , for one be always in a state of half - tremulous doubt as to 
 what sudden turn his formidable temper may take . 

 for two day we make our way up a good - sized river some hundred of 
 yard broad , and dark in color , but transparent , so that one could 
 usually see the bottom . the affluent of the Amazon be , half of they , 
 of this nature , while the other half be whitish and opaque , the 
 difference depend upon the class of country through which they have 
 flow . the dark indicate vegetable decay , while the other point to 
 clayey soil . twice we come across rapid , and in each case make a 
 portage of half a mile or so to avoid they . the wood on either side 
 be primeval , which be more easily penetrate than wood of the 
 second growth , and we have no great difficulty in carry our canoe 
 through they . how shall I ever forget the solemn mystery of it ? the 
 height of the tree and the thickness of the bole exceed anything 
 which I in my town - breed life could have imagine , shoot upwards in 
 magnificent column until , at an enormous distance above our head , we 
 could dimly discern the spot where they throw out their side - branch 
 into Gothic upward curve which coalesce to form one great matted roof 
 of verdure , through which only an occasional golden ray of sunshine 
 shoot downwards to trace a thin dazzle line of light amidst the 
 majestic obscurity . as we walk noiselessly amid the thick , soft 
 carpet of decay vegetation the hush fall upon our soul which come 
 upon we in the twilight of the Abbey , and even Professor Challenger 's 
 full - cheste note sink into a whisper . alone , I should have be 
 ignorant of the name of these giant growth , but our man of science 
 point out the cedar , the great silk cotton tree , and the redwood 
 tree , with all that profusion of various plant which have make this 
 continent the chief supplier to the human race of those gift of Nature 
 which depend upon the vegetable world , while it be the most backward in 
 those product which come from animal life . vivid orchid and 
 wonderful colored lichen smolder upon the swarthy tree - trunk and 
 where a wandering shaft of light fall full upon the golden allamanda , 
 the scarlet star - cluster of the tacsonia , or the rich deep blue of 
 ipomaea , the effect be as a dream of fairyland . in these great waste 
 of forest , life , which abhor darkness , struggle ever upwards to the 
 light . every plant , even the small one , curl and writhe to the 
 green surface , twin itself round its strong and tall brother in 
 the effort . climb plant be monstrous and luxuriant , but other 
 which have never be know to climb elsewhere learn the art as an 
 escape from that somber shadow , so that the common nettle , the jasmine , 
 and even the jacitara palm tree can be see circle the stem of the 
 cedar and strive to reach their crown . of animal life there be no 
 movement amid the majestic vaulted aisle which stretch from we as we 
 walk , but a constant movement far above our head tell of that 
 multitudinous world of snake and monkey , bird and sloth , which live in 
 the sunshine , and look down in wonder at our tiny , dark , stumble 
 figure in the obscure depth immeasurably below they . at dawn and at 
 sunset the howler monkey scream together and the parrakeet break 
 into shrill chatter , but during the hot hour of the day only the full 
 drone of insect , like the beat of a distant surf , fill the ear , 
 while nothing move amid the solemn vista of stupendous trunk , fade 
 away into the darkness which hold we in . once some bandy - legged , 
 lurch creature , an ant - eater or a bear , scuttle clumsily amid the 
 shadow . it be the only sign of earth life which I see in this great 
 amazonian forest . 

 and yet there be indication that even human life itself be not far 
 from we in those mysterious recess . on the third day out we be 
 aware of a singular deep throbbing in the air , rhythmic and solemn , 
 come and go fitfully throughout the morning . the two boat be 
 paddle within a few yard of each other when first we hear it , and 
 our Indians remain motionless , as if they have be turn to bronze , 
 listen intently with expression of terror upon their face . 

 " what be it , then ? " I ask . 

 " drum , " say Lord John , carelessly ; " war drum . I have hear they 
 before . " 

 " yes , sir , war drum , " say Gomez , the half - breed . " Wild Indians , 
 bravos , not manso ; they watch we every mile of the way ; kill we if 
 they can . " 

 " how can they watch we ? " I ask , gaze into the dark , motionless void . 

 the half - breed shrug his broad shoulder . 

 " the Indians know . they have their own way . they watch we . they talk 
 the drum talk to each other . kill we if they can . " 

 by the afternoon of that day - my pocket diary show I that it be 
 Tuesday , August 18th - at least six or seven drum be throb from 
 various point . sometimes they beat quickly , sometimes slowly , 
 sometimes in obvious question and answer , one far to the east breaking 
 out in a high staccato rattle , and be follow after a pause by a 
 deep roll from the north . there be something indescribably 
 nerve - shake and menacing in that constant mutter , which seem to 
 shape itself into the very syllable of the half - breed , endlessly 
 repeat , " we will kill you if we can . we will kill you if we can . " 
 no one ever move in the silent wood . all the peace and soothe of 
 quiet Nature lie in that dark curtain of vegetation , but away from 
 behind there come ever the one message from our fellow - man . " we will 
 kill you if we can , " say the man in the east . " we will kill you if we 
 can , " say the man in the north . 

 all day the drum rumble and whisper , while their menace reflect 
 itself in the face of our colored companion . even the hardy , 
 swagger half - breed seem cow . I learn , however , that day once 
 for all that both Summerlee and Challenger possess that high type 
 of bravery , the bravery of the scientific mind . Theirs be the spirit 
 which uphold Darwin among the gauchos of the Argentine or Wallace among 
 the head - hunter of Malaya . it be decree by a merciful nature that 
 the human brain can not think of two thing simultaneously , so that if 
 it be steep in curiosity as to science it have no room for merely 
 personal consideration . all day amid that incessant and mysterious 
 menace our two Professors watch every bird upon the wing , and every 
 shrub upon the bank , with many a sharp wordy contention , when the snarl 
 of Summerlee come quick upon the deep growl of Challenger , but with no 
 more sense of danger and no more reference to drum - beat Indians than 
 if they be seat together in the smoking - room of the Royal Society 's 
 Club in St. James 's Street . once only do they condescend to discuss 
 they . 

 " Miranha or Amajuaca cannibal , " say Challenger , jerk his thumb 
 towards the reverberate wood . 

 " no doubt , sir , " Summerlee answer . " like all such tribe , I shall 
 expect to find they of poly - synthetic speech and of mongolian type . " 

 " Polysynthetic certainly , " say Challenger , indulgently . " I be not 
 aware that any other type of language exist in this continent , and I 
 have note of more than a hundred . the mongolian theory I regard with 
 deep suspicion . " 

 " I should have think that even a limited knowledge of comparative 
 anatomy would have help to verify it , " say Summerlee , bitterly . 

 Challenger thrust out his aggressive chin until he be all beard and 
 hat - rim . " no doubt , sir , a limited knowledge would have that effect . 
 when one 's knowledge be exhaustive , one come to other conclusion . " 
 they glare at each other in mutual defiance , while all round rise the 
 distant whisper , " we will kill you - we will kill you if we can . " 

 that night we moor our canoe with heavy stone for anchor in the 
 center of the stream , and make every preparation for a possible attack . 
 nothing come , however , and with the dawn we push upon our way , the 
 drum - beat die out behind we . about three o'clock in the afternoon 
 we come to a very steep rapid , more than a mile long - the very one in 
 which Professor Challenger have suffer disaster upon his first 
 journey . I confess that the sight of it console I , for it be really 
 the first direct corroboration , slight as it be , of the truth of his 
 story . the Indians carry first our canoe and then our store 
 through the brushwood , which be very thick at this point , while we four 
 white , our rifle on our shoulder , walk between they and any danger 
 come from the wood . before evening we have successfully pass the 
 rapid , and make our way some ten mile above they , where we anchor 
 for the night . at this point I reckon that we have come not less than 
 a hundred mile up the tributary from the main stream . 

 it be in the early forenoon of the next day that we make the great 
 departure . since dawn Professor Challenger have be acutely uneasy , 
 continually scan each bank of the river . suddenly he give an 
 exclamation of satisfaction and point to a single tree , which 
 project at a peculiar angle over the side of the stream . 

 " what do you make of that ? " he ask . 

 " it be surely an Assai palm , " say Summerlee . 

 " exactly . it be an Assai palm which I take for my landmark . the 
 secret opening be half a mile onwards upon the other side of the river . 
 there be no break in the tree . that be the wonder and the mystery of 
 it . there where you see light - green rush instead of dark - green 
 undergrowth , there between the great cotton wood , that be my private 
 gate into the unknown . push through , and you will understand . " 

 it be indeed a wonderful place . have reach the spot mark by a 
 line of light - green rush , we pole out two canoe through they for 
 some hundred of yard , and eventually emerge into a placid and 
 shallow stream , run clear and transparent over a sandy bottom . it 
 may have be twenty yard across , and be bank in on each side by 
 most luxuriant vegetation . no one who have not observe that for a 
 short distance reed have take the place of shrub , could possibly have 
 guess the existence of such a stream or dream of the fairyland 
 beyond . 

 for a fairyland it be - the most wonderful that the imagination of man 
 could conceive . the thick vegetation meet overhead , interlace into a 
 natural pergola , and through this tunnel of verdure in a golden 
 twilight flow the green , pellucid river , beautiful in itself , but 
 marvelous from the strange tint throw by the vivid light from above 
 filter and temper in its fall . clear as crystal , motionless as a 
 sheet of glass , green as the edge of an iceberg , it stretch in front 
 of we under its leafy archway , every stroke of our paddle send a 
 thousand ripple across its shin surface . it be a fitting avenue 
 to a land of wonder . all sign of the Indians have pass away , but 
 animal life be more frequent , and the tameness of the creature show 
 that they know nothing of the hunter . fuzzy little black - velvet 
 monkey , with snow - white tooth and gleam , mock eye , chatter at 
 we as we pass . with a dull , heavy splash an occasional cayman 
 plunge in from the bank . once a dark , clumsy tapir star at we from 
 a gap in the bush , and then lumber away through the forest ; once , 
 too , the yellow , sinuous form of a great puma whisk amid the 
 brushwood , and its green , baleful eye glare hatred at we over its 
 tawny shoulder . bird life be abundant , especially the wad bird , 
 stork , heron , and ibis gathering in little group , blue , scarlet , and 
 white , upon every log which jut from the bank , while beneath we the 
 crystal water be alive with fish of every shape and color . 

 for three day we make our way up this tunnel of hazy green sunshine . 
 on the long stretch one could hardly tell as one look ahead where 
 the distant green water end and the distant green archway begin . the 
 deep peace of this strange waterway be unbroken by any sign of man . 

 " no Indian here . too much afraid . Curupuri , " say Gomez . 

 " Curupuri be the spirit of the wood , " Lord John explain . " it be a 
 name for any kind of devil . the poor beggar think that there be 
 something fearsome in this direction , and therefore they avoid it . " 

 on the third day it become evident that our journey in the canoe could 
 not last much long , for the stream be rapidly grow more shallow . 
 twice in as many hour we stick upon the bottom . finally we pull the 
 boat up among the brushwood and spend the night on the bank of the 
 river . in the morning Lord John and I make our way for a couple of 
 mile through the forest , keep parallel with the stream ; but as it 
 grow ever shallow we return and report , what Professor Challenger 
 have already suspect , that we have reach the high point to which 
 the canoe could be bring . we draw they up , therefore , and conceal 
 they among the bush , blaze a tree with our axis , so that we should 
 find they again . then we distribute the various burden among 
 us - gun , ammunition , food , a tent , blanket , and the rest - and , 
 shoulder our package , we set forth upon the more laborious stage of 
 our journey . 

 an unfortunate quarrel between our pepper - pot mark the outset of our 
 new stage . Challenger have from the moment of join we issue 
 direction to the whole party , much to the evident discontent of 
 Summerlee . now , upon his assign some duty to his fellow - professor 
  it be only the carrying of an aneroid barometer , the matter suddenly 
 come to a head . 

 " may I ask , sir , " say Summerlee , with vicious calm , " in what capacity 
 you take it upon yourself to issue these order ? " 

 Challenger glare and bristle . 

 " I do it , Professor Summerlee , as leader of this expedition . " 

 " I be compel to tell you , sir , that I do not recognize you in that 
 capacity . " 

 " indeed ! " Challenger bow with unwieldy sarcasm . " perhaps you would 
 define my exact position . " 

 " yes , sir . you be a man whose veracity be upon trial , and this 
 committee be here to try it . you walk , sir , with your judge . " 

 " dear I ! " say Challenger , seat himself on the side of one of the 
 canoe . " in that case you will , of course , go on your way , and I will 
 follow at my leisure . if I be not the leader you can not expect I to 
 lead . " 

 thank heaven that there be two sane man - Lord John Roxton and 
 myself - to prevent the petulance and folly of our learn professor 
 from send we back empty - handed to London . such arguing and plead 
 and explain before we could get they mollify ! then at last 
 Summerlee , with his sneer and his pipe , would move forwards , and 
 Challenger would come roll and grumble after . by some good 
 fortune we discover about this time that both our savant have the 
 very poor opinion of Dr. Illingworth of Edinburgh . Thenceforward 
 that be our one safety , and every strained situation be relieve by 
 our introduce the name of the Scotch zoologist , when both our 
 Professors would form a temporary alliance and friendship in their 
 detestation and abuse of this common rival . 

 advance in single file along the bank of the stream , we soon find 
 that it narrow down to a mere brook , and finally that it lose itself 
 in a great green morass of sponge - like moss , into which we sink up to 
 our knee . the place be horribly haunt by cloud of mosquito and 
 every form of fly pest , so we be glad to find solid ground again 
 and to make a circuit among the tree , which enable we to outflank 
 this pestilent morass , which drone like an organ in the distance , so 
 loud be it with insect life . 

 on the second day after leave our canoe we find that the whole 
 character of the country change . our road be persistently upwards , 
 and as we ascend the wood become thin and lose their tropical 
 luxuriance . the huge tree of the alluvial Amazonian plain give place 
 to the Phoenix and coco palm , grow in scatter clump , with thick 
 brushwood between . in the damper hollow the Mauritia palm throw out 
 their graceful droop frond . we travel entirely by compass , and 
 once or twice there be difference of opinion between Challenger and 
 the two Indians , when , to quote the Professor 's indignant word , the 
 whole party agree to " trust the fallacious instinct of undeveloped 
 savage rather than the high product of modern european culture . " 
 that we be justify in do so be show upon the third day , when 
 Challenger admit that he recognize several landmark of his former 
 journey , and in one spot we actually come upon four fire - blacken 
 stone , which must have mark a camping - place . 

 the road still ascend , and we cross a rock - stud slope which take 
 two day to traverse . the vegetation have again change , and only the 
 vegetable ivory tree remain , with a great profusion of wonderful 
 orchid , among which I learn to recognize the rare Nuttonia 
 Vexillaria and the glorious pink and scarlet blossom of Cattleya and 
 odontoglossum . occasional brooks with pebbly bottom and fern - drape 
 bank gurgle down the shallow gorge in the hill , and offer good 
 camping - ground every evening on the bank of some rock - stud pool , 
 where swarm of little blue - back fish , about the size and shape of 
 english trout , give we a delicious supper . 

 on the ninth day after leave the canoe , have do , as I reckon , 
 about a hundred and twenty mile , we begin to emerge from the tree , 
 which have grow small until they be mere shrub . their place be 
 take by an immense wilderness of bamboo , which grow so thickly that we 
 could only penetrate it by cut a pathway with the machete and 
 billhook of the Indians . it take we a long day , travel from seven 
 in the morning till eight at night , with only two break of one hour 
 each , to get through this obstacle . anything more monotonous and 
 wearying could not be imagine , for , even at the most open place , I 
 could not see more than ten or twelve yard , while usually my vision 
 be limit to the back of Lord John 's cotton jacket in front of I , 
 and to the yellow wall within a foot of I on either side . from above 
 come one thin knife - edge of sunshine , and fifteen foot over our head 
 one see the top of the reed sway against the deep blue sky . I do 
 not know what kind of creature inhabit such a thicket , but several 
 time we hear the plunging of large , heavy animal quite close to we . 
 from their sound Lord John judge they to be some form of wild cattle . 
 just as night fall we clear the belt of bamboo , and at once form 
 our camp , exhaust by the interminable day . 

 early next morning we be again afoot , and find that the character of 
 the country have change once again . behind we be the wall of bamboo , 
 as definite as if it mark the course of a river . in front be an 
 open plain , slop slightly upwards and dot with clump of 
 tree - fern , the whole curve before we until it end in a long , 
 whale - back ridge . this we reach about midday , only to find a 
 shallow valley beyond , rise once again into a gentle incline which 
 lead to a low , rounded sky - line . it be here , while we cross the 
 first of these hill , that an incident occur which may or may not 
 have be important . 

 Professor Challenger , who with the two local Indians be in the van of 
 the party , stop suddenly and point excitedly to the right . as he 
 do so we see , at the distance of a mile or so , something which 
 appear to be a huge gray bird flap slowly up from the ground and skim 
 smoothly off , fly very low and straight , until it be lose among the 
 tree - fern . 

 " do you see it ? " cry Challenger , in exultation . " Summerlee , do you 
 see it ? " 

 his colleague be star at the spot where the creature have 
 disappear . 

 " what do you claim that it be ? " he ask . 

 " to the good of my belief , a pterodactyl . " 

 Summerlee burst into derisive laughter " a pter - fiddlestick ! " say he . 
 " it be a stork , if ever I see one . " 

 Challenger be too furious to speak . he simply swing his pack upon his 
 back and continue upon his march . Lord John come abreast of I , 
 however , and his face be more grave than be his will not . he have his 
 zeiss glass in his hand . 

 " I focus it before it get over the tree , " say he . " I will not 
 undertake to say what it be , but I will risk my reputation as a 
 sportsman that it be not   any bird that ever I clap eye on in my 
 life . " 

 so there the matter stand . be we really just at the edge of the 
 unknown , encounter the outlying picket of this lose world of which 
 our leader speak ? I give you the incident as it occur and you will 
 know as much as I do . it stand alone , for we see nothing more which 
 could be call remarkable . 

 and now , my reader , if ever I have any , I have bring you up the 
 broad river , and through the screen of rush , and down the green 
 tunnel , and up the long slope of palm tree , and through the bamboo 
 brake , and across the plain of tree - fern . at last our destination lay 
 in full sight of we . when we have cross the second ridge we see 
 before we an irregular , palm - stud plain , and then the line of high 
 red cliff which I have see in the picture . there it lie , even as I 
 write , and there can be no question that it be the same . at the 
 near point it be about seven mile from our present camp , and it 
 curve away , stretch as far as I can see . Challenger strut about 
 like a prize peacock , and Summerlee be silent , but still sceptical . 
 another day should bring some of our doubt to an end . meanwhile , as 
 Jose , whose arm be pierce by a broken bamboo , insist upon return , 
 I send this letter back in his charge , and only hope that it may 
 eventually come to hand . I will write again as the occasion serve . I 
 have enclose with this a rough chart of our journey , which may have 
 the effect of make the account rather easy to understand . 




  CHAPTER IX 

  " who could have foresee it ? " 

 a dreadful thing have happen to we . who could have foresee it ? I 
 can not foresee any end to our trouble . it may be that we be 
 condemn to spend our whole life in this strange , inaccessible place . 
 I be still so confused that I can hardly think clearly of the fact of 
 the present or of the chance of the future . to my astounded sens 
 the one seem most terrible and the other as black as night . 

 no man have ever find themselves in a bad position ; nor be there any 
 use in disclosing to you our exact geographical situation and ask 
 our friend for a relief party . even if they could send one , our fate 
 will in all human probability be decide long before it could arrive in 
 South America . 

 we be , in truth , as far from any human aid as if we be in the moon . 
 if we be to win through , it be only our own quality which can save 
 we . I have as companion three remarkable man , man of great 
 brain - power and of unshaken courage . there lie our one and only hope . 
 it be only when I look upon the untroubled face of my comrade that I 
 see some glimmer through the darkness . outwardly I trust that I appear 
 as unconcerned as they . inwardly I be fill with apprehension . 

 let I give you , with as much detail as I can , the sequence of event 
 which have lead we to this catastrophe . 

 when I finish my last letter I state that we be within seven mile 
 from an enormous line of ruddy cliff , which encircle , beyond all 
 doubt , the plateau of which Professor Challenger speak . their height , 
 as we approach they , seem to I in some place to be great than 
 he have state - run up in part to at least a thousand foot - and 
 they be curiously striate , in a manner which be , I believe , 
 characteristic of basaltic upheaval . something of the sort be to be 
 see in Salisbury Crags at Edinburgh . the summit show every sign of 
 a luxuriant vegetation , with bush near the edge , and far back 
 many high tree . there be no indication of any life that we could see . 

 that night we pitch our camp immediately under the cliff - a most wild 
 and desolate spot . the crag above we be not merely perpendicular , 
 but curved outward at the top , so that ascent be out of the question . 
 close to we be the high thin pinnacle of rock which I believe I 
 mention early in this narrative . it be like a broad red church 
 spire , the top of it be level with the plateau , but a great chasm 
 gap between . on the summit of it there grow one high tree . both 
 pinnacle and cliff be comparatively low - some five or six hundred 
 foot , I should think . 

 " it be on that , " say Professor Challenger , point to this tree , 
 " that the pterodactyl be perch . I climb half - way up the rock 
 before I shoot he . I be inclined to think that a good mountaineer like 
 myself could ascend the rock to the top , though he would , of course , be 
 no nearer to the plateau when he have do so . " 

 as Challenger speak of his pterodactyl I glance at Professor 
 Summerlee , and for the first time I seem to see some sign of a 
 dawn credulity and repentance . there be no sneer upon his thin 
 lip , but , on the contrary , a gray , draw look of excitement and 
 amazement . Challenger see it , too , and revel in the first taste of 
 victory . 

 " of course , " say he , with his clumsy and ponderous sarcasm , 
 " Professor Summerlee will understand that when I speak of a pterodactyl 
 I mean a stork - only it be the kind of stork which have no feather , a 
 leathery skin , membranous wing , and tooth in its jaw . " he grin 
 and blink and bow until his colleague turn and walk away . 

 in the morning , after a frugal breakfast of coffee and manioc - we have 
 to be economical of our store - we hold a council of war as to the good 
 method of ascend to the plateau above we . 

 Challenger preside with a solemnity as if he be the Lord Chief 
 Justice on the Bench . picture he seat upon a rock , his absurd 
 boyish straw hat tilt on the back of his head , his supercilious eye 
 dominate we from under his droop lid , his great black beard 
 wagging as he slowly define our present situation and our future 
 movement . 

 beneath he you might have see the three of we - myself , sunburnt , 
 young , and vigorous after our open - air tramp ; Summerlee , solemn but 
 still critical , behind his eternal pipe ; Lord John , as keen as a 
 razor - edge , with his supple , alert figure lean upon his rifle , and 
 his eager eye fix eagerly upon the speaker . behind we be group 
 the two swarthy half - breed and the little knot of Indians , while in 
 front and above we tower those huge , ruddy rib of rock which keep 
 we from our goal . 

 " I need not say , " say our leader , " that on the occasion of my last 
 visit I exhaust every mean of climb the cliff , and where I fail 
 I do not think that anyone else be likely to succeed , for I be 
 something of a mountaineer . I have none of the appliance of a 
 rock - climber with I , but I have take the precaution to bring they 
 now . with their aid I be positive I could climb that detach pinnacle 
 to the summit ; but so long as the main cliff overhang , it be vain to 
 attempt ascend that . I be hurry upon my last visit by the 
 approach of the rainy season and by the exhaustion of my supply . 
 these consideration limit my time , and I can only claim that I have 
 survey about six mile of the cliff to the east of we , find no 
 possible way up . what , then , shall we now do ? " 

 " there seem to be only one reasonable course , " say Professor 
 Summerlee . " if you have explore the east , we should travel along the 
 base of the cliff to the west , and seek for a practicable point for our 
 ascent . " 

 " that be it , " say Lord John . " the odd be that this plateau be of no 
 great size , and we shall travel round it until we either find an easy 
 way up it , or come back to the point from which we start . " 

 " I have already explain to our young friend here , " say Challenger 
  he have a way of allude to I as if I be a school child ten year 
 old , " that it be quite impossible that there should be an easy way up 
 anywhere , for the simple reason that if there be the summit would not 
 be isolate , and those condition would not obtain which have effect 
 so singular an interference with the general law of survival . yet I 
 admit that there may very well be place where an expert human climber 
 may reach the summit , and yet a cumbrous and heavy animal be unable to 
 descend . it be certain that there be a point where an ascent be 
 possible . " 

 " how do you know that , sir ? " ask Summerlee , sharply . 

 " because my predecessor , the American Maple White , actually make such 
 an ascent . how otherwise could he have see the monster which he 
 sketch in his notebook ? " 

 " there you reason somewhat ahead of the prove fact , " say the 
 stubborn Summerlee . " I admit your plateau , because I have see it ; but 
 I have not as yet satisfy myself that it contain any form of life 
 whatever . " 

 " what you admit , sir , or what you do not admit , be really of 
 inconceivably small importance . I be glad to perceive that the plateau 
 itself have actually obtrude itself upon your intelligence . " he glance 
 up at it , and then , to our amazement , he spring from his rock , and , 
 seize Summerlee by the neck , he tilt his face into the air . " now 
 sir ! " he shout , hoarse with excitement . " do I help you to realize 
 that the plateau contain some animal life ? " 

 I have say that a thick fringe of green overhung the edge of the 
 cliff . out of this there have emerge a black , glisten object . as 
 it come slowly forth and overhung the chasm , we see that it be a very 
 large snake with a peculiar flat , spade - like head . it waver and 
 quiver above we for a minute , the morning sun gleam upon its 
 sleek , sinuous coil . then it slowly draw inward and disappear . 

 Summerlee have be so interested that he have stand unresiste while 
 Challenger tilt his head into the air . now he shake his colleague 
 off and come back to his dignity . 

 " I should be glad , Professor Challenger , " say he , " if you could see 
 your way to make any remark which may occur to you without seize I 
 by the chin . even the appearance of a very ordinary rock python do 
 not appear to justify such a liberty . " 

 " but there be life upon the plateau all the same , " his colleague 
 reply in triumph . " and now , have demonstrate this important 
 conclusion so that it be clear to anyone , however prejudiced or obtuse , 
 I be of opinion that we can not do well than break up our camp and 
 travel to westward until we find some mean of ascent . " 

 the ground at the foot of the cliff be rocky and break so that the 
 going be slow and difficult . suddenly we come , however , upon 
 something which cheer our heart . it be the site of an old 
 encampment , with several empty Chicago meat tin , a bottle label 
 " Brandy , " a break tin - opener , and a quantity of other traveler ' 
 debris . a crumple , disintegrate newspaper reveal itself as the 
 Chicago Democrat , though the date have be obliterate . 

 " not mine , " say Challenger . " it must be Maple White 's . " 

 Lord John have be gaze curiously at a great tree - fern which 
 overshadow the encampment . " I say , look at this , " say he . " I 
 believe it be mean for a sign - post . " 

 a slip of hard wood have be nail to the tree in such a way as to 
 point to the westward . 

 " most certainly a sign - post , " say Challenger . " what else ? find 
 himself upon a dangerous errand , our pioneer have leave this sign so that 
 any party which follow he may know the way he have take . perhaps we 
 shall come upon some other indication as we proceed . " 

 we do indeed , but they be of a terrible and most unexpected nature . 
 immediately beneath the cliff there grow a considerable patch of high 
 bamboo , like that which we have traverse in our journey . many of these 
 stem be twenty foot high , with sharp , strong top , so that even as 
 they stand they make formidable spear . we be pass along the edge 
 of this cover when my eye be catch by the gleam of something white 
 within it . thrust in my head between the stem , I find myself 
 gaze at a fleshless skull . the whole skeleton be there , but the 
 skull have detach itself and lie some foot near to the open . 

 with a few blow from the machete of our Indians we clear the spot 
 and be able to study the detail of this old tragedy . only a few 
 shred of clothe could still be distinguish , but there be the 
 remain of boot upon the bony foot , and it be very clear that the 
 dead man be a European . a gold watch by Hudson , of New York , and a 
 chain which hold a stylographic pen , lie among the bone . there be 
 also a silver cigarette - case , with " J. C. , from A. E. S. , " upon the 
 lid . the state of the metal seem to show that the catastrophe have 
 occur no great time before . 

 " who can he be ? " ask Lord John . " poor devil ! every bone in his body 
 seem to be break . " 

 " and the bamboo grow through his smashed rib , " say Summerlee . " it 
 be a fast - grow plant , but it be surely inconceivable that this body 
 could have be here while the cane grow to be twenty foot in length . " 

 " as to the man 's identity , " say Professor Challenger , " I have no doubt 
 whatever upon that point . as I make my way up the river before I 
 reach you at the fazenda I institute very particular inquiry about 
 Maple White . at Para they know nothing . fortunately , I have a definite 
 clew , for there be a particular picture in his sketch - book which 
 show he take lunch with a certain ecclesiastic at Rosario . this 
 priest I be able to find , and though he prove a very argumentative 
 fellow , who take it absurdly amiss that I should point out to he the 
 corrosive effect which modern science must have upon his belief , he 
 none the less give I some positive information . Maple White pass 
 Rosario four year ago , or two year before I see his dead body . he 
 be not alone at the time , but there be a friend , an American name 
 James Colver , who remain in the boat and do not meet this 
 ecclesiastic . I think , therefore , that there can be no doubt that we 
 be now look upon the remain of this James Colver . " 

 " nor , " say Lord John , " be there much doubt as to how he meet his death . 
 he have fall or be chuck from the top , and so be impale . how 
 else could he come by his broken bone , and how could he have be 
 stick through by these cane with their point so high above our head ? " 

 a hush come over we as we stand round these shatter remain and 
 realize the truth of Lord John Roxton 's word . the beetle head of 
 the cliff project over the cane - brake . undoubtedly he have fall 
 from above . but have he fall ? have it be an accident ? or - already 
 ominous and terrible possibility begin to form round that unknown 
 land . 

 we move off in silence , and continue to coast round the line of 
 cliff , which be as even and unbroken as some of those monstrous 
 antarctic ice - field which I have see depict as stretch from 
 horizon to horizon and tower high above the mast - head of the 
 explore vessel . 

 in five mile we see no rift or break . and then suddenly we perceive 
 something which fill we with new hope . in a hollow of the rock , 
 protect from rain , there be draw a rough arrow in chalk , point 
 still to the westward . 

 " Maple White again , " say Professor Challenger . " he have some 
 presentiment that worthy footstep would follow close behind he . " 

 " he have chalk , then ? " 

 " a box of colored chalk be among the effect I find in his knapsack . 
 I remember that the white one be wear to a stump . " 

 " that be certainly good evidence , " say Summerlee . " we can only accept 
 his guidance and follow on to the westward . " 

 we have proceed some five more mile when again we see a white arrow 
 upon the rock . it be at a point where the face of the cliff be for 
 the first time split into a narrow cleft . inside the cleft be a 
 second guidance mark , which point right up it with the tip somewhat 
 elevated , as if the spot indicate be above the level of the ground . 

 it be a solemn place , for the wall be so gigantic and the slit of 
 blue sky so narrow and so obscure by a double fringe of verdure , that 
 only a dim and shadowy light penetrate to the bottom . we have have no 
 food for many hour , and be very weary with the stony and irregular 
 journey , but our nerve be too string to allow we to halt . we 
 order the camp to be pitch , however , and , leave the Indians to 
 arrange it , we four , with the two half - breed , proceed up the narrow 
 gorge . 

 it be not more than forty foot across at the mouth , but it rapidly 
 close until it end in an acute angle , too straight and smooth for an 
 ascent . certainly it be not this which our pioneer have attempt to 
 indicate . we make our way back - the whole gorge be not more than a 
 quarter of a mile deep - and then suddenly the quick eye of Lord John 
 fall upon what we be seek . high up above our head , amid the dark 
 shadow , there be one circle of deep gloom . surely it could only be 
 the opening of a cave . 

 the base of the cliff be heap with loose stone at the spot , and it 
 be not difficult to clamber up . when we reach it , all doubt be 
 remove . not only be it an opening into the rock , but on the side of 
 it there be mark once again the sign of the arrow . here be the 
 point , and this the mean by which Maple White and his ill - fat 
 comrade have make their ascent . 

 we be too excited to return to the camp , but must make our first 
 exploration at once . Lord John have an electric torch in his knapsack , 
 and this have to serve we as light . he advance , throw his little 
 clear circlet of yellow radiance before he , while in single file we 
 follow at his heel . 

 the cave have evidently be water - wear , the side be smooth and the 
 floor cover with rounded stone . it be of such a size that a single 
 man could just fit through by stoop . for fifty yard it run almost 
 straight into the rock , and then it ascend at an angle of forty - five . 
 presently this incline become even steep , and we find ourselves 
 climb upon hand and knee among loose rubble which slide from 
 beneath we . suddenly an exclamation break from Lord Roxton . 

 " it be block ! " say he . 

 cluster behind he we see in the yellow field of light a wall of 
 break basalt which extend to the ceiling . 

 " the roof have fall in ! " 

 in vain we drag out some of the piece . the only effect be that 
 the large one become detach and threaten to roll down the 
 gradient and crush we . it be evident that the obstacle be far beyond 
 any effort which we could make to remove it . the road by which Maple 
 White have ascend be no long available . 

 too much cast down to speak , we stumble down the dark tunnel and make 
 our way back to the camp . 

 one incident occur , however , before we leave the gorge , which be of 
 importance in view of what come afterwards . 

 we have gather in a little group at the bottom of the chasm , some 
 forty foot beneath the mouth of the cave , when a huge rock roll 
 suddenly downwards - and shoot past we with tremendous force . it be the 
 narrow escape for one or all of we . we could not ourselves see 
 whence the rock have come , but our half - breed servant , who be still 
 at the opening of the cave , say that it have fly past they , and must 
 therefore have fall from the summit . look upwards , we could see 
 no sign of movement above we amidst the green jungle which top the 
 cliff . there could be little doubt , however , that the stone be aim 
 at we , so the incident surely point to humanity - and malevolent 
 humanity - upon the plateau . 

 we withdraw hurriedly from the chasm , our mind full of this new 
 development and its bearing upon our plan . the situation be 
 difficult enough before , but if the obstruction of Nature be 
 increase by the deliberate opposition of man , then our case be indeed 
 a hopeless one . and yet , as we look up at that beautiful fringe of 
 verdure only a few hundred of foot above our head , there be not one 
 of we who could conceive the idea of return to London until we have 
 explore it to its depth . 

 on discuss the situation , we determine that our good course be to 
 continue to coast round the plateau in the hope of find some other 
 mean of reach the top . the line of cliff , which have decrease 
 considerably in height , have already begin to trend from west to north , 
 and if we could take this as represent the arc of a circle , the 
 whole circumference could not be very great . at the bad , then , we 
 should be back in a few day at our starting - point . 

 we make a march that day which total some two - and - twenty mile , 
 without any change in our prospect . I may mention that our aneroid 
 show we that in the continual incline which we have ascend since we 
 abandon our canoe we have rise to no less than three thousand foot 
 above sea - level . hence there be a considerable change both in the 
 temperature and in the vegetation . we have shake off some of that 
 horrible insect life which be the bane of tropical travel . a few palm 
 still survive , and many tree - fern , but the amazonian tree have be 
 all leave behind . it be pleasant to see the convolvulus , the 
 passion - flower , and the begonia , all remind I of home , here among 
 these inhospitable rock . there be a red begonia just the same color 
 as one that be keep in a pot in the window of a certain villa in 
 Streatham - but I be drift into private reminiscence . 

 that night - I be still speak of the first day of our 
 circumnavigation of the plateau - a great experience await we , and one 
 which for ever set at rest any doubt which we could have have as to the 
 wonder so near we . 

 you will realize as you read it , my dear Mr. McArdle , and possibly for 
 the first time that the paper have not send I on a wild - goose chase , 
 and that there be inconceivably fine copy wait for the world 
 whenever we have the Professor 's leave to make use of it . I shall not 
 dare to publish these article unless I can bring back my proof to 
 England , or I shall be hail as the journalistic Munchausen of all 
 time . I have no doubt that you feel the same way yourself , and that 
 you would not care to stake the whole credit of the Gazette upon this 
 adventure until we can meet the chorus of criticism and scepticism 
 which such article must of necessity elicit . so this wonderful 
 incident , which would make such a headline for the old paper , must 
 still wait its turn in the editorial drawer . 

 and yet it be all over in a flash , and there be no sequel to it , save 
 in our own conviction . 

 what occur be this . Lord John have shoot an ajouti - which be a 
 small , pig - like animal - and , half of it have be give to the 
 Indians , we be cook the other half upon our fire . there be a 
 chill in the air after dark , and we have all draw close to the blaze . 
 the night be moonless , but there be some star , and one could see 
 for a little distance across the plain . well , suddenly out of the 
 darkness , out of the night , there swoop something with a swish like 
 an aeroplane . the whole group of we be cover for an instant by a 
 canopy of leathery wing , and I have a momentary vision of a long , 
 snake - like neck , a fierce , red , greedy eye , and a great snapping beak , 
 fill , to my amazement , with little , gleam tooth . the next instant 
 it be go - and so be our dinner . a huge black shadow , twenty foot 
 across , skim up into the air ; for an instant the monster wing 
 blot out the star , and then it vanish over the brow of the cliff 
 above we . we all sit in amazed silence round the fire , like the hero 
 of Virgil when the Harpies come down upon they . it be Summerlee who 
 be the first to speak . 

 " Professor Challenger , " say he , in a solemn voice , which quaver with 
 emotion , " I owe you an apology . Sir , I be very much in the wrong , and 
 I beg that you will forget what be past . " 

 it be handsomely say , and the two man for the first time shake hand . 
 so much we have gain by this clear vision of our first pterodactyl . 
 it be worth a steal supper to bring two such man together . 

 but if prehistoric life exist upon the plateau it be not 
 superabundant , for we have no further glimpse of it during the next 
 three day . during this time we traverse a barren and forbid 
 country , which alternate between stony desert and desolate marsh 
 full of many wild - fowl , upon the north and east of the cliff . from 
 that direction the place be really inaccessible , and , be it not for a 
 hardish ledge which run at the very base of the precipice , we should 
 have have to turn back . many time we be up to our waist in the 
 slime and blubber of an old , semi - tropical swamp . to make matter 
 bad , the place seem to be a favorite breeding - place of the Jaracaca 
 snake , the most venomous and aggressive in South America . again and 
 again these horrible creature come writhe and spring towards we 
 across the surface of this putrid bog , and it be only by keep our 
 shot - gun for ever ready that we could feel safe from they . one 
 funnel - shape depression in the morass , of a livid green in color from 
 some lichen which fester in it , will always remain as a nightmare 
 memory in my mind . it seem to have be a special nest of these 
 vermin , and the slope be alive with they , all writhe in our 
 direction , for it be a peculiarity of the Jaracaca that he will always 
 attack man at first sight . there be too many for we to shoot , so we 
 fairly take to our heel and run until we be exhaust . I shall 
 always remember as we look back how far behind we could see the head 
 and neck of our horrible pursuer rise and fall amid the reed . 
 Jaracaca Swamp we name it in the map which we be construct . 

 the cliff upon the farth side have lose their ruddy tint , be 
 chocolate - brown in color ; the vegetation be more scatter along the 
 top of they , and they have sink to three or four hundred foot in height , 
 but in no place do we find any point where they could be ascend . if 
 anything , they be more impossible than at the first point where we 
 have meet they . their absolute steepness be indicate in the photograph 
 which I take over the stony desert . 

 " surely , " say I , as we discuss the situation , " the rain must find 
 its way down somehow . there be bind to be water - channel in the 
 rock . " 

 " our young friend have glimpse of lucidity , " say Professor Challenger , 
 pat I upon the shoulder . 

 " the rain must go somewhere , " I repeat . 

 " he keep a firm grip upon actuality . the only drawback be that we 
 have conclusively prove by ocular demonstration that there be no 
 water channel down the rock . " 

 " where , then , do it go ? " I persist . 

 " I think it may be fairly assume that if it do not come outward it 
 must run inward . " 

 " then there be a lake in the center . " 

 " so I should suppose . " 

 " it be more than likely that the lake may be an old crater , " say 
 Summerlee . " the whole formation be , of course , highly volcanic . but , 
 however that may be , I should expect to find the surface of the plateau 
 slope inward with a considerable sheet of water in the center , which 
 may drain off , by some subterranean channel , into the marsh of the 
 Jaracaca Swamp . " 

 " or evaporation might preserve an equilibrium , " remark Challenger , 
 and the two learn man wander off into one of their usual scientific 
 argument , which be as comprehensible as chinese to the layman . 

 on the sixth day we complete our first circuit of the cliff , and 
 find ourselves back at the first camp , beside the isolated pinnacle of 
 rock . we be a disconsolate party , for nothing could have be more 
 minute than our investigation , and it be absolutely certain that there 
 be no single point where the most active human being could possibly 
 hope to scale the cliff . the place which Maple White 's chalk - mark have 
 indicate as his own mean of access be now entirely impassable . 

 what be we to do now ? our store of provision , supplement by our 
 gun , be hold out well , but the day must come when they would need 
 replenishment . in a couple of month the rain might be expect , and 
 we should be wash out of our camp . the rock be hard than marble , 
 and any attempt at cut a path for so great a height be more than 
 our time or resource would admit . no wonder that we look gloomily 
 at each other that night , and seek our blanket with hardly a word 
 exchange . I remember that as I drop off to sleep my last 
 recollection be that Challenger be squat , like a monstrous 
 bull - frog , by the fire , his huge head in his hand , sink apparently in 
 the deep thought , and entirely oblivious to the good - night which I 
 wish he . 

 but it be a very different Challenger who greet we in the morning - a 
 Challenger with contentment and self - congratulation shin from his 
 whole person . he face we as we assemble for breakfast with a 
 deprecate false modesty in his eye , as who should say , " I know that 
 I deserve all that you can say , but I pray you to spare my blush by 
 not say it . " his beard bristle exultantly , his chest be throw 
 out , and his hand be thrust into the front of his jacket . so , in his 
 fancy , may he see himself sometimes , grace the vacant pedestal in 
 Trafalgar Square , and add one more to the horror of the London 
 street . 

 " Eureka ! " he cry , his tooth shin through his beard . " gentleman , 
 you may congratulate I and we may congratulate each other . the 
 problem be solve . " 

 " you have find a way up ? " 

 " I venture to think so . " 

 " and where ? " 

 for answer he point to the spire - like pinnacle upon our right . 

 our face - or mine , at least - fall as we survey it . that it could be 
 climb we have our companion 's assurance . but a horrible abyss lay 
 between it and the plateau . 

 " we can never get across , " I gasp . 

 " we can at least all reach the summit , " say he . " when we be up I may 
 be able to show you that the resource of an inventive mind be not yet 
 exhaust . " 

 after breakfast we unpack the bundle in which our leader have bring 
 his climbing accessory . from it he take a coil of the strong and 
 light rope , a hundred and fifty foot in length , with climbing iron , 
 clamp , and other device . Lord John be an experienced mountaineer , 
 and Summerlee have do some rough climbing at various time , so that I 
 be really the novice at rock - work of the party ; but my strength and 
 activity may have make up for my want of experience . 

 it be not in reality a very stiff task , though there be moment 
 which make my hair bristle upon my head . the first half be perfectly 
 easy , but from there upwards it become continually steep until , for 
 the last fifty foot , we be literally cling with our finger and 
 toe to tiny ledge and crevice in the rock . I could not have 
 accomplish it , nor could Summerlee , if Challenger have not gain the 
 summit   it be extraordinary to see such activity in so unwieldy a 
 creature   and there fix the rope round the trunk of the considerable 
 tree which grow there . with this as our support , we be soon able to 
 scramble up the jagged wall until we find ourselves upon the small 
 grassy platform , some twenty - five foot each way , which form the 
 summit . 

 the first impression which I receive when I have recover my breath 
 be of the extraordinary view over the country which we have traverse . 
 the whole brazilian plain seem to lie beneath we , extend away and 
 away until it end in dim blue mist upon the farth sky - line . in 
 the foreground be the long slope , strew with rock and dot with 
 tree - fern ; far off in the middle distance , look over the 
 saddle - back hill , I could just see the yellow and green mass of bamboos 
 through which we have pass ; and then , gradually , the vegetation 
 increase until it form the huge forest which extend as far as the 
 eye could reach , and for a good two thousand mile beyond . 

 I be still drink in this wonderful panorama when the heavy hand of 
 the Professor fall upon my shoulder . 

 " this way , my young friend , " say he ; " vestigia nulla retrorsum . never 
 look rearwards , but always to our glorious goal . " 

 the level of the plateau , when I turn , be exactly that on which we 
 stand , and the green bank of bush , with occasional tree , be so near 
 that it be difficult to realize how inaccessible it remain . at a 
 rough guess the gulf be forty foot across , but , so far as I could see , 
 it might as well have be forty mile . I place one arm round the 
 trunk of the tree and lean over the abyss . far down be the small 
 dark figure of our servant , look up at we . the wall be 
 absolutely precipitous , as be that which face I . 

 " this be indeed curious , " say the creak voice of Professor 
 Summerlee . 

 I turn , and find that he be examine with great interest the tree 
 to which I clung . that smooth bark and those small , ribbed leaf 
 seem familiar to my eye . " why , " I cry , " it be a beech ! " 

 " exactly , " say Summerlee . " a fellow - countryman in a far land . " 

 " not only a fellow - countryman , my good sir , " say Challenger , " but 
 also , if I may be allow to enlarge your simile , an ally of the first 
 value . this beech tree will be our saviour . " 

 " by George ! " cry Lord John , " a bridge ! " 

 " exactly , my friend , a bridge ! it be not for nothing that I expend 
 an hour last night in focus my mind upon the situation . I have some 
 recollection of once remark to our young friend here that G. E. C. 
 be at his good when his back be to the wall . last night you will admit 
 that all our back be to the wall . but where will - power and 
 intellect go together , there be always a way out . a drawbridge have to 
 be find which could be drop across the abyss . behold it ! " 

 it be certainly a brilliant idea . the tree be a good sixty foot in 
 height , and if it only fall the right way it would easily cross the 
 chasm . Challenger have sling the camp axe over his shoulder when he 
 ascend . now he hand it to I . 

 " our young friend have the thews and sinew , " say he . " I think he will 
 be the most useful at this task . I must beg , however , that you will 
 kindly refrain from think for yourself , and that you will do exactly 
 what you be tell . " 

 under his direction I cut such gash in the side of the tree as 
 would ensure that it should fall as we desire . it have already a 
 strong , natural tilt in the direction of the plateau , so that the 
 matter be not difficult . finally I set to work in earnest upon the 
 trunk , take turn and turn with Lord John . in a little over an hour 
 there be a loud crack , the tree sway forward , and then crash over , 
 bury its branch among the bush on the farth side . the severed 
 trunk roll to the very edge of our platform , and for one terrible 
 second we all think it be over . it balance itself , however , a few 
 inch from the edge , and there be our bridge to the unknown . 

 all of we , without a word , shake hand with Professor Challenger , who 
 raise his straw hat and bow deeply to each in turn . 

 " I claim the honor , " say he , " to be the first to cross to the unknown 
 land - a fitting subject , no doubt , for some future historical painting . " 

 he have approach the bridge when Lord John lay his hand upon his coat . 

 " my dear chap , " say he , " I really can not allow it . " 

 " can not allow it , sir ! " the head go back and the beard forward . 

 " when it be a matter of science , do not   you know , I follow your lead 
 because you be by way of bein ' a man of science . but it be up to you 
 to follow I when you come into my department . " 

 " your department , sir ? " 

 " we all have our profession , and soldierin ' be mine . we be , 
 accordin ' to my idea , invadin ' a new country , which may or may not be 
 chock - full of enemy of sort . to barge blindly into it for want of a 
 little common sense and patience be not   my notion of management . " 

 the remonstrance be too reasonable to be disregard . Challenger 
 toss his head and shrug his heavy shoulder . 

 " well , sir , what do you propose ? " 

 " for all I know there may be a tribe of cannibal waitin ' for 
 lunch - time among those very bush , " say Lord John , look across the 
 bridge . " it be well to learn wisdom before you get into a 
 cookin'-pot ; so we will content ourselves with hopin ' that there be no 
 trouble waitin ' for we , and at the same time we will act as if there 
 be . Malone and I will go down again , therefore , and we will fetch up 
 the four rifle , together with Gomez and the other . one man can then 
 go across and the rest will cover he with gun , until he see that it 
 be safe for the whole crowd to come along . " 

 Challenger sit down upon the cut stump and groan his impatience ; but 
 Summerlee and I be of one mind that Lord John be our leader when 
 such practical detail be in question . the climb be a more simple 
 thing now that the rope dangle down the face of the bad part of the 
 ascent . within an hour we have bring up the rifle and a shot - gun . 
 the half - breed have ascend also , and under Lord John 's order they 
 have carry up a bale of provision in case our first exploration 
 should be a long one . we have each bandolier of cartridge . 

 " now , Challenger , if you really insist upon be the first man in , " 
 say Lord John , when every preparation be complete . 

 " I be much indebted to you for your gracious permission , " say the 
 angry Professor ; for never be a man so intolerant of every form of 
 authority . " since you be good enough to allow it , I shall most 
 certainly take it upon myself to act as pioneer upon this occasion . " 

 seat himself with a leg overhang the abyss on each side , and his 
 hatchet sling upon his back , Challenger hop his way across the trunk 
 and be soon at the other side . he clamber up and wave his arm in 
 the air . 

 " at last ! " he cry ; " at last ! " 

 I gaze anxiously at he , with a vague expectation that some terrible 
 fate would dart at he from the curtain of green behind he . but all 
 be quiet , save that a strange , many - color bird fly up from under 
 his foot and vanish among the tree . 

 Summerlee be the second . his wiry energy be wonderful in so frail a 
 frame . he insist upon have two rifle sling upon his back , so that 
 both Professors be arm when he have make his transit . I come next , 
 and try hard not to look down into the horrible gulf over which I be 
 pass . Summerlee hold out the butt - end of his rifle , and an instant 
 later I be able to grasp his hand . as to Lord John , he walk 
 across - actually walk without support ! he must have nerve of iron . 

 and there we be , the four of we , upon the dreamland , the lost world , 
 of Maple White . to all of we it seem the moment of our supreme 
 triumph . who could have guess that it be the prelude to our supreme 
 disaster ? let I say in a few word how the crush blow fall upon we . 

 we have turn away from the edge , and have penetrate about fifty yard 
 of close brushwood , when there come a frightful rending crash from 
 behind we . with one impulse we rush back the way that we have come . 
 the bridge be go ! 

 far down at the base of the cliff I see , as I look over , a tangle 
 mass of branch and splinter trunk . it be our beech tree . have the 
 edge of the platform crumble and let it through ? for a moment this 
 explanation be in all our mind . the next , from the farth side of 
 the rocky pinnacle before we a swarthy face , the face of Gomez the 
 half - breed , be slowly protrude . yes , it be Gomez , but no long the 
 Gomez of the demure smile and the mask - like expression . here be a 
 face with flash eye and distort feature , a face convulse with 
 hatred and with the mad joy of gratified revenge . 

 " Lord Roxton ! " he shout . " Lord John Roxton ! " 

 " well , " say our companion , " here I be . " 

 a shriek of laughter come across the abyss . 

 " yes , there you be , you english dog , and there you will remain ! I 
 have wait and wait , and now have come my chance . you find it hard 
 to get up ; you will find it hard to get down . you curse fool , you 
 be trap , every one of you ! " 

 we be too astounded to speak . we could only stand there star in 
 amazement . a great broken bough upon the grass show whence he have 
 gain his leverage to tilt over our bridge . the face have vanish , 
 but presently it be up again , more frantic than before . 

 " we nearly kill you with a stone at the cave , " he cry ; " but this be 
 well . it be slow and more terrible . your bone will whiten up 
 there , and none will know where you lie or come to cover they . as you 
 lie die , think of Lopez , whom you shoot five year ago on the Putomayo 
 River . I be his brother , and , come what will I will die happy now , for 
 his memory have be avenge . " a furious hand be shake at we , and then 
 all be quiet . 

 have the half - breed simply work his vengeance and then escape , all 
 might have be well with he . it be that foolish , irresistible Latin 
 impulse to be dramatic which bring his own downfall . Roxton , the man 
 who have earn himself the name of the Flail of the Lord through three 
 country , be not one who could be safely taunt . the half - breed be 
 descend on the farth side of the pinnacle ; but before he could 
 reach the ground Lord John have run along the edge of the plateau and 
 gain a point from which he could see his man . there be a single 
 crack of his rifle , and , though we see nothing , we hear the scream and 
 then the distant thud of the fall body . Roxton come back to we with 
 a face of granite . 

 " I have be a blind simpleton , " say he , bitterly , " it be my folly 
 that have bring you all into this trouble . I should have remember 
 that these people have long memory for blood - feud , and have be 
 more upon my guard . " 

 " what about the other one ? it take two of they to lever that tree over 
 the edge . " 

 " I could have shoot he , but I let he go . he may have have no part in 
 it . perhaps it would have be well if I have kill he , for he 
 must , as you say , have lend a hand . " 

 now that we have the clue to his action , each of we could cast back and 
 remember some sinister act upon the part of the half - breed - his 
 constant desire to know our plan , his arrest outside our tent when he 
 be over - hear they , the furtive look of hatred which from time to 
 time one or other of we have surprise . we be still discuss it , 
 endeavor to adjust our mind to these new condition , when a 
 singular scene in the plain below arrest our attention . 

 a man in white clothe , who could only be the survive half - breed , be 
 run as one do run when death be the pacemaker . behind he , only 
 a few yard in his rear , bound the huge ebony figure of Zambo , our 
 devoted negro . even as we look , he spring upon the back of the 
 fugitive and fling his arm round his neck . they roll on the ground 
 together . an instant afterwards Zambo rise , look at the prostrate 
 man , and then , wave his hand joyously to we , come run in our 
 direction . the white figure lie motionless in the middle of the great 
 plain . 

 our two traitor have be destroy , but the mischief that they have 
 do live after they . by no possible mean could we get back to the 
 pinnacle . we have be native of the world ; now we be native of the 
 plateau . the two thing be separate and apart . there be the plain 
 which lead to the canoe . yonder , beyond the violet , hazy horizon , be 
 the stream which lead back to civilization . but the link between be 
 miss . no human ingenuity could suggest a mean of bridge the 
 chasm which yawn between ourselves and our past life . one instant 
 have alter the whole condition of our existence . 

 it be at such a moment that I learn the stuff of which my three 
 comrade be compose . they be grave , it be true , and thoughtful , 
 but of an invincible serenity . for the moment we could only sit among 
 the bush in patience and wait the coming of Zambo . presently his 
 honest black face top the rock and his Herculean figure emerge 
 upon the top of the pinnacle . 

 " what I do now ? " he cry . " you tell I and I do it . " 

 it be a question which it be easy to ask than to answer . one thing 
 only be clear . he be our one trusty link with the outside world . on 
 no account must he leave we . 

 " no no ! " he cry . " I not leave you . whatever come , you always find 
 I here . but no able to keep Indians . already they say too much 
 Curupuri live on this place , and they go home . now you leave they I 
 no able to keep they . " 

 it be a fact that our Indians have show in many way of late that they 
 be weary of their journey and anxious to return . we realize that 
 Zambo speak the truth , and that it would be impossible for he to keep 
 they . 

 " make they wait till to - morrow , Zambo , " I shout ; " then I can send 
 letter back by they . " 

 " very good , sarr ! I promise they wait till to - morrow , " say the negro . 
 " but what I do for you now ? " 

 there be plenty for he to do , and admirably the faithful fellow do 
 it . first of all , under our direction , he undo the rope from the 
 tree - stump and throw one end of it across to we . it be not thick 
 than a clothe - line , but it be of great strength , and though we could 
 not make a bridge of it , we might well find it invaluable if we have any 
 climbing to do . he then fasten his end of the rope to the package of 
 supply which have be carry up , and we be able to drag it across . 
 this give we the mean of life for at least a week , even if we find 
 nothing else . finally he descend and carry up two other packet of 
 mixed good - a box of ammunition and a number of other thing , all of 
 which we get across by throw our rope to he and haul it back . 
 it be evening when he at last climb down , with a final assurance 
 that he would keep the Indians till next morning . 

 and so it be that I have spend nearly the whole of this our first night 
 upon the plateau write up our experience by the light of a single 
 candle - lantern . 

 we sup and camp at the very edge of the cliff , quench our 
 thirst with two bottle of Apollinaris which be in one of the case . 
 it be vital to we to find water , but I think even Lord John himself have 
 have adventure enough for one day , and none of we feel inclined to make 
 the first push into the unknown . we forbear to light a fire or to make 
 any unnecessary sound . 

 to - morrow   or to - day , rather , for it be already dawn as I write   we 
 shall make our first venture into this strange land . when I shall be 
 able to write again - or if I ever shall write again - I know not . 
 meanwhile , I can see that the Indians be still in their place , and I 
 be sure that the faithful Zambo will be here presently to get my 
 letter . I only trust that it will come to hand . 


 P.S. - the more I think the more desperate do our position seem . I 
 see no possible hope of our return . if there be a high tree near the 
 edge of the plateau we might drop a return bridge across , but there be 
 none within fifty yard . our united strength could not carry a trunk 
 which would serve our purpose . the rope , of course , be far too short 
 that we could descend by it . no , our position be hopeless - hopeless ! 




  CHAPTER x 

  " the most wonderful thing have happen " 

 the most wonderful thing have happen and be continually happen 
 to we . all the paper that I possess consist of five old note - book 
 and a lot of scrap , and I have only the one stylographic pencil ; but 
 so long as I can move my hand I will continue to set down our 
 experience and impression , for , since we be the only man of the 
 whole human race to see such thing , it be of enormous importance that 
 I should record they whilst they be fresh in my memory and before that 
 fate which seem to be constantly impend do actually overtake we . 
 whether Zambo can at last take these letter to the river , or whether I 
 shall myself in some miraculous way carry they back with I , or , 
 finally , whether some daring explorer , come upon our track with the 
 advantage , perhaps , of a perfect monoplane , should find this bundle 
 of manuscript , in any case I can see that what I be write be destine 
 to immortality as a classic of true adventure . 

 on the morning after our be trap upon the plateau by the 
 villainous Gomez we begin a new stage in our experience . the first 
 incident in it be not such as to give I a very favorable opinion of 
 the place to which we have wander . as I rouse myself from a short 
 nap after day have dawn , my eye fall upon a most singular appearance 
 upon my own leg . my trouser have slip up , expose a few inch of 
 my skin above my sock . on this there rest a large , purplish grape . 
 astonish at the sight , I lean forward to pick it off , when , to my 
 horror , it burst between my finger and thumb , squirt blood in every 
 direction . my cry of disgust have bring the two professor to my side . 

 " most interesting , " say Summerlee , bend over my shin . " an enormous 
 blood - tick , as yet , I believe , unclassified . " 

 " the first - fruit of our labor , " say Challenger in his booming , 
 pedantic fashion . " we can not do less than call it ixode Maloni . the 
 very small inconvenience of be bite , my young friend , can not , I be 
 sure , weigh with you as against the glorious privilege of have your 
 name inscribe in the deathless roll of zoology . unhappily you have 
 crush this fine speciman at the moment of satiation . " 

 " filthy vermin ! " I cry . 

 Professor Challenger raise his great eyebrow in protest , and place a 
 soothe paw upon my shoulder . 

 " you should cultivate the scientific eye and the detach scientific 
 mind , " say he . " to a man of philosophic temperament like myself the 
 blood - tick , with its lancet - like proboscis and its distend stomach , 
 be as beautiful a work of Nature as the peacock or , for that matter , 
 the aurora borealis . it pain I to hear you speak of it in so 
 unappreciative a fashion . no doubt , with due diligence , we can secure 
 some other speciman . " 

 " there can be no doubt of that , " say Summerlee , grimly , " for one have 
 just disappear behind your shirt - collar . " 

 Challenger spring into the air bellowing like a bull , and tore 
 frantically at his coat and shirt to get they off . Summerlee and I 
 laugh so that we could hardly help he . at last we expose that 
 monstrous torso   fifty - four inch , by the tailor 's tape . his body 
 be all mat with black hair , out of which jungle we pick the 
 wandering tick before it have bite he . but the bush round be 
 full of the horrible pest , and it be clear that we must shift our 
 camp . 

 but first of all it be necessary to make our arrangement with the 
 faithful negro , who appear presently on the pinnacle with a number of 
 tin of cocoa and biscuit , which he toss over to we . of the store 
 which remain below he be order to retain as much as would keep he 
 for two month . the Indians be to have the remainder as a reward for 
 their service and as payment for take our letter back to the 
 Amazon . some hour later we see they in single file far out upon the 
 plain , each with a bundle on his head , make their way back along the 
 path we have come . Zambo occupy our little tent at the base of the 
 pinnacle , and there he remain , our one link with the world below . 

 and now we have to decide upon our immediate movement . we shift our 
 position from among the tick - laden bush until we come to a small 
 clearing thickly surround by tree upon all side . there be some 
 flat slab of rock in the center , with an excellent well close by , and 
 there we sit in cleanly comfort while we make our first plan for the 
 invasion of this new country . bird be call among the 
 foliage - especially one with a peculiar whooping cry which be new to 
 we - but beyond these sound there be no sign of life . 

 our first care be to make some sort of list of our own store , so that 
 we might know what we have to rely upon . what with the thing we have 
 ourselves bring up and those which Zambo have send across on the rope , 
 we be fairly well supply . most important of all , in view of the 
 danger which might surround we , we have our four rifle and one 
 thousand three hundred round , also a shot - gun , but not more than a 
 hundred and fifty medium pellet cartridge . in the matter of 
 provision we have enough to last for several week , with a sufficiency 
 of tobacco and a few scientific implement , include a large telescope 
 and a good field - glass . all these thing we collect together in the 
 clearing , and as a first precaution , we cut down with our hatchet and 
 knife a number of thorny bush , which we pile round in a circle some 
 fifteen yard in diameter . this be to be our headquarters for the 
 time - our place of refuge against sudden danger and the guard - house for 
 our store . Fort Challenger , we call it . 

 it be midday before we have make ourselves secure , but the heat be not 
 oppressive , and the general character of the plateau , both in its 
 temperature and in its vegetation , be almost temperate . the beech , 
 the oak , and even the birch be to be find among the tangle of tree 
 which girt we in . one huge gingko tree , top all the other , shot 
 its great limb and maidenhair foliage over the fort which we have 
 construct . in its shade we continue our discussion , while Lord 
 John , who have quickly take command in the hour of action , give we his 
 view . 

 " so long as neither man nor beast have see or hear we , we be safe , " 
 say he . " from the time they know we be here our trouble begin . 
 there be no sign that they have find we out as yet . so our game 
 surely be to lie low for a time and spy out the land . we want to have 
 a good look at our neighbor before we get on visitin ' term . " 

 " but we must advance , " I venture to remark . 

 " by all mean , sonny my boy ! we will advance . but with common sense . 
 we must never go so far that we can not   get back to our base . above all , 
 we must never , unless it be life or death , fire off our gun . " 

 " but you fire yesterday , " say Summerlee . 

 " well , it could not   be help . however , the wind be strong and blow 
 outward . it be not likely that the sound could have travel far into 
 the plateau . by the way , what shall we call this place ? I suppose it 
 be up to we to give it a name ? " 

 there be several suggestion , more or less happy , but Challenger 's 
 be final . 

 " it can only have one name , " say he . " it be call after the pioneer 
 who discover it . it be Maple White Land . " 

 Maple White Land it become , and so it be name in that chart which have 
 become my special task . so it will , I trust , appear in the atlas of 
 the future . 

 the peaceful penetration of Maple White Land be the press subject 
 before we . we have the evidence of our own eye that the place be 
 inhabit by some unknown creature , and there be that of Maple 
 White 's sketch - book to show that more dreadful and more dangerous 
 monster might still appear . that there might also prove to be human 
 occupant and that they be of a malevolent character be suggest by 
 the skeleton impale upon the bamboo , which could not have get there 
 have it not be drop from above . our situation , strand without 
 possibility of escape in such a land , be clearly full of danger , and 
 our reason endorse every measure of caution which Lord John 's 
 experience could suggest . yet it be surely impossible that we should 
 halt on the edge of this world of mystery when our very soul be 
 tingle with impatience to push forward and to pluck the heart from it . 

 we therefore block the entrance to our zareba by fill it up with 
 several thorny bush , and leave our camp with the store entirely 
 surround by this protect hedge . we then slowly and cautiously set 
 forth into the unknown , follow the course of the little stream which 
 flow from our spring , as it should always serve we as a guide on our 
 return . 

 hardly have we start when we come across sign that there be indeed 
 wonder await we . after a few hundred yard of thick forest , 
 contain many tree which be quite unknown to I , but which 
 Summerlee , who be the botanist of the party , recognize as form of 
 conifera and of cycadaceous plant which have long pass away in the 
 world below , we enter a region where the stream widen out and 
 form a considerable bog . high reed of a peculiar type grow thickly 
 before we , which be pronounce to be equisetacea , or mare' - tail , 
 with tree - fern scatter amongst they , all of they sway in a brisk 
 wind . suddenly Lord John , who be walk first , halt with uplifted 
 hand . 

 " look at this ! " say he . " by George , this must be the trail of the 
 father of all bird ! " 

 an enormous three - toed track be imprint in the soft mud before we . 
 the creature , whatever it be , have cross the swamp and have pass on 
 into the forest . we all stop to examine that monstrous spoor . if 
 it be indeed a bird - and what animal could leave such a mark ? - its 
 foot be so much large than an ostrich 's that its height upon the same 
 scale must be enormous . Lord John look eagerly round he and slip 
 two cartridge into his elephant - gun . 

 " I will stake my good name as a shikarree , " say he , " that the track be a 
 fresh one . the creature have not pass ten minute . look how the 
 water be still ooze into that deep print ! by Jove ! see , here be 
 the mark of a little one ! " 

 sure enough , small track of the same general form be run 
 parallel to the large one . 

 " but what do you make of this ? " cry Professor Summerlee , 
 triumphantly , point to what look like the huge print of a 
 five - finger human hand appear among the three - toed mark . 

 " Wealden ! " cry Challenger , in an ecstasy . " I have   see they in the 
 Wealden clay . it be a creature walking erect upon three - toed foot , and 
 occasionally put one of its five - finger forepaw upon the ground . 
 not a bird , my dear Roxton - not a bird . " 

 " a beast ? " 

 " no ; a reptile - a dinosaur . nothing else could have leave such a track . 
 they puzzle a worthy Sussex doctor some ninety year ago ; but who in 
 the world could have hop - hop - to have see a sight like that ? " 

 his word die away into a whisper , and we all stand in motionless 
 amazement . follow the track , we have leave the morass and pass 
 through a screen of brushwood and tree . beyond be an open glade , and 
 in this be five of the most extraordinary creature that I have ever 
 see . crouch down among the bush , we observe they at our leisure . 

 there be , as I say , five of they , two be adult and three young 
 one . in size they be enormous . even the baby be as big as 
 elephant , while the two large one be far beyond all creature I 
 have ever see . they have slate - color skin , which be scale like a 
 lizard 's and shimmer where the sun shine upon it . all five be 
 sit up , balance themselves upon their broad , powerful tail and 
 their huge three - toed hind - foot , while with their small five - finger 
 front - foot they pull down the branch upon which they browse . I do 
 not know that I can bring their appearance home to you well than by 
 say that they look like monstrous kangaroo , twenty foot in 
 length , and with skin like black crocodile . 

 I do not know how long we stay motionless gaze at this marvelous 
 spectacle . a strong wind blow towards we and we be well conceal , 
 so there be no chance of discovery . from time to time the little one 
 play round their parent in unwieldy gambol , the great beast 
 bound into the air and fall with dull thud upon the earth . the 
 strength of the parent seem to be limitless , for one of they , have 
 some difficulty in reach a bunch of foliage which grow upon a 
 considerable - sized tree , put his fore - leg round the trunk and tear it 
 down as if it have be a sapling . the action seem , as I think , to 
 show not only the great development of its muscle , but also the small 
 one of its brain , for the whole weight come crash down upon the top 
 of it , and it utter a series of shrill yelps to show that , big as it 
 be , there be a limit to what it could endure . the incident make it 
 think , apparently , that the neighborhood be dangerous , for it slowly 
 lurch off through the wood , follow by its mate and its three 
 enormous infant . we see the shimmering slaty gleam of their skin 
 between the tree - trunk , and their head undulate high above the 
 brush - wood . then they vanish from our sight . 

 I look at my comrade . Lord John be stand at gaze with his 
 finger on the trigger of his elephant - gun , his eager hunter 's soul 
 shin from his fierce eye . what would he not give for one such head 
 to place between the two cross oar above the mantelpiece in his 
 snuggery at the Albany ! and yet his reason hold he in , for all our 
 exploration of the wonder of this unknown land depend upon our 
 presence be conceal from its inhabitant . the two professor be 
 in silent ecstasy . in their excitement they have unconsciously seize 
 each other by the hand , and stand like two little child in the 
 presence of a marvel , Challenger 's cheek bunch up into a seraphic 
 smile , and Summerlee 's sardonic face soften for the moment into 
 wonder and reverence . 

 " Nunc dimittis ! " he cry at last . " what will they say in England of 
 this ? " 

 " my dear Summerlee , I will tell you with great confidence exactly what 
 they will say in England , " say Challenger . " they will say that you 
 be an infernal liar and a scientific charlatan , exactly as you and 
 other say of I . " 

 " in the face of photograph ? " 

 " Faked , Summerlee ! Clumsily fake ! " 

 " in the face of specimen ? " 

 " ah , there we may have they ! Malone and his filthy Fleet Street crew 
 may be all yelp our praise yet . August the twenty - eighth - the day 
 we see five live iguanodon in a glade of Maple White Land . put it 
 down in your diary , my young friend , and send it to your rag . " 

 " and be ready to get the toe - end of the editorial boot in return , " say 
 Lord John . " thing look a bit different from the latitude of London , 
 young fellah my lad . there be many a man who never tell his 
 adventure , for he can not   hope to be believe . who be to blame they ? 
 for this will seem a bit of a dream to ourselves in a month or two . 
 what do you say they be ? " 

 " iguanodon , " say Summerlee . " you will find their footmark all over 
 the Hastings sand , in Kent , and in Sussex . the South of England be 
 alive with they when there be plenty of good lush green - stuff to keep 
 they go . condition have change , and the beast die . here it 
 seem that the condition have not change , and the beast have live . " 

 " if ever we get out of this alive , I must have a head with I , " say 
 Lord John . " Lord , how some of that Somaliland - Uganda crowd would turn 
 a beautiful pea - green if they see it ! I do not   know what you chap 
 think , but it strike I that we be on mighty thin ice all this time . " 

 I have the same feeling of mystery and danger around we . in the gloom 
 of the tree there seem a constant menace and as we look up into 
 their shadowy foliage vague terror creep into one 's heart . it be true 
 that these monstrous creature which we have see be lumber , 
 inoffensive brute which be unlikely to hurt anyone , but in this 
 world of wonder what other survival might there not be - what fierce , 
 active horror ready to pounce upon we from their lair among the rock 
 or brushwood ? I know little of prehistoric life , but I have a clear 
 remembrance of one book which I have read in which it speak of creature 
 who would live upon our lion and tiger as a cat live upon mouse . 
 what if these also be to be find in the wood of Maple White Land ! 

 it be destine that on this very morning - our first in the new 
 country - we be to find out what strange hazard lie around we . it 
 be a loathsome adventure , and one of which I hate to think . if , as 
 Lord John say , the glade of the iguanodon will remain with we as a 
 dream , then surely the swamp of the pterodactyls will forever be our 
 nightmare . let I set down exactly what occur . 

 we pass very slowly through the wood , partly because Lord Roxton 
 act as scout before he would let we advance , and partly because at 
 every second step one or other of our professor would fall , with a cry 
 of wonder , before some flower or insect which present he with a new 
 type . we may have travel two or three mile in all , keep to the 
 right of the line of the stream , when we come upon a considerable 
 opening in the tree . a belt of brushwood lead up to a tangle of 
 rock - the whole plateau be strew with boulder . we be walk 
 slowly towards these rock , among bush which reach over our waist , 
 when we become aware of a strange low gabbling and whistle sound , 
 which fill the air with a constant clamor and appear to come from 
 some spot immediately before we . Lord John hold up his hand as a 
 signal for we to stop , and he make his way swiftly , stoop and 
 run , to the line of rock . we see he peep over they and give a 
 gesture of amazement . then he stand star as if forget we , so 
 utterly entrance be he by what he see . finally he wave we to come 
 on , hold up his hand as a signal for caution . his whole bearing 
 make I feel that something wonderful but dangerous lie before we . 

 creep to his side , we look over the rock . the place into which 
 we gaze be a pit , and may , in the early day , have be one of the 
 small volcanic blow - hole of the plateau . it be bowl - shaped and at 
 the bottom , some hundred of yard from where we lay , be pool of 
 green - scummed , stagnant water , fringe with bullrush . it be a weird 
 place in itself , but its occupant make it seem like a scene from the 
 Seven Circles of Dante . the place be a rookery of pterodactyls . 
 there be hundred of they congregate within view . all the bottom 
 area round the water - edge be alive with their young one , and with 
 hideous mother brood upon their leathery , yellowish egg . from 
 this crawl flap mass of obscene reptilian life come the shocking 
 clamor which fill the air and the mephitic , horrible , musty odor 
 which turn we sick . but above , perch each upon its own stone , 
 tall , gray , and wither , more like dead and dried specimen than 
 actual living creature , sit the horrible male , absolutely motionless 
 save for the rolling of their red eye or an occasional snap of their 
 rat - trap beak as a dragon - fly go past they . their huge , membranous 
 wing be close by fold their fore - arm , so that they sit like 
 gigantic old woman , wrap in hideous web - colored shawl , and with 
 their ferocious head protrude above they . large and small , not less 
 than a thousand of these filthy creature lie in the hollow before we . 

 our professor would gladly have stay there all day , so entrance 
 be they by this opportunity of study the life of a prehistoric 
 age . they point out the fish and dead bird lie about among the 
 rock as prove the nature of the food of these creature , and I hear 
 they congratulate each other on have clear up the point why the 
 bone of this fly dragon be find in such great number in certain 
 well - define area , as in the Cambridge Green - sand , since it be now 
 see that , like penguin , they live in gregarious fashion . 

 finally , however , Challenger , bent upon prove some point which 
 Summerlee have contest , thrust his head over the rock and nearly 
 bring destruction upon we all . in an instant the near male give a 
 shrill , whistle cry , and flap its twenty - foot span of leathery 
 wing as it soar up into the air . the female and young one huddle 
 together beside the water , while the whole circle of sentinel rise one 
 after the other and sail off into the sky . it be a wonderful sight 
 to see at least a hundred creature of such enormous size and hideous 
 appearance all swoop like swallow with swift , shearing wing - stroke 
 above we ; but soon we realize that it be not one on which we could 
 afford to linger . at first the great brute fly round in a huge ring , 
 as if to make sure what the exact extent of the danger might be . then , 
 the flight grow low and the circle narrower , until they be whiz 
 round and round we , the dry , rustle flap of their huge slate - color 
 wing fill the air with a volume of sound that make I think of 
 Hendon aerodrome upon a race day . 

 " make for the wood and keep together , " cry Lord John , club his 
 rifle . " the brute mean mischief . " 

 the moment we attempt to retreat the circle close in upon we , until 
 the tip of the wing of those near to we nearly touch our face . 
 we beat at they with the stock of our gun , but there be nothing 
 solid or vulnerable to strike . then suddenly out of the whiz , 
 slate - color circle a long neck shoot out , and a fierce beak make a 
 thrust at we . another and another follow . Summerlee give a cry and 
 put his hand to his face , from which the blood be stream . I feel a 
 prod at the back of my neck , and turn dizzy with the shock . 
 Challenger fall , and as I stoop to pick he up I be again strike 
 from behind and drop on the top of he . at the same instant I hear 
 the crash of Lord John 's elephant - gun , and , look up , see one of the 
 creature with a broken wing struggle upon the ground , spit and 
 gurgle at we with a wide - open beak and blood - shot , goggled eye , 
 like some devil in a medieval picture . its comrade have fly high 
 at the sudden sound , and be circle above our head . 

 " now , " cry Lord John , " now for our life ! " 

 we stagger through the brushwood , and even as we reach the tree 
 the harpy be on we again . Summerlee be knock down , but we tore 
 he up and rush among the trunk . once there we be safe , for those 
 huge wing have no space for their sweep beneath the branch . as we 
 limp homeward , sadly maul and discomfit , we see they for a long 
 time fly at a great height against the deep blue sky above our 
 head , soar round and round , no big than wood - pigeon , with their 
 eye no doubt still follow our progress . at last , however , as we 
 reach the thick wood they give up the chase , and we see they no 
 more . 

 " a most interesting and convincing experience , " say Challenger , as we 
 halt beside the brook and he bath a swollen knee . " we be 
 exceptionally well inform , Summerlee , as to the habit of the enraged 
 pterodactyl . " 

 Summerlee be wipe the blood from a cut in his forehead , while I be 
 tie up a nasty stab in the muscle of the neck . Lord John have the 
 shoulder of his coat tear away , but the creature 's tooth have only 
 graze the flesh . 

 " it be worth note , " Challenger continue , " that our young friend have 
 receive an undoubted stab , while Lord John 's coat could only have be 
 tear by a bite . in my own case , I be beat about the head by their 
 wing , so we have have a remarkable exhibition of their various method 
 of offence . " 

 " it have be touch and go for our life , " say Lord John , gravely , " and 
 I could not think of a more rotten sort of death than to be out by 
 such filthy vermin . I be sorry to fire my rifle , but , by Jove ! there 
 be no great choice . " 

 " we should not be here if you have not , " say I , with conviction . 

 " it may do no harm , " say he . " among these wood there must be many 
 loud crack from split or fall tree which would be just like 
 the sound of a gun . but now , if you be of my opinion , we have have 
 thrill enough for one day , and have good get back to the surgical box 
 at the camp for some carbolic . who know what venom these beast may 
 have in their hideous jaw ? " 

 but surely no man ever have just such a day since the world begin . some 
 fresh surprise be ever in store for we . when , follow the course of 
 our brook , we at last reach our glade and see the thorny barricade of 
 our camp , we think that our adventure be at an end . but we have 
 something more to think of before we could rest . the gate of Fort 
 Challenger have be untouched , the wall be unbroken , and yet it have 
 be visit by some strange and powerful creature in our absence . no 
 foot - mark show a trace of its nature , and only the overhang branch 
 of the enormous ginko tree suggest how it might have come and go ; 
 but of its malevolent strength there be ample evidence in the 
 condition of our store . they be strew at random all over the 
 ground , and one tin of meat have be crush into piece so as to 
 extract the content . a case of cartridge have be shatter into 
 matchwood , and one of the brass shell lie shred into piece beside 
 it . again the feeling of vague horror come upon our soul , and we 
 gaze round with frightened eye at the dark shadow which lie around 
 we , in all of which some fearsome shape might be lurk . how good it 
 be when we be hail by the voice of Zambo , and , go to the edge 
 of the plateau , see he sit grin at we upon the top of the 
 opposite pinnacle . 

 " all well , Massa Challenger , all well ! " he cry . " I stay here . no 
 fear . you always find I when you want . " 

 his honest black face , and the immense view before we , which carry we 
 half - way back to the affluent of the Amazon , help we to remember that 
 we really be upon this earth in the twentieth century , and have not by 
 some magic be convey to some raw planet in its early and wild 
 state . how difficult it be to realize that the violet line upon the 
 far horizon be well advanced to that great river upon which huge 
 steamer run , and folk talk of the small affair of life , while we , 
 maroon among the creature of a bygone age , could but gaze towards it 
 and yearn for all that it mean ! 

 one other memory remain with I of this wonderful day , and with it I 
 will close this letter . the two professor , their temper aggravate 
 no doubt by their injury , have fall out as to whether our assailant 
 be of the genus pterodactylus or dimorphodon , and high word have 
 ensue . to avoid their wrangling I move some little way apart , and 
 be seat smoking upon the trunk of a fallen tree , when Lord John 
 stroll over in my direction . 

 " I say , Malone , " say he , " do you remember that place where those 
 beast be ? " 

 " very clearly . " 

 " a sort of volcanic pit , be it not ? " 

 " exactly , " say I. 

 " do you notice the soil ? " 

 " Rocks . " 

 " but round the water - where the reed be ? " 

 " it be a bluish soil . it look like clay . " 

 " exactly . a volcanic tube full of blue clay . " 

 " what of that ? " I ask . 

 " oh , nothing , nothing , " say he , and stroll back to where the voice 
 of the contend man of science rise in a prolong duet , the high , 
 strident note of Summerlee rise and fall to the sonorous bass of 
 Challenger . I should have think no more of Lord John 's remark be 
 it not that once again that night I hear he mutter to himself : " blue 
 clay - clay in a volcanic tube ! " they be the last word I hear before 
 I drop into an exhausted sleep . 




  CHAPTER XI 

  " for once I be the Hero " 

 Lord John Roxton be right when he think that some specially toxic 
 quality might lie in the bite of the horrible creature which have 
 attack we . on the morning after our first adventure upon the 
 plateau , both Summerlee and I be in great pain and fever , while 
 Challenger 's knee be so bruised that he could hardly limp . we keep to 
 our camp all day , therefore , Lord John busy himself , with such help 
 as we could give he , in raise the height and thickness of the thorny 
 wall which be our only defense . I remember that during the whole 
 long day I be haunt by the feeling that we be closely observe , 
 though by whom or whence I could give no guess . 

 so strong be the impression that I tell Professor Challenger of it , 
 who put it down to the cerebral excitement cause by my fever . again 
 and again I glance round swiftly , with the conviction that I be about 
 to see something , but only to meet the dark tangle of our hedge or the 
 solemn and cavernous gloom of the great tree which arch above our 
 head . and yet the feeling grow ever strong in my own mind that 
 something observant and something malevolent be at our very elbow . I 
 think of the indian superstition of the Curupuri - the dreadful , 
 lurk spirit of the wood - and I could have imagine that his 
 terrible presence haunt those who have invade his most remote and 
 sacred retreat . 

 that night   our third in Maple White Land   we have an experience which 
 leave a fearful impression upon our mind , and make we thankful that 
 Lord John have work so hard in make our retreat impregnable . we 
 be all sleep round our die fire when we be arouse - or , 
 rather , I should say , shoot out of our slumber - by a succession of the 
 most frightful cry and scream to which I have ever listen . I know 
 no sound to which I could compare this amazing tumult , which seem to 
 come from some spot within a few hundred yard of our camp . it be as 
 ear - splitting as any whistle of a railway - engine ; but whereas the 
 whistle be a clear , mechanical , sharp - edge sound , this be far deep 
 in volume and vibrant with the uttermost strain of agony and horror . 
 we clap our hand to our ear to shut out that nerve - shake appeal . 
 a cold sweat break out over my body , and my heart turn sick at the 
 misery of it . all the woe of torture life , all its stupendous 
 indictment of high heaven , its innumerable sorrow , seem to be 
 center and condense into that one dreadful , agonize cry . and then , 
 under this high - pitch , ring sound there be another , more 
 intermittent , a low , deep - cheste laugh , a growling , throaty gurgle of 
 merriment which form a grotesque accompaniment to the shriek with 
 which it be blend . for three or four minute on end the fearsome 
 duet continue , while all the foliage rustle with the rise of 
 startled bird . then it shut off as suddenly as it begin . for a long 
 time we sit in horrified silence . then Lord John throw a bundle of 
 twig upon the fire , and their red glare light up the intent face of my 
 companion and flicker over the great bough above our head . 

 " what be it ? " I whisper . 

 " we shall know in the morning , " say Lord John . " it be close to 
 we - not far than the glade . " 

 " we have be privileged to overhear a prehistoric tragedy , the sort of 
 drama which occur among the reed upon the border of some Jurassic 
 lagoon , when the great dragon pin the less among the slime , " 
 say Challenger , with more solemnity than I have ever hear in his 
 voice . " it be surely well for man that he come late in the order of 
 creation . there be power abroad in early day which no courage 
 and no mechanism of his could have meet . what could his sling , his 
 throwing - stick , or his arrow avail he against such force as have be 
 loose to - night ? even with a modern rifle it would be all odd on the 
 monster . " 

 " I think I should back my little friend , " say Lord John , caress his 
 Express . " but the beast would certainly have a good sporting chance . " 

 Summerlee raise his hand . 

 " hush ! " he cry . " surely I hear something ? " 

 from the utter silence there emerge a deep , regular pat - pat . it be 
 the tread of some animal - the rhythm of soft but heavy pad place 
 cautiously upon the ground . it steal slowly round the camp , and then 
 halt near our gateway . there be a low , sibilant rise and fall - the 
 breathing of the creature . only our feeble hedge separate we from 
 this horror of the night . each of we have seize his rifle , and Lord 
 John have pull out a small bush to make an embrasure in the hedge . 

 " by George ! " he whisper . " I think I can see it ! " 

 I stoop and peer over his shoulder through the gap . yes , I could 
 see it , too . in the deep shadow of the tree there be a deep shadow 
 yet , black , inchoate , vague - a crouch form full of savage vigor and 
 menace . it be no high than a horse , but the dim outline suggest 
 vast bulk and strength . that hiss pant , as regular and full - volume 
 as the exhaust of an engine , speak of a monstrous organism . once , as 
 it move , I think I see the glint of two terrible , greenish eye . 
 there be an uneasy rustling , as if it be crawl slowly forward . 

 " I believe it be go to spring ! " say I , cock my rifle . 

 " do not   fire ! do not   fire ! " whisper Lord John . " the crash of a gun in 
 this silent night would be hear for mile . keep it as a last card . " 

 " if it get over the hedge we be do , " say Summerlee , and his voice 
 crackle into a nervous laugh as he speak . 

 " no , it must not get over , " cry Lord John ; " but hold your fire to the 
 last . perhaps I can make something of the fellow . I will chance it , 
 anyhow . " 

 it be as brave an act as ever I see a man do . he stoop to the fire , 
 pick up a blaze branch , and slip in an instant through a 
 sallyport which he have make in our gateway . the thing move forward 
 with a dreadful snarl . Lord John never hesitate , but , run towards 
 it with a quick , light step , he dash the flame wood into the 
 brute 's face . for one moment I have a vision of a horrible mask like a 
 giant toad 's , of a warty , leprous skin , and of a loose mouth all 
 beslobbere with fresh blood . the next , there be a crash in the 
 underwood and our dreadful visitor be go . 

 " I think he would not   face the fire , " say Lord John , laugh , as he 
 come back and throw his branch among the faggot . 

 " you should not have take such a risk ! " we all cry . 

 " there be nothing else to be do . if he have get among we we should 
 have shoot each other in tryin ' to down he . on the other hand , if we 
 have fire through the hedge and wound he he would soon have be on 
 the top of we - to say nothing of give ourselves away . on the whole , 
 I think that we be jolly well out of it . what be he , then ? " 

 our learn man look at each other with some hesitation . 

 " personally , I be unable to classify the creature with any certainty , " 
 say Summerlee , light his pipe from the fire . 

 " in refuse to commit yourself you be but show a proper scientific 
 reserve , " say Challenger , with massive condescension . " I be not 
 myself prepare to go far than to say in general term that we have 
 almost certainly be in contact to - night with some form of carnivorous 
 dinosaur . I have already express my anticipation that something of 
 the sort might exist upon this plateau . " 

 " we have to bear in mind , " remark Summerlee , " that there be many 
 prehistoric form which have never come down to we . it would be rash 
 to suppose that we can give a name to all that we be likely to meet . " 

 " exactly . a rough classification may be the good that we can attempt . 
 to - morrow some further evidence may help we to an identification . 
 meantime we can only renew our interrupted slumber . " 

 " but not without a sentinel , " say Lord John , with decision . " we can not 
 afford to take chance in a country like this . two - hour spell in the 
 future , for each of we . " 

 " then I will just finish my pipe in start the first one , " say 
 Professor Summerlee ; and from that time onwards we never trust 
 ourselves again without a watchman . 

 in the morning it be not long before we discover the source of the 
 hideous uproar which have arouse we in the night . the iguanodon glade 
 be the scene of a horrible butchery . from the pool of blood and the 
 enormous lump of flesh scatter in every direction over the green 
 sward we imagine at first that a number of animal have be kill , 
 but on examine the remain more closely we discover that all this 
 carnage come from one of these unwieldy monster , which have be 
 literally tear to piece by some creature not large , perhaps , but far 
 more ferocious , than itself . 

 our two professor sit in absorbed argument , examine piece after 
 piece , which show the mark of savage tooth and of enormous claw . 

 " our judgment must still be in abeyance , " say Professor Challenger , 
 with a huge slab of whitish - color flesh across his knee . " the 
 indication would be consistent with the presence of a saber - toothe 
 tiger , such as be still find among the breccia of our cavern ; but 
 the creature actually see be undoubtedly of a large and more 
 reptilian character . personally , I should pronounce for allosaurus . " 

 " or megalosaurus , " say Summerlee . 

 " exactly . any one of the large carnivorous dinosaur would meet the 
 case . among they be to be find all the most terrible type of animal 
 life that have ever curse the earth or bless a museum . " he laugh 
 sonorously at his own conceit , for , though he have little sense of 
 humor , the crude pleasantry from his own lip move he always to 
 roar of appreciation . 

 " the less noise the well , " say Lord Roxton , curtly . " we do not   know 
 who or what may be near we . if this fellah come back for his 
 breakfast and catch we here we will not   have so much to laugh at . by 
 the way , what be this mark upon the iguanodon 's hide ? " 

 on the dull , scaly , slate - color skin somewhere above the shoulder , 
 there be a singular black circle of some substance which look like 
 asphalt . none of we could suggest what it mean , though Summerlee be 
 of opinion that he have see something similar upon one of the young 
 one two day before . Challenger say nothing , but look pompous and 
 puffy , as if he could if he would , so that finally Lord John ask his 
 opinion direct . 

 " if your lordship will graciously permit I to open my mouth , I shall 
 be happy to express my sentiment , " say he , with elaborate sarcasm . 
 " I be not in the habit of be take to task in the fashion which 
 seem to be customary with your lordship . I be not aware that it be 
 necessary to ask your permission before smile at a harmless 
 pleasantry . " 

 it be not until he have receive his apology that our touchy friend 
 would suffer himself to be appease . when at last his ruffle feeling 
 be at ease , he address we at some length from his seat upon a 
 fall tree , speak , as his habit be , as if he be impart most 
 precious information to a class of a thousand . 

 " with regard to the marking , " say he , " I be inclined to agree with my 
 friend and colleague , Professor Summerlee , that the stain be from 
 asphalt . as this plateau be , in its very nature , highly volcanic , and 
 as asphalt be a substance which one associate with plutonic force , I 
 can not doubt that it exist in the free liquid state , and that the 
 creature may have come in contact with it . a much more important 
 problem be the question as to the existence of the carnivorous monster 
 which have leave its trace in this glade . we know roughly that this 
 plateau be not large than an average English county . within this 
 confine space a certain number of creature , mostly type which have 
 pass away in the world below , have live together for innumerable 
 year . now , it be very clear to I that in so long a period one would 
 have expect that the carnivorous creature , multiply unchecked , 
 would have exhaust their food supply and have be compel to 
 either modify their flesh - eat habit or die of hunger . this we see 
 have not be so . we can only imagine , therefore , that the balance of 
 Nature be preserve by some check which limit the number of these 
 ferocious creature . one of the many interesting problem , therefore , 
 which await our solution be to discover what that check may be and how 
 it operate . I venture to trust that we may have some future 
 opportunity for the close study of the carnivorous dinosaur . " 

 " and I venture to trust we may not , " I observe . 

 the Professor only raise his great eyebrow , as the schoolmaster meet 
 the irrelevant observation of the naughty boy . 

 " perhaps Professor Summerlee may have an observation to make , " he say , 
 and the two savant ascend together into some rarefy scientific 
 atmosphere , where the possibility of a modification of the birth - rate 
 be weigh against the decline of the food supply as a check in the 
 struggle for existence . 

 that morning we map out a small portion of the plateau , avoid the 
 swamp of the pterodactyls , and keep to the east of our brook instead 
 of to the west . in that direction the country be still thickly 
 woode , with so much undergrowth that our progress be very slow . 

 I have dwell up to now upon the terror of Maple White Land ; but there 
 be another side to the subject , for all that morning we wander among 
 lovely flower - mostly , as I observe , white or yellow in color , these 
 being , as our professor explain , the primitive flower - shades . in 
 many place the ground be absolutely cover with they , and as we 
 walk ankle - deep on that wonderful yielding carpet , the scent be 
 almost intoxicate in its sweetness and intensity . the homely english 
 bee buzz everywhere around we . many of the tree under which we 
 pass have their branch bow down with fruit , some of which be of 
 familiar sort , while other variety be new . by observe which of 
 they be peck by the bird we avoid all danger of poison and add 
 a delicious variety to our food reserve . in the jungle which we 
 traverse be numerous hard - trodden path make by the wild beast , and 
 in the more marshy place we see a profusion of strange footmark , 
 include many of the iguanodon . once in a grove we observe several 
 of these great creature graze , and Lord John , with his glass , be 
 able to report that they also be spot with asphalt , though in a 
 different place to the one which we have examine in the morning . what 
 this phenomenon mean we could not imagine . 

 we see many small animal , such as porcupine , a scaly ant - eater , and a 
 wild pig , piebald in color and with long curve tusk . once , through a 
 break in the tree , we see a clear shoulder of green hill some distance 
 away , and across this a large dun - color animal be travel at a 
 considerable pace . it pass so swiftly that we be unable to say 
 what it be ; but if it be a deer , as be claim by Lord John , it 
 must have be as large as those monstrous irish elk which be still 
 dig up from time to time in the bog of my native land . 

 ever since the mysterious visit which have be pay to our camp we 
 always return to it with some misgiving . however , on this occasion 
 we find everything in order . 

 that evening we have a grand discussion upon our present situation and 
 future plan , which I must describe at some length , as it lead to a new 
 departure by which we be enable to gain a more complete knowledge of 
 Maple White Land than might have come in many week of explore . it 
 be Summerlee who open the debate . all day he have be querulous in 
 manner , and now some remark of Lord John 's as to what we should do on 
 the morrow bring all his bitterness to a head . 

 " what we ought to be do to - day , to - morrow , and all the time , " say 
 he , " be find some way out of the trap into which we have fall . 
 you be all turn your brain towards get into this country . I 
 say that we should be scheme how to get out of it . " 

 " I be surprised , sir , " boom Challenger , stroke his majestic beard , 
 " that any man of science should commit himself to so ignoble a 
 sentiment . you be in a land which offer such an inducement to the 
 ambitious naturalist as none ever have since the world begin , and you 
 suggest leave it before we have acquire more than the most 
 superficial knowledge of it or of its content . I expect well 
 thing of you , Professor Summerlee . " 

 " you must remember , " say Summerlee , sourly , " that I have a large class 
 in London who be at present at the mercy of an extremely inefficient 
 locum tenen . this make my situation different from your , Professor 
 Challenger , since , so far as I know , you have never be entrust with 
 any responsible educational work . " 

 " quite so , " say Challenger . " I have feel it to be a sacrilege to 
 divert a brain which be capable of the high original research to any 
 less object . that be why I have sternly set my face against any 
 proffer scholastic appointment . " 

 " for example ? " ask Summerlee , with a sneer ; but Lord John hasten to 
 change the conversation . 

 " I must say , " say he , " that I think it would be a mighty poor thing to 
 go back to London before I know a great deal more of this place than I 
 do at present . " 

 " I could never dare to walk into the back office of my paper and face 
 old McArdle , " say I.   you will excuse the frankness of this report , 
 will you not , sir ?   " he would never forgive I for leave such 
 unexhausted copy behind I . besides , so far as I can see it be not 
 worth discuss , since we can not   get down , even if we want . " 

 " our young friend make up for many obvious mental lacunae by some 
 measure of primitive common sense , " remark Challenger . " the 
 interest of his deplorable profession be immaterial to we ; but , as he 
 observe , we can not get down in any case , so it be a waste of energy to 
 discuss it . " 

 " it be a waste of energy to do anything else , " growl Summerlee from 
 behind his pipe . " let I remind you that we come here upon a perfectly 
 definite mission , entrust to we at the meeting of the Zoological 
 Institute in London . that mission be to test the truth of Professor 
 Challenger 's statement . those statement , as I be bind to admit , we 
 be now in a position to endorse . our ostensible work be therefore 
 do . as to the detail which remain to be work out upon this 
 plateau , it be so enormous that only a large expedition , with a very 
 special equipment , could hope to cope with it . should we attempt to do 
 so ourselves , the only possible result must be that we shall never 
 return with the important contribution to science which we have already 
 gain . Professor Challenger have devise mean for get we on to 
 this plateau when it appear to be inaccessible ; I think that we 
 should now call upon he to use the same ingenuity in get we back 
 to the world from which we come . " 

 I confess that as Summerlee state his view it strike I as altogether 
 reasonable . even Challenger be affect by the consideration that his 
 enemy would never stand confute if the confirmation of his 
 statement should never reach those who have doubt they . 

 " the problem of the descent be at first sight a formidable one , " say 
 he , " and yet I can not doubt that the intellect can solve it . I be 
 prepared to agree with our colleague that a protract stay in Maple 
 White Land be at present inadvisable , and that the question of our 
 return will soon have to be face . I absolutely refuse to leave , 
 however , until we have make at least a superficial examination of this 
 country , and be able to take back with we something in the nature of a 
 chart . " 

 Professor Summerlee give a snort of impatience . 

 " we have spend two long day in exploration , " say he , " and we be no 
 wise as to the actual geography of the place than when we start . it 
 be clear that it be all thickly woode , and it would take month to 
 penetrate it and to learn the relation of one part to another . if 
 there be some central peak it would be different , but it all slope 
 downward , so far as we can see . the far we go the less likely it 
 be that we will get any general view . " 

 it be at that moment that I have my inspiration . my eye chance to 
 light upon the enormous gnarl trunk of the gingko tree which cast its 
 huge branch over we . surely , if its bole exceed that of all 
 other , its height must do the same . if the rim of the plateau be 
 indeed the high point , then why should this mighty tree not prove to 
 be a watchtower which command the whole country ? now , ever since I 
 run wild as a lad in Ireland I have be a bold and skilled 
 tree - climber . my comrade might be my master on the rock , but I know 
 that I would be supreme among those branch . could I only get my leg 
 on to the low of the giant off - shoot , then it would be strange 
 indeed if I could not make my way to the top . my comrade be 
 delighted at my idea . 

 " our young friend , " say Challenger , bunch up the red apple of his 
 cheek , " be capable of acrobatic exertion which would be impossible to 
 a man of a more solid , though possibly of a more commanding , 
 appearance . I applaud his resolution . " 

 " by George , young fellah , you have   put your hand on it ! " say Lord John , 
 clap I on the back . " how we never come to think of it before I 
 can not   imagine ! there be not more than an hour of daylight leave , but if 
 you take your notebook you may be able to get some rough sketch of the 
 place . if we put these three ammunition case under the branch , I will 
 soon hoist you on to it . " 

 he stand on the box while I face the trunk , and be gently raise 
 I when Challenger spring forward and give I such a thrust with his 
 huge hand that he fairly shoot I into the tree . with both arm 
 clasp the branch , I scramble hard with my foot until I have work , 
 first my body , and then my knee , onto it . there be three excellent 
 off - shoot , like huge rung of a ladder , above my head , and a tangle of 
 convenient branch beyond , so that I clamber onwards with such speed 
 that I soon lose sight of the ground and have nothing but foliage 
 beneath I . now and then I encounter a check , and once I have to shin 
 up a creeper for eight or ten foot , but I make excellent progress , and 
 the booming of Challenger 's voice seem to be a great distance beneath 
 I . the tree be , however , enormous , and , look upwards , I could see 
 no thinning of the leaf above my head . there be some thick , 
 bush - like clump which seem to be a parasite upon a branch up which I 
 be swarm . I lean my head round it in order to see what be 
 beyond , and I nearly fall out of the tree in my surprise and horror at 
 what I see . 

 a face be gaze into mine - at the distance of only a foot or two . 
 the creature that own it have be crouch behind the parasite , and 
 have look round it at the same instant that I do . it be a human 
 face - or at least it be far more human than any monkey 's that I have 
 ever see . it be long , whitish , and blotch with pimple , the nose 
 flatten , and the low jaw project , with a bristle of coarse 
 whisker round the chin . the eye , which be under thick and heavy 
 brow , be bestial and ferocious , and as it open its mouth to snarl 
 what sound like a curse at I I observe that it have curve , sharp 
 canine tooth . for an instant I read hatred and menace in the evil 
 eye . then , as quick as a flash , come an expression of overpower 
 fear . there be a crash of broken bough as it dive wildly down into 
 the tangle of green . I catch a glimpse of a hairy body like that of a 
 reddish pig , and then it be go amid a swirl of leaf and branch . 

 " what be the matter ? " shout Roxton from below . " anything wrong with 
 you ? " 

 " do you see it ? " I cry , with my arm round the branch and all my 
 nerve tingle . 

 " we hear a row , as if your foot have slip . what be it ? " 

 I be so shocked at the sudden and strange appearance of this ape - man 
 that I hesitate whether I should not climb down again and tell my 
 experience to my companion . but I be already so far up the great 
 tree that it seem a humiliation to return without have carry out 
 my mission . 

 after a long pause , therefore , to recover my breath and my courage , I 
 continue my ascent . once I put my weight upon a rotten branch and 
 swing for a few second by my hand , but in the main it be all easy 
 climbing . gradually the leaf thin around I , and I be aware , 
 from the wind upon my face , that I have top all the tree of the 
 forest . I be determine , however , not to look about I before I have 
 reach the very high point , so I scramble on until I have get so 
 far that the topmost branch be bend beneath my weight . there I 
 settle into a convenient fork , and , balance myself securely , I find 
 myself look down at a most wonderful panorama of this strange 
 country in which we find ourselves . 

 the sun be just above the western sky - line , and the evening be a 
 particularly bright and clear one , so that the whole extent of the 
 plateau be visible beneath I . it be , as see from this height , of 
 an oval contour , with a breadth of about thirty mile and a width of 
 twenty . its general shape be that of a shallow funnel , all the side 
 slop down to a considerable lake in the center . this lake may have 
 be ten mile in circumference , and lie very green and beautiful in 
 the evening light , with a thick fringe of reed at its edge , and with 
 its surface break by several yellow sandbank , which gleam golden in 
 the mellow sunshine . a number of long dark object , which be too 
 large for alligator and too long for canoe , lie upon the edge of 
 these patch of sand . with my glass I could clearly see that they 
 be alive , but what their nature might be I could not imagine . 

 from the side of the plateau on which we be , slope of woodland , with 
 occasional glade , stretch down for five or six mile to the central 
 lake . I could see at my very foot the glade of the iguanodon , and 
 far off be a round opening in the tree which mark the swamp of 
 the pterodactyls . on the side face I , however , the plateau 
 present a very different aspect . there the basalt cliff of the 
 outside be reproduce upon the inside , form an escarpment about 
 two hundred foot high , with a woody slope beneath it . along the base 
 of these red cliff , some distance above the ground , I could see a 
 number of dark hole through the glass , which I conjecture to be the 
 mouth of cave . at the opening of one of these something white be 
 shimmering , but I be unable to make out what it be . I sit chart 
 the country until the sun have set and it be so dark that I could no 
 long distinguish detail . then I climb down to my companion 
 wait for I so eagerly at the bottom of the great tree . for once I 
 be the hero of the expedition . alone I have think of it , and alone I 
 have do it ; and here be the chart which would save we a month 's blind 
 groping among unknown danger . each of they shake I solemnly by the 
 hand . 

 but before they discuss the detail of my map I have to tell they of 
 my encounter with the ape - man among the branch . 

 " he have be there all the time , " say I. 

 " how do you know that ? " ask Lord John . 

 " because I have never be without that feeling that something 
 malevolent be watch we . I mention it to you , Professor 
 Challenger . " 

 " our young friend certainly say something of the kind . he be also the 
 one among we who be endow with that celtic temperament which would 
 make he sensitive to such impression . " 

 " the whole theory of telepathy - - " begin Summerlee , fill his pipe . 

 " be too vast to be now discuss , " say Challenger , with decision . 
 " tell I , now , " he add , with the air of a bishop address a 
 Sunday - school , " do you happen to observe whether the creature could 
 cross its thumb over its palm ? " 

 " no , indeed . " 

 " have it a tail ? " 

 " no . " 

 " be the foot prehensile ? " 

 " I do not think it could have make off so fast among the branch if it 
 could not get a grip with its foot . " 

 " in South America there be , if my memory serve I - you will check the 
 observation , Professor Summerlee - some thirty - six specie of monkey , 
 but the anthropoid ape be unknown . it be clear , however , that he 
 exist in this country , and that he be not the hairy , gorilla - like 
 variety , which be never see out of Africa or the East . "   I be 
 inclined to interpolate , as I look at he , that I have see his first 
 cousin in Kensington .   " this be a whiskered and colorless type , the 
 latter characteristic pointing to the fact that he spend his day in 
 arboreal seclusion . the question which we have to face be whether he 
 approach more closely to the ape or the man . in the latter case , he 
 may well approximate to what the vulgar have call the ' miss link . ' 
 the solution of this problem be our immediate duty . " 

 " it be nothing of the sort , " say Summerlee , abruptly . " now that , 
 through the intelligence and activity of Mr. Malone "   I can not help 
 quote the word , " we have get our chart , our one and only immediate 
 duty be to get ourselves safe and sound out of this awful place . " 

 " the flesh - pot of civilization , " groan Challenger . 

 " the ink - pot of civilization , sir . it be our task to put on record 
 what we have see , and to leave the further exploration to other . you 
 all agree as much before Mr. Malone get we the chart . " 

 " well , " say Challenger , " I admit that my mind will be more at ease 
 when I be assure that the result of our expedition have be convey 
 to our friend . how we be to get down from this place I have not as 
 yet an idea . I have never yet encounter any problem , however , which 
 my inventive brain be unable to solve , and I promise you that 
 to - morrow I will turn my attention to the question of our descent . " 
 and so the matter be allow to rest . 

 but that evening , by the light of the fire and of a single candle , the 
 first map of the lost world be elaborate . every detail which I have 
 roughly note from my watch - tower be draw out in its relative place . 
 Challenger 's pencil hover over the great blank which mark the lake . 

 " what shall we call it ? " he ask . 

 " why should you not take the chance of perpetuate your own name ? " 
 say Summerlee , with his usual touch of acidity . 

 " I trust , sir , that my name will have other and more personal claim 
 upon posterity , " say Challenger , severely . " any ignoramus can hand 
 down his worthless memory by impose it upon a mountain or a river . I 
 need no such monument . " 

 Summerlee , with a twisted smile , be about to make some fresh assault 
 when Lord John hasten to intervene . 

 " it be up to you , young fellah , to name the lake , " say he . " you see it 
 first , and , by George , if you choose to put ' Lake Malone ' on it , no one 
 have a well right . " 

 " by all mean . let our young friend give it a name , " say Challenger . 

 " then , " say I , blushing , I dare say , as I say it , " let it be name 
 Lake Gladys . " 

 " do not   you think the Central Lake would be more descriptive ? " remark 
 Summerlee . 

 " I should prefer Lake Gladys . " 

 Challenger look at I sympathetically , and shake his great head in 
 mock disapproval . " boy will be boy , " say he . " Lake Gladys let it 
 be . " 




  CHAPTER XII 

  " it be dreadful in the Forest " 

 I have say - or perhaps I have not say , for my memory play I sad 
 trick these day - that I glow with pride when three such man as my 
 comrade thank I for have save , or at least greatly help , the 
 situation . as the youngster of the party , not merely in year , but in 
 experience , character , knowledge , and all that go to make a man , I 
 have be overshadow from the first . and now I be come into my 
 own . I warm at the thought . alas ! for the pride which go before a 
 fall ! that little glow of self - satisfaction , that add measure of 
 self - confidence , be to lead I on that very night to the most 
 dreadful experience of my life , end with a shock which turn my 
 heart sick when I think of it . 

 it come about in this way . I have be unduly excite by the adventure 
 of the tree , and sleep seem to be impossible . Summerlee be on 
 guard , sit hunch over our small fire , a quaint , angular figure , 
 his rifle across his knee and his point , goat - like beard wagging 
 with each weary nod of his head . Lord John lie silent , wrap in the 
 south american poncho which he wear , while Challenger snore with a 
 roll and rattle which reverberate through the wood . the full moon 
 be shin brightly , and the air be crisply cold . what a night for a 
 walk ! and then suddenly come the thought , " why not ? " suppose I stole 
 softly away , suppose I make my way down to the central lake , suppose I 
 be back at breakfast with some record of the place - would I not in 
 that case be think an even more worthy associate ? then , if Summerlee 
 carry the day and some mean of escape be find , we should return 
 to London with first - hand knowledge of the central mystery of the 
 plateau , to which I alone , of all man , would have penetrate . I think 
 of Gladys , with she " there be heroism all round we . " I seem to hear 
 her voice as she say it . I think also of McArdle . what a three 
 column article for the paper ! what a foundation for a career ! a 
 correspondentship in the next great war might be within my reach . I 
 clutch at a gun - my pocket be full of cartridge - and , part the 
 thorn bush at the gate of our zareba , quickly slip out . my last 
 glance show I the unconscious Summerlee , most futile of sentinel , 
 still nod away like a queer mechanical toy in front of the 
 smoulder fire . 

 I have not go a hundred yard before I deeply repent my rashness . I 
 may have say somewhere in this chronicle that I be too imaginative to 
 be a really courageous man , but that I have an overpower fear of 
 seem afraid . this be the power which now carry I onwards . I 
 simply could not slink back with nothing do . even if my comrade 
 should not have miss I , and should never know of my weakness , there 
 would still remain some intolerable self - shame in my own soul . and yet 
 I shudder at the position in which I find myself , and would have 
 give all I possess at that moment to have be honorably free of the 
 whole business . 

 it be dreadful in the forest . the tree grow so thickly and their 
 foliage spread so widely that I could see nothing of the moon - light 
 save that here and there the high branch make a tangled filigree 
 against the starry sky . as the eye become more used to the obscurity 
 one learn that there be different degree of darkness among the 
 tree - that some be dimly visible , while between and among they there 
 be coal - black shadowed patch , like the mouth of cave , from which 
 I shrink in horror as I pass . I think of the despairing yell of 
 the torture iguanodon - that dreadful cry which have echo through the 
 wood . I think , too , of the glimpse I have in the light of Lord 
 John 's torch of that bloated , warty , blood - slaver muzzle . even now 
 I be on its hunting - ground . at any instant it might spring upon I 
 from the shadow - this nameless and horrible monster . I stop , and , 
 pick a cartridge from my pocket , I open the breech of my gun . as 
 I touch the lever my heart leap within I . it be the shot - gun , 
 not the rifle , which I have take ! 

 again the impulse to return sweep over I . here , surely , be a most 
 excellent reason for my failure - one for which no one would think the 
 less of I . but again the foolish pride fight against that very word . 
 I could not - must not - fail . after all , my rifle would probably have 
 be as useless as a shot - gun against such danger as I might meet . if 
 I be to go back to camp to change my weapon I could hardly expect to 
 enter and to leave again without be see . in that case there would 
 be explanation , and my attempt would no long be all my own . after a 
 little hesitation , then , I screw up my courage and continue upon my 
 way , my useless gun under my arm . 

 the darkness of the forest have be alarming , but even bad be the 
 white , still flood of moonlight in the open glade of the iguanodon . 
 Hid among the bush , I look out at it . none of the great brute 
 be in sight . perhaps the tragedy which have befall one of they have 
 drive they from their feeding - ground . in the misty , silvery night I 
 could see no sign of any live thing . take courage , therefore , I 
 slip rapidly across it , and among the jungle on the farth side I 
 pick up once again the brook which be my guide . it be a cheery 
 companion , gurgle and chuckle as it run , like the dear old 
 trout - stream in the West Country where I have fish at night in my 
 boyhood . so long as I follow it down I must come to the lake , and so 
 long as I follow it back I must come to the camp . often I have to 
 lose sight of it on account of the tangle brush - wood , but I be always 
 within earshot of its tinkle and splash . 

 as one descend the slope the wood become thin , and bush , with 
 occasional high tree , take the place of the forest . I could make good 
 progress , therefore , and I could see without be see . I pass 
 close to the pterodactyl swamp , and as I do so , with a dry , crisp , 
 leathery rattle of wing , one of these great creature - it be twenty 
 foot at least from tip to tip - rise up from somewhere near I and 
 soar into the air . as it pass across the face of the moon the 
 light shine clearly through the membranous wing , and it look like a 
 fly skeleton against the white , tropical radiance . I crouch low 
 among the bush , for I know from past experience that with a single 
 cry the creature could bring a hundred of its loathsome mate about my 
 ear . it be not until it have settle again that I dare to steal 
 onwards upon my journey . 

 the night have be exceedingly still , but as I advance I become 
 conscious of a low , rumble sound , a continuous murmur , somewhere in 
 front of I . this grow louder as I proceed , until at last it be 
 clearly quite close to I . when I stand still the sound be constant , 
 so that it seem to come from some stationary cause . it be like a 
 boiling kettle or the bubbling of some great pot . soon I come upon the 
 source of it , for in the center of a small clearing I find a lake - or 
 a pool , rather , for it be not large than the basin of the Trafalgar 
 Square fountain - of some black , pitch - like stuff , the surface of which 
 rise and fall in great blister of burst gas . the air above it be 
 shimmer with heat , and the ground round be so hot that I could 
 hardly bear to lay my hand on it . it be clear that the great volcanic 
 outburst which have raise this strange plateau so many year ago have 
 not yet entirely spend its force . blacken rock and mound of lava 
 I have already see everywhere peep out from amid the luxuriant 
 vegetation which drape they , but this asphalt pool in the jungle be 
 the first sign that we have of actual exist activity on the slope of 
 the ancient crater . I have no time to examine it far for I have need 
 to hurry if I be to be back in camp in the morning . 

 it be a fearsome walk , and one which will be with I so long as memory 
 hold . in the great moonlight clearing I slunk along among the 
 shadow on the margin . in the jungle I creep forward , stop with a 
 beat heart whenever I hear , as I often do , the crash of break 
 branch as some wild beast go past . now and then great shadow 
 loom up for an instant and be go - great , silent shadow which 
 seem to prowl upon pad foot . how often I stop with the 
 intention of return , and yet every time my pride conquer my fear , 
 and send I on again until my object should be attain . 

 at last   my watch show that it be one in the morning   I see the 
 gleam of water amid the opening of the jungle , and ten minute later I 
 be among the reed upon the border of the central lake . I be 
 exceedingly dry , so I lie down and take a long draught of its water , 
 which be fresh and cold . there be a broad pathway with many track 
 upon it at the spot which I have find , so that it be clearly one of 
 the drinking - place of the animal . close to the water 's edge there 
 be a huge isolate block of lava . up this I climb , and , lie on 
 the top , I have an excellent view in every direction . 

 the first thing which I see fill I with amazement . when I describe 
 the view from the summit of the great tree , I say that on the far 
 cliff I could see a number of dark spot , which appear to be the 
 mouth of cave . now , as I look up at the same cliff , I see disc 
 of light in every direction , ruddy , clearly - define patch , like the 
 port - hole of a liner in the darkness . for a moment I think it be 
 the lava - glow from some volcanic action ; but this could not be so . any 
 volcanic action would surely be down in the hollow and not high among 
 the rock . what , then , be the alternative ? it be wonderful , and yet 
 it must surely be . these ruddy spot must be the reflection of fire 
 within the cave - fire which could only be light by the hand of man . 
 there be human being , then , upon the plateau . how gloriously my 
 expedition be justify ! here be news indeed for we to bear back 
 with we to London ! 

 for a long time I lay and watch these red , quiver blotch of 
 light . I suppose they be ten mile off from I , yet even at that 
 distance one could observe how , from time to time , they twinkle or 
 be obscure as someone pass before they . what would I not have 
 give to be able to crawl up to they , to peep in , and to take back some 
 word to my comrade as to the appearance and character of the race who 
 live in so strange a place ! it be out of the question for the 
 moment , and yet surely we could not leave the plateau until we have some 
 definite knowledge upon the point . 

 Lake Gladys - my own lake - lie like a sheet of quicksilver before I , 
 with a reflect moon shin brightly in the center of it . it be 
 shallow , for in many place I see low sandbank protrude above the 
 water . everywhere upon the still surface I could see sign of life , 
 sometimes mere ring and ripple in the water , sometimes the gleam of a 
 great silver - side fish in the air , sometimes the arched , slate - color 
 back of some pass monster . once upon a yellow sandbank I see a 
 creature like a huge swan , with a clumsy body and a high , flexible 
 neck , shuffle about upon the margin . presently it plunge in , and 
 for some time I could see the arched neck and dart head undulating 
 over the water . then it dive , and I see it no more . 

 my attention be soon draw away from these distant sight and bring 
 back to what be go on at my very foot . two creature like large 
 armadillo have come down to the drinking - place , and be squat at 
 the edge of the water , their long , flexible tongue like red ribbon 
 shoot in and out as they lap . a huge deer , with branch horn , 
 a magnificent creature which carry itself like a king , come down with 
 its doe and two fawn and drink beside the armadillo . no such deer 
 exist anywhere else upon earth , for the moose or elk which I have see 
 would hardly have reach its shoulder . presently it give a warning 
 snort , and be off with its family among the reed , while the 
 armadillo also scuttle for shelter . a new - comer , a most monstrous 
 animal , be come down the path . 

 for a moment I wonder where I could have see that ungainly shape , 
 that arch back with triangular fringe along it , that strange 
 bird - like head hold close to the ground . then it come back , to I . it 
 be the stegosaurus - the very creature which Maple White have preserve 
 in his sketch - book , and which have be the first object which arrest 
 the attention of Challenger ! there he be - perhaps the very speciman 
 which the american artist have encounter . the ground shake beneath 
 his tremendous weight , and his gulping of water resound through the 
 still night . for five minute he be so close to my rock that by 
 stretch out my hand I could have touch the hideous wave hackle 
 upon his back . then he lumber away and be lose among the boulder . 

 look at my watch , I see that it be half - past two o'clock , and high 
 time , therefore , that I start upon my homeward journey . there be no 
 difficulty about the direction in which I should return for all along I 
 have keep the little brook upon my left , and it open into the central 
 lake within a stone's - throw of the boulder upon which I have be lie . 
 I set off , therefore , in high spirit , for I feel that I have do good 
 work and be bring back a fine budget of news for my companion . 
 foremost of all , of course , be the sight of the fiery cave and the 
 certainty that some troglodytic race inhabit they . but besides that 
 I could speak from experience of the central lake . I could testify 
 that it be full of strange creature , and I have see several land 
 form of primeval life which we have not before encounter . I 
 reflect as I walk that few man in the world could have spend a 
 stranger night or add more to human knowledge in the course of it . 

 I be plod up the slope , turn these thought over in my mind , 
 and have reach a point which may have be half - way to home , when my 
 mind be bring back to my own position by a strange noise behind I . 
 it be something between a snore and a growl , low , deep , and 
 exceedingly menacing . some strange creature be evidently near I , but 
 nothing could be see , so I hasten more rapidly upon my way . I have 
 traverse half a mile or so when suddenly the sound be repeat , still 
 behind I , but louder and more menacing than before . my heart stand 
 still within I as it flash across I that the beast , whatever it 
 be , must surely be after I . my skin grow cold and my hair rise at 
 the thought . that these monster should tear each other to piece be 
 a part of the strange struggle for existence , but that they should turn 
 upon modern man , that they should deliberately track and hunt down the 
 predominant human , be a staggering and fearsome thought . I remember 
 again the blood - beslobbere face which we have see in the glare of Lord 
 John 's torch , like some horrible vision from the deep circle of 
 Dante 's hell . with my knee shake beneath I , I stand and glare 
 with start eye down the moonlit path which lie behind I . all be 
 quiet as in a dream landscape . silver clearing and the black patch 
 of the bush - nothing else could I see . then from out of the silence , 
 imminent and threatening , there come once more that low , throaty 
 croaking , far louder and close than before . there could no long be 
 a doubt . something be on my trail , and be close in upon I every 
 minute . 

 I stand like a man paralyze , still star at the ground which I have 
 traverse . then suddenly I see it . there be movement among the 
 bush at the far end of the clearing which I have just traverse . a 
 great dark shadow disengage itself and hop out into the clear 
 moonlight . I say " hop " advisedly , for the beast move like a 
 kangaroo , spring along in an erect position upon its powerful hind 
 leg , while its front one be hold bent in front of it . it be of 
 enormous size and power , like an erect elephant , but its movement , in 
 spite of its bulk , be exceedingly alert . for a moment , as I see its 
 shape , I hop that it be an iguanodon , which I know to be harmless , 
 but , ignorant as I be , I soon see that this be a very different 
 creature . instead of the gentle , deer - shape head of the great 
 three - toed leaf - eater , this beast have a broad , squat , toad - like face 
 like that which have alarm we in our camp . his ferocious cry and the 
 horrible energy of his pursuit both assure I that this be surely one 
 of the great flesh - eat dinosaur , the most terrible beast which 
 have ever walk this earth . as the huge brute lop along it drop 
 forward upon its fore - paw and bring its nose to the ground every 
 twenty yard or so . it be smell out my trail . sometimes , for an 
 instant , it be at fault . then it would catch it up again and come 
 bound swiftly along the path I have take . 

 even now when I think of that nightmare the sweat break out upon my 
 brow . what could I do ? my useless fowling - piece be in my hand . what 
 help could I get from that ? I look desperately round for some rock 
 or tree , but I be in a bushy jungle with nothing high than a sapling 
 within sight , while I know that the creature behind I could tear down 
 an ordinary tree as though it be a reed . my only possible chance lie 
 in flight . I could not move swiftly over the rough , broken ground , but 
 as I look round I in despair I see a well - mark , hard - beat path 
 which run across in front of I . we have see several of the sort , the 
 run of various wild beast , during our expedition . along this I 
 could perhaps hold my own , for I be a fast runner , and in excellent 
 condition . fling away my useless gun , I set myself to do such a 
 half - mile as I have never do before or since . my limb ache , my 
 chest heave , I feel that my throat would burst for want of air , and 
 yet with that horror behind I I run and I run and run . at last I 
 pause , hardly able to move . for a moment I think that I have throw 
 he off . the path lie still behind I . and then suddenly , with a 
 crashing and a rending , a thudding of giant foot and a panting of 
 monster lung the beast be upon I once more . he be at my very 
 heel . I be lose . 

 Madman that I be to linger so long before I flee ! up to then he have 
 hunt by scent , and his movement be slow . but he have actually see 
 I as I start to run . from then onwards he have hunt by sight , for 
 the path show he where I have go . now , as he come round the curve , 
 he be spring in great bound . the moonlight shine upon his huge 
 project eye , the row of enormous tooth in his open mouth , and the 
 gleam fringe of claw upon his short , powerful forearm . with a 
 scream of terror I turn and rush wildly down the path . behind I 
 the thick , gasp breathing of the creature sound louder and louder . 
 his heavy footfall be beside I . every instant I expect to feel his 
 grip upon my back . and then suddenly there come a crash - I be fall 
 through space , and everything beyond be darkness and rest . 

 as I emerge from my unconsciousness - which could not , I think , have 
 last more than a few minute - I be aware of a most dreadful and 
 penetrate smell . put out my hand in the darkness I come upon 
 something which feel like a huge lump of meat , while my other hand 
 close upon a large bone . up above I there be a circle of starlit 
 sky , which show I that I be lie at the bottom of a deep pit . 
 slowly I stagger to my foot and feel myself all over . I be stiff 
 and sore from head to foot , but there be no limb which would not move , 
 no joint which would not bend . as the circumstance of my fall come 
 back into my confused brain , I look up in terror , expect to see 
 that dreadful head silhouette against the pal sky . there be no 
 sign of the monster , however , nor could I hear any sound from above . I 
 begin to walk slowly round , therefore , feel in every direction to 
 find out what this strange place could be into which I have be so 
 opportunely precipitate . 

 it be , as I have say , a pit , with sharply - slop wall and a level 
 bottom about twenty foot across . this bottom be litter with great 
 gobbet of flesh , most of which be in the last state of putridity . 
 the atmosphere be poisonous and horrible . after trip and 
 stumble over these lump of decay , I come suddenly against something 
 hard , and I find that an upright post be firmly fix in the center 
 of the hollow . it be so high that I could not reach the top of it 
 with my hand , and it appear to be cover with grease . 

 suddenly I remember that I have a tin box of wax - vesta in my pocket . 
 strike one of they , I be able at last to form some opinion of this 
 place into which I have fall . there could be no question as to its 
 nature . it be a trap - make by the hand of man . the post in the 
 center , some nine foot long , be sharpen at the upper end , and be 
 black with the stale blood of the creature who have be impale upon 
 it . the remain scatter about be fragment of the victim , which 
 have be cut away in order to clear the stake for the next who might 
 blunder in . I remember that Challenger have declare that man could 
 not exist upon the plateau , since with his feeble weapon he could not 
 hold his own against the monster who roam over it . but now it be 
 clear enough how it could be do . in their narrow - mouthed cave the 
 native , whoever they might be , have refuge into which the huge 
 saurian could not penetrate , while with their develop brain they 
 be capable of set such trap , cover with branch , across the 
 path which mark the run of the animal as would destroy they in 
 spite of all their strength and activity . Man be always the master . 

 the slop wall of the pit be not difficult for an active man to 
 climb , but I hesitate long before I trust myself within reach of the 
 dreadful creature which have so nearly destroy I . how do I know 
 that he be not lurk in the near clump of bush , wait for my 
 reappearance ? I take heart , however , as I recall a conversation 
 between Challenger and Summerlee upon the habit of the great saurian . 
 both be agree that the monster be practically brainless , that 
 there be no room for reason in their tiny cranial cavity , and that 
 if they have disappear from the rest of the world it be assuredly on 
 account of their own stupidity , which make it impossible for they to 
 adapt themselves to change condition . 

 to lie in wait for I now would mean that the creature have appreciate 
 what have happen to I , and this in turn would argue some power 
 connect cause and effect . surely it be more likely that a 
 brainless creature , act solely by vague predatory instinct , would 
 give up the chase when I disappear , and , after a pause of 
 astonishment , would wander away in search of some other prey ? I 
 clamber to the edge of the pit and look over . the star be 
 fade , the sky be whiten , and the cold wind of morning blew 
 pleasantly upon my face . I could see or hear nothing of my enemy . 
 slowly I climb out and sit for a while upon the ground , ready to 
 spring back into my refuge if any danger should appear . then , 
 reassure by the absolute stillness and by the grow light , I take my 
 courage in both hand and steal back along the path which I have come . 
 some distance down it I pick up my gun , and shortly afterwards strike 
 the brook which be my guide . so , with many a frightened backward 
 glance , I make for home . 

 and suddenly there come something to remind I of my absent companion . 
 in the clear , still morning air there sound far away the sharp , hard 
 note of a single rifle - shot . I pause and listen , but there be 
 nothing more . for a moment I be shock at the thought that some 
 sudden danger might have befall they . but then a simple and more 
 natural explanation come to my mind . it be now broad daylight . no 
 doubt my absence have be notice . they have imagine , that I be lose 
 in the wood , and have fire this shot to guide I home . it be true 
 that we have make a strict resolution against firing , but if it seem 
 to they that I might be in danger they would not hesitate . it be for 
 I now to hurry on as fast as possible , and so to reassure they . 

 I be weary and spend , so my progress be not so fast as I wish ; but 
 at last I come into region which I know . there be the swamp of the 
 pterodactyls upon my left ; there in front of I be the glade of the 
 iguanodon . now I be in the last belt of tree which separate I 
 from Fort Challenger . I raise my voice in a cheery shout to allay 
 their fear . no answering greeting come back to I . my heart sink at 
 that ominous stillness . I quicken my pace into a run . the zareba 
 rise before I , even as I have leave it , but the gate be open . I rush 
 in . in the cold , morning light it be a fearful sight which meet my 
 eye . our effect be scatter in wild confusion over the ground ; my 
 comrade have disappear , and close to the smoulder ash of our 
 fire the grass be stain crimson with a hideous pool of blood . 

 I be so stunned by this sudden shock that for a time I must have 
 nearly lose my reason . I have a vague recollection , as one remember a 
 bad dream , of rush about through the wood all round the empty camp , 
 call wildly for my companion . no answer come back from the silent 
 shadow . the horrible thought that I might never see they again , that 
 I might find myself abandon all alone in that dreadful place , with no 
 possible way of descend into the world below , that I might live and 
 die in that nightmare country , drive I to desperation . I could have 
 tear my hair and beat my head in my despair . only now do I realize 
 how I have learn to lean upon my companion , upon the serene 
 self - confidence of Challenger , and upon the masterful , humorous 
 coolness of Lord John Roxton . without they I be like a child in the 
 dark , helpless and powerless . I do not know which way to turn or what 
 I should do first . 

 after a period , during which I sit in bewilderment , I set myself to try 
 and discover what sudden misfortune could have befall my companion . 
 the whole disordered appearance of the camp show that there have be 
 some sort of attack , and the rifle - shoot no doubt mark the time when 
 it have occur . that there should have be only one shot show that 
 it have be all over in an instant . the rifle still lie upon the 
 ground , and one of they - Lord John 's - have the empty cartridge in the 
 breech . the blanket of Challenger and of Summerlee beside the fire 
 suggest that they have be asleep at the time . the case of 
 ammunition and of food be scatter about in a wild litter , together 
 with our unfortunate camera and plate - carrier , but none of they be 
 miss . on the other hand , all the expose provision - and I 
 remember that there be a considerable quantity of they - be go . 
 they be animal , then , and not native , who have make the inroad , for 
 surely the latter would have leave nothing behind . 

 but if animal , or some single terrible animal , then what have become of 
 my comrade ? a ferocious beast would surely have destroy they and 
 leave their remain . it be true that there be that one hideous pool of 
 blood , which tell of violence . such a monster as have pursue I during 
 the night could have carry away a victim as easily as a cat would a 
 mouse . in that case the other would have follow in pursuit . but 
 then they would assuredly have take their rifle with they . the more 
 I try to think it out with my confused and weary brain the less could 
 I find any plausible explanation . I search round in the forest , but 
 could see no track which could help I to a conclusion . once I lose 
 myself , and it be only by good luck , and after an hour of wandering , 
 that I find the camp once more . 

 suddenly a thought come to I and bring some little comfort to my 
 heart . I be not absolutely alone in the world . down at the bottom of 
 the cliff , and within call of I , be wait the faithful Zambo . I 
 go to the edge of the plateau and look over . sure enough , he be 
 squat among his blanket beside his fire in his little camp . but , 
 to my amazement , a second man be seat in front of he . for an 
 instant my heart leap for joy , as I think that one of my comrade 
 have make his way safely down . but a second glance dispel the hope . 
 the rise sun shone red upon the man 's skin . he be an Indian . I 
 shout loudly and wave my handkerchief . presently Zambo look up , 
 wave his hand , and turn to ascend the pinnacle . in a short time he 
 be stand close to I and listen with deep distress to the story 
 which I tell he . 

 " Devil get they for sure , Massa Malone , " say he . " you get into the 
 devil 's country , sah , and he take you all to himself . you take advice , 
 Massa Malone , and come down quick , else he get you as well . " 

 " how can I come down , Zambo ? " 

 " you get creeper from tree , Massa Malone . throw they over here . I 
 make fast to this stump , and so you have bridge . " 

 " we have think of that . there be no creeper here which could bear 
 we . " 

 " send for rope , Massa Malone . " 

 " who can I send , and where ? " 

 " send to indian village , sah . plenty hide rope in indian village . 
 indian down below ; send he . " 

 " who be he ? 

 " one of our Indians . other one beat he and take away his pay . he 
 come back to we . ready now to take letter , bring rope , - anything . " 

 to take a letter ! why not ? perhaps he might bring help ; but in any 
 case he would ensure that our life be not spend for nothing , and 
 that news of all that we have win for Science should reach our friend 
 at home . I have two complete letter already wait . I would spend 
 the day in write a third , which would bring my experience absolutely 
 up to date . the Indian could bear this back to the world . I order 
 Zambo , therefore , to come again in the evening , and I spend my 
 miserable and lonely day in record my own adventure of the night 
 before . I also draw up a note , to be give to any white merchant or 
 captain of a steam - boat whom the Indian could find , implore they to 
 see that rope be send to we , since our life must depend upon it . 
 these document I throw to Zambo in the evening , and also my purse , 
 which contain three english sovereign . these be to be give to 
 the Indian , and he be promise twice as much if he return with the 
 rope . 

 so now you will understand , my dear Mr. McArdle , how this communication 
 reach you , and you will also know the truth , in case you never hear 
 again from your unfortunate correspondent . to - night I be too weary and 
 too depressed to make my plan . to - morrow I must think out some way by 
 which I shall keep in touch with this camp , and yet search round for 
 any trace of my unhappy friend . 




  CHAPTER XIII 

  " A Sight which I shall never forget " 

 just as the sun be set upon that melancholy night I see the lonely 
 figure of the Indian upon the vast plain beneath I , and I watch he , 
 our one faint hope of salvation , until he disappear in the rise 
 mist of evening which lay , rose - tint from the set sun , between 
 the far - off river and I . 

 it be quite dark when I at last turn back to our stricken camp , and 
 my last vision as I go be the red gleam of Zambo 's fire , the one 
 point of light in the wide world below , as be his faithful presence in 
 my own shadowed soul . and yet I feel happy than I have do since 
 this crush blow have fall upon I , for it be good to think that 
 the world should know what we have do , so that at the bad our name 
 should not perish with our body , but should go down to posterity 
 associate with the result of our labor . 

 it be an awesome thing to sleep in that ill - fat camp ; and yet it be 
 even more unnerving to do so in the jungle . one or the other it must 
 be . Prudence , on the one hand , warn I that I should remain on 
 guard , but exhaust nature , on the other , declare that I should do 
 nothing of the kind . I climb up on to a limb of the great gingko 
 tree , but there be no secure perch on its rounded surface , and I 
 should certainly have fall off and break my neck the moment I begin 
 to doze . I get down , therefore , and ponder over what I should do . 
 finally , I close the door of the zareba , light three separate fire in a 
 triangle , and have eat a hearty supper drop off into a profound 
 sleep , from which I have a strange and most welcome awakening . in the 
 early morning , just as day be break , a hand be lay upon my arm , 
 and start up , with all my nerve in a tingle and my hand feel for 
 a rifle , I give a cry of joy as in the cold gray light I see Lord John 
 Roxton kneel beside I . 

 it be he - and yet it be not he . I have leave he calm in his bearing , 
 correct in his person , prim in his dress . now he be pale and 
 wild - eye , gasp as he breathe like one who have run far and fast . 
 his gaunt face be scratch and bloody , his clothe be hang in 
 rag , and his hat be go . I star in amazement , but he give I no 
 chance for question . he be grab at our store all the time he 
 speak . 

 " quick , young fellah ! quick ! " he cry . " every moment count . get 
 the rifle , both of they . I have the other two . now , all the 
 cartridge you can gather . fill up your pocket . now , some food . 
 half a dozen tin will do . that be all right ! do not   wait to talk or 
 think . get a move on , or we be do ! " 

 still half - awake , and unable to imagine what it all might mean , I find 
 myself hurry madly after he through the wood , a rifle under each 
 arm and a pile of various store in my hand . he dodge in and out 
 through the thickest of the scrub until he come to a dense clump of 
 brush - wood . into this he rush , regardless of thorn , and throw 
 himself into the heart of it , pull I down by his side . 

 " there ! " he pant . " I think we be safe here . they will make for the 
 camp as sure as fate . it will be their first idea . but this should 
 puzzle them . " 

 " what be it all ? " I ask , when I have get my breath . " where be the 
 professor ? and who be it that be after we ? " 

 " the ape - man , " he cry . " my God , what brute ! do not   raise your 
 voice , for they have long ear - sharp eye , too , but no power of scent , 
 so far as I could judge , so I do not   think they can sniff we out . where 
 have you be , young fellah ? you be well out of it . " 

 in a few sentence I whisper what I have do . 

 " pretty bad , " say he , when he have hear of the dinosaur and the pit . 
 " it be not   quite the place for a rest cure . what ? but I have no idea 
 what its possibility be until those devil get hold of we . the 
 man - eatin ' Papuans have I once , but they be chesterfield compare to 
 this crowd . " 

 " how do it happen ? " I ask . 

 " it be in the early mornin ' . our learn friend be just stirrin ' . 
 had not   even begin to argue yet . suddenly it rain ape . they come 
 down as thick as apple out of a tree . they have be assemblin ' in the 
 dark , I suppose , until that great tree over our head be heavy with 
 they . I shoot one of they through the belly , but before we know where 
 we be they have we spread - eagle on our back . I call they ape , but 
 they carry stick and stone in their hand and jabber talk to each 
 other , and end up by tyin ' our hand with creeper , so they be ahead 
 of any beast that I have see in my wanderin 's . ape - man - that be what 
 they be - Missin ' link , and I wish they have stay missin ' . they 
 carry off their wound comrade - he be bleedin ' like a pig - and then 
 they sit around we , and if ever I see frozen murder it be in their 
 face . they be big fellow , as big as a man and a deal strong . 
 curious glassy gray eye they have , under red tuft , and they just sit 
 and gloat and gloat . Challenger be no chicken , but even he be 
 cow . he manage to struggle to his foot , and yell out at they to 
 have do with it and get it over . I think he have go a bit off his 
 head at the suddenness of it , for he rag and curse at they like a 
 lunatic . if they have be a row of his favorite pressman he could not 
 have slang they bad . " 

 " well , what do they do ? " I be enthral by the strange story which 
 my companion be whisper into my ear , while all the time his keen 
 eye be shoot in every direction and his hand grasp his cocked 
 rifle . 

 " I think it be the end of we , but instead of that it start they on 
 a new line . they all jabber and chatter together . then one of 
 they stand out beside Challenger . you will smile , young fellah , but ' pon 
 my word they might have be kinsman . I could not   have believe it if I 
 have not   see it with my own eye . this old ape - man - he be their 
 chief - be a sort of red Challenger , with every one of our friend 's 
 beauty point , only just a trifle more so . he have the short body , the 
 big shoulder , the round chest , no neck , a great ruddy frill of a 
 beard , the tufte eyebrow , the ' what do you want , damn you ! ' look 
 about the eye , and the whole catalogue . when the ape - man stand by 
 Challenger and put his paw on his shoulder , the thing be complete . 
 Summerlee be a bit hysterical , and he laugh till he cry . the 
 ape - man laugh too - or at least they put up the devil of a 
 cacklin ' - and they set to work to drag we off through the forest . they 
 would not   touch the gun and thing - think they dangerous , I 
 expect - but they carry away all our loose food . Summerlee and I get 
 some rough handlin ' on the way - there be my skin and my clothe to prove 
 it - for they take we a bee - line through the bramble , and their own 
 hide be like leather . but Challenger be all right . four of they 
 carry he shoulder high , and he go like a roman emperor . what be 
 that ? " 

 it be a strange clicking noise in the distance not unlike castanet . 

 " there they go ! " say my companion , slip cartridge into the second 
 double barrel " Express . " " load they all up , young fellah my lad , 
 for we be not go to be take alive , and do not   you think it ! that be 
 the row they make when they be excited . by George ! they will have 
 something to excite they if they put we up . the ' last stand of the 
 Grays ' will not   be in it . ' with their rifle grasp in their stiffen 
 hand , mid a ring of the dead and dyin ' , ' as some fathead sing . can 
 you hear they now ? " 

 " very far away . " 

 " that little lot will do no good , but I expect their search party be 
 all over the wood . well , I be tell you my tale of woe . they get 
 we soon to this town of theirs - about a thousand hut of branch and 
 leaf in a great grove of tree near the edge of the cliff . it be 
 three or four mile from here . the filthy beast finger I all over , 
 and I feel as if I should never be clean again . they tie we up - the 
 fellow who handle I could tie like a bosun - and there we lay with our 
 toe up , beneath a tree , while a great brute stand guard over we with a 
 club in his hand . when I say ' we ' I mean Summerlee and myself . Old 
 Challenger be up a tree , eatin ' pine and havin' the time of his life . 
 I be bind to say that he manage to get some fruit to we , and with his 
 own hand he loosen our bond . if you have see he sit up in that 
 tree hob - nobbin ' with his twin brother - and singin ' in that rollin ' 
 bass of his , ' ring out , wild bell , ' cause music of any kind seem to 
 put them in a good humor , you would have smile ; but we be not   in much mood 
 for laughin ' , as you can guess . they be incline , within limit , to 
 let he do what he like , but they draw the line pretty sharply at we . 
 it be a mighty consolation to we all to know that you be runnin ' 
 loose and have the archive in your keepin ' . 

 " well , now , young fellah , I will tell you what will surprise you . you 
 say you see sign of man , and fire , trap , and the like . well , we 
 have see the native themselves . poor devil they be , down - face 
 little chap , and have enough to make they so . it seem that the human 
 hold one side of this plateau - over yonder , where you see the 
 cave - and the ape - man hold this side , and there be bloody war between 
 they all the time . that be the situation , so far as I could follow it . 
 well , yesterday the ape - man get hold of a dozen of the human and 
 bring they in as prisoner . you never hear such a jabberin ' and 
 shriekin ' in your life . the man be little red fellow , and have be 
 bite and claw so that they could hardly walk . the ape - man put two 
 of they to death there and then - fairly pull the arm off one of 
 they - it be perfectly beastly . Plucky little chap they be , and 
 hardly give a squeak . but it turn we absolutely sick . Summerlee 
 faint , and even Challenger have as much as he could stand . I think 
 they have clear , do not   you ? " 

 we listen intently , but nothing save the calling of the bird break 
 the deep peace of the forest . Lord Roxton go on with his story . 

 " I think you have have the escape of your life , young fellah my lad . it 
 be catchin ' those Indians that put you clean out of their head , else 
 they would have be back to the camp for you as sure as fate and 
 gather you in . of course , as you say , they have be watchin ' we 
 from the beginnin ' out of that tree , and they know perfectly well that 
 we be one short . however , they could think only of this new haul ; so 
 it be I , and not a bunch of ape , that drop in on you in the 
 morning . well , we have a horrid business afterwards . my God ! what a 
 nightmare the whole thing be ! you remember the great bristle of sharp 
 cane down below where we find the skeleton of the American ? well , 
 that be just under ape - town , and that be the jumpin'-off place of their 
 prisoner . I expect there be heap of skeleton there , if we look for 
 them . they have a sort of clear parade - ground on the top , and they make 
 a proper ceremony about it . one by one the poor devil have to jump , 
 and the game be to see whether they be merely dash to piece or 
 whether they get skewer on the cane . they take we out to see it , 
 and the whole tribe line up on the edge . four of the Indians jump , 
 and the cane go through them like knittin ' needle through a pat of 
 butter . no wonder we find that poor Yankee 's skeleton with the cane 
 growin ' between his rib . it be horrible - but it be doocedly 
 interestin ' too . we be all fascinated to see they take the dive , 
 even when we think it would be our turn next on the spring - board . 

 " well , it be not . they keep six of the Indians up for to - day - that be 
 how I understand it - but I fancy we be to be the star performer in 
 the show . Challenger might get off , but Summerlee and I be in the 
 bill . their language be more than half sign , and it be not hard to 
 follow they . so I think it be time we make a break for it . I have 
 be plottin ' it out a bit , and have one or two thing clear in my mind . 
 it be all on I , for Summerlee be useless and Challenger not much 
 well . the only time they get together they get slangin ' because they 
 could not   agree upon the scientific classification of these red - headed 
 devil that have get hold of we . one say it be the dryopithecus of 
 Java , the other say it be pithecanthropus . Madness , I call 
 it - Loonies , both . but , as I say , I have think out one or two point 
 that be helpful . one be that these brute could not run as fast as 
 a man in the open . they have short , bandy leg , you see , and heavy 
 body . even Challenger could give a few yard in a hundred to the 
 good of they , and you or I would be a perfect Shrubb . another point 
 be that they know nothing about gun . I do not   believe they ever 
 understand how the fellow I shoot come by his hurt . if we could get at 
 our gun there be no sayin ' what we could do . 

 " so I break away early this mornin ' , give my guard a kick in the tummy 
 that lay he out , and sprint for the camp . there I get you and the 
 gun , and here we be . " 

 " but the professor ! " I cry , in consternation . 

 " well , we must just go back and fetch them . I could not   bring them with 
 I . Challenger be up the tree , and Summerlee be not fit for the 
 effort . the only chance be to get the gun and try a rescue . of 
 course they may scupper they at once in revenge . I do not   think they 
 would touch Challenger , but I would not   answer for Summerlee . but they 
 would have have he in any case . of that I be certain . so I have not 
 make matter any bad by boltin ' . but we be honor bind to go back 
 and have they out or see it through with they . so you can make up your 
 soul , young fellah my lad , for it will be one way or the other before 
 evenin ' . " 

 I have try to imitate here Lord Roxton 's jerky talk , his short , 
 strong sentence , the half - humorous , half - reckless tone that run 
 through it all . but he be a bear leader . as danger thicken his 
 jaunty manner would increase , his speech become more racy , his cold 
 eye glitter into ardent life , and his Don Quixote moustache bristle 
 with joyous excitement . his love of danger , his intense appreciation 
 of the drama of an adventure - all the more intense for be hold 
 tightly in - his consistent view that every peril in life be a form of 
 sport , a fierce game betwixt you and Fate , with death as a forfeit , 
 make he a wonderful companion at such hour . if it be not for our 
 fear as to the fate of our companion , it would have be a positive 
 joy to throw myself with such a man into such an affair . we be 
 rise from our brushwood hiding - place when suddenly I feel his grip 
 upon my arm . 

 " by George ! " he whisper , " here they come ! " 

 from where we lay we could look down a brown aisle , arch with green , 
 form by the trunk and branch . along this a party of the ape - man 
 be pass . they go in single file , with bent leg and rounded 
 back , their hand occasionally touch the ground , their head 
 turn to left and right as they trot along . their crouch gait 
 take away from their height , but I should put they at five foot or so , 
 with long arm and enormous chest . many of they carry stick , and 
 at the distance they look like a line of very hairy and deform 
 human being . for a moment I catch this clear glimpse of they . then 
 they be lose among the bush . 

 " not this time , " say Lord John , who have catch up his rifle . " our 
 good chance be to lie quiet until they have give up the search . then 
 we shall see whether we can not   get back to their town and hit them where 
 it hurt most . give them an hour and we will march . " 

 we fill in the time by open one of our food tin and make sure 
 of our breakfast . Lord Roxton have have nothing but some fruit since the 
 morning before and eat like a starve man . then , at last , our pocket 
 bulge with cartridge and a rifle in each hand , we start off upon 
 our mission of rescue . before leave it we carefully mark our 
 little hiding - place among the brush - wood and its bearing to Fort 
 Challenger , that we might find it again if we need it . we slunk 
 through the bush in silence until we come to the very edge of the 
 cliff , close to the old camp . there we halt , and Lord John give I 
 some idea of his plan . 

 " so long as we be among the thick tree these swine be our master , " 
 say he . " they can see we and we can not see they . but in the open it 
 be different . there we can move fast than they . so we must stick to 
 the open all we can . the edge of the plateau have few large tree 
 than further inland . so that be our line of advance . go slowly , keep 
 your eye open and your rifle ready . above all , never let they get you 
 prisoner while there be a cartridge leave - that be my last word to you , 
 young fellah . " 

 when we reach the edge of the cliff I look over and see our good 
 old black Zambo sit smoke on a rock below we . I would have give 
 a great deal to have hail he and tell he how we be place , but it 
 be too dangerous , lest we should be hear . the wood seem to be 
 full of the ape - man ; again and again we hear their curious clicking 
 chatter . at such time we plunge into the near clump of bush and 
 lie still until the sound have pass away . our advance , therefore , be 
 very slow , and two hour at least must have pass before I see by Lord 
 John 's cautious movement that we must be close to our destination . he 
 motion to I to lie still , and he crawl forward himself . in a 
 minute he be back again , his face quiver with eagerness . 

 " come ! " say he . " come quick ! I hope to the Lord we be not too late 
 already ! " 

 I find myself shake with nervous excitement as I scramble forward 
 and lie down beside he , look out through the bush at a clearing 
 which stretch before we . 

 it be a sight which I shall never forget until my die day - so weird , 
 so impossible , that I do not know how I be to make you realize it , or 
 how in a few year I shall bring myself to believe in it if I live to 
 sit once more on a lounge in the Savage Club and look out on the drab 
 solidity of the Embankment . I know that it will seem then to be some 
 wild nightmare , some delirium of fever . yet I will set it down now , 
 while it be still fresh in my memory , and one at least , the man who lay 
 in the damp grass by my side , will know if I have lie . 

 a wide , open space lie before we - some hundred of yard across - all 
 green turf and low bracken grow to the very edge of the cliff . 
 round this clearing there be a semi - circle of tree with curious hut 
 build of foliage pile one above the other among the branch . a 
 rookery , with every nest a little house , would well convey the idea . 
 the opening of these hut and the branch of the tree be throng 
 with a dense mob of ape - people , whom from their size I take to be the 
 female and infant of the tribe . they form the background of the 
 picture , and be all look out with eager interest at the same scene 
 which fascinate and bewilder we . 

 in the open , and near the edge of the cliff , there have assemble a 
 crowd of some hundred of these shaggy , red - haired creature , many of 
 they of immense size , and all of they horrible to look upon . there be 
 a certain discipline among they , for none of they attempt to break 
 the line which have be form . in front there stand a small group of 
 Indians - little , clean - limbe , red fellow , whose skin glow like 
 polished bronze in the strong sunlight . a tall , thin white man be 
 stand beside they , his head bow , his arm fold , his whole 
 attitude expressive of his horror and dejection . there be no 
 mistake the angular form of Professor Summerlee . 

 in front of and around this dejected group of prisoner be several 
 ape - man , who watch they closely and make all escape impossible . 
 then , right out from all the other and close to the edge of the cliff , 
 be two figure , so strange , and under other circumstance so 
 ludicrous , that they absorb my attention . the one be our comrade , 
 Professor Challenger . the remain of his coat still hang in strip 
 from his shoulder , but his shirt have be all tear out , and his great 
 beard merge itself in the black tangle which cover his mighty chest . 
 he have lose his hat , and his hair , which have grow long in our 
 wandering , be fly in wild disorder . a single day seem to have 
 change he from the high product of modern civilization to the most 
 desperate savage in South America . beside he stand his master , the 
 king of the ape - man . in all thing he be , as Lord John have say , the 
 very image of our Professor , save that his coloring be red instead of 
 black . the same short , broad figure , the same heavy shoulder , the 
 same forward hang of the arm , the same bristling beard merge itself 
 in the hairy chest . only above the eyebrow , where the sloping 
 forehead and low , curved skull of the ape - man be in sharp contrast to 
 the broad brow and magnificent cranium of the European , could one see 
 any marked difference . at every other point the king be an absurd 
 parody of the Professor . 

 all this , which take I so long to describe , impress itself upon I 
 in a few second . then we have very different thing to think of , for 
 an active drama be in progress . two of the ape - man have seize one of 
 the Indians out of the group and drag he forward to the edge of the 
 cliff . the king raise his hand as a signal . they catch the man by 
 his leg and arm , and swing he three time backwards and forwards with 
 tremendous violence . then , with a frightful heave they shoot the poor 
 wretch over the precipice . with such force do they throw he that he 
 curve high in the air before begin to drop . as he vanish from 
 sight , the whole assembly , except the guard , rush forward to the 
 edge of the precipice , and there be a long pause of absolute silence , 
 break by a mad yell of delight . they spring about , toss their 
 long , hairy arm in the air and howl with exultation . then they 
 fall back from the edge , form themselves again into line , and wait 
 for the next victim . 

 this time it be Summerlee . two of his guard catch he by the wrist 
 and pull he brutally to the front . his thin figure and long limb 
 struggle and flutter like a chicken be drag from a coop . 
 Challenger have turn to the king and wave his hand frantically 
 before he . he be beg , plead , implore for his comrade 's 
 life . the ape - man push he roughly aside and shake his head . it be 
 the last conscious movement he be to make upon earth . Lord John 's 
 rifle crack , and the king sink down , a tangle red sprawling thing , 
 upon the ground . 

 " shoot into the thick of they ! Shoot ! sonny , shoot ! " cry my 
 companion . 

 there be strange red depth in the soul of the most commonplace man . 
 I be tenderhearte by nature , and have find my eye moist many a time 
 over the scream of a wound hare . yet the blood lust be on I now . 
 I find myself on my foot empty one magazine , then the other , 
 click open the breech to re - load , snap it to again , while 
 cheer and yell with pure ferocity and joy of slaughter as I do 
 so . with our four gun the two of we make a horrible havoc . both the 
 guard who hold Summerlee be down , and he be staggering about like a 
 drunken man in his amazement , unable to realize that he be a free man . 
 the dense mob of ape - man run about in bewilderment , marvel whence 
 this storm of death be come or what it might mean . they wave , 
 gesticulate , scream , and trip up over those who have fall . 
 then , with a sudden impulse , they all rush in a howl crowd to the 
 tree for shelter , leave the ground behind they spot with their 
 stricken comrade . the prisoner be leave for the moment stand 
 alone in the middle of the clearing . 

 Challenger 's quick brain have grasp the situation . he seize the 
 bewildered Summerlee by the arm , and they both run towards we . two of 
 their guard bound after they and fall to two bullet from Lord John . 
 we run forward into the open to meet our friend , and press a loaded 
 rifle into the hand of each . but Summerlee be at the end of his 
 strength . he could hardly totter . already the ape - man be recover 
 from their panic . they be come through the brushwood and 
 threaten to cut we off . Challenger and I run Summerlee along , one 
 at each of his elbow , while Lord John cover our retreat , fire 
 again and again as savage head snarl at we out of the bush . for a 
 mile or more the chatter brute be at our very heel . then the 
 pursuit slacken , for they learn our power and would no long face 
 that unerre rifle . when we have at last reach the camp , we look 
 back and find ourselves alone . 

 so it seem to we ; and yet we be mistaken . we have hardly close the 
 thornbush door of our zareba , clasp each other 's hand , and throw 
 ourselves pant upon the ground beside our spring , when we hear a 
 patter of foot and then a gentle , plaintive crying from outside our 
 entrance . Lord Roxton rush forward , rifle in hand , and throw it 
 open . there , prostrate upon their face , lie the little red figure of 
 the four survive Indians , tremble with fear of we and yet implore 
 our protection . with an expressive sweep of his hand one of they 
 point to the wood around they , and indicate that they be full of 
 danger . then , dart forward , he throw his arm round Lord John 's 
 leg , and rest his face upon they . 

 " by George ! " cry our peer , pull at his moustache in great 
 perplexity , " I say - what the deuce be we to do with these people ? get 
 up , little chappie , and take your face off my boot . " 

 Summerlee be sit up and stuff some tobacco into his old briar . 

 " we have   get to see they safe , " say he . " you have   pull we all out of 
 the jaw of death . my word ! it be a good bit of work ! " 

 " Admirable ! " cry Challenger . " Admirable ! not only we as 
 individual , but european science collectively , owe you a deep debt of 
 gratitude for what you have do . I do not hesitate to say that the 
 disappearance of Professor Summerlee and myself would have leave an 
 appreciable gap in modern zoological history . our young friend here 
 and you have do most excellently well . " 

 he beam at we with the old paternal smile , but european science would 
 have be somewhat amazed could they have see their choose child , the 
 hope of the future , with his tangle , unkempt head , his bare chest , and 
 his tattered clothe . he have one of the meat - tin between his knee , 
 and sit with a large piece of cold australian mutton between his 
 finger . the Indian look up at he , and then , with a little yelp , 
 cringe to the ground and clung to Lord John 's leg . 

 " do not   you be scared , my bonnie boy , " say Lord John , pat the 
 matted head in front of he . " he can not   stick your appearance , 
 Challenger ; and , by George ! I do not   wonder . all right , little chap , 
 he be only a human , just the same as the rest of we . " 

 " really , sir ! " cry the Professor . 

 " well , it be lucky for you , Challenger , that you be a little out of the 
 ordinary . if you have not   be so like the king - - " 

 " upon my word , Lord John , you allow yourself great latitude . " 

 " well , it be a fact . " 

 " I beg , sir , that you will change the subject . your remark be 
 irrelevant and unintelligible . the question before we be what be we 
 to do with these Indians ? the obvious thing be to escort they home , if 
 we know where their home be . " 

 " there be no difficulty about that , " say i. " they live in the cave 
 on the other side of the central lake . " 

 " our young friend here know where they live . I gather that it be some 
 distance . " 

 " a good twenty mile , " say I. 

 Summerlee give a groan . 

 " I , for one , could never get there . surely I hear those brute still 
 howl upon our track . " 

 as he speak , from the dark recess of the wood we hear far away the 
 jabbering cry of the ape - man . the Indians once more set up a feeble 
 wail of fear . 

 " we must move , and move quick ! " say Lord John . " you help Summerlee , 
 young fellah . these Indians will carry store . now , then , come along 
 before they can see we . " 

 in less than half - an - hour we have reach our brushwood retreat and 
 conceal ourselves . all day we hear the excited calling of the 
 ape - man in the direction of our old camp , but none of they come our 
 way , and the tired fugitive , red and white , have a long , deep sleep . I 
 be doze myself in the evening when someone pluck my sleeve , and I 
 find Challenger kneeling beside I . 

 " you keep a diary of these event , and you expect eventually to publish 
 it , Mr. Malone , " say he , with solemnity . 

 " I be only here as a Press reporter , " I answer . 

 " exactly . you may have hear some rather fatuous remark of Lord John 
 Roxton 's which seem to imply that there be some - some 
 resemblance - - " 

 " yes , I hear they . " 

 " I need not say that any publicity give to such an idea - any levity in 
 your narrative of what occur - would be exceedingly offensive to I . " 

 " I will keep well within the truth . " 

 " Lord John 's observation be frequently exceedingly fanciful , and he 
 be capable of attribute the most absurd reason to the respect which 
 be always show by the most undeveloped race to dignity and character . 
 you follow my meaning ? " 

 " entirely . " 

 " I leave the matter to your discretion . " then , after a long pause , he 
 add : " the king of the ape - man be really a creature of great 
 distinction - a most remarkably handsome and intelligent personality . 
 do it not strike you ? " 

 " a most remarkable creature , " say I. 

 and the Professor , much ease in his mind , settle down to his slumber 
 once more . 




  CHAPTER XIV 

  " those be the Real Conquests " 

 we have imagine that our pursuer , the ape - man , know nothing of our 
 brush - wood hiding - place , but we be soon to find out our mistake . 
 there be no sound in the wood - not a leaf move upon the tree , and 
 all be peace around we - but we should have be warn by our first 
 experience how cunningly and how patiently these creature can watch 
 and wait until their chance come . whatever fate may be mine through 
 life , I be very sure that I shall never be near death than I be that 
 morning . but I will tell you the thing in its due order . 

 we all awake exhausted after the terrific emotion and scanty food of 
 yesterday . Summerlee be still so weak that it be an effort for he 
 to stand ; but the old man be full of a sort of surly courage which 
 would never admit defeat . a council be hold , and it be agree that 
 we should wait quietly for an hour or two where we be , have our 
 much - need breakfast , and then make our way across the plateau and 
 round the central lake to the cave where my observation have show 
 that the Indians live . we rely upon the fact that we could count 
 upon the good word of those whom we have rescue to ensure a warm 
 welcome from their fellow . then , with our mission accomplish and 
 possess a full knowledge of the secret of Maple White Land , we 
 should turn our whole thought to the vital problem of our escape and 
 return . even Challenger be ready to admit that we should then have 
 do all for which we have come , and that our first duty from that time 
 onward be to carry back to civilization the amazing discovery we 
 have make . 

 we be able now to take a more leisurely view of the Indians whom we 
 have rescue . they be small man , wiry , active , and well - build , with 
 lank black hair tie up in a bunch behind their head with a leathern 
 thong , and leathern also be their loin - clothe . their face be 
 hairless , well form , and good - humor . the lobe of their ear , 
 hang ragged and bloody , show that they have be pierce for some 
 ornament which their captor have tear out . their speech , though 
 unintelligible to we , be fluent among themselves , and as they point 
 to each other and utter the word " Accala " many time over , we 
 gather that this be the name of the nation . occasionally , with 
 face which be convulse with fear and hatred , they shake their 
 clench hand at the wood round and cry : " Doda ! Doda ! " which be 
 surely their term for their enemy . 

 " what do you make of they , Challenger ? " ask Lord John . " one thing be 
 very clear to I , and that be that the little chap with the front of 
 his head shave be a chief among they . " 

 it be indeed evident that this man stand apart from the other , and 
 that they never venture to address he without every sign of deep 
 respect . he seem to be the young of they all , and yet , so proud 
 and high be his spirit that , upon Challenger lay his great hand 
 upon his head , he start like a spurred horse and , with a quick flash 
 of his dark eye , move far away from the Professor . then , place 
 his hand upon his breast and hold himself with great dignity , he 
 utter the word " Maretas " several time . the Professor , unabashed , 
 seize the near indian by the shoulder and proceed to lecture upon 
 he as if he be a potted speciman in a class - room . 

 " the type of these people , " say he in his sonorous fashion , " whether 
 judge by cranial capacity , facial angle , or any other test , can not be 
 regard as a low one ; on the contrary , we must place it as 
 considerably high in the scale than many south american tribe which 
 I can mention . on no possible supposition can we explain the evolution 
 of such a race in this place . for that matter , so great a gap 
 separate these ape - man from the primitive animal which have survive 
 upon this plateau , that it be inadmissible to think that they could 
 have develop where we find they . " 

 " then where the dooce do they drop from ? " ask Lord John . 

 " a question which will , no doubt , be eagerly discuss in every 
 scientific society in Europe and America , " the Professor answer . " my 
 own reading of the situation for what it be worth - " he inflate his 
 chest enormously and look insolently around he at the word - " be 
 that evolution have advance under the peculiar condition of this 
 country up to the vertebrate stage , the old type survive and live 
 on in company with the new one . thus we find such modern creature 
 as the tapir - an animal with quite a respectable length of 
 pedigree - the great deer , and the ant - eater in the companionship of 
 reptilian form of jurassic type . so much be clear . and now come the 
 ape - man and the Indian . what be the scientific mind to think of their 
 presence ? I can only account for it by an invasion from outside . it 
 be probable that there exist an anthropoid ape in South America , who 
 in past age find his way to this place , and that he develop into 
 the creature we have see , some of which " - here he look hard at 
 I - " be of an appearance and shape which , if it have be accompany 
 by correspond intelligence , would , I do not hesitate to say , have 
 reflect credit upon any living race . as to the Indians I can not 
 doubt that they be more recent immigrant from below . under the 
 stress of famine or of conquest they have make their way up here . 
 face by ferocious creature which they have never before see , they 
 take refuge in the cave which our young friend have describe , but they 
 have no doubt have a bitter fight to hold their own against wild beast , 
 and especially against the ape - man who would regard they as intruder , 
 and wage a merciless war upon they with a cunning which the large 
 beast would lack . hence the fact that their number appear to be 
 limited . well , gentleman , have I read you the riddle aright , or be 
 there any point which you would query ? " 

 Professor Summerlee for once be too depressed to argue , though he 
 shake his head violently as a token of general disagreement . Lord John 
 merely scratch his scanty lock with the remark that he could not   put 
 up a fight as he be not   in the same weight or class . for my own part I 
 perform my usual role of bring thing down to a strictly prosaic 
 and practical level by the remark that one of the Indians be miss . 

 " he have go to fetch some water , " say Lord Roxton . " we fit he up 
 with an empty beef tin and he be off . " 

 " to the old camp ? " I ask . 

 " no , to the brook . it be among the tree there . it can not   be more than 
 a couple of hundred yard . but the beggar be certainly take his 
 time . " 

 " I will go and look after he , " say I. I pick up my rifle and 
 stroll in the direction of the brook , leave my friend to lay out 
 the scanty breakfast . it may seem to you rash that even for so short a 
 distance I should quit the shelter of our friendly thicket , but you 
 will remember that we be many mile from ape - town , that so far as we 
 know the creature have not discover our retreat , and that in any case 
 with a rifle in my hand I have no fear of they . I have not yet learn 
 their cunning or their strength . 

 I could hear the murmur of our brook somewhere ahead of I , but there 
 be a tangle of tree and brushwood between I and it . I be make my 
 way through this at a point which be just out of sight of my 
 companion , when , under one of the tree , I notice something red 
 huddle among the bush . as I approach it , I be shock to see 
 that it be the dead body of the missing Indian . he lie upon his side , 
 his limb draw up , and his head screw round at a most unnatural 
 angle , so that he seem to be look straight over his own shoulder . 
 I give a cry to warn my friend that something be amiss , and run 
 forward I stoop over the body . surely my guardian angel be very 
 near I then , for some instinct of fear , or it may have be some faint 
 rustle of leaf , make I glance upwards . out of the thick green 
 foliage which hang low over my head , two long muscular arm cover 
 with reddish hair be slowly descend . another instant and the 
 great stealthy hand would have be round my throat . I spring 
 backwards , but quick as I be , those hand be quick still . through 
 my sudden spring they miss a fatal grip , but one of they catch the 
 back of my neck and the other one my face . I throw my hand up to 
 protect my throat , and the next moment the huge paw have slide down my 
 face and close over they . I be lift lightly from the ground , and I 
 feel an intolerable pressure force my head back and back until the 
 strain upon the cervical spine be more than I could bear . my sens 
 swam , but I still tear at the hand and force it out from my chin . 
 look up I see a frightful face with cold inexorable light blue eye 
 look down into mine . there be something hypnotic in those terrible 
 eye . I could struggle no long . as the creature feel I grow limp 
 in his grasp , two white canine gleam for a moment at each side of 
 the vile mouth , and the grip tighten still more upon my chin , force 
 it always upwards and back . a thin , oval - tint mist form before my 
 eye and little silvery bell tinkle in my ear . dully and far off I 
 hear the crack of a rifle and be feebly aware of the shock as I be 
 drop to the earth , where I lay without sense or motion . 

 I awake to find myself on my back upon the grass in our lair within the 
 thicket . someone have bring the water from the brook , and Lord John 
 be sprinkle my head with it , while Challenger and Summerlee be 
 prop I up , with concern in their face . for a moment I have a 
 glimpse of the human spirit behind their scientific mask . it be 
 really shock , rather than any injury , which have prostrate I , and in 
 half - an - hour , in spite of ache head and stiff neck , I be sit up 
 and ready for anything . 

 " but you have   have the escape of your life , young fellah my lad , " say 
 Lord Roxton . " when I hear your cry and run forward , and see your head 
 twist half - off and your stohwasser kickin ' in the air , I think we 
 be one short . I miss the beast in my flurry , but he drop you 
 all right and be off like a streak . by George ! I wish I have fifty 
 man with rifle . I would clear out the whole infernal gang of they and 
 leave this country a bit clean than we find it . " 

 it be clear now that the ape - man have in some way mark we down , and 
 that we be watch on every side . we have not so much to fear from 
 they during the day , but they would be very likely to rush we by night ; 
 so the soon we get away from their neighborhood the well . on three 
 side of we be absolute forest , and there we might find ourselves in 
 an ambush . but on the fourth side - that which slop down in the 
 direction of the lake - there be only low scrub , with scatter tree 
 and occasional open glade . it be , in fact , the route which I have 
 myself take in my solitary journey , and it lead we straight for the 
 indian cave . this then must for every reason be our road . 

 one great regret we have , and that be to leave our old camp behind we , 
 not only for the sake of the store which remain there , but even more 
 because we be lose touch with Zambo , our link with the outside 
 world . however , we have a fair supply of cartridge and all our gun , 
 so , for a time at least , we could look after ourselves , and we hop 
 soon to have a chance of return and restore our communication 
 with our negro . he have faithfully promise to stay where he be , and 
 we have not a doubt that he would be as good as his word . 

 it be in the early afternoon that we start upon our journey . the 
 young chief walk at our head as our guide , but refuse indignantly to 
 carry any burden . behind he come the two survive Indians with our 
 scanty possession upon their back . we four white man walk in the 
 rear with rifle loaded and ready . as we start there break from the 
 thick silent wood behind we a sudden great ululation of the ape - man , 
 which may have be a cheer of triumph at our departure or a jeer of 
 contempt at our flight . look back we see only the dense screen of 
 tree , but that long - draw yell tell we how many of our enemy lurk 
 among they . we see no sign of pursuit , however , and soon we have get 
 into more open country and beyond their power . 

 as I tramp along , the rearmost of the four , I could not help smile 
 at the appearance of my three companion in front . be this the 
 luxurious Lord John Roxton who have sit that evening in the Albany 
 amidst his persian rug and his picture in the pink radiance of the 
 tinted light ? and be this the impose Professor who have swell 
 behind the great desk in his massive study at Enmore Park ? and , 
 finally , could this be the austere and prim figure which have rise 
 before the meeting at the Zoological Institute ? no three tramp that 
 one could have meet in a Surrey lane could have look more hopeless and 
 bedraggle . we have , it be true , be only a week or so upon the top of 
 the plateau , but all our spare clothing be in our camp below , and the 
 one week have be a severe one upon we all , though least to I who have 
 not to endure the handling of the ape - man . my three friend have all 
 lose their hat , and have now bind handkerchief round their head , 
 their clothe hang in ribbon about they , and their unshaven grimy 
 face be hardly to be recognize . both Summerlee and Challenger be 
 limp heavily , while I still drag my foot from weakness after the 
 shock of the morning , and my neck be as stiff as a board from the 
 murderous grip that hold it . we be indeed a sorry crew , and I do 
 not wonder to see our indian companion glance back at we occasionally 
 with horror and amazement on their face . 

 in the late afternoon we reach the margin of the lake , and as we 
 emerge from the bush and see the sheet of water stretch before we 
 our native friend set up a shrill cry of joy and point eagerly in 
 front of they . it be indeed a wonderful sight which lie before we . 
 sweep over the glassy surface be a great flotilla of canoe come 
 straight for the shore upon which we stand . they be some mile out 
 when we first see they , but they shoot forward with great swiftness , and 
 be soon so near that the rower could distinguish our person . 
 instantly a thunderous shout of delight burst from they , and we see 
 they rise from their seat , wave their paddle and spear madly in 
 the air . then bend to their work once more , they fly across the 
 intervene water , beach their boat upon the slop sand , and 
 rush up to we , prostrate themselves with loud cry of greeting 
 before the young chief . finally one of they , an elderly man , with a 
 necklace and bracelet of great lustrous glass bead and the skin of 
 some beautiful mottled amber - color animal sling over his shoulder , 
 run forward and embrace most tenderly the youth whom we have save . he 
 then look at we and ask some question , after which he step up 
 with much dignity and embrace we also each in turn . then , at his 
 order , the whole tribe lie down upon the ground before we in homage . 
 personally I feel shy and uncomfortable at this obsequious adoration , 
 and I read the same feeling in the face of Roxton and Summerlee , but 
 Challenger expand like a flower in the sun . 

 " they may be undeveloped type , " say he , stroke his beard and 
 look round at they , " but their deportment in the presence of their 
 superior might be a lesson to some of our more advanced Europeans . 
 strange how correct be the instinct of the natural man ! " 

 it be clear that the native have come out upon the war - path , for every 
 man carry his spear - a long bamboo tip with bone - his bow and 
 arrow , and some sort of club or stone battle - axe slung at his side . 
 their dark , angry glance at the wood from which we have come , and the 
 frequent repetition of the word " Doda , " make it clear enough that this 
 be a rescue party who have set forth to save or revenge the old chief 's 
 son , for such we gather that the youth must be . a council be now 
 hold by the whole tribe squat in a circle , whilst we sit near on a 
 slab of basalt and watch their proceeding . two or three warrior 
 speak , and finally our young friend make a spirited harangue with such 
 eloquent feature and gesture that we could understand it all as 
 clearly as if we have know his language . 

 " what be the use of return ? " he say . " soon or later the thing 
 must be do . your comrade have be murder . what if I have 
 return safe ? these other have be do to death . there be no 
 safety for any of we . we be assemble now and ready . " then he point 
 to we . " these strange man be our friend . they be great fighter , 
 and they hate the ape - man even as we do . they command , " here he 
 point up to heaven , " the thunder and the lightning . when shall we 
 have such a chance again ? let we go forward , and either die now or 
 live for the future in safety . how else shall we go back unashamed to 
 our woman ? " 

 the little red warrior hang upon the word of the speaker , and when he 
 have finish they burst into a roar of applause , wave their rude 
 weapon in the air . the old chief step forward to we , and ask we 
 some question , point at the same time to the wood . Lord John make 
 a sign to he that he should wait for an answer and then he turn to 
 we . 

 " well , it be up to you to say what you will do , " say he ; " for my part I 
 have a score to settle with these monkey - folk , and if it end by wipe 
 they off the face of the earth I do not   see that the earth need fret 
 about it . I be go with our little red pal and I mean to see they 
 through the scrap . what do you say , young fellah ? " 

 " of course I will come . " 

 " and you , Challenger ? " 

 " I will assuredly co - operate . " 

 " and you , Summerlee ? " 

 " we seem to be drift very far from the object of this expedition , 
 Lord John . I assure you that I little think when I leave my 
 professional chair in London that it be for the purpose of head a 
 raid of savage upon a colony of anthropoid ape . " 

 " to such base us do we come , " say Lord John , smile . " but we be 
 up against it , so what be the decision ? " 

 " it seem a most questionable step , " say Summerlee , argumentative to 
 the last , " but if you be all go , I hardly see how I can remain 
 behind . " 

 " then it be settle , " say Lord John , and turn to the chief he 
 nod and slap his rifle . 

 the old fellow clasp our hand , each in turn , while his man cheer 
 louder than ever . it be too late to advance that night , so the 
 Indians settle down into a rude bivouac . on all side their fire 
 begin to glimmer and smoke . some of they who have disappear into the 
 jungle come back presently drive a young iguanodon before they . like 
 the other , it have a daub of asphalt upon its shoulder , and it be only 
 when we see one of the native step forward with the air of an owner 
 and give his consent to the beast 's slaughter that we understand at 
 last that these great creature be as much private property as a herd 
 of cattle , and that these symbol which have so perplex we be 
 nothing more than the mark of the owner . helpless , torpid , and 
 vegetarian , with great limb but a minute brain , they could be round 
 up and drive by a child . in a few minute the huge beast have be cut 
 up and slab of he be hang over a dozen camp fire , together with 
 great scaly ganoid fish which have be spear in the lake . 

 Summerlee have lain down and sleep upon the sand , but we other roam 
 round the edge of the water , seek to learn something more of this 
 strange country . twice we find pit of blue clay , such as we have 
 already see in the swamp of the pterodactyls . these be old volcanic 
 vent , and for some reason excite the great interest in Lord John . 
 what attract Challenger , on the other hand , be a bubble , gurgle 
 mud geyser , where some strange gas form great bursting bubble upon 
 the surface . he thrust a hollow reed into it and cry out with 
 delight like a schoolboy then he be able , on touch it with a 
 light match , to cause a sharp explosion and a blue flame at the far 
 end of the tube . still more pleased be he when , invert a leathern 
 pouch over the end of the reed , and so fill it with the gas , he be 
 able to send it soar up into the air . 

 " an inflammable gas , and one markedly light than the atmosphere . I 
 should say beyond doubt that it contain a considerable proportion of 
 free hydrogen . the resource of G. E. C. be not yet exhaust , my 
 young friend . I may yet show you how a great mind mold all Nature to 
 its use . " he swell with some secret purpose , but would say no more . 

 there be nothing which we could see upon the shore which seem to I 
 so wonderful as the great sheet of water before we . our number and 
 our noise have frighten all living creature away , and save for a few 
 pterodactyls , which soar round high above our head while they wait 
 for the carrion , all be still around the camp . but it be different 
 out upon the rose - tint water of the central lake . it boil and 
 heave with strange life . great slate - color back and high serrate 
 dorsal fin shoot up with a fringe of silver , and then roll down into 
 the depth again . the sand - bank far out be spot with uncouth 
 crawl form , huge turtle , strange saurian , and one great flat 
 creature like a writhing , palpitate mat of black greasy leather , 
 which flop its way slowly to the lake . here and there high serpent 
 head project out of the water , cut swiftly through it with a 
 little collar of foam in front , and a long swirling wake behind , rise 
 and fall in graceful , swan - like undulation as they go . it be 
 not until one of these creature wriggle on to a sand - bank within a 
 few hundred yard of we , and expose a barrel - shape body and huge 
 flipper behind the long serpent neck , that Challenger , and Summerlee , 
 who have join we , break out into their duet of wonder and admiration . 

 " Plesiosaurus ! a fresh - water plesiosaurus ! " cry Summerlee . " that I 
 should have live to see such a sight ! we be bless , my dear 
 Challenger , above all zoologist since the world begin ! " 

 it be not until the night have fall , and the fire of our savage 
 ally glow red in the shadow , that our two man of science could be 
 drag away from the fascination of that primeval lake . even in the 
 darkness as we lie upon the strand , we hear from time to time the 
 snort and plunge of the huge creature who live therein . 

 at early dawn our camp be astir and an hour later we have start 
 upon our memorable expedition . often in my dream have I think that 
 I might live to be a war correspondent . in what wild one could I 
 have conceive the nature of the campaign which it should be my lot to 
 report ! here then be my first despatch from a field of battle : 

 our number have be reinforce during the night by a fresh batch of 
 native from the cave , and we may have be four or five hundred 
 strong when we make our advance . a fringe of scout be throw out in 
 front , and behind they the whole force in a solid column make their way 
 up the long slope of the bush country until we be near the edge of 
 the forest . here they spread out into a long straggle line of 
 spearman and bowman . Roxton and Summerlee take their position upon the 
 right flank , while Challenger and I be on the left . it be a host of 
 the stone age that we be accompany to battle - we with the last 
 word of the gunsmith 's art from St. James ' Street and the Strand . 

 we have not long to wait for our enemy . a wild shrill clamor rise from 
 the edge of the wood and suddenly a body of ape - man rush out with 
 club and stone , and make for the center of the indian line . it be a 
 valiant move but a foolish one , for the great bandy - legged creature 
 be slow of foot , while their opponent be as active as cat . it 
 be horrible to see the fierce brute with foaming mouth and glare 
 eye , rush and grasp , but forever miss their elusive enemy , 
 while arrow after arrow bury itself in their hide . one great fellow 
 run past I roar with pain , with a dozen dart stick from his 
 chest and rib . in mercy I put a bullet through his skull , and he fall 
 sprawl among the aloe . but this be the only shot fire , for the 
 attack have be on the center of the line , and the Indians there have 
 need no help of our in repulse it . of all the ape - man who have 
 rush out into the open , I do not think that one get back to cover . 

 but the matter be more deadly when we come among the tree . for an 
 hour or more after we enter the wood , there be a desperate struggle 
 in which for a time we hardly hold our own . spring out from among 
 the scrub the ape - man with huge club break in upon the Indians and 
 often fell three or four of they before they could be spear . their 
 frightful blow shatter everything upon which they fall . one of they 
 knock Summerlee 's rifle to matchwood and the next would have crush 
 his skull have an Indian not stab the beast to the heart . other 
 ape - man in the tree above we hurl down stone and log of wood , 
 occasionally drop bodily on to our rank and fight furiously 
 until they be fell . once our ally break under the pressure , and 
 have it not be for the execution do by our rifle they would 
 certainly have take to their heel . but they be gallantly rally 
 by their old chief and come on with such a rush that the ape - man begin 
 in turn to give way . Summerlee be weaponless , but I be empty my 
 magazine as quick as I could fire , and on the further flank we hear 
 the continuous cracking of our companion 's rifle . 

 then in a moment come the panic and the collapse . scream and 
 howling , the great creature rush away in all direction through the 
 brushwood , while our ally yell in their savage delight , follow 
 swiftly after their fly enemy . all the feud of countless 
 generation , all the hatred and cruelty of their narrow history , all 
 the memory of ill - usage and persecution be to be purge that day . 
 at last man be to be supreme and the man - beast to find forever his 
 allotted place . fly as they would the fugitive be too slow to 
 escape from the active savage , and from every side in the tangle 
 wood we hear the exultant yell , the twanging of bow , and the crash 
 and thud as ape - man be bring down from their hiding - place in the 
 tree . 

 I be follow the other , when I find that Lord John and Challenger 
 have come across to join we . 

 " it be over , " say Lord John . " I think we can leave the tidying up to 
 they . perhaps the less we see of it the well we shall sleep . " 

 Challenger 's eye be shin with the lust of slaughter . 

 " we have be privilege , " he cry , strut about like a gamecock , 
 " to be present at one of the typical decisive battle of history - the 
 battle which have determine the fate of the world . what , my friend , 
 be the conquest of one nation by another ? it be meaningless . each 
 produce the same result . but those fierce fight , when in the dawn of 
 the age the cave - dweller hold their own against the tiger folk , or 
 the elephant first find that they have a master , those be the real 
 conquest - the victory that count . by this strange turn of fate we 
 have see and help to decide even such a contest . now upon this 
 plateau the future must ever be for man . " 

 it need a robust faith in the end to justify such tragic mean . as 
 we advance together through the wood we find the ape - man lie 
 thick , transfix with spear or arrow . here and there a little group 
 of shatter Indians mark where one of the anthropoid have turn to 
 bay , and sell his life dearly . always in front of we we hear the 
 yelling and roar which show the direction of the pursuit . the 
 ape - man have be drive back to their city , they have make a last stand 
 there , once again they have be break , and now we be in time to see 
 the final fearful scene of all . some eighty or a hundred male , the 
 last survivor , have be drive across that same little clearing which 
 lead to the edge of the cliff , the scene of our own exploit two day 
 before . as we arrive the Indians , a semicircle of spearman , have 
 close in on they , and in a minute it be over , thirty or forty die 
 where they stand . the other , scream and clawing , be thrust over 
 the precipice , and go hurtle down , as their prisoner have of old , 
 on to the sharp bamboos six hundred foot below . it be as Challenger 
 have say , and the reign of man be assure forever in Maple White Land . 
 the male be exterminate , Ape Town be destroy , the female and 
 young be drive away to live in bondage , and the long rivalry of 
 untold century have reach its bloody end . 

 for we the victory bring much advantage . once again we be able to 
 visit our camp and get at our store . once more also we be able to 
 communicate with Zambo , who have be terrify by the spectacle from 
 afar of an avalanche of ape fall from the edge of the cliff . 

 " come away , Massas , come away ! " he cry , his eye start from his 
 head . " the debbil get you sure if you stay up there . " 

 " it be the voice of sanity ! " say Summerlee with conviction . " we have 
 have adventure enough and they be neither suitable to our character or 
 our position . I hold you to your word , Challenger . from now onwards 
 you devote your energy to get we out of this horrible country and 
 back once more to civilization . " 




  CHAPTER XV 

  " our eye have see Great wonder " 

 I write this from day to day , but I trust that before I come to the end 
 of it , I may be able to say that the light shin , at last , through our 
 cloud . we be hold here with no clear mean of make our escape , and 
 bitterly we chafe against it . yet , I can well imagine that the day may 
 come when we may be glad that we be keep , against our will , to see 
 something more of the wonder of this singular place , and of the 
 creature who inhabit it . 

 the victory of the Indians and the annihilation of the ape - man , mark 
 the turning point of our fortune . from then onwards , we be in truth 
 master of the plateau , for the native look upon we with a mixture 
 of fear and gratitude , since by our strange power we have aid they to 
 destroy their hereditary foe . for their own sake they would , perhaps , 
 be glad to see the departure of such formidable and incalculable 
 people , but they have not themselves suggest any way by which we may 
 reach the plain below . there have be , so far as we could follow 
 their sign , a tunnel by which the place could be approach , the low 
 exit of which we have see from below . by this , no doubt , both ape - man 
 and Indians have at different epoch reach the top , and Maple White 
 with his companion have take the same way . only the year before , 
 however , there have be a terrific earthquake , and the upper end of the 
 tunnel have fall in and completely disappear . the Indians now could 
 only shake their head and shrug their shoulder when we express by 
 sign our desire to descend . it may be that they can not , but it may 
 also be that they will not , help we to get away . 

 at the end of the victorious campaign the survive ape - folk be 
 drive across the plateau   their wailing be horrible   and 
 establish in the neighborhood of the indian cave , where they would , 
 from now onwards , be a servile race under the eye of their master . 
 it be a rude , raw , primeval version of the Jews in Babylon or the 
 Israelites in Egypt . at night we could hear from amid the tree the 
 long - draw cry , as some primitive Ezekiel mourn for fallen greatness 
 and recall the depart glory of Ape Town . hewer of wood and 
 drawer of water , such be they from now onwards . 

 we have return across the plateau with our ally two day after the 
 battle , and make our camp at the foot of their cliff . they would have 
 have we share their cave with they , but Lord John would by no mean 
 consent to it consider that to do so would put we in their power if 
 they be treacherously dispose . we keep our independence , therefore , 
 and have our weapon ready for any emergency , while preserve the most 
 friendly relation . we also continually visit their cave , which 
 be most remarkable place , though whether make by man or by Nature we 
 have never be able to determine . they be all on the one stratum , 
 hollow out of some soft rock which lie between the volcanic basalt 
 form the ruddy cliff above they , and the hard granite which form 
 their base . 

 the opening be about eighty foot above the ground , and be lead up 
 to by long stone stair , so narrow and steep that no large animal could 
 mount they . inside they be warm and dry , run in straight 
 passage of vary length into the side of the hill , with smooth gray 
 wall decorate with many excellent picture do with charred stick 
 and represent the various animal of the plateau . if every living 
 thing be sweep from the country the future explorer would find upon 
 the wall of these cave ample evidence of the strange fauna - the 
 dinosaur , iguanodon , and fish lizard - which have live so recently 
 upon earth . 

 since we have learn that the huge iguanodon be keep as tame herd 
 by their owner , and be simply walk meat - store , we have conceive 
 that man , even with his primitive weapon , have establish his 
 ascendancy upon the plateau . we be soon to discover that it be not 
 so , and that he be still there upon tolerance . 

 it be on the third day after our form our camp near the indian 
 cave that the tragedy occur . Challenger and Summerlee have go off 
 together that day to the lake where some of the native , under their 
 direction , be engage in harpoon specimen of the great lizard . 
 Lord John and I have remain in our camp , while a number of the Indians 
 be scatter about upon the grassy slope in front of the cave 
 engage in different way . suddenly there be a shrill cry of alarm , 
 with the word " stoa " resound from a hundred tongue . from every 
 side man , woman , and child be rush wildly for shelter , swarm 
 up the staircase and into the cave in a mad stampede . 

 look up , we could see they wave their arm from the rock above 
 and beckon to we to join they in their refuge . we have both seize 
 our magazine rifle and run out to see what the danger could be . 
 suddenly from the near belt of tree there break forth a group of 
 twelve or fifteen Indians , run for their life , and at their very 
 heel two of those frightful monster which have disturb our camp and 
 pursue I upon my solitary journey . in shape they be like horrible 
 toad , and move in a succession of spring , but in size they be of 
 an incredible bulk , large than the large elephant . we have never 
 before see they save at night , and indeed they be nocturnal animal 
 save when disturb in their lair , as these have be . we now stand 
 amazed at the sight , for their blotched and warty skin be of a 
 curious fish - like iridescence , and the sunlight strike they with an 
 ever - vary rainbow bloom as they move . 

 we have little time to watch they , however , for in an instant they have 
 overtake the fugitive and be make a dire slaughter among they . 
 their method be to fall forward with their full weight upon each in 
 turn , leave he crush and mangle , to bind on after the other . 
 the wretched Indians scream with terror , but be helpless , run as 
 they would , before the relentless purpose and horrible activity of 
 these monstrous creature . one after another they go down , and there 
 be not half - a - dozen survive by the time my companion and I could 
 come to their help . but our aid be of little avail and only involve 
 we in the same peril . at the range of a couple of hundred yard we 
 empty our magazine , fire bullet after bullet into the beast , but 
 with no more effect than if we be pelt they with pellet of paper . 
 their slow reptilian nature care nothing for wound , and the spring 
 of their life , with no special brain center but scatter throughout 
 their spinal cord , could not be tap by any modern weapon . the 
 most that we could do be to check their progress by distract their 
 attention with the flash and roar of our gun , and so to give both the 
 native and ourselves time to reach the step which lead to safety . but 
 where the conical explosive bullet of the twentieth century be of no 
 avail , the poison arrow of the native , dip in the juice of 
 strophanthu and steep afterwards in decay carrion , could succeed . 
 such arrow be of little avail to the hunter who attack the beast , 
 because their action in that torpid circulation be slow , and before 
 its power fail it could certainly overtake and slay its assailant . 
 but now , as the two monster hound we to the very foot of the stair , 
 a drift of dart come whistle from every chink in the cliff above 
 they . in a minute they be feather with they , and yet with no sign 
 of pain they claw and slobber with impotent rage at the step which 
 would lead they to their victim , mount clumsily up for a few yard 
 and then slide down again to the ground . but at last the poison 
 work . one of they give a deep rumble groan and drop his huge 
 squat head on to the earth . the other bounded round in an eccentric 
 circle with shrill , wail cry , and then lie down writhe in agony 
 for some minute before it also stiffen and lie still . with yell of 
 triumph the Indians come flock down from their cave and dance a 
 frenzied dance of victory round the dead body , in mad joy that two 
 more of the most dangerous of all their enemy have be slay . that 
 night they cut up and remove the body , not to eat - for the poison 
 be still active - but lest they should breed a pestilence . the great 
 reptilian heart , however , each as large as a cushion , still lie there , 
 beat slowly and steadily , with a gentle rise and fall , in horrible 
 independent life . it be only upon the third day that the ganglia run 
 down and the dreadful thing be still . 

 some day , when I have a well desk than a meat - tin and more helpful 
 tool than a worn stub of pencil and a last , tattered note - book , I will 
 write some full account of the Accala Indians - of our life amongst 
 they , and of the glimpse which we have of the strange condition of 
 wondrous Maple White Land . memory , at least , will never fail I , for 
 so long as the breath of life be in I , every hour and every action of 
 that period will stand out as hard and clear as do the first strange 
 happening of our childhood . no new impression could efface those 
 which be so deeply cut . when the time come I will describe that 
 wondrous moonlit night upon the great lake when a young 
 ichthyosaurus - a strange creature , half seal , half fish , to look at , 
 with bone - cover eye on each side of his snout , and a third eye fix 
 upon the top of his head - be entangle in an indian net , and nearly 
 upset our canoe before we tow it ashore ; the same night that a green 
 water - snake shoot out from the rush and carry off in its coil the 
 steersman of Challenger 's canoe . I will tell , too , of the great 
 nocturnal white thing - to this day we do not know whether it be beast 
 or reptile - which live in a vile swamp to the east of the lake , and 
 flit about with a faint phosphorescent glimmer in the darkness . the 
 Indians be so terrified at it that they would not go near the place , 
 and , though we twice make expedition and see it each time , we could 
 not make our way through the deep marsh in which it live . I can only 
 say that it seem to be large than a cow and have the strange musky 
 odor . I will tell also of the huge bird which chase Challenger to the 
 shelter of the rock one day - a great running bird , far tall than an 
 ostrich , with a vulture - like neck and cruel head which make it a 
 walk death . as Challenger climb to safety one dart of that savage 
 curve beak shore off the heel of his boot as if it have be cut with 
 a chisel . this time at least modern weapon prevail and the great 
 creature , twelve foot from head to foot - phororachus its name , 
 accord to our panting but exultant Professor - go down before Lord 
 Roxton 's rifle in a flurry of wave feather and kicking limb , with 
 two remorseless yellow eye glare up from the midst of it . may I 
 live to see that flatten vicious skull in its own niche amid the 
 trophy of the Albany . finally , I will assuredly give some account of 
 the toxodon , the giant ten - foot guinea pig , with project chisel 
 tooth , which we kill as it drink in the gray of the morning by the 
 side of the lake . 

 all this I shall some day write at fuller length , and amidst these more 
 stir day I would tenderly sketch in these lovely summer evening , 
 when with the deep blue sky above we we lay in good comradeship among 
 the long grass by the wood and marvel at the strange fowl that 
 sweep over we and the quaint new creature which creep from their 
 burrow to watch we , while above we the bough of the bush be heavy 
 with luscious fruit , and below we strange and lovely flower peep at 
 we from among the herbage ; or those long moonlit night when we lay out 
 upon the shimmering surface of the great lake and watch with wonder 
 and awe the huge circle ripple out from the sudden splash of some 
 fantastic monster ; or the greenish gleam , far down in the deep water , 
 of some strange creature upon the confine of darkness . these be the 
 scene which my mind and my pen will dwell upon in every detail at some 
 future day . 

 but , you will ask , why these experience and why this delay , when you 
 and your comrade should have be occupy day and night in the 
 devising of some mean by which you could return to the outer world ? 
 my answer be , that there be not one of we who be not work for this 
 end , but that our work have be in vain . one fact we have very speedily 
 discover : the Indians would do nothing to help we . in every other 
 way they be our friend - one might almost say our devoted slave - but 
 when it be suggest that they should help we to make and carry a 
 plank which would bridge the chasm , or when we wish to get from they 
 thong of leather or liana to weave rope which might help we , we be 
 meet by a good - humor , but an invincible , refusal . they would smile , 
 twinkle their eye , shake their head , and there be the end of it . 
 even the old chief meet we with the same obstinate denial , and it be 
 only Maretas , the youngster whom we have save , who look wistfully at 
 we and tell we by his gesture that he be grieve for our thwart 
 wish . ever since their crown triumph with the ape - man they look 
 upon we as superman , who bear victory in the tube of strange weapon , 
 and they believe that so long as we remain with they good fortune 
 would be theirs . a little red - skinned wife and a cave of our own be 
 freely offer to each of we if we would but forget our own people and 
 dwell forever upon the plateau . so far all have be kindly , however 
 far apart our desire might be ; but we feel well assure that our 
 actual plan of a descent must be keep secret , for we have reason to 
 fear that at the last they might try to hold we by force . 

 in spite of the danger from dinosaur   which be not great save at 
 night , for , as I may have say before , they be mostly nocturnal in 
 their habit   I have twice in the last three week be over to our old 
 camp in order to see our negro who still keep watch and ward below the 
 cliff . my eye strain eagerly across the great plain in the hope of 
 see afar off the help for which we have pray . but the long 
 cactus - strew level still stretch away , empty and bare , to the 
 distant line of the cane - brake . 

 " they will soon come now , Massa Malone . before another week pass 
 Indian come back and bring rope and fetch you down . " such be the 
 cheery cry of our excellent Zambo . 

 I have one strange experience as I come from this second visit which have 
 involve my be away for a night from my companion . I be return 
 along the well - remember route , and have reach a spot within a mile 
 or so of the marsh of the pterodactyls , when I see an extraordinary 
 object approach I . it be a man who walk inside a framework make 
 of bent cane so that he be enclose on all side in a bell - shape 
 cage . as I draw near I be more amazed still to see that it be Lord 
 John Roxton . when he see I he slip from under his curious 
 protection and come towards I laugh , and yet , as I think , with 
 some confusion in his manner . 

 " well , young fellah , " say he , " who would have think of meetin ' you 
 up here ? " 

 " what in the world be you do ? " I ask . 

 " Visitin ' my friend , the pterodactyls , " say he . 

 " but why ? " 

 " Interestin ' beast , do not   you think ? but unsociable ! nasty rude way 
 with stranger , as you may remember . so I rig this framework which 
 keep they from bein ' too pressin ' in their attention . " 

 " but what do you want in the swamp ? " 

 he look at I with a very questioning eye , and I read hesitation in 
 his face . 

 " do not   you think other people besides Professors can want to know 
 thing ? " he say at last . " I be studyin ' the pretty dear . that be 
 enough for you . " 

 " no offense , " say I. 

 his good - humor return and he laugh . 

 " no offense , young fellah . I be go to get a young devil chick for 
 Challenger . that be one of my job . no , I do not   want your company . 
 I be safe in this cage , and you be not . so long , and I will be back in 
 camp by night - fall . " 

 he turn away and I leave he wander on through the wood with his 
 extraordinary cage around he . 

 if Lord John 's behavior at this time be strange , that of Challenger 
 be more so . I may say that he seem to possess an extraordinary 
 fascination for the indian woman , and that he always carry a large 
 spread palm branch with which he beat they off as if they be 
 fly , when their attention become too pressing . to see he walk 
 like a comic opera Sultan , with this badge of authority in his hand , 
 his black beard bristling in front of he , his toe point at each 
 step , and a train of wide - eyed indian girl behind he , clothe in their 
 slender drapery of bark cloth , be one of the most grotesque of all the 
 picture which I will carry back with I . as to Summerlee , he be 
 absorb in the insect and bird life of the plateau , and spend his 
 whole time   save that considerable portion which be devoted to abuse 
 Challenger for not get we out of our difficulty   in cleaning and 
 mount his specimen . 

 Challenger have be in the habit of walk off by himself every 
 morning and return from time to time with look of portentous 
 solemnity , as one who bear the full weight of a great enterprise upon 
 his shoulder . one day , palm branch in hand , and his crowd of adore 
 devotee behind he , he lead we down to his hidden work - shop and take we 
 into the secret of his plan . 

 the place be a small clearing in the center of a palm grove . in this 
 be one of those boil mud geyser which I have already describe . 
 around its edge be scatter a number of leathern thong cut from 
 iguanodon hide , and a large collapse membrane which prove to be the 
 dry and scrap stomach of one of the great fish lizard from the 
 lake . this huge sack have be sew up at one end and only a small 
 orifice leave at the other . into this opening several bamboo cane have 
 be insert and the other end of these cane be in contact with 
 conical clay funnel which collect the gas bubble up through the 
 mud of the geyser . soon the flaccid organ begin to slowly expand and 
 show such a tendency to upward movement that Challenger fasten the 
 cord which hold it to the trunk of the surround tree . in half an 
 hour a good - sized gas - bag have be form , and the jerking and 
 strain upon the thong show that it be capable of considerable 
 lift . Challenger , like a glad father in the presence of his 
 first - bear , stand smile and stroke his beard , in silent , 
 self - satisfy content as he gaze at the creation of his brain . it 
 be Summerlee who first break the silence . 

 " you do not   mean we to go up in that thing , Challenger ? " say he , in an 
 acid voice . 

 " I mean , my dear Summerlee , to give you such a demonstration of its 
 power that after see it you will , I be sure , have no hesitation in 
 trust yourself to it . " 

 " you can put it right out of your head now , at once , " say Summerlee 
 with decision , " nothing on earth would induce I to commit such a 
 folly . Lord John , I trust that you will not countenance such madness ? " 

 " dooced ingenious , I call it , " say our peer . " I would like to see how it 
 work . " 

 " so you shall , " say Challenger . " for some day I have exert my 
 whole brain force upon the problem of how we shall descend from these 
 cliff . we have satisfy ourselves that we can not climb down and that 
 there be no tunnel . we be also unable to construct any kind of bridge 
 which may take we back to the pinnacle from which we come . how then 
 shall I find a means to convey we ? some little time ago I have remark 
 to our young friend here that free hydrogen be evolve from the 
 geyser . the idea of a balloon naturally follow . I be , I will 
 admit , somewhat baffle by the difficulty of discover an envelope to 
 contain the gas , but the contemplation of the immense entrail of these 
 reptile supply I with a solution to the problem . behold the 
 result ! " 

 he put one hand in the front of his ragged jacket and point proudly 
 with the other . 

 by this time the gas - bag have swell to a goodly rotundity and be 
 jerk strongly upon its lashing . 

 " midsummer madness ! " snort Summerlee . 

 Lord John be delighted with the whole idea . " clever old dear , be not 
 he ? " he whisper to I , and then loud to Challenger . " what about a 
 car ? " 

 " the car will be my next care . I have already plan how it be to be 
 make and attach . meanwhile I will simply show you how capable my 
 apparatus be of support the weight of each of we . " 

 " all of we , surely ? " 

 " no , it be part of my plan that each in turn shall descend as in a 
 parachute , and the balloon be draw back by mean which I shall have no 
 difficulty in perfect . if it will support the weight of one and let 
 he gently down , it will have do all that be require of it . I will 
 now show you its capacity in that direction . " 

 he bring out a lump of basalt of a considerable size , construct in 
 the middle so that a cord could be easily attach to it . this cord 
 be the one which we have bring with we on to the plateau after we have 
 use it for climb the pinnacle . it be over a hundred foot long , 
 and though it be thin it be very strong . he have prepare a sort of 
 collar of leather with many strap depend from it . this collar be 
 place over the dome of the balloon , and the hang thong be 
 gather together below , so that the pressure of any weight would be 
 diffuse over a considerable surface . then the lump of basalt be 
 fasten to the thong , and the rope be allow to hang from the end 
 of it , be pass three time round the Professor 's arm . 

 " I will now , " say Challenger , with a smile of pleased anticipation , 
 " demonstrate the carrying power of my balloon . " as he say so he cut 
 with a knife the various lashing that hold it . 

 never be our expedition in more imminent danger of complete 
 annihilation . the inflated membrane shoot up with frightful velocity 
 into the air . in an instant Challenger be pull off his foot and 
 drag after it . I have just time to throw my arm round his ascending 
 waist when I be myself whip up into the air . Lord John have I with 
 a rat - trap grip round the leg , but I feel that he also be come off 
 the ground . for a moment I have a vision of four adventurer float 
 like a string of sausage over the land that they have explore . but , 
 happily , there be limit to the strain which the rope would stand , 
 though none apparently to the lift power of this infernal machine . 
 there be a sharp crack , and we be in a heap upon the ground with 
 coil of rope all over we . when we be able to stagger to our foot we 
 see far off in the deep blue sky one dark spot where the lump of basalt 
 be speed upon its way . 

 " Splendid ! " cry the undaunted Challenger , rub his injured arm . 
 " a most thorough and satisfactory demonstration ! I could not have 
 anticipate such a success . within a week , gentleman , I promise that a 
 second balloon will be prepare , and that you can count upon take in 
 safety and comfort the first stage of our homeward journey . " so far I 
 have write each of the forego event as it occur . now I be 
 round off my narrative from the old camp , where Zambo have wait so 
 long , with all our difficulty and danger leave like a dream behind we 
 upon the summit of those vast ruddy crag which tower above our head . 
 we have descend in safety , though in a most unexpected fashion , and 
 all be well with we . in six week or two month we shall be in London , 
 and it be possible that this letter may not reach you much early than 
 we do ourselves . already our heart yearn and our spirit fly towards 
 the great mother city which hold so much that be dear to we . 

 it be on the very evening of our perilous adventure with Challenger 's 
 home - make balloon that the change come in our fortune . I have say 
 that the one person from whom we have have some sign of sympathy in our 
 attempt to get away be the young chief whom we have rescue . he alone 
 have no desire to hold we against our will in a strange land . he have 
 tell we as much by his expressive language of sign . that evening , 
 after dusk , he come down to our little camp , hand I   for some reason 
 he have always show his attention to I , perhaps because I be the one 
 who be near his age   a small roll of the bark of a tree , and then 
 point solemnly up at the row of cave above he , he have put his 
 finger to his lip as a sign of secrecy and have steal back again to 
 his people . 

 I take the slip of bark to the firelight and we examine it together . 
 it be about a foot square , and on the inner side there be a singular 
 arrangement of line , which I here reproduce : 


 they be neatly do in charcoal upon the white surface , and look to 
 I at first sight like some sort of rough musical score . 

 " whatever it be , I can swear that it be of importance to we , " say I. 
 " I could read that on his face as he give it . " 

 " unless we have come upon a primitive practical joker , " Summerlee 
 suggest , " which I should think would be one of the most elementary 
 development of man . " 

 " it be clearly some sort of script , " say Challenger . 

 " look like a guinea puzzle competition , " remark Lord John , crane 
 his neck to have a look at it . then suddenly he stretch out his hand 
 and seize the puzzle . 

 " by George ! " he cry , " I believe I have   get it . the boy guess right 
 the very first time . see here ! how many mark be on that paper ? 
 Eighteen . well , if you come to think of it there be eighteen cave 
 opening on the hill - side above we . " 

 " he point up to the cave when he give it to I , " say I. 

 " well , that settle it . this be a chart of the cave . what ! eighteen 
 of they all in a row , some short , some deep , some branching , same as we 
 see they . it be a map , and here be a cross on it . what be the cross for ? 
 it be place to mark one that be much deep than the other . " 

 " one that go through , " I cry . 

 " I believe our young friend have read the riddle , " say Challenger . " if 
 the cave do not go through I do not understand why this person , who 
 have every reason to mean we well , should have draw our attention to 
 it . but if it do go through and come out at the corresponding point 
 on the other side , we should not have more than a hundred foot to 
 descend . " 

 " a hundred foot ! " grumble Summerlee . 

 " well , our rope be still more than a hundred foot long , " I cry . 
 " surely we could get down . " 

 " how about the Indians in the cave ? " Summerlee object . 

 " there be no Indians in any of the cave above our head , " say I. 
 " they be all use as barn and store - house . why should we not go up 
 now at once and spy out the land ? " 

 there be a dry bituminous wood upon the plateau - a species of 
 araucaria , accord to our botanist - which be always use by the 
 Indians for torch . each of we pick up a faggot of this , and we 
 make our way up weed - cover step to the particular cave which be 
 mark in the drawing . it be , as I have say , empty , save for a great 
 number of enormous bat , which flap round our head as we advance 
 into it . as we have no desire to draw the attention of the Indians to 
 our proceeding , we stumble along in the dark until we have go round 
 several curve and penetrate a considerable distance into the cavern . 
 then , at last , we light our torch . it be a beautiful dry tunnel with 
 smooth gray wall cover with native symbol , a curved roof which 
 arch over our head , and white glistening sand beneath our foot . we 
 hurry eagerly along it until , with a deep groan of bitter 
 disappointment , we be bring to a halt . a sheer wall of rock have 
 appear before we , with no chink through which a mouse could have 
 slip . there be no escape for we there . 

 we stand with bitter heart star at this unexpected obstacle . it 
 be not the result of any convulsion , as in the case of the ascending 
 tunnel . the end wall be exactly like the side one . it be , and have 
 always be , a cul - de - sac . 

 " never mind , my friend , " say the indomitable Challenger . " you have 
 still my firm promise of a balloon . " 

 Summerlee groan . 

 " can we be in the wrong cave ? " I suggest . 

 " no use , young fellah , " say Lord John , with his finger on the chart . 
 " seventeen from the right and second from the left . this be the cave 
 sure enough . " 

 I look at the mark to which his finger point , and I give a sudden 
 cry of joy . 

 " I believe I have it ! follow I ! follow I ! " 

 I hurry back along the way we have come , my torch in my hand . " here , " 
 say I , point to some match upon the ground , " be where we light up . " 

 " exactly . " 

 " well , it be mark as a forked cave , and in the darkness we pass the 
 fork before the torch be light . on the right side as we go out we 
 should find the long arm . " 

 it be as I have say . we have not go thirty yard before a great 
 black opening loom in the wall . we turn into it to find that we 
 be in a much large passage than before . along it we hurry in 
 breathless impatience for many hundred of yard . then , suddenly , in 
 the black darkness of the arch in front of we we see a gleam of dark 
 red light . we star in amazement . a sheet of steady flame seem to 
 cross the passage and to bar our way . we hasten towards it . no 
 sound , no heat , no movement come from it , but still the great luminous 
 curtain glow before we , silver all the cave and turn the sand 
 to powdered jewel , until as we draw close it discover a circular 
 edge . 

 " the moon , by George ! " cry Lord John . " we be through , boy ! we be 
 through ! " 

 it be indeed the full moon which shine straight down the aperture 
 which open upon the cliff . it be a small rift , not large than a 
 window , but it be enough for all our purpose . as we crane our neck 
 through it we could see that the descent be not a very difficult one , 
 and that the level ground be no very great way below we . it be no 
 wonder that from below we have not observe the place , as the cliff 
 curve overhead and an ascent at the spot would have seem so 
 impossible as to discourage close inspection . we satisfy ourselves 
 that with the help of our rope we could find our way down , and then 
 return , rejoice , to our camp to make our preparation for the next 
 evening . 

 what we do we have to do quickly and secretly , since even at this last 
 hour the Indians might hold we back . our store we would leave behind 
 we , save only our gun and cartridge . but Challenger have some 
 unwieldy stuff which he ardently desire to take with he , and one 
 particular package , of which I may not speak , which give we more labor 
 than any . slowly the day pass , but when the darkness fall we be 
 ready for our departure . with much labor we get our thing up the 
 step , and then , look back , take one last long survey of that 
 strange land , soon I fear to be vulgarize , the prey of hunter and 
 prospector , but to each of we a dreamland of glamour and romance , a 
 land where we have dare much , suffer much , and learn much - OUR 
 land , as we shall ever fondly call it . along upon our leave the 
 neighboring cave each throw out its ruddy cheery firelight into the 
 gloom . from the slope below we rise the voice of the Indians as they 
 laugh and sing . beyond be the long sweep of the wood , and in the 
 center , shimmer vaguely through the gloom , be the great lake , the 
 mother of strange monster . even as we look a high whicker cry , 
 the call of some weird animal , rang clear out of the darkness . it be 
 the very voice of Maple White Land bid we good - bye . we turn and 
 plunge into the cave which lead to home . 

 two hour later , we , our package , and all we own , be at the foot 
 of the cliff . save for Challenger 's luggage we have never a difficulty . 
 leave it all where we descend , we start at once for Zambo 's camp . 
 in the early morning we approach it , but only to find , to our 
 amazement , not one fire but a dozen upon the plain . the rescue party 
 have arrive . there be twenty Indians from the river , with stake , 
 rope , and all that could be useful for bridge the chasm . at least 
 we shall have no difficulty now in carry our package , when 
 to - morrow we begin to make our way back to the Amazon . 

 and so , in humble and thankful mood , I close this account . our eye 
 have see great wonder and our soul be chasten by what we have 
 endure . each be in his own way a well and deep man . it may be 
 that when we reach Para we shall stop to refit . if we do , this letter 
 will be a mail ahead . if not , it will reach London on the very day 
 that I do . in either case , my dear Mr. McArdle , I hope very soon to 
 shake you by the hand . 




  CHAPTER XVI 

  " A Procession ! a Procession ! " 

 I should wish to place upon record here our gratitude to all our 
 friend upon the Amazon for the very great kindness and hospitality 
 which be show to we upon our return journey . very particularly would 
 I thank senhor Penalosa and other official of the brazilian Government 
 for the special arrangement by which we be help upon our way , and 
 Senhor Pereira of Para , to whose forethought we owe the complete outfit 
 for a decent appearance in the civilized world which we find ready for 
 we at that town . it seem a poor return for all the courtesy which we 
 encounter that we should deceive our host and benefactor , but under 
 the circumstance we have really no alternative , and I hereby tell they 
 that they will only waste their time and their money if they attempt to 
 follow upon our trace . even the name have be alter in our 
 account , and I be very sure that no one , from the most careful study 
 of they , could come within a thousand mile of our unknown land . 

 the excitement which have be cause through those part of South 
 America which we have to traverse be imagine by we to be purely local , 
 and I can assure our friend in England that we have no notion of the 
 uproar which the mere rumor of our experience have cause through 
 Europe . it be not until the Ivernia be within five hundred mile of 
 Southampton that the wireless message from paper after paper and 
 agency after agency , offer huge price for a short return message as 
 to our actual result , show we how strained be the attention not 
 only of the scientific world but of the general public . it be agree 
 among we , however , that no definite statement should be give to the 
 Press until we have meet the member of the Zoological Institute , since 
 as delegate it be our clear duty to give our first report to the body 
 from which we have receive our commission of investigation . thus , 
 although we find Southampton full of Pressmen , we absolutely refuse 
 to give any information , which have the natural effect of focusse 
 public attention upon the meeting which be advertise for the evening 
 of November 7th . for this gathering , the Zoological Hall which have 
 be the scene of the inception of our task be find to be far too 
 small , and it be only in the Queen 's Hall in Regent Street that 
 accommodation could be find . it be now common knowledge the promoter 
 might have venture upon the Albert Hall and still find their space 
 too scanty . 

 it be for the second evening after our arrival that the great meeting 
 have be fix . for the first , we have each , no doubt , our own press 
 personal affair to absorb we . of mine I can not yet speak . it may be 
 that as it stand far from I I may think of it , and even speak of 
 it , with less emotion . I have show the reader in the beginning of 
 this narrative where lie the spring of my action . it be but right , 
 perhaps , that I should carry on the tale and show also the result . 
 and yet the day may come when I would not have it otherwise . at least 
 I have be drive forth to take part in a wondrous adventure , and I 
 can not but be thankful to the force that drive I . 

 and now I turn to the last supreme eventful moment of our adventure . 
 as I be rack my brain as to how I should well describe it , my eye 
 fall upon the issue of my own Journal for the morning of the 8th of 
 November with the full and excellent account of my friend and 
 fellow - reporter Macdona . what can I do well than transcribe his 
 narrative - head - line and all ? I admit that the paper be exuberant in 
 the matter , out of compliment to its own enterprise in send a 
 correspondent , but the other great daily be hardly less full in 
 their account . thus , then , friend Mac in his report : 


  the new world 
  great meeting at the QUEEN 'S HALL 
  SCENES of UPROAR 
  EXTRAORDINARY INCIDENT 
  what be it ? 
  NOCTURNAL RIOT in REGENT STREET 
   Special 


 " the much - discuss meeting of the Zoological Institute , convene to 
 hear the report of the Committee of Investigation send out last year to 
 South America to test the assertion make by Professor Challenger as to 
 the continued existence of prehistoric life upon that continent , be 
 hold last night in the great Queen 's Hall , and it be safe to say that 
 it be likely to be a red letter date in the history of Science , for the 
 proceeding be of so remarkable and sensational a character that no 
 one present be ever likely to forget they . "   oh , brother scribe 
 Macdona , what a monstrous opening sentence !   " the ticket be 
 theoretically confine to member and their friend , but the latter be 
 an elastic term , and long before eight o'clock , the hour fix for the 
 commencement of the proceeding , all part of the Great Hall be 
 tightly packed . the general public , however , which most unreasonably 
 entertain a grievance at have be exclude , storm the door at a 
 quarter to eight , after a prolong melee in which several people be 
 injure , include Inspector Scoble of H. Division , whose leg be 
 unfortunately break . after this unwarrantable invasion , which not 
 only fill every passage , but even intrude upon the space set apart 
 for the Press , it be estimate that nearly five thousand people await 
 the arrival of the traveler . when they eventually appear , they take 
 their place in the front of a platform which already contain all the 
 lead scientific man , not only of this country , but of France and of 
 Germany . Sweden be also represent , in the person of Professor 
 Sergius , the famous Zoologist of the University of Upsala . the 
 entrance of the four hero of the occasion be the signal for a 
 remarkable demonstration of welcome , the whole audience rise and 
 cheer for some minute . an acute observer might , however , have 
 detect some sign of dissent amid the applause , and gather that the 
 proceeding be likely to become more lively than harmonious . it may 
 safely be prophesy , however , that no one could have foresee the 
 extraordinary turn which they be actually to take . 

 " of the appearance of the four wanderer little need be say , since 
 their photograph have for some time be appear in all the paper . 
 they bear few trace of the hardship which they be say to have 
 undergone . Professor Challenger 's beard may be more shaggy , Professor 
 Summerlee 's feature more ascetic , Lord John Roxton 's figure more 
 gaunt , and all three may be burn to a dark tint than when they leave 
 our shore , but each appear to be in most excellent health . as to 
 our own representative , the well - know athlete and international Rugby 
 football player , E. D. Malone , he look train to a hair , and as he 
 survey the crowd a smile of good - humor contentment pervade his 
 honest but homely face . "   all right , Mac , wait till I get you alone ! 

 " when quiet have be restore and the audience resume their seat 
 after the ovation which they have give to the traveler , the chairman , 
 the Duke of Durham , address the meeting . ' he would not , ' he say , 
 ' stand for more than a moment between that vast assembly and the treat 
 which lie before they . it be not for he to anticipate what Professor 
 Summerlee , who be the spokesman of the committee , have to say to they , 
 but it be common rumor that their expedition have be crown by 
 extraordinary success . '   applause .   ' apparently the age of romance 
 be not dead , and there be common ground upon which the wild 
 imagining of the novelist could meet the actual scientific 
 investigation of the searcher for truth . he would only add , before he 
 sit down , that he rejoice - and all of they would rejoice - that these 
 gentleman have return safe and sound from their difficult and 
 dangerous task , for it can not be deny that any disaster to such an 
 expedition would have inflict a well - nigh irreparable loss to the 
 cause of zoological science . '   great applause , in which Professor 
 Challenger be observe to join . 

 " Professor Summerlee 's rise be the signal for another extraordinary 
 outbreak of enthusiasm , which break out again at interval throughout 
 his address . that address will not be give in extenso in these 
 column , for the reason that a full account of the whole adventure of 
 the expedition be be publish as a supplement from the pen of our 
 own special correspondent . some general indication will therefore 
 suffice . have describe the genesis of their journey , and pay a 
 handsome tribute to his friend Professor Challenger , couple with an 
 apology for the incredulity with which his assertion , now fully 
 vindicate , have be receive , he give the actual course of their 
 journey , carefully withhold such information as would aid the public 
 in any attempt to locate this remarkable plateau . have describe , in 
 general term , their course from the main river up to the time that 
 they actually reach the base of the cliff , he enthral his hearer 
 by his account of the difficulty encounter by the expedition in 
 their repeat attempt to mount they , and finally describe how they 
 succeed in their desperate endeavor , which cost the life of their 
 two devoted half - breed servant . "   this amazing reading of the affair 
 be the result of Summerlee 's endeavor to avoid raise any 
 questionable matter at the meeting . 

 " have conduct his audience in fancy to the summit , and maroon 
 they there by reason of the fall of their bridge , the Professor 
 proceed to describe both the horror and the attraction of that 
 remarkable land . of personal adventure he say little , but lay 
 stress upon the rich harvest reap by Science in the observation of 
 the wonderful beast , bird , insect , and plant life of the plateau . 
 peculiarly rich in the coleoptera and in the lepidoptera , forty - six new 
 specie of the one and ninety - four of the other have be secure in the 
 course of a few week . it be , however , in the large animal , and 
 especially in the large animal suppose to have be long extinct , 
 that the interest of the public be naturally center . of these he 
 be able to give a goodly list , but have little doubt that it would be 
 largely extend when the place have be more thoroughly investigate . 
 he and his companion have see at least a dozen creature , most of they 
 at a distance , which correspond with nothing at present know to 
 Science . these would in time be duly classify and examine . he 
 instance a snake , the cast skin of which , deep purple in color , be 
 fifty - one foot in length , and mention a white creature , suppose to 
 be mammalian , which give forth well - mark phosphorescence in the 
 darkness ; also a large black moth , the bite of which be suppose by 
 the Indians to be highly poisonous . set aside these entirely new 
 form of life , the plateau be very rich in known prehistoric form , 
 date back in some case to early Jurassic time . among these he 
 mention the gigantic and grotesque stegosaurus , see once by Mr. 
 Malone at a drinking - place by the lake , and draw in the sketch - book of 
 that adventurous American who have first penetrate this unknown world . 
 he describe also the iguanodon and the pterodactyl - two of the first 
 of the wonder which they have encounter . he then thrill the 
 assembly by some account of the terrible carnivorous dinosaur , which 
 have on more than one occasion pursue member of the party , and which 
 be the most formidable of all the creature which they have 
 encounter . thence he pass to the huge and ferocious bird , the 
 phororachu , and to the great elk which still roam upon this upland . 
 it be not , however , until he sketch the mystery of the central 
 lake that the full interest and enthusiasm of the audience be 
 arouse . one have to pinch oneself to be sure that one be awake as one 
 hear this sane and practical Professor in cold measured tone 
 describe the monstrous three - eyed fish - lizard and the huge 
 water - snake which inhabit this enchant sheet of water . next he 
 touch upon the Indians , and upon the extraordinary colony of 
 anthropoid ape , which might be look upon as an advance upon the 
 pithecanthropus of Java , and as come therefore near than any know 
 form to that hypothetical creation , the miss link . finally he 
 describe , amongst some merriment , the ingenious but highly dangerous 
 aeronautic invention of Professor Challenger , and wound up a most 
 memorable address by an account of the method by which the committee 
 do at last find their way back to civilization . 

 " it have be hop that the proceeding would end there , and that a 
 vote of thank and congratulation , move by Professor Sergius , of 
 Upsala University , would be duly second and carry ; but it be soon 
 evident that the course of event be not destine to flow so smoothly . 
 symptom of opposition have be evident from time to time during the 
 evening , and now Dr. James Illingworth , of Edinburgh , rise in the 
 center of the hall . Dr. Illingworth ask whether an amendment should 
 not be take before a resolution . 

 " the chairman : ' yes , sir , if there must be an amendment . ' 

 " DR . ILLINGWORTH : ' your grace , there must be an amendment . ' 

 " the chairman : ' then let we take it at once . ' 

 " PROFESSOR SUMMERLEE   spring to his foot : ' might I explain , your 
 Grace , that this man be my personal enemy ever since our controversy in 
 the Quarterly Journal of Science as to the true nature of Bathybius ? ' 

 " the chairman : ' I fear I can not go into personal matter . proceed . ' 

 " Dr. Illingworth be imperfectly hear in part of his remark on 
 account of the strenuous opposition of the friend of the explorer . 
 some attempt be also make to pull he down . be a man of enormous 
 physique , however , and possess of a very powerful voice , he dominate 
 the tumult and succeed in finish his speech . it be clear , from 
 the moment of his rise , that he have a number of friend and 
 sympathizer in the hall , though they form a minority in the 
 audience . the attitude of the great part of the public might be 
 describe as one of attentive neutrality . 

 " Dr. Illingworth begin his remark by express his high appreciation 
 of the scientific work both of Professor Challenger and of Professor 
 Summerlee . he much regret that any personal bias should have be 
 read into his remark , which be entirely dictate by his desire for 
 scientific truth . his position , in fact , be substantially the same as 
 that take up by Professor Summerlee at the last meeting . at that last 
 meeting Professor Challenger have make certain assertion which have be 
 query by his colleague . now this colleague come forward himself with 
 the same assertion and expect they to remain unquestioned . be this 
 reasonable ?   ' yes , ' ' no , ' and prolong interruption , during which 
 Professor Challenger be hear from the Press box to ask leave from the 
 chairman to put Dr. Illingworth into the street .   a year ago one man 
 say certain thing . now four man say other and more startling one . 
 be this to constitute a final proof where the matter in question be 
 of the most revolutionary and incredible character ? there have be 
 recent example of traveler arrive from the unknown with certain 
 tale which have be too readily accept . be the London Zoological 
 Institute to place itself in this position ? he admit that the 
 member of the committee be man of character . but human nature be 
 very complex . even Professors might be mislead by the desire for 
 notoriety . like moth , we all love well to flutter in the light . 
 heavy - game shot like to be in a position to cap the tale of their 
 rival , and journalist be not averse from sensational coup , even 
 when imagination have to aid fact in the process . each member of the 
 committee have his own motive for make the most of his result . 
  ' Shame ! shame ! '   he have no desire to be offensive .   ' you be ! ' and 
 interruption .   the corroboration of these wondrous tale be really of 
 the most slender description . what do it amount to ? some 
 photograph .   be it possible that in this age of ingenious 
 manipulation photograph could be accept as evidence ?   what more ? 
 we have a story of a flight and a descent by rope which preclude the 
 production of large specimen . it be ingenious , but not convince . 
 it be understand that Lord John Roxton claim to have the skull of a 
 phororachu . he could only say that he would like to see that skull . 

 " LORD JOHN ROXTON : ' be this fellow call I a liar ? '   Uproar . 

 " the chairman : ' order ! order ! Dr. Illingworth , I must direct you to 
 bring your remark to a conclusion and to move your amendment . ' 

 " DR . ILLINGWORTH : ' your grace , I have more to say , but I bow to your 
 ruling . I move , then , that , while Professor Summerlee be thank for 
 his interesting address , the whole matter shall be regard as 
 ' non - prove , ' and shall be refer back to a large , and possibly more 
 reliable Committee of Investigation . ' 

 " it be difficult to describe the confusion cause by this amendment . a 
 large section of the audience express their indignation at such a 
 slur upon the traveler by noisy shout of dissent and cry of , ' do not 
 put it ! ' ' withdraw ! ' ' turn he out ! ' on the other hand , the 
 malcontent - and it can not be deny that they be fairly 
 numerous - cheer for the amendment , with cry of ' order ! ' ' Chair ! ' 
 and ' fair play ! ' a scuffle break out in the back bench , and blow 
 be freely exchange among the medical student who crowd that part 
 of the hall . it be only the moderate influence of the presence of 
 large number of lady which prevent an absolute riot . suddenly , 
 however , there be a pause , a hush , and then complete silence . 
 Professor Challenger be on his foot . his appearance and manner be 
 peculiarly arresting , and as he raise his hand for order the whole 
 audience settle down expectantly to give he a hearing . 

 " ' it will be within the recollection of many present , ' say Professor 
 Challenger , ' that similar foolish and unmannerly scene mark the last 
 meeting at which I have be able to address they . on that occasion 
 Professor Summerlee be the chief offender , and though he be now 
 chastened and contrite , the matter could not be entirely forget . I 
 have hear to - night similar , but even more offensive , sentiment from 
 the person who have just sit down , and though it be a conscious effort 
 of self - effacement to come down to that person 's mental level , I will 
 endeavor to do so , in order to allay any reasonable doubt which could 
 possibly exist in the mind of anyone . '   Laughter and interruption . 
 ' I need not remind this audience that , though Professor Summerlee , as 
 the head of the Committee of Investigation , have be put up to speak 
 to - night , still it be I who be the real prime mover in this business , 
 and that it be mainly to I that any successful result must be 
 ascribe . I have safely conduct these three gentleman to the spot 
 mention , and I have , as you have hear , convince they of the 
 accuracy of my previous account . we have hop that we should find upon 
 our return that no one be so dense as to dispute our joint 
 conclusion . warn , however , by my previous experience , I have not 
 come without such proof as may convince a reasonable man . as 
 explain by Professor Summerlee , our camera have be tamper with 
 by the ape - man when they ransack our camp , and most of our negative 
 ruin . '   jeer , laughter , and ' tell we another ! ' from the back .   ' I 
 have mention the ape - man , and I can not forbear from say that some 
 of the sound which now meet my ear bring back most vividly to my 
 recollection my experience with those interesting creature . ' 
  Laughter .   ' in spite of the destruction of so many invaluable 
 negative , there still remain in our collection a certain number of 
 corroborative photograph show the condition of life upon the 
 plateau . do they accuse they of have forge these photograph ? '   a 
 voice , ' yes , ' and considerable interruption which end in several man 
 be put out of the hall .   ' the negative be open to the inspection 
 of expert . but what other evidence have they ? under the condition of 
 their escape it be naturally impossible to bring a large amount of 
 baggage , but they have rescue Professor Summerlee 's collection of 
 butterfly and beetle , contain many new specie . be this not 
 evidence ? '   several voice , ' no . '   ' who say no ? ' 

 " DR . ILLINGWORTH   rise : ' our point be that such a collection might 
 have be make in other place than a prehistoric plateau . '   applause . 

 " PROFESSOR CHALLENGER : ' no doubt , sir , we have to bow to your 
 scientific authority , although I must admit that the name be 
 unfamiliar . pass , then , both the photograph and the entomological 
 collection , I come to the varied and accurate information which we 
 bring with we upon point which have never before be elucidate . for 
 example , upon the domestic habit of the pterodactyl - ' a voice : 
 ' bosh , ' and uproar   - ' I say , that upon the domestic habit of the 
 pterodactyl we can throw a flood of light . I can exhibit to you from 
 my portfolio a picture of that creature take from life which would 
 convince you - - ' 

 " DR . ILLINGWORTH : ' no picture could convince we of anything . ' 

 " PROFESSOR CHALLENGER : ' you would require to see the thing itself ? ' 

 " DR . ILLINGWORTH : ' undoubtedly . ' 

 " PROFESSOR CHALLENGER : ' and you would accept that ? ' 

 " DR . ILLINGWORTH   laugh : ' beyond a doubt . ' 

 " it be at this point that the sensation of the evening arise - a 
 sensation so dramatic that it can never have be parallel in the 
 history of scientific gathering . Professor Challenger raise his hand 
 in the air as a signal , and at once our colleague , Mr. E. D. Malone , 
 be observe to rise and to make his way to the back of the platform . 
 an instant later he re - appear in company of a gigantic negro , the two 
 of they bear between they a large square packing - case . it be 
 evidently of great weight , and be slowly carry forward and place in 
 front of the Professor 's chair . all sound have hush in the audience 
 and everyone be absorb in the spectacle before they . Professor 
 Challenger draw off the top of the case , which form a slide lid . 
 peer down into the box he snap his finger several time and be 
 hear from the Press seat to say , ' come , then , pretty , pretty ! ' in a 
 coax voice . an instant later , with a scratch , rattle sound , a 
 most horrible and loathsome creature appear from below and perch 
 itself upon the side of the case . even the unexpected fall of the Duke 
 of Durham into the orchestra , which occur at this moment , could not 
 distract the petrified attention of the vast audience . the face of the 
 creature be like the wildest gargoyle that the imagination of a mad 
 medieval builder could have conceive . it be malicious , horrible , 
 with two small red eye as bright as point of burn coal . its long , 
 savage mouth , which be hold half - open , be full of a double row of 
 shark - like tooth . its shoulder be hump , and round they be 
 drape what appear to be a fade gray shawl . it be the devil of our 
 childhood in person . there be a turmoil in the audience - someone 
 scream , two lady in the front row fall senseless from their chair , 
 and there be a general movement upon the platform to follow their 
 chairman into the orchestra . for a moment there be danger of a 
 general panic . Professor Challenger throw up his hand to still the 
 commotion , but the movement alarm the creature beside he . its 
 strange shawl suddenly unfurl , spread , and flutter as a pair of 
 leathery wing . its owner grab at its leg , but too late to hold 
 it . it have spring from the perch and be circle slowly round the 
 Queen 's Hall with a dry , leathery flapping of its ten - foot wing , while 
 a putrid and insidious odor pervade the room . the cry of the people 
 in the gallery , who be alarmed at the near approach of those 
 glow eye and that murderous beak , excite the creature to a frenzy . 
 fast and fast it fly , beat against wall and chandelier in a 
 blind frenzy of alarm . ' the window ! for heaven 's sake shut that 
 window ! ' roar the Professor from the platform , dancing and wring 
 his hand in an agony of apprehension . alas , his warning be too late ! 
 in a moment the creature , beat and bump along the wall like a 
 huge moth within a gas - shade , come upon the opening , squeeze its 
 hideous bulk through it , and be go . Professor Challenger fall back 
 into his chair with his face bury in his hand , while the audience 
 give one long , deep sigh of relief as they realize that the incident 
 be over . 

 " then - oh ! how shall one describe what take place then - when the full 
 exuberance of the majority and the full reaction of the minority unite 
 to make one great wave of enthusiasm , which roll from the back of the 
 hall , gather volume as it come , sweep over the orchestra , submerge 
 the platform , and carry the four hero away upon its crest ? "   good 
 for you , Mac !   " if the audience have do less than justice , surely it 
 make ample amend . every one be on his foot . every one be move , 
 shout , gesticulate . a dense crowd of cheer man be round the 
 four traveler . ' up with they ! up with they ! ' cry a hundred voice . 
 in a moment four figure shoot up above the crowd . in vain they strove 
 to break loose . they be hold in their lofty place of honor . it 
 would have be hard to let they down if it have be wish , so dense 
 be the crowd around they . ' Regent Street ! Regent Street ! ' sound 
 the voice . there be a swirl in the pack multitude , and a slow 
 current , bear the four upon their shoulder , make for the door . out 
 in the street the scene be extraordinary . an assemblage of not less 
 than a hundred thousand people be wait . the close - pack throng 
 extended from the other side of the Langham Hotel to Oxford Circus . a 
 roar of acclamation greet the four adventurer as they appear , high 
 above the head of the people , under the vivid electric lamp outside 
 the hall . ' a procession ! a procession ! ' be the cry . in a dense 
 phalanx , block the street from side to side , the crowd set forth , 
 take the route of Regent Street , Pall Mall , St. James 's Street , and 
 Piccadilly . the whole central traffic of London be hold up , and many 
 collision be report between the demonstrator upon the one side 
 and the police and taxi - cabman upon the other . finally , it be not 
 until after midnight that the four traveler be release at the 
 entrance to Lord John Roxton 's chamber in the Albany , and that the 
 exuberant crowd , have sing ' they be Jolly Good Fellows ' in chorus , 
 conclude their program with ' God save the king . ' so end one of the 
 most remarkable evening that London have see for a considerable time . " 

 so far my friend Macdona ; and it may be take as a fairly accurate , if 
 florid , account of the proceeding . as to the main incident , it be a 
 bewilder surprise to the audience , but not , I need hardly say , to 
 we . the reader will remember how I meet Lord John Roxton upon the very 
 occasion when , in his protective crinoline , he have go to bring the 
 " Devil 's chick " as he call it , for Professor Challenger . I have 
 hint also at the trouble which the Professor 's baggage give we when 
 we leave the plateau , and have I describe our voyage I might have say a 
 good deal of the worry we have to coax with putrid fish the appetite of 
 our filthy companion . if I have not say much about it before , it be , 
 of course , that the Professor 's earnest desire be that no possible 
 rumor of the unanswerable argument which we carry should be allow 
 to leak out until the moment come when his enemy be to be confute . 

 one word as to the fate of the London pterodactyl . nothing can be say 
 to be certain upon this point . there be the evidence of two frightened 
 woman that it perch upon the roof of the Queen 's Hall and remain 
 there like a diabolical statue for some hour . the next day it come 
 out in the evening paper that private Miles , of the Coldstream Guards , 
 on duty outside Marlborough House , have desert his post without leave , 
 and be therefore courtmartiale . private Miles ' account , that he 
 drop his rifle and take to his heel down the Mall because on 
 look up he have suddenly see the devil between he and the moon , be 
 not accept by the Court , and yet it may have a direct bearing upon 
 the point at issue . the only other evidence which I can adduce be from 
 the log of the SS . Friesland , a dutch - american liner , which assert 
 that at nine next morning , Start Point be at the time ten mile upon 
 their starboard quarter , they be pass by something between a fly 
 goat and a monstrous bat , which be head at a prodigious pace south 
 and west . if its home instinct lead it upon the right line , there can 
 be no doubt that somewhere out in the waste of the Atlantic the last 
 european pterodactyl find its end . 

 and Gladys - oh , my Gladys ! - Gladys of the mystic lake , now to be 
 re - name the Central , for never shall she have immortality through I . 
 do I not always see some hard fiber in her nature ? do I not , even at 
 the time when I be proud to obey her behest , feel that it be surely a 
 poor love which could drive a lover to his death or the danger of it ? 
 do I not , in my true thought , always recur and always 
 dismiss , see past the beauty of the face , and , peer into the soul , 
 discern the twin shadow of selfishness and of fickleness gloome at 
 the back of it ? do she love the heroic and the spectacular for its 
 own noble sake , or be it for the glory which might , without effort or 
 sacrifice , be reflect upon herself ? or be these thought the vain 
 wisdom which come after the event ? it be the shock of my life . for 
 a moment it have turn I to a cynic . but already , as I write , a week 
 have pass , and we have have our momentous interview with Lord John 
 Roxton and - well , perhaps thing might be bad . 

 let I tell it in a few word . no letter or telegram have come to I at 
 Southampton , and I reach the little villa at Streatham about ten 
 o'clock that night in a fever of alarm . be she dead or alive ? where 
 be all my nightly dream of the open arm , the smile face , the 
 word of praise for her man who have risk his life to humor her whim ? 
 already I be down from the high peak and stand flat - footed upon 
 earth . yet some good reason give might still lift I to the cloud 
 once more . I rush down the garden path , hammer at the door , hear 
 the voice of Gladys within , push past the star maid , and strode 
 into the sitting - room . she be seat in a low settee under the shade 
 standard lamp by the piano . in three step I be across the room and 
 have both her hand in mine . 

 " Gladys ! " I cry , " Gladys ! " 

 she look up with amazement in her face . she be alter in some 
 subtle way . the expression of her eye , the hard upward stare , the set 
 of the lip , be new to I . she draw back her hand . 

 " what do you mean ? " she say . 

 " Gladys ! " I cry . " what be the matter ? you be my Gladys , be you 
 not - little Gladys Hungerton ? " 

 " no , " say she , " I be Gladys Potts . let I introduce you to my 
 husband . " 

 how absurd life be ! I find myself mechanically bow and shake 
 hand with a little ginger - haired man who be coil up in the deep 
 arm - chair which have once be sacred to my own use . we bobbed and 
 grin in front of each other . 

 " Father let we stay here . we be get our house ready , " say 
 Gladys . 

 " oh , yes , " say I. 

 " you do not   get my letter at Para , then ? " 

 " no , I get no letter . " 

 " oh , what a pity ! it would have make all clear . " 

 " it be quite clear , " say I. 

 " I have   tell William all about you , " say she . " we have no secret . I 
 be so sorry about it . but it could not   have be so very deep , could 
 it , if you could go off to the other end of the world and leave I here 
 alone . you be not crabby , be you ? " 

 " no , no , not at all . I think I will go . " 

 " have some refreshment , " say the little man , and he add , in a 
 confidential way , " it be always like this , be not   it ? and must be unless 
 you have polygamy , only the other way round ; you understand . " he laugh 
 like an idiot , while I make for the door . 

 I be through it , when a sudden fantastic impulse come upon I , and I 
 go back to my successful rival , who look nervously at the electric 
 push . 

 " will you answer a question ? " I ask . 

 " well , within reason , " say he . 

 " how do you do it ? have you search for hidden treasure , or 
 discover a pole , or do time on a pirate , or fly the Channel , or 
 what ? where be the glamour of romance ? how do you get it ? " 

 he star at I with a hopeless expression upon his vacuous , 
 good - nature , scrubby little face . 

 " do not   you think all this be a little too personal ? " he say . 

 " well , just one question , " I cry . " what be you ? what be your 
 profession ? " 

 " I be a solicitor 's clerk , " say he . " second man at Johnson and 
 Merivale 's , 41 Chancery Lane . " 

 " good - night ! " say I , and vanish , like all disconsolate and 
 break - hearted hero , into the darkness , with grief and rage and 
 laughter all simmer within I like a boiling pot . 

 one more little scene , and I have do . last night we all sup at 
 Lord John Roxton 's room , and sit together afterwards we smoke in 
 good comradeship and talk our adventure over . it be strange under 
 these altered surrounding to see the old , well - know face and 
 figure . there be Challenger , with his smile of condescension , his 
 droop eyelid , his intolerant eye , his aggressive beard , his huge 
 chest , swell and puffing as he lay down the law to Summerlee . and 
 Summerlee , too , there he be with his short briar between his thin 
 moustache and his gray goat's - beard , his worn face protrude in eager 
 debate as he query all Challenger 's proposition . finally , there be 
 our host , with his rugged , eagle face , and his cold , blue , glaci eye 
 with always a shimmer of devilment and of humor down in the depth of 
 they . such be the last picture of they that I have carry away . 

 it be after supper , in his own sanctum - the room of the pink radiance 
 and the innumerable trophy - that Lord John Roxton have something to 
 say to we . from a cupboard he have bring an old cigar - box , and this 
 he lay before he on the table . 

 " there be one thing , " say he , " that maybe I should have speak about 
 before this , but I want to know a little more clearly where I be . 
 no use to raise hope and let they down again . but it be fact , not 
 hop , with we now . you may remember that day we find the pterodactyl 
 rookery in the swamp - what ? well , something in the lie of the land 
 take my notice . perhaps it have escape you , so I will tell you . it 
 be a volcanic vent full of blue clay . " the Professors nod . 

 " well , now , in the whole world I have   only have to do with one place that 
 be a volcanic vent of blue clay . that be the great De Beers Diamond 
 Mine of Kimberley - what ? so you see I get diamond into my head . I 
 rig up a contraption to hold off those stink beast , and I spend 
 a happy day there with a spud . this be what I get . " 

 he open his cigar - box , and tilt it over he pour about twenty or 
 thirty rough stone , vary from the size of bean to that of 
 chestnut , on the table . 

 " perhaps you think I should have tell you then . well , so I should , 
 only I know there be a lot of trap for the unwary , and that stone 
 may be of any size and yet of little value where color and consistency 
 be clean off . therefore , I bring they back , and on the first day at 
 home I take one round to Spink 's , and ask he to have it roughly cut 
 and value . " 

 he take a pill - box from his pocket , and spill out of it a beautiful 
 glitter diamond , one of the fine stone that I have ever see . 

 " there be the result , " say he . " he price the lot at a minimum of two 
 hundred thousand pound . of course it be fair share between we . I 
 will not   hear of anythin ' else . well , Challenger , what will you do with 
 your fifty thousand ? " 

 " if you really persist in your generous view , " say the Professor , " I 
 should find a private museum , which have long be one of my dream . " 

 " and you , Summerlee ? " 

 " I would retire from teaching , and so find time for my final 
 classification of the chalk fossil . " 

 " I will use my own , " say Lord John Roxton , " in fit a well - form 
 expedition and have another look at the dear old plateau . as to you , 
 young fellah , you , of course , will spend yours in gettin ' married . " 

 " not just yet , " say I , with a rueful smile . " I think , if you will 
 have I , that I would rather go with you . " 

 Lord Roxton say nothing , but a brown hand be stretch out to I 
 across the table . 





