Arthur Conan Doyle 

 the Hound of the Baskervilles 

 Chapter 1 

 Mr. Sherlock Holmes 

 Mr. Sherlock Holmes , who be usually very late in the morning , save upon those not infrequent occasion when he be up all night , be seat at the breakfast table . I stand upon the hearth - rug and pick up the stick which our visitor have leave behind he the night before . it be a fine , thick piece of wood , bulbous - headed , of the sort which be know as a " Penang law- yer . " just under the head be a broad silver band nearly an inch across . " to James Mortimer , M.R.C.S. , from his friend of the C.C.H. , " be engrave upon it , with the date " 1884 . " it be just such a stick as the old - fashioned family practitioner use to carry - dignify , solid , and reassuring . 

 " well , Watson , what do you make of it ? " 

 Holmes be sit with his back to I , and I have give he no sign of my occupation . 

 " how do you know what I be do ? I believe you have eye in the back of your head . " 

 " I have , at least , a well - polish , silver - plat coffee - pot in front of I , " say he . " but , tell I , Watson , what do you make of our visitor 's stick ? since we have be so unfortunate as to miss he and have no notion of his errand , this accidental souvenir become of importance . let I hear you reconstruct the man by an examination of it . " 

 " I think , " say I , follow as far as I could the method of my companion , " that Dr. Mortimer be a successful , elderly medical man , well - esteemed since those who know he give he this mark of their appreciation . " 

 " good ! " say Holmes . " Excellent ! " 

 " I think also that the probability be in favour of his be a country practitioner who do a great deal of his visit on foot . " 

 " why so ? " 

 " because this stick , though originally a very handsome one have be so knock about that I can hardly imagine a town practitioner carry it . the thick - iron ferrule be wear down , so it be evident that he have do a great amount of walk with it . " 

 " perfectly sound ! " say Holmes . 

 " and then again , there be the ' friend of the C.C.H. ' I should guess that to be the Something Hunt , the local hunt to whose member he have possibly give some surgical assistance , and which have make he a small presentation in return . " 

 " really , Watson , you excel yourself , " say Holmes , push back his chair and light a cigarette . " I be bind to say that in all the account which you have be so good as to give of my own small achievement you have habitually underrate your own ability . it may be that you be not yourself luminous , but you be a conductor of light . some people without possess genius have a remarkable power of stimulate it . I confess , my dear fellow , that I be very much in your debt . " 

 he have never say as much before , and I must admit that his word give I keen pleasure , for I have often be pique by his indifference to my admiration and to the attempt which I have make to give publicity to his method . I be proud , too , to think that I have so far master his system as to apply it in a way which earn his approval . he now take the stick from my hand and examine it for a few minute with his naked eye . then with an expression of interest he lay down his cigarette , and carry the cane to the window , he look over it again with a convex len . 

 " Interesting , though elementary , " say he as he return to his favourite corner of the settee . " there be certainly one or two indication upon the stick . it give we the basis for several deduction . " 

 " have anything escape I ? " I ask with some self- importance . " I trust that there be nothing of consequence which I have overlook ? " 

 " I be afraid , my dear Watson , that most of your conclusion be erroneous . when I say that you stimulate I I mean , to be frank , that in note your fallacy I be occasionally guide towards the truth . not that you be entirely wrong in this in- stance . the man be certainly a country practitioner . and he walk a good deal . " 

 " then I be right . " 

 " to that extent . " 

 " but that be all . " 

 " no , no , my dear Watson , not all - by no means all . I would suggest , for example , that a presentation to a doctor be more likely to come from a hospital than from a hunt , and that when the initial ' C.C. ' be place before that hospital the word ' Charing Cross ' very naturally suggest themselves . " 

 " you may be right . " 

 " the probability lie in that direction . and if we take this as a work hypothesis we have a fresh basis from which to start our construction of this unknown visitor . " 

 " well , then , suppose that ' C.C.H. ' do stand for ' Charing Cross Hospital , ' what further inference may we draw ? " 

 " do none suggest themselves ? you know my method . apply they ! " 

 " I can only think of the obvious conclusion that the man have practise in town before go to the country . " 

 " I think that we might venture a little farth than this . look at it in this light . on what occasion would it be most probable that such a presentation would be make ? when would his friend unite to give he a pledge of their good will ? obviously at the moment when Dr. Mortimer withdraw from the service of the hospital in order to start in practice for himself . we know there have be a presentation . we believe there have be a change from a town hospital to a country practice . be it , then , stretch our inference too far to say that the presentation be on the occasion of the change ? " 

 " it certainly seem probable . " 

 " now , you will observe that he could not have be on the staff of ohe hospital , since only a man well - establish in a London practice could hold such a position , and such a one would not drift into the country . what be he , then ? if he be in the hospital and yet not on the staff he could only have be a house - surpeon or a house - physician - little more than a senior student . and he leave five year ago - the date be on the stick . so your grave , middle - aged family practitioner vanish into thin air , my dear Watson , and there emerge a young fellow under thirty , amiable , unambitious , absent - minded , and the possessor of a favourite dog , which I should describe roughly as be large than a terri and small than a mastiff . " 

 I laugh incredulously as Sherlock Holmes lean back in his settee and blow little wavering ring of smoke up to the ceiling . 

 " as to the latter part , I have no mean of check you , " say I , " but at least it be not difficult to find out a few particular about the man 's age and professional career . " from my small medical shelf I take down the Medical Directory and turn up the name . there be several Mortimers , but only one who could be our visitor . I read his record aloud . 

  " Mortimer , James , M.R.C.S. , 1882 , Grimpen , Dartmoor , 

 Devon . House - surgeon , from 1882 to 1884 , at Charing 

 Cross Hospital . winner of the Jackson prize for Compara- 

 tive Pathology , with essay entitle ' is Disease a reversion ? ' 

 correspond member of the Swedish Pathological Soci- 

 ety . author of ' some Freaks of Atavism '   Lancet 1882 . 

 ' do we progress ? '   Journal of Psychology , March , 1883 . 

 Medical Officer for the parish of Grimpen , Thorsley , and 

 high Barrow . " 

  " no mention of that local hunt , Watson , " say Holmes with a mischievous smile , " but a country doctor , as you very astutely observe . I think that I be fairly justified in my inference . as to the adjective , I say , if I remember right , amiable , unambi- tious , and absent - minded . it be my experience that it be only an amiable man in this world who receive testimonial , only an unambitious one who abandon a London career for the country , and only an absent - minded one who leave his stick and not his visit - card after wait an hour in your room . " 

 " and the dog ? " 

 " have be in the habit of carry this stick behind his master . be a heavy stick the dog have hold it tightly by the middle , and the mark of his tooth be very plainly visible . the dog 's jaw , as show in the space between these mark , be too broad in my opinion for a terri and not broad enough for a mastiff . it may have be - yes , by Jove , it be a curly - haired spaniel . " 

 he have rise and pace the room as he speak . now he halt in the recess of the window . there be such a ring of conviction in his voice that I glance up in surprise . 

 " my dear fellow , how can you possibly be so sure of that ? " 

 " for the very simple reason that I see the dog himself on our very door - step , and there be the ring of its owner . do not   move , I beg you , Watson . he be a professional brother of your , and your presence may be of assistance to I . now be the dramatic moment of fate , Watson , when you hear a step upon the stair which be walk into your life , and you know not whether for good or ill . what do Dr. James Mortimer , the man of science , ask of Sherlock Holmes , the specialist in crime ? come in ! " 

 the appearance of our visitor be a surprise to I , since I have expect a typical country practitioner . he be a very tall , thin man , with a long nose like a beak , which jut out between two keen , gray eye , set closely together and sparkle brightly from behind a pair of gold - rim glass . he be clothe in a professional but rather slovenly fashion , for his frock - coat be dingy and his trouser fray . though young , his long back be already bow , and he walk with a forward thrust of his head and a general air of peer benevolence . as he enter his eye fall upon the stick in Holmes 's hand , and he run towards it with an exclamation of joy . " I be so very glad , " say he . " I be not sure whether I have leave it here or in the Shipping Office . I would not lose that stick for the world . " 

 " a presentation , I see , " say Holmes . 

 " yes , sir . " 

 " from Charing Cross Hospital ? " 

 " from one or two friend there on the occasion of my marriage . " 

 " dear , dear , that be bad ! " say Holmes , shake his head . 

 Dr. Mortimer blink through his glass in mild astonishment . 

 " why be it bad ? " 

 " only that you have disarrange our little deduction . your marriage , you say ? " 

 " yes , sir . I marry , and so leave the hospital , and with it all hope of a consulting practice . it be necessary to make a home of my own . " 

 " come , come , we be not so far wrong , after all , " say Holmes . " and now , Dr. James Mortimer - " 

 " Mister , sir , Mister - a humble M.R.C.S. " 

 " and a man of precise mind , evidently . " 

 " a dabbler in science , Mr. Holmes , a picker up of shell on the shore of the great unknown ocean . I presume that it be Mr. Sherlock Holmes whom I be address and not - " 

 " no , this be my friend Dr. Watson . " 

 " glad to meet you , sir . I have hear your name mention in connection with that of your friend . you interest I very much , Mr. Holmes . I have hardly expect so dolichocephalic a skull or such well - mark supra - orbital development . would you have any objection to my run my finger along your parietal fissure ? a cast of your skull , sir , until the original be available , would be an ornament to any anthropological museum . it be not my intention to be fulsome , but I confess that I covet your skull . " 

 Sherlock Holmes wave our strange visitor into a chair . " you be an enthusiast in your line of thought , I perceive , sir , as I be in mine , " say he . " I observe from your forefinger that you make your own cigarette . have no hesitation in light one . " 

 the man draw out paper and tobacco and twirl the one up in the other with surprising dexterity . he have long , quiver fin- ger as agile and restless as the antennae of an insect . 

 Holmes be silent , but his little darting glance show I the interest which he take in our curious companion . 

 " I presume , sir , " say he at last , " that it be not merely for the purpose of examine my skull that you have do I the honour to call here last night and again to - day ? " 

 " no , sir , no ; though I be happy to have have the opportunity of do that as well . I come to you , Mr. Holmes , because I recognize that I be myself an unpractical man and because I be suddenly confront with a most serious and extraordinary prob- lem . recognize , as I do , that you be the second high expert in Europe - " 

 " indeed , sir ! may I inquire who have the honour to be the first ? " ask Holmes with some asperity . 

 " to the man of precisely scientific mind the work of Mon- sieur Bertillon must always appeal strongly . " 

 " then have you not well consult he ? " 

 " I say , sir , to the precisely scientific mind . but as a practical man of affair it be acknowledge that you stand alone . I trust , sir , that I have not inadvertently - " 

 " just a little , " say Holmes . " I think , Dr. Mortimer , you would do wisely if without more ado you would kindly tell I plainly what the exact nature of the problem be in which you demand my assistance . " 

  Chapter 2 

 the curse of the Baskervilles 

  " I have in my pocket a manuscript , " say Dr. James Mortimer . 

 " I observe it as you enter the room , " say Holmes . 

 " it be an old manuscript . " 

 " early eighteenth century , unless it be a forgery . " 

 " how can you say that , sir ? " 

 " you have present an inch or two of it to my examination all the time that you have be talk . it would be a poor expert who could not give the date of a document within a decade or so . you may possibly have read my little monograph upon the subject . I put that at 1730 . " 

 " the exact date be 1742 . " Dr. Mortimer draw it from his breast - pocket . " this family paper be commit to my care by Sir Charles Baskerville , whose sudden and tragic death some three month ago create so much excitement in Devonshire . I may say that I be his personal friend as well as his medical attendant . he be a strong - minded man , sir , shrewd , practical , and as unimaginative as I be myself . yet he take this document very seriously , and his mind be prepare for just such an end as do eventually overtake he . " 

 Holmes stretch out his hand for the manuscript and flatten it upon his knee . 

 " you will observe , Watson , the alternative use of the long s and the short . it be one of several indication which enable I to fix the date . " 

 I look over his shoulder at the yellow paper and the faded script . at the head be write : " Baskerville Hall , " and below in large , scrawling figure : " 1742 . " 

 " it appear to be a statement of some sort . " 

 " yes , it be a statement of a certain legend which run in the Baskerville family . " 

 " but I understand that it be something more modern and practical upon which you wish to consult I ? " 

 " Most modern . a most practical , press matter , which must be decide within twenty - four hour . but the manuscript be short and be intimately connect with the affair . with your permission I will read it to you . " 

 Holmes lean back in his chair , place his finger - tip to- gether , and close his eye , with an air of resignation . Dr. Mortimer turn the manuscript to the light and read in a high , crack voice the follow curious , old - world narrative : 

  " of the origin of the Hound of the Baskervilles there have be many statement , yet as I come in a direct line from Hugo Baskerville , and as I have the story from my father , who also have it from his , I have set it down with all belief that it occur even as be here set forth . and I would have you believe , my son , that the same justice which punish sin may also most graciously forgive it , and that no ban be so heavy but that by prayer and repentance it may be remove . learn then from this story not to fear the fruit of the past , but rather to be circumspect in the future , that those foul passion whereby our family have suffer so grievously may not again be loose to our undoing . 
  know then that in the time of the Great Rebellion   the history of which by the learn Lord Clarendon I most earnestly commend to your attention   this Manor of Basker- ville be hold by Hugo of that name , nor can it be gainsaid that he be a most wild , profane , and godless man . this , in truth , his neighbour might have pardon , see that saint have never flourish in those part , but there be in he a certain wanton and cruel humour which make his name a by- word through the West . it chance that this Hugo come to love   if , indeed , so dark a passion may be know under so bright a name   the daughter of a yeoman who hold land near the Baskerville estate . but the young maiden , be discreet and of good repute , would ever avoid he , for she fear his evil name . so it come to pass that one Michaelmas this Hugo , with five or six of his idle and wicked compan- ion , steal down upon the farm and carry off the maiden , her father and brother be from home , as he well know . when they have bring she to the Hall the maiden be place in an upper chamber , while Hugo and his friend sit down to a long carouse , as be their nightly custom . now , the poor lass upstairs be like to have her wit turn at the singing and shouting and terrible oath which come up to she from below , for they say that the word use by Hugo Baskerville , when he be in wine , be such as might blast the man who say they . at last in the stress of her fear she do that which might have daunt the brave or most active man , for by the aid of the growth of ivy which cover   and still cover   the south wall she come down from under the eave , and so homeward across the moor , there be three league betwixt the Hall and her father 's farm . 
  it chance that some little time later Hugo leave his guest to carry food and drink - with other bad thing , perchance - to his captive , and so find the cage empty and the bird escape . then , as it would seem , he become as one that hath a devil , for , rush down the stair into the dining - hall , he spring upon the great table , flagon and trencher fly before he , and he cry aloud before all the company that he would that very night render his body and soul to the Powers of Evil if he might but overtake the wench . and while the reveller stand aghast at the fury of the man , one more wicked or , it may be , more drunken than the rest , cry out that they should put the hound upon her Whereat Hugo run from the house , cry to his groom that they should saddle his mare and unkennel the pack , and give the hound a kerchief of the maid 's , he swing they to the line , and so off full cry in the moonlight over the moor . 
  now , for some space the reveller stand agape , unable to understand all that have be do in such haste . but anon their bemuse wit awake to the nature of the deed which be like to be do upon the moorland . everything be now in an uproar , some call for their pistol , some for their horse , and some for another flask of wine . but at length some sense come back to their craze mind , and the whole of they , thirteen in number , take horse and start in pursuit . the moon shine clear above they , and they ride swiftly abreast , take that course which the maid must need have take if she be to reach her own home . 
  they have go a mile or two when they pass one of the night shepherd upon the moorland , and they cry to he to know if he have see the hunt . and the man , as the story go , be so craze with fear that he could scarce speak , but at last he say that he have indeed see the unhappy maiden , with the hound upon her track . ' but I have see more than that , ' say he , ' for Hugo Baskerville pass I upon his black mare , and there run mute behind he such a hound of hell as God forbid should ever be at my heel . ' so the drunken squire curse the shepherd and ride onward . but soon their skin turn cold , for there come a galloping across the moor , and the black mare , dabble with white froth , go past with trail bridle and empty saddle . then the reveller ride close together , for a great fear be on they , but they still follow over the moor , though each , have he be alone , would have be right glad to have turn his horse 's head . rid slowly in this fashion they come at last upon the hound . these , though know for their valour and their breed , be whim- pere in a cluster at the head of a deep dip or goyal , as we call it , upon the moor , some slink away and some , with start hackle and star eye , gaze down the narrow valley before they . 
  the company have come to a halt , more sober man , as you may guess , than when they start . the most of they would by no mean advance , but three of they , the bold , or it may be the most drunken , ride forward down the goyal . now , it open into a broad space in which stand two of those great stone , still to be see there , which be set by certain forget people in the day of old . the moon be shin bright upon the clearing , and there in the centre lie the unhappy maid where she have fall , dead of fear and of fatigue . but it be not the sight of her body , nor yet be it that of the body of Hugo Baskerviile lie near she , which raise the hair upon the head of these three dare- devil roysterer , but it be that , stand over Hugo , and pluck at his throat , there stand a foul thing , a great , black beast , shape like a hound , yet large than any hound that ever mortal eye have rest upon . and even as they look the thing tear the throat out of Hugo Baskerville , on which , as it turn its blaze eye and dripping jaw upon they , the three shriek with fear and ride for dear life , still scream , across the moor . one , it be say , die that very night of what he have see , and the other twain be but broken man for the rest of their day . 
  such be the tale , my son , of the coming of the hound which be say to have plague the family so sorely ever since . if I have set it down it be because that which be clearly know hath less terror than that which be but hint at and guess . nor can it be deny that many of the family have be unhappy in their death , which have be sudden , bloody , and mysterious . yet may we shelter ourselves in the infinite goodness of Providence , which would not for- ever punish the innocent beyond that third or fourth genera- tion which be threaten in Holy Writ . to that Providence , my son , I hereby commend you , and I counsel you by way of caution to forbear from cross the moor in those dark hour when the power of evil be exalt . 
   this from Hugo Baskerville to his son Rodger and John , with instruction that they say nothing thereof to their sister Elizabeth . " 
  when Dr. Mortimer have finish read this singular narra- tive he push his spectacle up on his forehead and star across at Mr. Sherlock Holmes . the latter yawn and toss the end of his cigarette into the fire . 

 " well ? " say he . 

 " do you not find it interesting ? " 

 " to a collector of fairy tale . " 

 Dr. Mortimer draw a fold newspaper out of his pocket . 

 " now , Mr. Holmes , we will give you something a little more recent . this be the Devon County Chronicle of May 14th of this year . it be a short account of the fact elicit at the death of Sir Charles Baskerville which occur a few day before that date . " 

 my friend lean a little forward and his expression become intent . our visitor readjust his glass and begin : 

  " the recent sudden death of Sir Charles Baskerville , 

 whose name have be mention as the probable liberal 

 candidate for Mid - Devon at the next election , have cast a 

 gloom over the county . though Sir Charles have reside at 

 Baskerville Hall for a comparatively short period his amia- 

 bility of character and extreme generosity have win the 

 affection and respect of all who have be bring into 

 contact with he . in these day of nouveaux rich it be 

 refreshing to find a case where the scion of an old county 

 family which have fall upon evil day be able to make his 

 own fortune and to bring it back with he to restore the 

 fall grandeur of his line . Sir Charles , as be well know , 

 make large sum of money in south african speculation . 

 more wise than those who go on until the wheel turn 

 against they , he realize his gain and return to England 

 with they . it be only two year since he take up his resi- 

 dence at Baskerville Hall , and it be common talk how large 

 be those scheme of reconstruction and improvement which 

 have be interrupt by his death . be himself childless , 

 it be his openly express desire that the whole country- 

 side should , within his own lifetime , profit by his good 

 fortune , and many will have personal reason for bewail 

 his untimely end . his generous donation to local and county 

 charity have be frequently chronicle in these column . 

 " the circumstance connect with the death of Sir Charles 

 can not be say to have be entirely clear up by the 

 inquest , but at least enough have be do to dispose of 

 those rumour to which local superstition have give rise . 

 there be no reason whatever to suspect foul play , or to 

 imagine that death could be from any but natural cause . Sir 

 Charles be a widower , and a man who may be say to have 

 be in some way of an eccentric habit of mind . in spite of 

 his considerable wealth he be simple in his personal taste , 

 and bis indoor servant at Baskerville Hall consist of a mar- 

 rie couple name Barrymore , the husband act as butler 

 and the wife as housekeeper . their evidence , corroborate 

 by that of several friend , tend to show that Sir Charles 's 

 health have for some time be impaired , and point espe- 

 cially to some affection of the heart , manifest itself in 

 change of colour , breathlessness , and acute attack of ner- 

 vous depression . Dr. James Mortimer , the friend and medi- 

 cal attendant of the deceased , have give evidence to the 

 same effect . 

 " the fact of the case be simple . Sir Charles Baskerville 

 be in the habit every night before go to bed of walk 

 down the famous yew alley of Baskerville Hall . the evi- 

 dence of the Barrymores show that this have be his 

 custom . on the fourth of May Sir Charles have declare his 

 intention of start next day for London , and have order 

 Barrymore to prepare his luggage . that night he go out as 

 usual for his nocturnal walk , in the course of which he be 

 in the habit of smoke a cigar . he never return . at 

 twelve o'clock Barrymore , find the hall door still open , 

 become alarmed , and , light a lantern , go in search of 

 his master . the day have be wet , and Sir Charles 's foot- 

 mark be easily trace down the alley . halfway down this 

 walk there be a gate which lead out on to the moor . there 

 be indication that Sir Charles have stand for some little 

 time here . he then proceed down the alley , and it be at 

 the far end of it that his body be discover . one fact 

 which have not be explain be the statement of Barrymore 

 that his master 's footprint alter their character from the 

 time that he pass the moor - gate , and that he appear 

 from thence onward to have be walk upon his toe . 

 one Murphy , a gipsy horse - dealer , be on the moor at no 

 great distance at the time , but he appear by his own 

 confession to have be the bad for drink . he declare 

 that he hear cry but be unable to state from what direction 

 they come . no sign of violence be to be discover upon 

 Sir Charles 's person , and though the doctor 's evidence point 

 to an almost incredible facial distortion - so great that Dr. 

 Mortimer refuse at first to believe that it be indeed his 

 friend and patient who lie before he - it be explain 

 that that be a symptom which be not unusual in case of 

 dyspnoea and death from cardiac exhaustion . this expla- 

 nation be bear out by the post - mortem examination , which 

 show long - stand organic disease , and the coroner 's 

 jury return a verdict in accordance with the medical evi- 

 dence . it be well that this be so , for it be obviously of the 

 utmost importance that Sir Charles 's heir should settle at the 

 Hall and continue the good work which have be so sadly 

 interrupt . have the prosaic finding of the coroner not 

 finally put an end to the romantic story which have be 

 whisper in connection with the affair , it might have be 

 difficult to find a tenant for Baskerville Hall . it be under- 

 stand that the next of kin be Mr. Henry Baskerville , if he be 

 still alive , the son of Sir Charles Baskerville 's young 

 brother . the young man when last hear of be in America , 

 and inquiry be be institute with a view to inform 

 he of his good fortune . " 

  Dr. Mortimer refolde his paper and replace it in his pocket . 

 " those be the public fact , Mr. Holmes , in connection with the death of Sir Charles Baskerville . " 

 " I must thank you , " say Sherlock Holmes , " for call my attention to a case which certainly present some feature of interest . I have observe some newspaper comment at the time , but I be exceedingly preoccupy by that little affair of the Vatican cameo , and in my anxiety to oblige the Pope I lose touch with several interesting english case . this article , you say , contain all the public fact ? " 

 " it do . " 

 " then let I have the private one . " he lean back , put his finger - tip together , and assume his most impassive and judicial expression . 

 " in do so , " say Dr. Mortimer , who have begin to show sign of some strong emotion , " I be tell that which I have not confide to anyone . my motive for withhold it from the coroner 's inquiry be that a man of science shrink from place himself in the public position of seem to indorse a popular superstition . I have the further motive that Baskerville Hall , as the paper say , would certainly remain untenanted if anything be do to increase its already rather grim reputation . for both these reason I think that I be justify in tell rather less than I know , since no practical good could result from it , but with you there be no reason why I should not be perfectly frank . 

 " the moor be very sparsely inhabit , and those who live near each other be throw very much together . for this reason I see a good deal of Sir Charles Baskerville . with the exception of Mr. Frankland , of Lafter Hall , and Mr. Stapleton , the naturalist , there be no other man of education within many mile . Sir Charles be a retire man , but the chance of his illness bring we together , and a community of interest in science keep we so . he have bring back much scientific information from South Africa , and many a charming evening we have spend together discuss the comparative anatomy of the Bushman and the Hottentot . 

 " within the last few month it become increasingly plain to I that Sir Charles 's nervous system be strain to the break- ing point . he have take this legend which I have read you exceedingly to heart - so much so that , although he would walk in his own ground , nothing would induce he to go out upon the moor at night . incredible as it may appear to you , Mr. Holmes , he be honestly convince that a dreadful fate overhang his family , and certainly the record which he be able to give of his ancestor be not encouraging . the idea of some ghastly presence constantly haunt he , and on more than one occasion he have ask I whether I have on my medical journey at night ever see any strange creature or hear the baying of a hound . the latter question he put to I several time , and always with a voice which vibrate with excitement . 

 " I can well remember drive up to his house in the evening some three week before the fatal event . he chance to be at his hall door . I have descend from my gig and be stand in front of he , when I see his eye fix themselves over my shoulder and stare past I with an expression of the most dreadful horror . I whisk round and have just time to catch a glimpse of something which I take to be a large black calf pass at the head of the drive . so excited and alarmed be he that I be compel to go down to the spot where the animal have be and look around for it . it be go , however , and the incident appear to make the bad impression upon his mind . I stay with he all the evening , and it be on that occasion , to explain the emotion which he have show , that he confide to my keeping that narrative which I read to you when first I come . I mention this small episode because it assume some importance in view of the tragedy which follow , but I be convince at the time that the matter be entirely trivial and that his excite- ment have no justification . 

 " it be at my advice that Sir Charles be about to go to London . his heart be , I know , affect , and the constant anxi- ety in which he live , however chimerical the cause of it might be , be evidently have a serious effect upon his health . I think that a few month among the distraction of town would send he back a new man . Mr. Stapleton , a mutual friend who be much concerned at his state of health , be of the same opinion . at the last instant come this terrible catastrophe . 

 " on the night of Sir Charles 's death Barrymore the butler who make the discovery , send Perkins the groom on horseback to I , and as I be sit up late I be able to reach Baskerville Hall within an hour of the event . I check and corroborate all the fact which be mention at the inquest . I follow the footstep down the yew alley , I see the spot at the moor - gate where he seem to have wait , I remark the change in the shape of the print after that point , I note that there be no other footstep save those of Barrymore on the soft gravel , and finally I carefully examine the body , which have not be touch until my arrival . Sir Charles lie on his face , his arm out , his finger dig into the ground , and his feature convulse with some strong emotion to such an extent that I could hardly have swear to his identity . TheFe be certainly no physical injury of any kind . but one false statement be make by Barrymore at the inquest . he say that there be no trace upon the ground round the body . he do not observe any . but I do - some little distance off , but fresh and clear . " 

 " footprint ? " 

 " Footprints . " 

 " a man 's or a woman 's ? " 

 Dr. Mortimer look strangely at we for an instant , and his voice sink almost to a whisper as he answer : 

 " Mr. Holmes , they be the footprint of a gigantic hound ! " 

  chapter 3 

 the problem 

  I confess at these word a shudder pass through I . there be a thrill in the doctor 's voice which show that he be himself deeply move by that which he tell we . Holmes lean forward in his excitement and his eye have the hard , dry glitter which shoot from they when he be keenly interested . 

 " you see this ? " 

 " as clearly as I see you . " 

 " and you say nothing ? " 

 " what be the use ? " 

 " how be it that no one else see it ? " 

 " the mark be some twenty yard from the body and no one give they a thought . I do not   suppose I should have do so have I not know this legend . " 

 " there be many sheep - dog on the moor ? " 

 " no doubt , but this be no sheep - dog . " 

 " you say it be large ? " 

 " enormous . " 

 " but it have not approach the body ? " 

 " no . " 

 " what sort of night be it ? ' 

 " damp and raw . " 

 " but not actually rain ? " 

 " no . " 

 " what be the alley like ? " 

 " there be two line of old yew hedge , twelve foot high and 

 impenetrable . the walk in the centre be about eight foot across . " 

 " be there anything between the hedge and the walk ? " 

 " yes , there be a strip of grass about six foot broad on either side . " 

 " I understand that the yew hedge be penetrate at one point by a gate ? " 

 " yes , the wicket - gate which lead on to the moor . " 

 " be there any other opening ? " 

 " none . " 

 " so that to reach the yew alley one either have to come down it from the house or else to enter it by the moor - gate ? " 

 " there be an exit through a summer - house at the far end . " 

 " have Sir Charles reach this ? " 

 " no ; he lie about fifty yard from it . " 

 " now , tell I , Dr. Mortimer - and this be important - the 

 mark which you see be on the path and not on the grass ? " 

 " no mark could show on the grass . " 

 " be they on the same side of the path as the moor - gate ? " 

 " yes ; they be on the edge of the path on the same side as the moor - gate . " 

 " you interest I exceedingly . another point . be the wicket- gate close ? " 

 " closed and padlock . " 

 " how high be it ? " 

 " about four foot high . " 

 " then anyone could have get over it ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " and what mark do you see by the wicket - gate ? " 

 " none in particular . " 

 " good heaven ! do no one examine ? " 

 " yes , I examine , myself . " 

 " and find nothing ? " 

 " it be all very confused . Sir Charles have evidently stand there for five or ten minute . " 

 " how do you know that ? " 

 " because the ash have twice drop from his cigar . " 

 " Excellent ! this be a colleague , Watson , after our own heart . but the mark ? " 

 " he have leave his own mark all over that small patch of gravel . I could discern no other . " 

 Sherlock Holmes strike his hand against his knee with an impatient gesture . 

 " if I have only be there ! " he cry . " it be evidently a case of extraordinary interest , and one which present immense opportu- nitie to the scientific expert . that gravel page upon which I might have read so much have be long ere this smudge by the rain and deface by the clog of curious peasant . oh , Dr. Mortimer , Dr. Mortimer , to think that you should not have call I in ! you have indeed much to answer for . " 

 " I could not call you in , Mr. Holmes , without disclose these fact to the world , and I have already give my reason for not wish to do so . besides , besides - " 

 " why do you hesitate ? " 

 " there be a realm in which the most acute and most experi- ence of detective be helpless . " 

 " you mean that the thing be supernatural ? " 

 " I do not positively say so . " 

 " no , but you evidently think it . " 

 " since the tragedy , Mr. Holmes , there have come to my ear several incident which be hard to reconcile with the settle order of Nature . " 

 " for example ? " 

 " I find that before the terrible event occur several people have see a creature upon the moor which correspond with this Baskerville demon , and which could not possibly be any animal know to science . they all agree that it be a huge creature , luminous , ghastly , and spectral . I have cros - examine these man , one of they a hard - head countryman , one a farrier , and one a moorland farmer , who all tell the same story of this dreadful apparition , exactly correspond to the hell - hound of the legend . I assure you that there be a reign of terror in the district , and that it be a hardy man who will cross the moor at night . " 

 " and you , a train man of science , believe it to be super- natural ? " 

 " I do not know what to believe . " 

 Holmes shrug his shoulder . 

 " I have hitherto confine my investigation to this world , " say he . " in a modest way I have combat evil , but to take on the Father of Evil himself would , perhaps , be too ambitious a task . yet you must admit that the footmark be material . " 

 " the original hound be material enough to tug a man 's throat out , and yet he be diabolical as well . " 

 " I see that you have quite go over to the supernaturalist . but now , Dr. Mortimer , tell I this . if you hold these view why have you come to consult I at all ? you tell I in the same breath that it be useless to investigate Sir Charles 's death , and that you desire I to do it . " 

 " I do not say that I desire you to do it . " 

 " then , how can I assist you ? " 

 " by advise I as to what I should do with Sir Henry Baskerville , who arrive at Waterloo Station " - Dr. Mortimer look at his watch - " in exactly one hour and a quarter . " 

 " he be the heir ? " 

 " yes . on the death of Sir Charles we inquire for this young gentleman and find that he have be farm in Canada . from the account which have reach we he be an excellent fellow in every way . I speak now not as a medical man but as a trustee and executor of Sir Charles 's will . " 

 " there be no other claimant , I presume ? " 

 " none . the only other kinsman whom we have be able to trace be Rodger Baskerville , the young of three brother of whom poor Sir Charles be the elder . the second brother , who die young , be the father of this lad Henry . the third , Rodger , be the black sheep of the family . he come of the old masterful Baskerville strain and be the very image , they tell I , of the family picture of old Hugo . he make England too hot to hold he , flee to Central America , and die there in 1876 of yellow fever . Henry be the last of the Baskervilles . in one hour and five minute I meet he at Waterloo Station . I have have a wire that he arrive at Southampton this morning . now , Mr. Holmes , what would you advise I to do with he ? " 

 " why should he not go to the home of his father ? " 

 " it seem natural , do it not ? and yet , consider that every Baskerville who go there meet with an evil fate . I feel sure that if Sir Charles could have speak with I before his death he would have warn I against bring this , the last of the old race , and the heir to great wealth , to that deadly place . and yet it can not be deny that the prosperity of the whole poor , bleak countryside depend upon his presence . all the good work which have be do by Sir Charles will crash to the ground if there be no tenant of the Hall . I fear lest I should be sway too much by my own obvious interest in the matter , and that be why I bring the case before you and ask for your advice . " 

 Holmes consider for a little time . 

 " put into plain word , the matter be this , " say he . " in your opinion there be a diabolical agency which make Dartmoor an unsafe abode for a Baskerville - that be your opinion ? " 

 " at least I might go the length of say that there be some evidence that this may be so . " 

 " exactly . but surely , if your supernatural theory be correct , it could work the young man evil in London as easily as in Devonshire . a devil with merely local power like a parish vestry would be too inconceivable a thing . " 

 " you put the matter more flippantly , Mr. Holmes , than you would probably do if you be bring into personal contact with these thing . your advice , then , as I understand it , be that the young man will be as safe in Devonshire as in London . he come in fifty minute . what would you recommend ? " 

 " I recommend , sir , that you take a cab , call off your spaniel who be scratch at my front door , and proceed to Waterloo to meet Sir Henry Baskerville . " 

 " and then ? " 

 " and then you will say nothing to he at all until I have make up my mind about the matter . " 

 " how long will it take you to make up your mind ? " 

 " twenty - four hour . at ten o'clock to - morrow , Dr. Morti- mer , I will be much oblige to you if you will call upon I here , and it will be of help to I in my plan for the future if you will bring Sir Henry Baskerville with you . " 

 " I will do so , Mr. Holmes . " he scribble the appointment on his shirt - cuff and hurry off in his strange , peering , absent- minded fashion . Holmes stop he at the head of the stair . 

 " only one more question , Dr. Mortimer . you say that before Sir Charles Baskerville 's death several people see this apparition upon the moor ? " 

 " three people do . " 

 " do any see it after ? " 

 " I have not hear of any . " 

 " thank you . good - morning . " 

 Holmes return to his seat with that quiet look of inward satisfaction which mean that he have a congenial task before he . 

 " go out , Watson ? " 

 " unless I can help you . " 

 " no , my dear fellow , it be at the hour of action that I turn to you for aid . but this be splendid , really unique from some point of view . when you pass Bradley 's , would you ask he to send up a pound of the strong shag tobacco ? thank you . it would be as well if you could make it convenient not to return before evening . then I should be very glad to compare impression as to this most interesting problem which have be submine to we this morning . " 

 I know that seclusion and solitude be very necessary for my friend in those hour of intense mental concentration during which he weigh every particle of evidence , construct alter- native theory , balance one against the other , and make up his mind as to which point be essential and which immaterial . I therefore spend the day at my club and do not return to Baker Street until evening . it be nearly nine o'clock when I find myself in the sitting - room once more . 

 my first impression as I open the door be that a fire have break out , for the room be so fill with smoke that the light of the lamp upon the table be blur by it . as I enter , however , my fear be set at rest , for it be the acrid fume of strong coarse tobacco which take I by the throat and set I cough . through the haze I have a vague vision of Holmes in his dressing - gown coil up in an armchair with his black clay pipe between his lip . several roll of paper lie around he . 

 " catch cold , Watson ? " say he . 

 " no , it be this poisonous atmosphere . " 

 " I suppose it be pretty thick , now that you mention it . " 

 " thick ! it be intolerable . " 

 " open the window , then ! you have be at your club all day , I perceive . " 

 " my dear Holmes ! " 

 " be I right ? " 

 " certainly , but how ? " 

 he laugh at my bewildered expression . 

 " there be a delightful freshness about you , Watson , which make it a pleasure to exercise any small power which I possess at your expense . a gentleman go forth on a showery and miry day . he return immaculate in the evening with the gloss still on his hat and his boot . he have be a fixture therefore all day . he be not a man with intimate friend . where , then , could he have be ? be it not obvious ? " 

 " well , it be rather obvious . " 

 " the world be full of obvious thing which nobody by any chance ever observe . where do you think that I have be ? " 

 " a fixture also . " 

 " on the contrary , I have be to devonshire . " 

 " in spirit ? " 

 " exactly . my body have remain in this armchair and have , I regret to observe , consume in my absence two large pot of coffee and an incredible amount of tobacco . after you leave I send down to Stamford 's for the Ordnance map of this portion of the moor , and my spirit have hover over it all day . I flatter myself that I could find my way about . " 

 " a large - scale map , I presume ? " 

 " very large . " he unroll one section and hold it over his knee . " here you have the particular district which concern we . that be Baskerville Hall in the middle . " 

 " with a wood round it ? " 

 " exactly . I fancy the yew alley , though not mark under that name , must stretch along this line , with the moor , as you per- ceive , upon the right of it . this small clump of building here be the hamlet of Grimpen , where our friend Dr. Mortimer have his headquarter . within a radius of five mile there be , as you see , only a very few scatter dwelling . here be Lafter Hall , which be mention in the narrative . there be a house indicate here which may be the residence of the naturalist - Stapleton , if I remember right , be his name . here be two moorland farm- house , High Tor and Foulmire . then fourteen mile away the great convict prison of Princetown . between and around these scatter point extend the desolate , lifeless moor . this , then , be the stage upon which tragedy have be play , and upon which we may help to play it again . " 

 " it must be a wild place . " 

 " yes , the setting be a worthy one . if the devil do desire to have a hand in the affair of man - " 

 " then you be yourself incline to the supernatural explanation . " 

 " the devil 's agent may be of flesh and blood , may they not ? there be two question wait for we at the outset . the one be whether any crime have be commit at all ; the second be , what be the crime and how be it commit ? of course , if Dr. Mortimer 's surmise should be correct , and we be deal with force outside the ordinary law of Nature , there be an end of our investigation . but we be bind to exhaust all other hypothesis before fall back upon this one . I think we will shut that window again , if you do not   mind . it be a singular thing , but I find that a concentrated atmosphere help a concentration of thought . I have not push it to the length of get into a box to think , but that be the logical outcome of my conviction . have you turn the case over in your mind ? " 

 " yes , I have think a good deal of it in the course of the day . " 

 " what do you make of it ? " 

 " it be very bewildering . " 

 " it have certainly a character of its own . there be point of distinction about it . that change in the footprint , for example . what do you make of that ? " 

 " Mortimer say that the man have walk on tiptoe down that portion of the alley . " 

 " he only repeat what some fool have say at the inqu why should a man walk on tiptoe down the alley ? " 

 " what then ? " 

 " he be run , Watson - run desperately , run for his life , run until he burst his heart - and fall dead upon his face . " 

 " run from what ? " 

 " there lie our problem . there be indication that the man be craze with fear before ever he begin to run . " 

 " how can you say that ? " 

 " I be presume that the cause of his fear come to he across the moor . if that be so , and it seem most probable only a man who have lose his wit would have run from the house instead of towards it . if the gipsy 's evidence may be take as true , he run with cry for help in the direction where help be least likely to be . then , again , whom be he wait for that night , and why be he wait for he in the yew alley rather than in his own house ? " 

 " you think that he be wait for someone ? " 

 " the man be elderly and infirm . we can understand his take an evening stroll , but the ground be damp and the night inclement . be it natural that he should stand for five or ten minute , as Dr. Mortimer , with more practical sense than I should have give he credit for , deduce from the cigar ash ? " 

 " but he go out every evening . " 

 " I think it unlikely that he wait at the moor - gate every evening . on the contrary , the evidence be that he avoid the moor . that night he wait there . it be the night before he make his departure for London . the thing take shape , Watson . it become coherent . might I ask you to hand I my violin , and we will postpone all far think upon this business until we have have the advantage of meet Dr. Mortimer and Sir Henry Baskerville in the morning . " 

  chapter 4 

 Sir Henry Baskerville 

  our breakfast table be clear early , and Holmes wait in his dressing - gown for the promise interview . our client be punc- tual to their appointment , for the clock have just strike ten when Dr. Mortimer be show up , follow by the young baronet . the latter be a small , alert , dark - eyed man about thirty year of age , very sturdily build , with thick black eyebrow and a strong , pugnacious face . he wear a ruddy - tint tweed suit and have the weather - beat appearance of one who have spend most of his time in the open air , and yet there be something in his steady eye and the quiet assurance of his bearing which indicate the gentleman . 

 " this be Sir Henry Baskerville , " say Dr. Mortimer . 

 " why , yes , " say he , " and the strange thing be , Mr. Sherlock Holmes , that if my friend here have not propose come round to you this morning I should have come on my own account . I understand that you think out little puzzle , and I have   have one this morning which want more thinking out than I be able to give it . " 

 " pray take a seat , Sir Henry . do I understand you to say that you have yourself have some remarkable experience since you arrive in London ? " 

 " nothing of much importance , Mr. Holmes . only a joke , as like as not . it be this letter , if you can call it a letter , which reach I this morning . " 

 he lay an envelope upon the table , and we all bent over it . it be of common quality , grayish in colour . the address , " Sir Henry Baskerville , Northumberland Hotel , " be print in rough character ; the post - mark " Charing Cross , " and the date of post the precede evening . 

 " who know that you be go to the Northumberland Ho- tel ? " ask Holmes , glance keenly across at our visitor . 

 " no one could have know . we only decide after I meet Dr. Mortimer . " 

 " but Dr. Mortimer be no doubt already stop there ? " 

 " no , I have be stay with a friend , " say the doctor . " there be no possible indication that we intend to go to this hotel . " 

 " Hum ! someone seem to be very deeply interested in your movement . " out of the envelope he take a half - sheet of fools- cap paper fold into four . this he open and spread flat upon the table . across the middle of it a single sentence have be form by the expedient of paste print word upon it . it run : 

  as you value your life or your reason keep away from the moor . 

 the word " moor " only be print in ink . 

 " now , " say Sir Henry Baskerville , " perhaps you will tell I , Mr. Holmes , what in thunder be the meaning of that , and who it be that take so much interest in my affair ? " 

 " what do you make of it , Dr. Mortimer ? you must allow that there be nothing supernatural about this , at any rate ? " 

 " no , sir , but it might very well come from someone who be convince that the business be supernatural . " 

 " what business ? " ask Sir Henry sharply . " it seem to I that all you gentleman know a great deal more than I do about my own affair . " 

 " you shall share our knowledge before you leave this room , Sir Henry . I promise you that , " say Sherlock Holmes . " we will confine ourselves for the present with your permission to this very interesting document , which must have be put together and post yesterday evening . have you yesterday 's Times , Watson ? " 

 " it be here in the corner . " 

 " might I trouble you for it - the inside page , please , with the lead article ? " he glance swiftly over it , run his eye up and down the column . " capital article this on free trade . permit I to give you an extract from it . 

  " you may be cajole into imagine that your own spe- 

 cial trade or your own industry will be encourage by a 

 protective tariff , but it stand to reason that such legislation 

 must in the long run keep away wealth from the country , 

 diminish the value of our import , and low the general 

 condition of life in this island . 

 " what do you think of that , Watson ? " cry Holmes in high glee , rub his hand together with satisfaction . " do not   you think that be an admirable sentiment ? " 

 Dr. Mortimer look at Holmes with an air of professional interest , and Sir Henry Baskerville turn a pair of puzzled dark eye upon I . 

 " I do not   know much about the tariff and thing of that kind , " say he , " but it seem to I we have   get a bit off the trail so far as that note be concern . " 

 " on the contrary , I think we be particularly hot upon the trail , Sir Henry . Watson here know more about my method than you do , but I fear that even he have not quite grasp the significance of this sentence . " 

 " no , I confess that I see no connection . " 

 " and yet , my dear Watson , there be so very close a connec- tion that the one be extract out of the other . ' you , ' ' your , ' ' your , ' ' life , ' ' reason , ' ' value , ' ' keep away , ' ' from the . ' do not   you see now whence these word have be take ? " 

 " by thunder , you be right ! well , if that be not   smart ! " cry Sir Henry . 

 " if any possible doubt remain it be settle by the fact that ' keep away ' and ' from the ' be cut out in one piece . " 

 " well , now - so it be ! " 

 " really , Mr. Holmes , this exceed anything which I could have imagine , " say Dr. Mortimer , gaze at my friend in amazement . " I could understand anyone say that the word be from a newspaper ; but that you should name which , and add that it come from the lead article , be really one of the most remarkable thing which I have ever know . how do you do it ? " 

 " I presume , Doctor , that you could tell the skull of a negro from that of an Esquimau ? " 

 " most certainly . " 

 " but how ? " 

 " because that be my special hobby . the difference be obvi- ous . the supra - orbital crest , the facial angle , the maxillary curve , the - " 

 " but this be my special hobby , and the difference be equally obvious . there be as much difference to my eye between the leaded bourgeois type of a Times article and the slovenly print of an evening half - penny paper as there could be between your negro and your Esquimau . the detection of type be one of the most elementary branch of knowledge to the special expert in crime , though I confess that once when I be very young I confuse the Leeds Mercury with the Western Morning News . but a Times leader be entirely distinctive , and these word could have be take from nothing else . as it be do yesterday the strong probability be that we should find the word in yester- day 's issue . " 

 " so far as I can follow you , then , Mr. Holmes , " say Sir Henry Baskerville , ' someone cut out this message with a scissor - " 

 " nail - scissor , " say Holmes . " you can see that it be a very short - bladed scissor , since the cutter have to take two snip over ' keep away . ' " 

 " that be so . someone , then , cut out the message with a pair of short - bladed scissor , paste it with paste - " 

 " Gum , " say Holmes . 

 " with gum on to the paper . but I want to know why the word ' moor ' should have be write ? " 

 " because he could not find it in print . the other word be all simple and might be find in any issue , but ' moor ' would be less common . " 

 " why , of course , that would explain it . have you read any- thing else in this message , Mr. Holmes ? " 

 " there be one or two indication , and yet the utmost pain have be take to remove all clue . the address , you observe be print in rough character . but the Times be a paper which be seldom find in any hand but those of the highly educated . we may take it , therefore , that the letter be compose by an educate man who wish to pose as an uneducated one , and his effort to conceal his own writing suggest that that writing might be know , or come to be know , by you . again , you will observe that the word be not gum on in an accurate line , but that some be much high than other . ' life , ' for example be quite out of its proper place . that may point to carelessness or it may point to agitation and hurry upon the part of the cutter . on the whole I incline to the latter view , since the matter be evidently important , and it be unlikely that the composer of such a letter would be careless . if he be in a hurry it open up the interesting question why he should be in a hurry , since any letter post up to early morning would reach Sir Henry before he would leave his hotel . do the composer fear an interruption - and from whom ? " 

 " we be come now rather into the region of guesswork , " say Dr. Mortimer . 

 " say , rather , into the region where we balance probability and choose the most likely . it be the scientific use of the imagina- tion , but we have always some material basis on which to start our speculation . now , you would call it a guess , no doubt , but I be almost certain that this address have be write in a hotel . " 

 " how in the world can you say that ? " 

 " if you examine it carefully you will see that both the pen and the ink have give the writer trouble . the pen have splutter twice in a single word and have run dry three time in a short address , show that there be very little ink in the bottle . now , a private pen or ink - bottle be seldom allow to be in such a state , and the combination of the two must be quite rare . but you know the hotel ink and the hotel pen , where it be rare to get anything else . yes , I have very little hesitation in say that could we examine the waste - paper basket of the hotel around Charing Cross until we find the remain of the mutilate Times leader we could lay our hand straight upon the person who send this singular message . Halloa ! Halloa ! what be this ? " 

 he be carefully examine the foolscap , upon which the word be paste , hold it only an inch or two from his eye . 

 " well ? " 

 " nothing , " say he , throw it down . " it be a blank half- sheet of paper , without even a water - mark upon it . I think we have draw as much as we can from this curious letter ; and now , Sir Henry , have anything else of interest happen to you since you have be in London ? " 

 " why , no , Mr. Holmes . I think not . " 

 " you have not observe anyone follow or watch you ? " 

 " I seem to have walk right into the thick of a dime novel , " say our visitor . " why in thunder should anyone follow or watch I ? " 

 " we be come to that . you have nothing else to report to we before we go into this matter ? " 

 " well , it depend upon what you think worth report . " 

 " I think anything out of the ordinary routine of life well worth reporting . " 

 Sir Henry smile . 

 " I do not   know much of british life yet , for I have spend nearly all my time in the States and in Canada . but I hope that to lose one of your boot be not part of the ordinary routine of life over here . " 

 " you have lose one of your boot ? " 

 " my dear sir , " cry Dr. Mortimer , " it be only mislaid . you will find it when you return to the hotel . what be the use of trouble Mr. Holmes with trifle of this kind ? " 

 " well , he ask I for anything outside the ordinary routine . " 

 " exactly , " say Holmes , " however foolish the incident may seem . you have lose one of your boot , you say ? " 

 " well , mislay it , anyhow . I put they both outside my door last night , and there be only one in the morning . I could get no sense out of the chap who clean they . the bad of it be that I only buy the pair last night in the Strand , and I have never have they on . " 

 " if you have never wear they , why do you put they out to be clean ? " 

 " they be tan boot and have never be varnish . that be why I put they out . " 

 " then I understand that on your arrival in London yesterday you go out at once and buy a pair of boot ? " 

 " I do a good deal of shopping . Dr. Mortimer here go round with I . you see , if I be to be squire down there I must dress the part , and it may be that I have get a little careless in my way out West . among other thing I buy these brown boot - give six dollar for they - and have one steal before ever I have they on my foot . " 

 " it seem a singularly useless thing to steal , " say Sherlock Holmes . " I confess that I share Dr. Mortimer 's belief that it will not be long before the miss boot be find . " 

 " and , now , gentleman , " say the baronet with decision , " it seem to I that I have speak quite enough about the little that I know . it be time that you keep your promise and give I a full account of what we be all drive at . " 

 " your request be a very reasonable one , " Holmes answer . " Dr. Mortimer , I think you could not do well than to tell your story as you tell it to we . " 

 thus encourage , our scientific friend draw his paper from his pocket and present the whole case as he have do upon the morning before . Sir Henry Baskerville listen with the deep attention and with an occasional exclamation of surprise . 

 " well , I seem to have come into an inheritance with a ven- geance , " say he when the long narrative be finish . " of course , I have   hear of the hound ever since I be in the nursery . it be the pet story of the family , though I never think of take it seriously before . but as to my uncle 's death - well , it all seem boil up in my head , and I can not   get it clear yet . you do not   seem quite to have make up your mind whether it be a case for a policeman or a clergyman . " 

 " precisely . " 

 " and now there be this affair of the letter to I at the hotel . I suppose that fit into its place . " 

 " it seem to show that someone know more than we do about what go on upon the moor , " say Dr. Mortimer . 

 " and also , " say Holmes , " that someone be not ill - disposed towards you , since they warn you of danger . " 

 " or it may be that they wish , for their own purpose , to scare I away . " 

 " well , of course , that be possible also . I be very much indebted to you , Dr. Mortimer , for introduce I to a problem which present several interesting alternative . but the practical point which we now have to decide , Sir Henry , be whether it be or be not advisable for you to go to Baskerville Hall . " 

 " why should I not go ? " 

 " there seem to be danger . " 

 " do you mean danger from this family fiend or do you mean danger from human being ? " 

 " well , that be what we have to find out . " 

 " whichever it be , my answer be fix . there be no devil in hell , Mr. Holmes , and there be no man upon earth who can prevent I from go to the home of my own people , and you may take that to be my final answer . " his dark brow knit and his face flush to a dusky red as he speak . it be evident that the fiery temper of the Baskervilles be not extinct in this their last representative . " meanwhile , " say he , " I have hardly have time to think over all that you have tell I . it be a big thing for a man to have to understand and to decide at one sitting . I should like to have a quiet hour by myself to make up my mind . now , look here , Mr. Holmes , it be half - past eleven now and I be go back right away to my hotel.- suppose you and your friend , Dr. Watson , come round and lunch with we at two . I will be able to tell you more clearly then how this thing strike I . " 

 " be that convenient to you , Watson ? " 

 " perfectly . " 

 " then you may expect we . shall I have a cab call ? " 

 " I would prefer to walk , for this affair have flurry I rather . " 

 " I will join you in a walk , with pleasure , " say his companion . 

 " then we meet again at two o'clock . Au revoir , and good- morning ! " 

 we hear the step of our visitor descend the stair and the bang of the front door . in an instant Holmes have change from the languid dreamer to the man of action . 

 " your hat and boot , Watson , quick ! not a moment to lose ! " he rush into his room in his dressing - gown and be back again in a few second in a frock - coat . we hurry together down the stair and into the street . Dr. Mortimer and Baskerville be still visible about two hundred yard ahead of we in the direction of Oxford Street . 

 " shall I run on and stop they ? " 

 " not for the world , my dear Watson . I be perfectly satisfied with your company if you will tolerate mine . our friend be wise , for it be certainly a very fine morning for a walk . " 

 he quicken his pace until we have decrease the distance which divide we by about half . then , still keep a hundred yard behind , we follow into Oxford Street and so down Regent Street . once our friend stop and star into a shop window , upon which Holmes do the same . an instant after- ward he give a little cry of satisfaction , and , follow the direction of his eager eye , I see that a hansom cab with a man inside which have halt on the other side of the street be now proceed slowly onward again . 

 " there be our man , Watson ! come along ! we will have a good look at he , if we can do no more . " 

 at that instant I be aware of a bushy black beard and a pair of pierce eye turn upon we through the side window of the cab . instantly the trapdoor at the top fly up , something be scream to the driver , and the cab fly madly off down Regent Street . Holmes look eagerly round for another , but no - empty one be in sight . then he dash in wild pursuit amid the stream of the traffic , but the start be too great , and already the cab be out of sight . 

 " there now ! " say Holmes bitterly as he emerge pant and white with vexation from the tide of vehicle . " be ever such bad luck and such bad management , too ? Watson , Watson , if you be an honest man you will record this also and set it against my success ! " 

 " who be the man ? " 

 " I have not an idea . " 

 " a spy ? " 

 " well , it be evident from what we have hear that Basker- ville have be very closely shadow by someone since he have be in town . how else could it be know so quickly that it be the Northumberland Hotel which he have choose ? if they have follow he the first day I argue that they would follow he also the second . you may have observe that I twice stroll over to the window while Dr. Mortimer be read his legend . " 

 " yes , I remember . " 

 " I be look out for loiterer in the street , but I see none . we be deal with a clever man , Watson . this matter cut very deep , and though I have not finally make up my mind whether it be a benevolent or a malevolent agency which be in touch with we , I be conscious always of power and design . when our friend leave I at once follow they in the hope of mark down their invisible attendant . so wily be he that he have not trust himself upon foot , but he have avail himself of a cab so that he could loiter behind or dash past they and so escape their notice . his method have the additional advantage that if they be to take a cab he be all ready to follow they . it have , however , one obvious disadvantage . " 

 " it put he in the power of the cabman . " 

 " exactly . " 

 " what a pity we do not get the number ! " 

 " my dear Watson , clumsy as I have be , you surely do not seriously imagine that I neglect to get the number ? no . 2704 be our man . but that be no use to we for the moment . " 

 " I fail to see how you could have do more . " 

 " on observe the cab I should have instantly turn and walk in the other direction . I should then at my leisure have hire a second cab and follow the first at a respectful distance , or , well still , have drive to the Northumberland Hotel and wait there . when our unknown have follow Baskerville home we should have have the opportunity of play his own game upon himself and see where he make for . as it be , by an indiscreet eagerness , which be take advantage of with extraor- dinary quickness and energy by our opponent , we have betray ourselves and lose our man . " 

 we have be saunter slowly down Regent Street during this conversation , and Dr. Mortimer , with his companion , have long vanish in front of we . 

 " there be no object in our follow they , " say Holmes . " the shadow have depart and will not return . we must see what further card we have in our hand and play they with decision . could you swear to that man 's face within the cab ? " 

 " I could swear only to the beard . " 

 " and so could i - from which I gather that in all probability it be a false one . a clever man upon so delicate an errand have no use for a beard save to conceal his feature . come in here , Watson ! " 

 he turn into one of the district messenger office , where he be warmly greet by the manager . 

 " ah , Wilson , I see you have not forget the little case in which I have the good fortune to help you ? " 

 " no , sir , indeed I have not . you save my good name , and perhaps my life . " 

 " my dear fellow , you exaggerate . I have some recollection , Wilson , that you have among your boy a lad name Cartwright , who show some ability during the investigation . " 

 " yes , sir , he be still with we . " 

 " could you ring he up ? - thank you ! and I should be glad to have change of this five - pound note . " 

 a lad of fourteen , with a bright , keen face , have obey the summon of the manager . he stand now gaze with great reverence at the famous detective . 

 " let I have the Hotel Directory , " say Holmes . " thank you ! now , Cartwright , there be the name of twenty - three hotel here , all in the immediate neighbourhood of Charing Cross . do you see ? " 

 " yes , sir . " 

 " you will visit each of these in turn . " 

 " yes , sir . " 

 " you will begin in each case by give the outside porter one shilling . here be twenty - three shilling . " 

 " yes , sir . " 

 " you will tell he that you want to see the waste - paper of yesterday . you will say that an important telegram have miscar- rie and that you be look for it . you understand ? " 

 " yes , sir . " 

 " but what you be really look for be the centre page of the Times with some hole cut in it with scissor . here be a copy of the Times . it be this page . you could easily recognize it , could you not ? " 

 " yes , sir . " 

 " in each case the outside porter will send for the hall porter , to whom also you will give a shilling . here be twenty - three shilling . you will then learn in possibly twenty case out of the twenty - three that the waste of the day before have be burn or remove . in the three other case you will be show a heap of paper and you will look for this page of the Times among it . the odd be enormously against your find it . there be ten shilling over in case of emergency . let I have a report by wire at Baker Street before evening . and now , Watson , it only remain for we to find out by wire the identity of the cabman , No . 2704 , and then we will drop into one of the Bond Street picture gallery and fill in the time until we be due at the hotel . " 

  Chapter 5 

 three Broken thread 

  Sherlock Holmes have , in a very remarkable degree , the power of detach his mind at will . for two hour the strange business in which we have be involve appear to be forget , and he be entirely absorb in the picture of the modern belgian master . he would talk of nothing but art , of which he have the crudest idea , from our leave the gallery until we find our- self at the Northumberland Hotel . 

 " Sir Henry Baskerville be upstairs expect you , " say the clerk . " he ask I to show you up at once when you come . " 

 " have you any objection to my look at your register ? " say Holmes . 

 " not in the least . " 

 the book show that two name have be add after that of Baskerville . one be Theophilus Johnson and family , of New- castle ; the other Mrs. Oldmore and maid , of High Lodge , Alton . 

 " surely that must be the same Johnson whom I use to know , " say Holmes to the porter . " a lawyer , be he not , gray- head , and walk with a limp ? " 

 " no , sir , this be Mr. Johnson , the coal - owner , a very active gentleman , not old than yourself . " 

 " surely you be mistaken about his trade ? " 

 " no , sir ! he have use this hotel for many year , and he be very well know to we . " 

 " ah , that settle it . Mrs. Oldmore , too ; I seem to remember the name . excuse my curiosity , but often in call upon one friend one find another . " 

 " she be an invalid lady , sir . her husband be once mayor of Gloucester . she always come to we when she be in town . " 

 " thank you ; I be afraid I can not claim her acquaintance . we have establish a most important fact by these question , Wat- son , " he continue in a low voice as we go upstairs together . " we know now that the people who be so interested in our friend have not settle down in his own hotel . that mean that while they be , as we have see , very anxious to watch he , they be equally anxious that he should not see they . now , this be a most suggestive fact . " 

 " what do it suggest ? " 

 " it suggest - halloa , my dear fellow , what on earth be the matter ? " 

 as we come round the top of the stair we have run up against Sir Henry Baskerville himself . his face be flush with anger , and he hold an old and dusty boot in one of his hand . so furious be he that he be hardly articulate , and when he do speak it be in a much broad and more western dialect than any which we have hear from he in the morning . 

 " seem to I they be play I for a sucker in this hotel , " he cry . " they will find they have   stafte in to monkey with the wrong man unless they be careful . by thunder , if that chap can not   find my miss boot there will be trouble . I can take a joke with the good , Mr. Holmes , but they have   get a bit over the mark this time . " 

 " still look for your boot ? " 

 " yes , sir , and mean to find it . " 

 " but , surely , you say that it be a new brown boot ? " 

 " so it be , sir . and now it be an old black one . " 

 " what ! you do not   mean to say ? " 

 " that be just what I do mean to say . I only have three pair in the world - the new brown , the old black , and the patent leath- er , which I be wear . last night they take one of my brown one , and to - day they have sneak one of the black . well , have you get it ? speak out , man , and do not   stand star ! " 

 an agitated german waiter have appear upon the scene . 

 " no , sir ; I have make inquiry all over the hotel , but I can hear no word of it . " 

 " well , either that boot come back before sundown or I will see the manager and tell he that I go right straight out of this hotel . " 

 " it shall be find , sir - I promise you that if you will have a little patience it will be find . " 

 " mind it be , for it be the last thing of mine that I will lose in this den of thief . well , well , Mr. Holmes , you will excuse my trouble you about such a trifle - " 

 " I think it be well worth trouble about . " 

 " why , you look very serious over it . " 

 " how do you explain it ? " 

 " I just do not   attempt to explain it . it seem the very maddest , queer thing that ever happen to I . " 

 " the queer perhaps - " say Holmes thoughtfully . 

 " what do you make of it yourself ? " 

 " well , I do not   profess to understand it yet . this case of yours be very complex , Sir Henry . when take in conjunction with your uncle 's death I be not sure that of all the five hundred case of capital importance which I have handle there be one which cut so deep . but we hold several thread in our hand , and the odd be that one or other of they guide we to the truth . we may waste time in follow the wrong one , but soon or later we must come upon the right . " 

 we have a pleasant luncheon in which little be say of the business which have bring we together . it be in the private sitting - room to which we afterwards repair that Holmes ask Baskerville what be his intention . 

 " to go to Baskerville Hall . " 

 " and when ? " 

 " at the end of the week . " 

 " on the whole , " say Holmes , " I think that your decision be a wise one . I have ample evidence that you be be dog in London , and amid the million of this great city it be difficult to discover who these people be or what their object can be . if their intention be evil they might do you a mischief , and we should be powerless to prevent it . you do not know , Dr. Moftimer , that you be follow this morning from my house ? " 

 Dr. Mortimer start violently . 

 " follow ! by whom ? " 

 " that , unfortunately , be what I can not tell you . have you among your neighbour or acquaintance on Daftmoor any man with a black , full beard ? " 

 " no - or , let I see - why , yes . Barrymore , Sir Charles 's butler , be a man with a full , black beard . " 

 " ha ! where be Baffymore ? " 

 " he be in charge of the Hall . " 

 " we have good ascertain if he be really there , or if by any possibility he might be in London . " 

 " how can you do that ? " 

 " give I a telegraph form . ' be all ready for Sir Henry ? ' that will do . address to Mr. Barrymore , Baskerville Hall . what be the near telegraph - office ? grimpen . very good , we will send a second wire to the postmaster , grimpen : ' Telegram to Mr. Barrymore to be deliver into his own hand . if absent , please return wire to Sir Henry Baskerville , Northumberland Hotel . ' that should let we know before evening whether Barrymore be at his post in Devonshire or not . " 

 " that be so , " say Baskerville . " by the way , Dr. Mortimer , who be this Barrymore , anyhow ? " 

 " he be the son of the old caretaker , who be dead . they have look after the Hall for four generation now . so far as I know , he and his wife be as respectable a couple as any in the county . " 

 " at the same time , " say Baskerville , " it be clear enough that so long as there be none of the family at the Hall these people have a mighty fine home and nothing to do . " 

 " that be true . " 

 " do barrymore profit at all by Sir Charles 's will ? " ask Holmes . 

 " he and his wife have five hundred pound each . " 

 " ha ! do they know that they would receive this ? " 

 " yes ; Sir Charles be very fond of talk about the provi- sion of his wlll . " 

 " that be very interesting . " 

 " I hope , " say Dr. Mortimer , " that you do not look with suspicious eye upon everyone who receive a legacy from Sir Charles , for I also have a thousand pound leave to I . " 

 " indeed ! and anyone else ? " 

 " there be many insignificant sum to individual , and a large number of public charity . the residue all go to Sir Henry . " 

 " and how much be the residue ? " 

 " seven hundred and forty thousand pound . " 

 Holmes raise his eyebrow in surprise . " I have no idea that so gigantic a sum be involve , " say he . 

 " Sir Charles have the reputation of be rich , but we do not know how very rich he be until we come to examine his security . the total value of the estate be close on to a million . " 

 " dear I ! it be a stake for which a man might well play a desperate game . and one more question , Dr. Mortimer . Suppos- ing that anything happen to our young friend here - you will forgive the unpleasant hypothesis ! - who would inherit the estate ? " 

 " since Rodger Baskerville , Sir Charles 's young brother die unmarried , the estate would descend to the Desmonds , who be distant cousin . James Desmond be an elderly clergyman in Westmoreland . " 

 " thank you . these detail be all of great interest . have you meet Mr. James Desmond ? " 

 " yes ; he once come down to visit Sir Charles . he be a man of venerable appearance and of saintly life . I remember that he refuse to accept any settlement from Sir Charles , though he press it upon he . " 

 " and this man of simple taste would be the heir to Sir Charles 's thousand . " 

 " he would be the heir to the estate because that be entail . he would also be the heir to the money unless it be willed otherwise by the present owner , who can , of course , do what he like with it . " 

 " and have you make your will , Sir Henry ? " 

 " no , Mr. Holmes , I have not . I have   have no time , for it be only yesterday that I learn how matter stand . but in any case I feel that the money should go with the title and estate . that be my poor uncle 's idea . how be the owner go to restore the glory of the Baskervilles if he have not money enough to keep up the property ? House , land , and dollar must go together . " 

 " quite so . well , Sir Henry , I be of one mind with you as to the advisability of your go down to Devonshire without delay . there be only one provision which I must make . you certainly must not go alone . " 

 " Dr. Mortimer return with I . " 

 " but Dr. Mortimer have his practice to attend to , and his house be mile away from your . with all the good will in the world he may be unable to help you . no , Sir Henry , you must take with you someone , a trusty man , who will be always by your side . " 

 " be it possible that you could come yourself , Mr. Holmes ? " 

 " if matter come to a crisis I should endeavour to be present in person ; but you can understand that , with my extensive con- sulte practice and with the constant appeal which reach I from many quarter , it be impossible for I to be absent from London for an indefinite time . at the present instant one of the most revere name in England be be besmirch by a black- mailer , and only I can stop a disastrous scandal . you will see how impossible it be for I to go to Dartmoor . " 

 " whom would you recommend , then ? " 

 Holmes lay his hand upon my arm . 

 " if my friend would undertake it there be no man who be well worth have at your side when you be in a tight place . no one can say so more confidently than I. " 

 the proposition take I completely by surprise , but before I have time to answer , Baskerville seize I by the hand and wrung it heartily . 

 " well , now , that be real kind of you , Dr. Watson , " say he . " you see how it be with I , and you know just as much about the matter as I do . if you will come down to Baskerville Hall and see I through I will never forget it . " 

 the promise of adventure have always a fascination for I , and I be compliment by the word of Holmes and by the eagerness with which the baronet hail I as a companion . 

 " I will come , with pleasure , " say I. " I do not know how I could employ my time well . " 

 " and you will report very carefully to I , " say Holmes . " when a crisis come , as it will do , I will direct how you shall act . I suppose that by Saturday all might be ready ? " 

 " would that suit Dr. Watson ? " 

 " perfectly . " 

 " then on Saturday , unless you hear to the contrary , we shall meet at the ten - thirty train from Paddington . " 

 we have rise to depart when Baskerville give a cry , of triumph , and dive into one of the corner of the room he draw a brown boot from under a cabinet . 

 " my missing boot ! " he cry . 

 " may all our difficulty vanish as easily ! " say Sherlock Holmes . 

 " but it be a very , singular thing , " Dr. Mortimer remark . " I search this room carefully before lunch . " 

 " and so do I , " say Baskerville . " every , inch of it . " 

 " there be certainly no boot in it then . " 

 " in that case the waiter must have place it there while we be lunch . " 

 the German be send for but profess to know nothing of the matter , nor could any inquiry , clear it up . another item have be add to that constant and apparently purposeless series of small mystery which have succeed each other so rapidly . set aside the whole grim story , of Sir Charles 's death , we have a line of inexplicable incident all within the limit of two day , which include the receipt of the print letter , the black - bearded spy in the hansom , the loss of the new brown boot , the loss of the old black boot , and now the return of the new brown boot . Holmes sit in silence in the cab as we drive back to Baker Street , and I know from his draw brow and keen face that his mind , like my own , be busy in endeavour to frame some scheme into which all these strange and apparently disconnected episode could be fit . all afternoon and late into the evening he sit lose in tobacco and thought . 

 just before dinner two telegram be hand in . the first run : 

  have just hear that Barrymore be at the Hall . 

 BASKERVILLE . 

 the second : 

  visit twenty - three hotel as direct , but sorry , to report 

 unable to trace cut sheet of Times . 

 CARTWRlGHT . 

  " there go two of my thread , Watson . there be nothing more stimulating than a case where everything go against you . we must cast round for another scent . " 

 " we have still the cabman who drive the spy . " 

 " exactly . I haw wire to get his name and address from the Official Registry . I should not be surprised if this be an answer to my question . " 

 the ring at the bell prove to be something even more satis- factory than an answer , however , for the door open and a rough - look fellow enter who be evidently the man himself . 

 " I get a message from the head office that a gent at this address have be inquire for No . 2704 , " say he . " I have   drive my cab this seven year and never a word of complaint . I come here straight from the Yard to ask you to your face what you have against I . " 

 " I have nothing in the world against you , my good man , " say Holmes . " on the contrary , I have half a sovereign for you if you will give I a clear answer to my question . " 

 " well , I have   have a good day and no mistake , " say the cabman with a grin . " what be it you want to ask , sir ? " 

 " first of all your name and address , in case I want you again . " 

 " John Clayton , 3 Turpey Street , the Borough . my cab be out of Shipley 's Yard , near Waterloo Station . " 

 Sherlock Holmes make a note of it . 

 " now , Clayton , tell I all about the fare who come and watch this house at ten o'clock this morning and afterwards follow the two gentleman down Regent Street . " 

 the man look surprised and a little embarrassed . " why there be no good my tell you thing , for you seem to know as much as I do already , " say he . " the truth be that the gentleman tell I that he be a detective and that I be to say nothing about he to anyone . " 

 " my good fellow ; this be a very serious business , and you may find yourself in a pretty bad position if you try to hide anything from I . you say that your fare tell you that he be a detective ? " 

 " yes , he do . " 

 " when do he say this ? " 

 " when he leave I . " 

 " do he say anything more ? " 

 " he mention his name . " 

 Holmes cast a swift glance of triumph at I . " oh , he men- tione his name , do he ? that be imprudent . what be the name that he mention ? " 

 " his name , " say the cabman , " be Mr. Sherlock Holmes . " 

 never have I see my friend more completely take aback than by the cabman 's reply . for an instant he sit in silent amazement . then he burst into a hearty laugh . 

 " a touch , Watson - an undeniable touch ! " say he . " I feel a foil as quick and supple as my own . he get home upon I very prettily that time . so his name be Sherlock Holmes , be it ? " 

 " yes , sir , that be the gentleman 's name . " 

 " excellent ! tell I where you pick he up and all that occur . " 

 " he hail I at half - past nine in Trafalgar Square . he say that he be a detective , and he offer I two guineas if I would do exactly what he want all day and ask no question . I be glad enough to agree . first we drive down to the Northumberland Hotel and wait there until two gentleman come out and take a cab from the rank . we follow their cab until it pull up somewhere near here . " 

 " this very door , " say Holmes . 

 " well , I could not   be sure of that , but I dare say my fare know all about it . we pull up halfway down the street and wait an hour and a half . then the two gentleman pass we , walk , and we follow down Baker Street and along - " 

 " I know , " say Holmes . 

 " until we get three - quarter down Regent Street . then my gentleman throw up the trap , and he cry that I should drive right away to Waterloo Station as hard as I could go . I whip up the mare and we be there under the ten minute . then he pay up his two guineas , like a good one , and away he go into the station . only just as he be leave he turn round and he say : ' it might interest you to know that you have be drive Mr. Sherlock Holmes . ' that be how I come to know the name . " 

 " I see . and you see no more of he ? " 

 " not after he go into the station . " 

 " and how would you describe Mr. Sherlock Holmes ? " 

 the cabman scratch his head . " well , he be not   altogether such an easy gentleman to describe . I would put he at forty year of age , and he be of a middle height , two or three inch short than you , sir . he be dress like a toff , and he have a black beard , cut square at the end , and a pale face . I do not   know as I could say more than that . " 

 " colour of his eye ? " 

 " no , I can not   say that . " 

 " nothing more that you can remember ? " 

 " no , sir ; nothing . " 

 " well , then , here be your half - sovereign . there be another one wait for you if you can bring any more information . good - night ! " 

 " good - night , sir , and thank you ! " 

 John Clayton depart chuckle , and Holmes turn to I with a shrug of his shoulder and a rueful smile . 

 " Snap go our third thread , and we end where we begin , " say he . " the cunning rascal ! he know our number , know that Sir Henry Baskerville have consult I , spot who I be in Regent Street , conjecture that I have get the number of the cab and would lay my hand on the driver , and so send back this audacious message . I tell you , Watson , this time we have get a foeman who be worthy of our steel . I have   be checkmate in London . I can only wish you well luck in Devonshire . but I be not easy in my mind about it . " 

 " about what ? " 

 " about send you . it be an ugly business , Watson , an ugly dangerous business , and the more I see of it the less I like it . yes my dear fellow , you may laugh , but I give you my word that I shall be very glad to have you back safe and sound in Baker Street once more . " 

  Chapter 6 

 Baskerville Hall 

  Sir Henry Baskerville and Dr. Mortimer be ready upon the appoint day , and we start as arrange for Devonshire . Mr. Sherlock Holmes drive with I to the station and give I his last parting injunction and advice . 

 " I will not bias your mind by suggest theory or suspi- cion , Watson , " say he ; " I wish you simply to report fact in the full possible manner to I , and you can leave I to do the theorizing . " 

 " what sort of fact ? " I ask . 

 " anything which may seem to have a bearing however indi- rect upon the case , and especially the relation between young Baskerville and his neighbour or any fresh particular concern- e the death of Sir Charles . I have make some inquiry myself in the last few day , but the result have , I fear , be negative . one thing only appear to be certain , and that be that Mr. James Desmond , who be the next heir , be an elderly gentleman of a very amiable disposition , so that this persecution do not arise from he . I really think that we may eliminate he entirely from our calculation . there remain the people who will actually surround Sir Henry Baskerville upon the moor . " 

 " would it not be well in the first place to get rid ofl this Barrymore couple ? " 

 " by no mean . you could not make a great mistake . if they be innocent it would be a cruel injustice , and if they be guilty we should be give up all chance of bring it home to they . no , no , we will preserve they upon our list of suspect . then there be a groom at the Hall , if I remember right . there be two moorland farmer . there be our friend Dr. Mortimer , whom I believe to be entirely honest , and there be his wife , of whom we know nothing . there be this naturalist , Stapleton , and there be his sister , who be say to be a young lady of attraction . there be Mr. Frankland , of Lafter Hall , who be also an unknown factor . and there be one or two other neighbour . these be the folk who must be your very special study . " 

 " I will do my good . " 

 " you have arm , I suppose ? " 

 " yes , I think it as well to take they . " 

 " most certainly . keep your revolver near you night and day , and never relax your precaution . " 

 our friend have already secure a first - class carriage and be wait for we upon the platform . 

 " no , we have no news of any kind , " say Dr. Mortimer in answer to my friend 's question . " I can swear to one thing , and that be that we have not be shadow during the last two day . we have never go out without keep a sharp watch , and no one could have escape our notice . " 

 " you have always keep together , I presume ? " 

 " except yesterday afternoon . I usually give up one day to pure amusement when I come to town , so I spend it at the Museum of the College of Surgeons . " 

 " and I go to look at the folk in the park , " say Baskerville . " but we have no trouble of any kind . " 

 " it be imprudent , all the same , " say Holmes , shake his head and look very grave . " I beg , Sir Henry , that you will not go about alone . some great misfortune will befall you if you do . do you get your other boot ? " 

 " no , sir , it be go forever . " 

 " indeed . that be very interesting . well , good - bye , " he add as the train begin to glide down the platform . " Bear in mind , Sir Henry , one of the phrase in that queer old legend which Dr. Mortimer have read to we and avoid the moor in those hour of darkness when the power of evil be exalt . " 

 I look back at the plafform when we have leave it far behind and see the tall , austere figure of Holmes stand motionless and gaze after we . 

 the journey be a swift and pleasant one , and I spend it in make the more intimate acquaintance of my two companion and in play with Dr. Mortimer 's spaniel . in a very few hour the brown earth have become ruddy , the brick have change to granite , and red cow graze in well - hedge field where the lush grass and more luxuriant vegetation speak of a rich , if a damper , climate . Young Baskerville star eagerly out of the window and cry aloud with delight as he recognize the famil- ar feature of the Devon scenery . 

 " I have   be over a good part of the world since I leave it , Dr. Watson , " say he ; " but I have never see a place to compare with it . " 

 " l never see a Devonshire man who do not swear by his county , " I remark . 

 " it depend upon the breed of man quite as much as on the county , " say Dr. Mortimer . " a glance at our friend here reveal the rounded head of the Celt , which carry inside it the celtic enthusiasm and power of attachment . poor Sir Charles 's head be of a very rare type , half Gaelic , half ivernian in its characteristic . but you be very young when you last see Baskerville Hall , be you not ? " 

 " I be a boy in my teen at the time of my father 's death and have never see the Hall , for he live in a little cottage on the South Coast . Thence I go straight to a friend in America . I tell you it be all as new to I as it be to Dr. Watson , and I be as keen as possible to see the moor . " 

 " be you ? then your wish be easily grant , for there be your first sight of the moor , " say Dr. Mortimer , point out of the carriage window . 

 over the green square of the field and the low curve of a wood there rise in the distance a gray , melancholy hill , with a strange jagged summit , dim and vague in the distance , like some fantastic landscape in a dream . Baskerville sit for a long time his eye fix upon it , and I read upon his eager face how much it mean to he , this first sight of that strange spot where the man of his blood have hold sway so long and leave their mark so deep . there he sit , with his tweed suit and his american accent , in the corner of a prosaic railway - carriage , and yet as I look at his dark and expressive face I feel more than ever how true a descendant he be of that long line of high - blooded , fiery , and masterful man . there be pride , valour , and strength in his thick brow , his sensitive nostril , and his large hazel eye . if on that forbid moor a difficult and dangerous quest should lie before we , this be at least a comrade for whom one might venture to take a risk with the certainty that he would bravely share it . 

 the train pull up at a small wayside station and we all descend . outside , beyond the low , white fence , a wagonette with a pair of cobs be wait . our come be evidently a great event , for station - master and porter cluster round we to carry out our luggage . it be a sweet , simple country spot , but I be surprised to observe that by the gate there stand two sol- dierly man in dark uniform who lean upon their short rifle and glance keenly at we as we pass . the coachman , a hard- face , gnarl little fellow , salute Sir Henry Baskerville , and in a few minute we be fly swiftly down the broad , white road . rolling pasture land curve upward on either side of we , and old gable house peep out from amid the thick green foliage , but behind the peaceful and sunlit countryside there rise ever , dark against the evening sky , the long , gloomy curve of the moor , break by the jagged and sinister hill . 

 the wagonette swing round into a side road , and we curve upward through deep lane wear by century of wheel , high bank on either side , heavy with dripping moss and fleshy hart's - tongue fern . bronze bracken and mottle bramble gleam in the light of the sink sun . still steadily rise , we pass over a narrow granite bridge and skirt a noisy stream which gush swiftly down , foam and roar amid the gray boul- der . both road and stream wind up through a valley dense with scrub oak and fir . at every turn Baskerville give an excla- mation of delight , look eagerly about he and ask count- less question . to his eye all seem beautiful , but to I a tinge of melancholy lie upon the countryside , which bear so clearly the mark of the wan year . yellow leaf carpet the lane and flutter down upon we as we pass . the rattle of our wheel die away as we drive through drift of rot vegetation - sad gift , as it seem to I , for Nature to throw before the carriage of the return heir of the Baskervilles . 

 " Halloa ! " cry Dr. Mortimer , " what be this ? " 

 a steep curve of heath - clothe land , an outlying spur of the moor , lie in front of we . on the summit , hard and clear like an equestrian statue upon its pedestal , be a mount soldier , dark and stern , his rifle poise ready over his forearm . he be watch the road along which we travel . 

 " what be this , Perkins ? " ask Dr. Mortimer . 

 our driver half turn in his seat . 

 " there be a convict escape from Princetown , sir . he be be out three day now , and the warder watch every road and every station , but they have   have no sight of he yet . the farmer about here do not   like it , sir , and that be a fact . " 

 " well , I understand that they get five pound if they can give information . " 

 " yes , sir , but the chance of five pound be but a poor thing compare to the chance of have your throat cut . you see , it be not   like any ordinary convict . this be a man that would stick at nothing . " 

 " who be he , then ? " 

 " it be Selden , the Notting Hill murderer . " 

 I remember the case well , for it be one in which Holmes have take an interest on account of the peculiar ferocity of the crime and the wanton brutality which have mark all the action of the assassin . the commutation of his death sentence have be due to some doubt as to his complete sanity , so atrocious be his conduct . our wagonette have top a rise and in front of we rise the huge expanse of the moor , mottle with gnarl and craggy caim and tor . a cold wind sweep down from it and set we shiver . somewhere there , on that desolate plain , be lurk this fiendish man , hide in a burrow like a wild beast , his heart full of malignancy against the whole race which have cast he out . it need but this to complete the grim suggestive- ness of the barren waste , the chill wind , and the darkling sky . even Baskerville fall silent and pull his overcoat more closely around he . 

 we have leave the fertile country behind and beneath we . we look back on it now , the slanting ray of a low sun turn the stream to thread of gold and glow on the red earth new turn by the plough and the broad tangle of the woodland . the road in front of we grow bleaker and wilder over huge russet and olive slope , sprinkle with giant boulder . now and then we pass a moorland cottage , wall and roof with stone , with no creeper to break its harsh outline . suddenly we look down into a cuplike depression , patch with stunt oak and fus which have be twist and bend by the fury of year of storm . two high , narrow tower rise over the tree . the driver point with his whip . 

 " Baskerville Hall , " say he . 

 its master have rise and be star with flush cheek and shin eye . a few minute later we have reach the lodge- gate , a maze of fantastic tracery in wrought iron , with weather- bite pillar on either side , blotch with lichen , and summounte by the boar ' head of the Baskervilles . the lodge be a ruin of black granite and bared rib of rafter , but face it be a new building , half construct , the first fruit of Sir Charles 's south african gold . 

 through the gateway we pass into the avenue , where the wheel be again hush amid the leaf , and the old tree shoot their branch in a sombre tunnel.over our head . Baskerville shudder as he look up the long , dark drive to where the house glimmer like a ghost at the farther end . 

 " be it here ? " he ask in a low voice . 

 " no , no , the yew alley be on the other side . " 

 the young heir glance round with a gloomy face . 

 " it be no wonder my uncle feel as if trouble be come on he in such a place as this , " say he . " it be enough to scare any man . I will have a row of electric lamp up here inside of six month , and you will not   know it again , with a thousand candle- power Swan and Edison right here in front of the hall door . " 

 the avenue open into a broad expanse of turf , and the house lie before we . in the fading light I could see that the centre be a heavy block of building from which a porch project . the whole front be drape in ivy , with a patch clip bare here and there where a window or a coat of arm break through the dark veil . from this central block rise the twin tower , ancient , crenellate , and pierce with many loophole . to right and leave of the turret be more modern wing of black granite . a dull light shone through heavy mullione window , and from the high chimney which rise from the steep , high - angle roof there spring a single black column of smoke . 

 " welcome , Sir Henry ! welcome to Baskerville Hall ! " 

 a tall man have step from the shadow of the porch to open the door of the wagonette . the figure of a woman be silhouet- te against the yellow light of the hall . she come out and help the man to hand down our bag . 

 " you do not   mind my drive straight home , Sir Henry ? " say Dr. Mortimer . " my wife be expect I . " 

 " surely you will stay and have some dinner ? " 

 " no , I must go . I shall probably find some work await I . I would stay to show you over the house , but Barrymore will be a well guide than I. Good - bye , and never hesitate night or day to send for I if I can be of service . " 

 the wheel die away down the drive while Sir Henry and I turn into the hall , and the door clang heavily behind we . it be a fine apartment in which we find ourselves , large , lofty , and heavily rafter with huge baulk of age - blacken oak . in the great old - fashioned fireplace behind the high iron dog a log - fire crackle and snap . Sir Henry and I hold out our hand to it , for we be numb from our long drive . then we gaze round we at the high , thin window of old stain glass , the oak panelling , the stag ' head , the coat of arm upon the wall , all dim and sombre in the subdue light of the central lamp . 

 " it be just as I imagine it , " say Sir Henry . " be it not the very picture of an old family home ? to think that this should be the same hall in which for five hundred year my people have live . it strike I solemn to think of it . " 

 I see his dark face light up with a boyish enthusiasm as he gaze about he . the light beat upon he where he stand , but long shadow trail down the wall and hang like a black canopy above he . Barrymore have return from take our luggage to our room . he stand in front of we now with the subdue manner of a well - train servant . he be a remarkable - looking man , tall , handsome , with a square black beard and pale , distinguished feature . 

 " would you wish dinner to be serve at once , sir ? " 

 " be it ready ? " 

 " in a very few minute , sir . you will find hot water in your room . my wife and I will be happy , Sir Henry , to stay with you until you have make your fresh arrangement , but you will understand that under the new condition this house will require a considerable staff . " 

 " what new condition ? " 

 " I only mean , sir , that Sir Charles lead a very retired life , and we be able to look after his want . you would , naturally , wish to have more company , and so you will need change in your household . " 

 " do you mean that your wife and you wish to leave ? " 

 " only when it be quite convenient to you , sir . " 

 " but your family have be with we for several generation , have they not ? I should be sorry to begin my life here by break an old family connection . " 

 I seem to discern some sign of emotion upon the butler 's white face . 

 " I feel that also , sir , and so do my wife . but to tell the truth , sir , we be both very much attach to Sir Charles and his death give we a shock and make these surrounding very painful to we . I fear that we shall never again be easy in our mind at Baskerville Hall . " 

 " but what do you intend to do ? " 

 " I have no doubt , sir , that we shall succeed in establish ourselves in some business . Sir Charles 's generosity have give we the mean to do so . and now , sir , perhaps I have good show you to your room . " 

 a square balustrade gallery run round the top of the old hall , approach by a double stair . from this central point two long corridor extend the whole length of the building , from which all the bedroom open . my own be in the same wing as Baskerville 's and almost next door to it . these room appear to be much more modern than the central part of the house , and the bright paper and numerous candle do something to remove the sombre impression which our arrival have leave upon my mind . 

 but the dining - room which open out of the hall be a place of shadow and gloom . it be a long chamber with a step separate the dais where the family sit from the low portion reserve for their dependent . at one end a minstrel 's gallery overlook it . black beam shoot across above our head , with a smoke - darken ceiling beyond they . with row of flare torch to light it up , and the colour and rude hilarity of an old - time banquet , it might have soften ; but now , when two black- clothed gentleman sit in the little circle of light throw by a shade lamp , one 's voice become hush and one 's spirit sub- due . a dim line of ancestor , in every variety of dress , from the Elizabethan knight to the buck of the Regency , star down upon we and daunt we by their silent company . we talk little , and I for one be glad when the meal be over and we be able to retire into the modern billiard - room and smoke a cigarette . 

 " my word , it be not   a very cheerful place , " say Sir Henry . " I suppose one can tone down to it , but I feel a bit out of the picture at present . I do not   wonder that my uncle get a little jumpy if he live all alone in such a house as this . however , if it suit you , we will retire early to - night , and perhaps thing may seem more cheerful in the morning . " 

 I draw aside my curtain before I go to bed and look out from my window . it open upon the grassy space which lie in front of the hall door . beyond , two copse of tree moan and swing in a rise wind . a half moon break through the rift of race cloud . in its cold light I see beyond the tree a broken fringe of rock , and the long , low curve of the melancholy moor . I close the curtain , feel that my last impression be in keep with the rest . 

 and yet it be not quite the last . I find myself weary and yet wakeful , toss restlessly from side to side , seek for the sleep which would not come . far away a chime clock strike out the quarter of the hour , but otherwise a deathly silence lie upon the old house . and then suddenly , in the very dead of the night , there come a sound to my ear , clear , resonant , and unmistakable . it be the sob of a woman , the muffled , strangle gasp of one who be tear by an uncontrollable sorrow . I sit up in bed and listen intently . the noise could not have be far away and be certainly in the house . for half an hour I wait with every nerve on the alert , but there come no other sound save the chime clock and the rustle of the ivy on the wall . 

  chapter 7 

 the Stapletons of Merripit House 

  the fresh beauty of the follow morning do something to efface from our mind the grim and gray impression which have be leave upon both of we by our first experience of Baskerville Hall . as Sir Henry and I sit at breakfast the sunlight flood in through the high mullione window , throw watery patch of colour from the coat of arm which cover they . the dark panelling glow like bronze in the golden ray , and it be hard to realize that this be indeed the chamber which have strike such a gloom into our soul upon the evening before . 

 " I guess it be ourselves and not the house that we have to blame ! " say the baronet . " we be tired with our journey and chill by our drive , so we take a gray view of the place . now we be fresh and well , so it be all cheerful once more . " 

 " and yet it be not entirely a question of imagination , " I answer . " do you , for example , happen to hear someone , a woman I think , sob in the night ? " 

 " that be curious , for I do when I be half asleep fancy that I hear something of the sort . I wait quite a time , but there be no more of it , so I conclude that it be all a dream . " 

 " I hear it distinctly , and I be sure that it be really the sob of a woman . " 

 " we must ask about this right away . " he ring the bell and ask Barrymore whether he could account for our experience . it seem to I that the pallid feature of the butler turn a shade paler still as he listen to his master 's question . 

 " there be only two woman in the house , Sir Henry , " he answer . " one be the scullery - maid , who sleep in the other wing . the other be my wife , and I can answer for it that the sound could not have come from she . " 

 and yet he lie as he say it , for it chance that after breakfast I meet Mrs. Barrymore in the long corridor with the sun full upon her face . she be a large , impassive , heavy - feature woman with a stern set expression of mouth . but her telltale eye be red and glance at I from between swollen lid . it be she , then , who weep in the night , and if she do so her husband must know it . yet he have take the obvious risk of discovery in declare that it be not so . why have he do this ? and why do she weep so bitterly ? already round this pale - face , handsome , black - bearded man there be gather an atmosphere of mys- tery and of gloom . it be he who have be the first to discover the body of Sir Charles , and we have only his word for all the circumstance which lead up to the old man 's death . be it possible that it be Barrymore , after all , whom we have see in the cab in Regent Street ? the beard might well have be the same . the cabman have describe a somewhat short man , but such an impression might easily have be erroneous . how could I settle the point forever ? obviously the first thing to do be to see the Grimpen postmaster and find whether the test telegram have really be place in Barrymore 's own hand . be the answer what it might , I should at least have something to report to Sherlock Holmes . 

 Sir Henry have numerous paper to examine after breakfast , so that the time be propitious for my excursion . it be a pleasant walk of four mile along the edge of the moor , lead I at last to a small gray hamlet , in which two large building , which prove to be the inn and the house of Dr. Mortimer , stand high above the rest . the postmaster , who be also the village grocer , have a clear recollection of the telegram . 

 " certainly , sir , " say he , " I have the telegram deliver to Mr. Barrymore exactly as direct . " 

 " who deliver it ? " 

 " my boy here . James , you deliver that telegram to Mr. Barrymore at the Hall last week , do you not ? " 

 " yes , father , I deliver it . " 

 " into his own hand ? " I ask . 

 " well , he be up in the loft at the time , so that I could not put it into his own hand , but I give it into Mrs. Barrymore 's hand , and she promise to deliver it at once . " 

 " do you see Mr. Barrymore ? " 

 " no , sir ; I tell you he be in the loft . " 

 " if you do not   see he , how do you know he be in the loft ? " 

 " well , surely his own wife ought to know where he be , " say the postmaster testily . " do not   he get the telegram ? if there be any mistake it be for Mr. Barrymore himself to complain . " 

 it seem hopeless to pursue the inquiry any far , but it be clear that in spite of Holmes 's ruse we have no proof that Barry- more have not be in London all the time . suppose that it be so - suppose that the same man have be the last who have see Sir Charles alive , and the first to dog the new heir when he return to England . what then ? be he the agent of other or have he some sinister design of his own ? what interest could he have in persecute the Baskerville family ? I think of the strange warning clip out of the lead article of the Times . be that his work or be it possibly the doing of someone who be bent upon counteract his scheme ? the only conceivable motive be that which have be suggest by Sir Henry , that if the family could be scar away a comfortable and permanent home would be secure for the Barrymores . but surely such an explanation as that would be quite inadequate to account for the deep and subtle scheming which seem to be weave an invisible net round the young baronet . Holmes himself have say that no more complex case have come to he in all the long series of his sensational investigation . I pray , as I walk back along the gray , lonely road , that my friend might soon be free from his preoccupation and able to come down to take this heavy burden of responsibility from my shoulder . 

 suddenly my thought be interrupt by the sound of run- ning foot behind I and by a voice which call I by name . I turn , expect to see Dr. Mortimer , but to my surprise it be a stranger who be pursue I . he be a small , slim , clean- shaven , prim - face man , flaxen - haired and leanjawe , between thirty and forty year of age , dress in a gray suit and wear a straw hat . a tin box for botanical specimen hang over his shoulder and he carry a green butterfly - net in one of his hand . 

 " you will , I be sure , excuse my presumption , Dr. Watson , " say he as he come pant up to where I stand . " here on the moor we be homely folk and do not wait for formal introduc- tion . you may possibly have hear my name from our mutual friend , Mortimer . I be Stapleton , of Merripit House . " 

 " your net and box would have tell I as much , " say I , " for I know that Mr. Stapleton be a naturalist . but how do you know I ? " 

 " I have be call on Mortimer , and he point you out to I from the window of his surgery as you pass . as our road lie the same way I think that I would overtake you and introduce myself . I trust that Sir Henry be none the bad for his journey ? " 

 " he be very well , thank you . " 

 " we be all rather afraid that after the sad death of Sir Charles the new baronet might refuse to live here . it be ask much of a wealthy man to come down and bury himself in a place of this kind , but I need not tell you that it mean a very great deal to the countryside . Sir Henry have , I suppose , no superstitious fear in the matter ? " 

 " I do not think that it be likely . " 

 " of course you know the legend of the fiend dog which haunt the family ? " 

 " I have hear it . " 

 " it be extraordinary how credulous the peasant be about here ! any number of they be ready to swear that they have see such a creature upon the moor . " he speak with a smile , but I seem to read in his eye that he take the matter more seri- ously . " the story take a great hold upon the imagination of Sir Charles , and I have no doubt that it lead to his tragic end . " 

 " but how ? " 

 " his nerve be so work up that the appearance of any dog might have have a fatal effect upon his diseased heart . I fancy that he really do see something of the kind upon that last night in the yew alley . I fear that some disaster might occur , for I be very fond of the old man , and I know that his heart be weak . " 

 " how do you know that ? " 

 " my friend Mortimer tell I . " 

 " you think , then , that some dog pursue Sir Charles , and that he die of fright in consequence ? " 

 " have you any well explanation ? " 

 " I have not come to any conclusion . " 

 " have Mr. Sherlock Holmes ? " 

 the word take away my breath for an instant but a glance at the placid face and steadfast eye of my companion show that no surprise be intend . 

 " it be useless for we to pretend that we do not know you , Dr Watson , " say he . " the record of your detective have reach we here , and you could not celebrate he without be know yourself . when Mortimer tell I your name he could not deny your identity . if you be here , then it follow that Mr. Sherlock Holmes be interesting himself in the matter , and I be naturally curious to know what view he may take . " 

 " I be afraid that I can not answer that question . " 

 " may I ask if he be go to honour we with a visit himsel ? " 

 " he can not leave town at present . he have other case which engage his attention . " 

 " what a pity ! he might throw some light on that which be so dark to we . but as to your own research , if there be any possible way in which I can be of service to you I trust that you will command I . if I have any indication of the nature of your suspicion or how you propose to investigate the case , I might perhaps even now give you some aid or advice . " 

 " I assure you that I be simply here upon a visit to my friend , Sir Henry , and that I need no help of any kind . " 

 " Excellent ! " say Stapleton . " you be perfectly right to be wary and discreet . I be justly reprove for what I feel be an unjustifiable intrusion , and I promise you that I will not mention the matter again . " 

 we have come to a point where a narrow grassy path strike off from the road and wound away across the moor . a steep , boulder - sprinkle hill lie upon the right which have in bygone day be cut into a granite quarry . the face which be turn towards we form a dark cliff , with fern and bramble grow in its niche . from over a distant rise there float a gray plume of smoke . 

 " a moderate walk along this moor - path bring we to Merripit House , " say he . " perhaps you will spare an hour that I may have the pleasure of introduce you to my sister . " 

 my first thought be that I should be by Sir Henry 's side . but then I remember the pile of paper and bill with which his study table be litter . it be certain that I could not help with those . and Holmes have expressly say that I should study the neighbour upon the moor . I accept Stapleton 's invitation , and we turn together down the path . 

 " it be a wonderful place , the moor , " say he , look round over the undulating down , long green roller , with crest of jagged granite foam up into fantastic surge . " you never tire of the moor . you can not think the wonderful secret which it contain . it be so vast , and so barren , and so mysterious . " 

 " you know it well , then ? " 

 " I have only be here two year . the resident would call I a newcomer . we come shortly after Sir Charles settle . but my taste lead I to explore every part of the country round , and I should think that there be few man who know it well than I do . " 

 " be it hard to know ? " 

 " very hard . you see , for example , this great plain to the north here with the queer hill break out of it . do you observe anything remarkable about that ? " 

 " it would be a rare place for a gallop . " 

 " you would naturally think so and the thought have cost several their life before now . you notice those bright green spot scatter thickly over it ? " 

 " yes , they seem more fertile than the rest . " 

 Stapleton laugh . 

 " that be the great Grimpen Mire , " say he . " a false step yonder mean death to man or beast . only yesterday I see one of the moor pony wander into it . he never come out . I see his head for quite a long time crane out of the bog - hole , but it suck he down at last . even in dry season it be a danger to cross it , but after these autumn rain it be an awful place . and yet I can find my way to the very heart of it and return alive . by George , there be another of those miserable pony ! " 

 something brown be roll and toss among the green sedge . then a long , agonized , writhe neck shoot upward and a dreadful cry echo over the moor . it turn I cold with horror , but my companion 's nerve seem to be strong than mme . 

 " it be go ! " say he . " the mire have he . two in two day , and many more , perhaps , for they get in the way of go there in the dry weather and never know the difference until the mire have they in its clutch . it be a bad place , the great Grimpen Mire . " 

 " and you say you can penetrate it ? " 

 " yes , there be one or two path which a very active man can take . I have find they out . " 

 " but why should you wish to go into so horrible a place ? " 

 " well , you see the hill beyond ? they be really island cut off on all side by the impassable mire , which have crawl round they in the course of year . that be where the rare plant and the butterfly be , if you have the wit to reach they . " 

 " I shall try my luck some day . " 

 he look at I with a surprised face . 

 " for God 's sake put such an idea out of your mind , " say he . 

 " your blood would be upon my head . I assure you that there would not be the least chance of your come back alive . it be only by remember certain complex landmark that I be able to do it . " 

 " Halloa ! " I cry . " what be that ? " 

 a long , low moan , indescribably sad , sweep over the moor . it fill the whole air , and yet it be impossible to say whence it come . from a dull murmur it swell into a deep roar , and then sink back into a melancholy , throb murmur once again . Stapleton look at I with a curious expression in his face . 

 " queer place , the moor ! " say he . 

 " but what be it ? " 

 " the peasant say it be the Hound of the Baskervilles call for its prey . I have   hear it once or twice before , but never quite so loud . " 

 I look round , with a chill of fear in my heart , at the huge swell plain , mottle with the green patch of rush . nothing stir over the vast expanse save a pair of raven , which croak loudly from a tor behind we . 

 " you be an educate man . you do not   believe such nonsense as that ? " say I. " what do you think be the cause of so strange a sound ? " 

 " bog make queer noise sometimes . it be the mud settle , or the water rise , or something . " 

 " no , no , that be a live voice . " 

 " well , perhaps it be . do you ever hear a bittern booming ? " 

 " no , I never do . " 

 " it be a very rare bird - practically extinct - in England now , but all thing be possible upon the moor . yes , I should not be surprised to learn that what we have hear be the cry of the last of the bittern . " 

 " it be the weird , strange thing that ever I hear in my life . " 

 " yes , it be rather an uncanny place altogether . look at the hillside yonder . what do you make of those ? " 

 the whole steep slope be cover with gray circular ring of stone , a score of they at least . 

 " what be they ? sheep - pen ? " 

 " no , they be the home of our worthy ancestor . prehistoric man live thickly on the moor , and as no one in particular have live there since , we find all his little arrangement exactly as he leave they . these be his wigwam with the roof off . you can even see his hearth and his couch if you have the curiosity to go inside . 

 " but it be quite a town . when be it inhabit ? " 

 " neolithic man - no date . " 

 " what do he do ? " 

 " he graze his cattle on these slope , and he learn to dig for tin when the bronze sword begin to supersede the stone axe . look at the great trench in the opposite hill . that be his mark . yes , you will find some very singular point about the moor , Dr. Watson . oh , excuse I an instant ! it be surely cyclopide . " 

 a small fly or moth have flutter across our path , and in an instant Stapleton be rush with extraordinary energy and speed in pursuit of it . to my dismay the creature fly straight for the great mire , and my acquaintance never pause for an instant , bound from tuft to tuft behind it , his green net wave in the air . his gray clothe and jerky , zigzag , irregular progress make he not unlike some huge moth himself . I be stand watch his pursuit with a mixture of admiration for his extraor- dinary activity and fear lest he should lose his footing in the treacherous mire when I hear the sound of step and , turn round , find a woman near I upon the path . she have come from the direction in which the plume of smoke indicate the position of Merripit House , but the dip of the moor have hide she until she be quite close . 

 I could not doubt that this be the Miss Stapleton of whom I have be tell , since lady of any sort must be few upon the moor , and I remember that I have hear someone describe she as be a beauty . the woman who approach I be certainly that , and of a most uncommon type . there could not have be a great contrast between brother and sister , for Stapleton be neutral tint , with light hair and gray eye , while she be dark than any brunette whom I have see in England - slim , elegant , and tall . she have a proud , finely cut face , so regular that it might have seem impassive be it not for the sensitive mouth and the beautiful dark , eager eye . with her perfect figure and elegant dress she be , indeed , a strange apparition upon a lonely moorland path . her eye be on her brother as I turn , and then she quicken her pace towards I . I have raise my hat and be about to make some explanatory remark when her own word turn all my thought into a new channel . 

 " go back ! " she say . " go straight back to London , instantly . " 

 I could only stare at she in stupid surprise . her eye blaze at I , and she tap the ground impatiently with her foot . 

 " why should I go back ? " I ask . 

 " I can not explain . " she speak in a low , eager voice , with a curious lisp in her utterance . " but for God 's sake do what I ask you . go back and never set foot upon the moor again . " 

 " but I have only just come . " 

 " Man , man ! " she cry . " can you not tell when a warning be for your own good ? go back to London ! start to - night ! get away from this place at all cost ! Hush , my brother be come ! not a word of what I have say . would you mind get that orchid for I among the mare' - tail yonder ? we be very rich in orchid on the moor , though , of course , you be rather late to see the beauty of the place . " 

 Stapleton have abandon the chase and come back to we breathe hard and flush with his exertion . 

 " Halloa , Beryl ! " say he , and it seem to I that the tone of his greeting be not altogether a cordial one . 

 " well , Jack , you be very hot . " 

 " yes , I be chase a cyclopide . he be very rare and seldom find in the late autumn . what a pity that I should have miss he ! " he speak unconcernedly , but his small light eye glance incessantly from the girl to I . 

 " you have introduce yourself , I can see . " 

 " yes . I be tell Sir Henry that it be rather late for he to see the true beauty of the moor . " 

 " why , who do you think this be ? " 

 " I imagine that it must be Sir Henry Baskerville . " 

 " no , no , " say I. " only a humble commoner , but his friend . my name be Dr. Watson . " 

 a flush of vexation pass over her expressive face . " we have be talk at cross purpose , " say she . 

 " why , you have not very much time for talk , " her brother remark with the same questioning eye . 

 " I talk as if Dr. Watson be a resident instead of be merely a visitor , " say she . " it can not much matter to he whether it be early or late for the orchid . but you will come on , will you not , and see Merripit House ? " 

 a short walk bring we to it , a bleak moorland house , once the farm of some grazier in the old prosperous day , but now put into repair and turn into a modern dwelling . an orchard surround it , but the tree , as be usual upon the moor , be stunt and nip , and the effect of the whole place be mean and melancholy . we be admit by a strange , wizene , rusty- coat old manservant , who seem in keep with the house . inside , however , there be large room furnish with an ele- gance in which I seem to recognize the taste of the lady . as I look from their window at the interminable granite - fleck moor roll unbroken to the farth horizon I could not but marvel at what could have bring this highly educate man and this beautiful woman to live in such a place . 

 " queer spot to choose , be it not ? " say he as if in answer to my thought . " and yet we manage to make ourselves fairly happy , do we not , Beryl ? " 

 " quite happy , " say she , but there be no ring of conviction in her word . 

 " I have a school , " say Stapleton . " it be in the north coun- try . the work to a man of my temperament be mechanical and uninteresting , but the privilege of live with youth , of help to mould those young mind , and of impress they with one 's own character and ideal be very dear to I . however , the fate be against we . a serious epidemic break out in the school and three of the boy die . it never recover from the blow , and much of my capital be irretrievably swallow up . and yet , if it be not for the loss of the charming companionship of the boy , I could rejoice over my own misfortune , for , with my strong taste for botany and zoology , I find an unlimited field of work here , and my sister be as devoted to Nature as I be . all this , Dr. Watson , have be bring upon your head by your expression as you survey the moor out of our window . " 

 " it certainly do cross my mind that it might be a little dull - less for you , perhaps , than for your sister . " 

 " no , no , I be never dull , " say she quickly . 

 " we have book , we have our study , and we have interest- ing neighbour . Dr. Mortimer be a most learn man in his own line . poor Sir Charles be also an admirable companion . we know he well and miss he more than I can tell . do you think that I should intrude if I be to call this afternoon and make the acquaintance of Sir Henry ? " 

 " I be sure that he would be delighted . " 

 " then perhaps you would mention that I propose to do so . we may in our humble way do something to make thing more easy for he until he become accustomed to his new surround- ing . will you come upstairs , Dr. Watson , and inspect my collection of Lepidoptera ? I think it be the most complete one in the south - west of England . by the time that you have look through they lunch will be almost ready . " 

 but I be eager to get back to my charge . the melancholy of the moor , the death of the unfortunate pony , the weird sound which have be associate with the grim legend of the Basker- ville , all these thing ting my thought with sadness . then on the top of these more or less vague impression there have come the definite and distinct warning of Miss Stapleton , deliver with such intense earnestness that I could not doubt that some grave and deep reason lie behind it . I resist all pressure to stay for lunch , and I set off at once upon my return journey , take the grass - grow path by which we have come . 

 it seem , however , that there must have be some short cut for those who know it , for before I have reach the road I be astounded to see Miss Stapleton sit upon a rock by the side of the track . her face be beautifully flush with her exertion and she hold her hand to her side . 

 " I have run all the way in order to cut you off , Dr. Watson , " say she . " I have not even time to put on my hat . I must not stop , or my brother may miss I . I want to say to you how sorry I be about the stupid mistake I make in think that you be Sir Henry . please forget the word I say , which have no application whatever to you . " 

 " but I can not   forget they , Miss Stapleton , " say I. " I be Sir Henry 's friend , and his welfare be a very close concern of mine . tell I why it be that you be so eager that Sir Henry should return to London . " 

 " a woman 's whim , Dr. Watson . when you know I well you will understand that I can not always give reason for what I say or do . " 

 " no , no . I remember the thrill in your voice . I remembe the look in your eye . please , please , be frank with I , Miss Stapleton , for ever since I have be here I have be conscious of shadow all round I . life have become like that great Grimpen Mire , with little green patch everywhere into which one may sink and with no guide to point the track . tell I then what it be that you mean , and I will promise to convey your warning to Sir Henry . " 

 an expression of irresolution pass for an instant over her face , but her eye have harden again when she answer I . 

 " you make too much of it , Dr. Watson , " say she . " my brother and I be very much shock by the death of Sir Charles . we know he very intimately , for his favourite walk be over the moor to our house . he be deeply impressed with the curse which hang over the family , and when this tragedy come I naturally feel that there must be some ground for the fear which he have express . I be distressed therefore when another member of the family come down to live here , and I feel that he should be warn of the danger which he will run . that be all which I intend to convey . 

 " but what be the danger ? " 

 " you know the story of the hound ? " 

 " I do not believe in such nonsense . " 

 " but I do . if you have any influence with Sir Henry , take he away from a place which have always be fatal to his family . the world be wide . why should he wish to live at the place of danger ? " 

 " because it be the place of danger . that be Sir Henry 's nature . I fear that unless you can give I some more definite informa- tion than this it would be impossible to get he to move . " 

 " I can not say anything definite , for I do not know anything definite . " 

 " I would ask you one more question , Miss Stapleton . if you mean no more than this when you first speak to I , why should you not wish your brother to overhear what you say ? there be nothing to which he , or anyone else , could object . " 

 " my brother be very anxious to have the Hall inhabit , for he think it be for the good of the poor folk upon the moor . he would be very angry if he know that I have say anything which might induce Sir Henry to go away . but I have do my duty now and I will say no more . I must go back , or he will miss I and suspect that I have see you . good - bye ! " she turn and have disappear in a few minute among the scatter boulder , while I , with my soul full of vague fear , pursue my way to Baskerville Hall . 

  chapter 8 

 First Report of Dr. Watson 

  from this point onward I will follow the course of event by transcribe my own letter to Mr. Sherlock Holmes which lie before I on the table . one page be miss , but otherwise they be exactly as write and show my feeling and suspicion of the moment more accurately than my memory , clear as it be upon these tragic event , can possibly do . 

  Baskerville Hall , October 13th . 

 my dear Holmes : 

 my previous letter and telegram have keep you pretty well up to date as to all that have occur in this most God - forsake corner of the world . the long one stay here the more do the spirit of the moor sink into one 's soul , its vastness , and also its grim charm . when you be once out upon its bosom you have leave all trace of modern England behind you , but , on the other hand , you be conscious everywhere of the home and the work of the prehistoric people . on all side of you as you walk be the house of these forget folk , with their graf and the huge monolith which be suppose to have mark their temple . as you look at their gray stone hut against the scarred hillside you leave your own age behind you , and if you be to see a skin - clothe , hairy man crawl out from the low door fit a flint - tip arrow on to the string of his bow , you wouid feel that his presence there be more natural than your own . the strange thing be that they should have live so thickly on what must always have be most unfruitful soil . I be no antiquarian , but I could imagine that they be some unwarlike and harry race who be force to accept that which none other would occupy . 

 all this , however , be foreign to the mission on which you send I and will probably be very uninteresting to your severely practical mind . I can still remember your complete indifference as to whether the sun move round the earth or the earth round the sun . let I , therefore , return to the fact concern Sir Henry Baskerville . 

 if you have not have any report within the last few day it be because up to to - day there be nothing of importance to relate . then a very surprising circumstance occur , which I shall tell you in due course . but , first of all , I must keep you in touch with some of the other factor in the situation . 

 one of these , concern which I have say little , be the escaped convict upon the moor . there be strong reason now to believe that he have get right away , which be a considerable relief to the lonely householder of this district . a fortnight have pass since his flight , during which he have not be see and nothing have be hear of he . it be surely inconceivable that he could have hold out upon the moor during all that time . of course , so far as his concealment go there be no difficulty at all . any one of these stone hut would give he a hiding - place . but there be nothing to eat unless he be to catch and slaughter one of the moor sheep . we think , therefore , that he have go , and the outlying farmer sleep the well in consequence . 

 we be four able - bodied man in this household , so that we could take good care of ourselves , but I confess that I have have uneasy moment when I have think of the Stapletons . they live mile from any help . there be one maid , an old manser- vant , the sister , and the brother , the latter not a very strong man . they would be helpless in the hand of a desperate fellow like this Notting Hill criminal if he could once effect an entrance . both Sir Henry and I be concern at their situation , and it be suggest that Perkins the groom should go over to sleep there , but Stapleton would not hear of it . 

 the fact be that our friend , the baronet , begin to display a considerable interest in our fair neighbour . it be not to be won- dere at , for time hang heavily in this lonely spot to an active man like he , and she be a very fascinating and beautiful woman . there be something tropical and exotic about she which form a singular contrast to her cool and unemotional brother . yet he also give the idea of hide fire . he have certainly a very marked influence over she , for I have see she continually glance at he as she talk as if seek approbation for what she say . I trust that he be kind to she . there be a dry glitter in his eye and a firm set of his thin lip , which go with a positive and possibly a harsh nature . you would find he an interesting study . 

 he come over to call upon Baskerville on that first day , and the very next morning he take we both to show we the spot where the legend of the wicked Hugo be suppose to have have its origin . it be an excursion of some mile across the moor to a place which be so dismal that it might have suggest the story . we find a short valley between rugged tor which lead to an open , grassy space fleck over with the white cotton grass . in the middle of it rise two great stone , wear and sharpen at the upper end until they look like the huge corroding fang of some monstrous beast . in every way it correspond with the scene of the old tragedy . Sir Henry be much interested and ask Stapleton more than once whether he do really believe in the possibility of the interference of the supernatural in the affair of man . he speak lightly , but it be evident that he be very much in earnest . Stapleton be guard in his reply , but it be easy to see that he say less than he might , and that he would not express his whole opinion out of consideration for the feeling of the baronet . he tell we of similar case , where family have suffer from some evil influence , and he leave we with the impression that he share the popular view upon the matter . 

 on our way back we stay for lunch at Merripit House , and it be there that Sir Henry make the acquaintance of Miss Stapleton . from the first moment that he see she he appear to be strongly attract by she , and I be much mistaken if the feeling be not mutual . he refer to she again and again on our walk home , and since then hardly a day have pass that we have not see something of the brother and sister . they dine here to - night , and there be some talk of our go to they next week . one would imagine that such a match would be very welcome to Stapleton , and yet I have more than once catch a look of the strong disapprobation in his face when Sir Henry have be pay some attention to his sister . he be much attach to she , no doubt , and would lead a lonely life without she , but it would seem the height of selfishness if he be to stand in the way of she make so brilliant a marriage . yet I be certain that he do not wish their intimacy to ripen into love , and I have several time observe that he have take pain to prevent they from be tete - a - tete . by the way , your instruction to I never to allow Sir Henry to go out alone will become very much more onerous if a love affair be to be add to our other difficulty . my popularity would soon suffer if I be to carry out your order to the letter . 

 the other day - Thursday , to be more exact - Dr. Mortimer lunch with we . he have be excavate a barrow at Long Down and have get a prehistoric skull which fill he with great joy . never be there such a single - minded enthusiast as he ! the Stapletons come in afterwards , and the good doctor take we all to the yew alley at Sir Henry 's request to show we exactly how everything occur upon that fatal night . it be a long , dismal walk , the yew alley , between two high wall of clip hedge , with a narrow band of grass upon either side . at the far end be an old tumble - down summer - house . halfway down be the moor- gate , where the old gentleman leave his cigar - ash . it be a white wooden gate with a latch . beyond it lie the wide moor . I remember your theory of the affair and try to picture all that have occur . as the old man stand there he see something come across the moor , something which terrify he so that he lose his wit and run and run until he die of sheer horror and exhaustion . there be the long , gloomy tunnel down which he flee . and from what ? a sheep - dog of the moor ? or a spectral hound , black , silent , and monstrous ? be there a human agency in the matter ? do the pale , watchful Barrymore know more than he care to say ? it be all dim and vague , but always there be the dark shadow of crime behind it . 

 one other neighbour I have meet since I write last . this be Mr. Frankland , of Lafter Hall , who live some four mile to the south of we . he be an elderly man , red - faced , white - haired , and cho- leric . his passion be for the british law , and he have spend a large fortune in litigation . he fight for the mere pleasure of fighting and be equally ready to take up either side of a question , so that it be no wonder that he have find it a costly amusement . some- time he will shut up a right of way and defy the parish to make he open it . at other he will with his own hand tear down some other man 's gate and declare that a path have exist there from time immemorial , defy the owner to prosecute he for trespass . he be learn in old manorial and communal right , and he apply his knowledge sometimes in favour of the villager of Fernworthy and sometimes against they , so that he be periodi- cally either carry in triumph down the village street or else burn in effigy , accord to his late exploit . he be say to have about seven lawsuit upon his hand at present , which will probably swallow up the remainder of his fortune and so draw his sting and leave he harmless for the future . apart from the law he seem a kindly , good - natured person , and I only mention he because you be particular that I should send some descrip- tion of the people who surround we . he be curiously employ at present , for , be an amateur astronomer , he have an excellent telescope , with which he lie upon the roof of his own house and sweep the moor all day in the hope of catch a glimpse of the escape convict . if he would confine his energy to this all would be well , but there be rumour that he intend to prosecute Dr. Mortimer for open a grave without the consent of the next of kin because he dig up the neolithic skull in the barrow on Long Down . he help to keep our life from be monotonous and give a little comic relief where it be badly need . 

 and now , have bring you up to date in the escaped convict , the Stapletons , Dr. Mortimer , and Frankland , of Lafter Hall , let I end on that which be most important and tell you more about the Barrymores , and especially about the surprising development of last night . 

 first of all about the test telegram , which you send from London in order to make sure that Barrymore be really here . I have already explain that the testimony of the postmaster show that the test be worthless and that we have no proof one way or the other . I tell Sir Henry how the matter stand , and he at once , in his downright fashion , have Barrymore up and ask he whether he have receive the telegram himself . Barrymore say that he have . 

 " do the boy deliver it into your own hand ? " ask Sir Henry . 

 Barrymore look surprised , and consider for a little time . 

 " no , " say he , " I be in the box - room at the time , and my wife bring it up to I . " 

 " do you answer it yourself ? " 

 " no ; I tell my wife what to answer and she go down to write it . " 

 in the evening he recur to the subject of his own accord . 

 " I could not quite understand the object of your question this morning , Sir Henry , " say he . " I trust that they do not mean that I have do anything to forfeit your confidence ? " 

 Sir Henry have to assure he that it be not so and pacify he by give he a considerable part of his old wardrobe , the London outfit have now all arrive . 

 Mrs. Barrymore be of interest to I . she be a heavy , solid person , very limited , intensely respectable , and incline to be puritanical . you could hardly conceive a less emotional subject . yet I have tell you how , on the first night here , I hear she sob bitterly , and since then I have more than once observe trace of tear upon her face . some deep sorrow gnaw ever at her heart . sometimes I wonder if she have a guilty memory which haunt she , and sometimes I suspect Barrymore of be a domestic tyrant . I have always feel that there be something singular and questionable in this man 's character , but the adven- ture of last night bring all my suspicion to a head . 

 and yet it may seem a small matter in itself . you be aware that I be not a very sound sleeper , and since I have be on guard in this house my slumber have be light than ever . last night , about two in the morning , I be arouse by a stealthy step pass my room . I rise , open my door , and peep out . a long black shadow be trail down the corridor . it be throw by a man who walk softly down the passage with a candle hold in his hand . he be in shirt and trouser , with no covering to his foot . I could merely see the outline , but his height tell I that it be Barrymore . he walk very slowly and circumspectly , and there be something indescribably guilty and furtive in his whole appearance . 

 I have tell you that the corridor be break by the balcony which run round the hall , but that it be resume upon the farth side . I wait until he have pass out of sight and then I follow he . when I come round the balcony he have reach the end of the far corridor , and I could see from the glimmer of light through an open door that he have enter one of the room . now , all these room be unfurnished and unoccupied so that his expedition become more mysterious than ever . the light shine steadily as if he be stand motionless . I creep down the passage as noiselessly as I could and peep round the corner of the door . 

 Barrymore be crouch at the window with the candle hold against the glass . his profile be half turn towards I , and his face seem to be rigid with expectation as he star out into the blackness of the moor . for some minute he stand watch intently . then he give a deep groan and with an impatient gesture he put out the light . instantly I make my way back to my room , and very shortly come the stealthy step pass once more upon their return journey . long afterwards when I have fall into a light sleep I hear a key turn somewhere in a lock , but I could not tell whence the sound come . what it all mean I can not guess , but there be some secret business go on in this house of gloom which soon or later we shall get to the bottom of . I do not trouble you with my theory , for you ask I to furnish you only with fact . I have have a long talk with Sir Henry this morning , and we have make a plan of campaign found upon my observation of last night . I will not speak about it just now , but it should make my next report interesting reading . 

  chapter 9 

 Second Report of Dr. Watson 

  the light upon THE MOOR 

  Baskerville Hall , Oct. 15th . 

 MY DEAR HOLMES : 

 if I be compel to leave you without much news during the early day of my mission you must acknowledge that I be make up for lose time , and that event be now crowd thick and fast upon we . in my last report I end upon my top note with Barrymore at the window , and now I have quite a budget already which will , unless I be much mistaken , considera- bly surprise you . thing have take a turn which I could not have anticipate . in some way they have within the last forty- eight hour become much clear and in some way they have become more complicated . but I will tell you all and you shall judge for yourself . 

 before breakfast on the morning follow my adventure I go down the corridor and examine the room in which Barry- more have be on the - night before . the western window through which he have star so intently have , I notice , one peculiarity above all other window in the house - it command the near outlook on to the moor . there be an opening between two tree which enable one from this point of view to look right down upon it , while from all the other window it be only a distant glimpse which can be obtain . it follow , therefore , that Barry- more , since only this window would serve the purpose , must have be look out for something or somebody upon the moor . the night be very dark , so that I can hardly imagine how he could have hop to see anyone . it have strike I that it be possible that some love intrigue be on foot . that would have account for his stealthy movement and also for the uneasiness of his wife . the man be a striking - look fellow , very well equipped to steal the heart of a country girl , so that this theory seem to have something to support it . that opening of the door whlch I have hear after I have return to my room might mean that he have go out to keep some clandestine appointment . so I reason with myself in the morning , and I tell you the direction of my suspicion , however much the result may have show that they be unfounded . 

 but whatever the true explanation of Barrymore 's movement might be , I feel that the responsibility of keep they to myself until I could explain they be more than I could bear . I have an interview with the baronet in his study after breakfast , and I tell he all that I have see . he be less surprised than I have expect . 

 " I know that Barrymore walk about night , and I have a mind to speak to he about it , " say he . " two or three time I have hear hls step in the passage , come and go , just about the hour you name . " 

 " perhaps then he pay a visit every night to that particular window , " I suggest . 

 " perhaps he do . if so , we should be able to shadow he and see what it be that he be after . I wonder what your friend Holmes would do if he be here . " 

 " I believe that he would do exactly what you now suggest , " say i. " he would follow Barrymore and see what he do . " 

 " then we shall do it together . " 

 " but surely he would hear we . " 

 " the man be rather deaf , and in any case we must take our chance of that . we will sit up in my room to - night and wait until he pass . " Sir Henry rub his hand with pleasure , and it be evident that he hail the adventure as a relief to his somewhat quiet life upon the moor . 

 the baronet have be in communication with the architect who prepare the plan for Sir Charles , and with a contractor from London , so that we may expect great change to begin here soon . there have be decorator and furnisher up from plym- outh , and it be evident that our friend have large idea and mean to spare no pain or expense to restore the grandeur of his family . when the house be renovate and refurnish , all that he will need will be a wife to make it complete . between ourselves there be pretty clear sign that this will not be want if the lady be willing , for I have seldom see a man more infatuated with a woman than he be with our beautiful neighbour , Miss Stapleton . and yet the course of true love do not run quite as smoothly as one would under the circumstance expect . to - day , for example , its surface be break by a very unexpected ripple , which have cause our friend considerable perplexity and annoyance . 

 after the conversation which I have quote about Barrymore , Sir Henry put on his hat and prepare to go out . as a matter of course I do the same . 

 " what , be you come , Watson ? " he ask , look at I in a curious way . 

 " that depend on whether you be go on the moor , " say I. 

 " yes , I be . " 

 " well , you know what my instruction be . I be sorry to intrude , but you hear how earnestly Holmes insist that I should not leave you , and especially that you should not go alone upon the moor . " 

 Sir Henry put his hand upon my shoulder with a pleasant smile . 

 " my dear fellow , " say he , " Holmes , with all his wisdom , do not foresee some thing which have happen since I have be on the moor . you understand I ? I be sure that you be the last man in the world who would wish to be a spoil - sport . I must go out alone . " 

 it put I in a most awkward position . I be at a loss what to say or what to do , and before I have make up my mind he pick up his cane and be go . 

 but when I come to think the matter over my conscience reproach I bitterly for have on any pretext allow he to go out of my sight . I imagine what my feeling would be if I have to return to you and to confess that some misfortune have occur through my disregard for your instruction . I assure you my cheek flush at the very thought . it might not even now be too late to overtake he , so I set off at once in the direction of Merripit House . 

 I hurry along the road at the top of my speed without see anything of Sir Henry , until I come to the point where the moor path branch off . there , fear that perhaps I have come in the wrong direction after all , I mount a hill from which I could command a view - the same hill which be cut into the dark quarry . Thence I see he at once . he be on the moor path about a quarter of a mile off , and a lady be by his side who could only be Miss Stapleton . it be clear that there be already an understanding between they and that they have meet by ap- pointment . they be walk slowly along in deep conversa- tion , and I see she make quick little movement of her hand as if she be very earnest in what she be say , while he listen intently , and once or twice shake his head in strong dissent . I stand among the rock watch they , very much puzzle as to what I should do next . to follow they and break into their intimate conversation seem to be an outrage , and yet my clear duty be never for an instant to let he out of my sight . to act the spy upon a friend be a hateful task . still , I could see no well course than to observe he from the hill , and to clear my conscience by confess to he afterwards what I have do . it be true that if any sudden danger have threaten he I be too far away to be of use , and yet I be sure that you will agree with I that the position be very difficult , and that there be nothing more which I could do . 

 our friend , Sir Henry , and the lady have halt on the path and be stand deeply absorb in their conversation , when I be suddenly aware that I be not the only witness of their interview . a wisp of green float in the air catch my eye , and another glance show I that it be carry on a stick by a man who be move among the broken ground . it be Stapleton with his butterfly - net . he be very much close to the pair than I be , and he appear to be move in their direction . at this instant Sir Henry suddenly draw Miss Stapleton to his side . his arm be round she , but it seem to I that she be strain away from he with her face avert . he stoop his head to her , and she raise one hand as if in protest . next moment I see they spring apart and turn hurriedly round . Stapleton be the cause of the interruption . he be run wildly towards they , his absurd net dangle behind he . he gesticulate and almost dance with excitement in front of the lover . what the scene mean I could not imagine , but it seem to I that Stapleton be abuse Sir Henry , who offer explanation , which become more angry as the other refuse to accept they . the lady stand by in haughty silence . finally Stapleton turn upon his heel and beckon in a peremptory way to his sister , who , after an irresolute glance at Sir Henry , walk off by the side of her brother . the naturalist 's angry gesture show that the lady be include in his displea- sure . the baronet stand for a minute look after they , and then he walk slowly back the way that he have come , his head hang , the very picture of dejection . 

 what all this mean I could not imagine , but I be deeply ashamed to have witness so intimate a scene without my friend 's knowledge . I run down the hill therefore and meet the baronet at the bottom . his face be flush with anger and his brow be wrinkle , like one who be at his wit 's end what to do . 

 " Halloa , Watson ! where have you drop from ? " say he . " you do not   mean to say that you come after I in spite of all ? " 

 I explain everything to he : how I have find it impossible to remain behind , how I have follow he , and how I have witness all that have occur . for an instant his eye blaze at I , but my frankness disarm his anger , and he break at last into a rather rueful laugh . 

 " you would have think the middle of that prairie a fairly safe place for a man to be private , " say he , " but , by thunder , the whole countryside seem to have be out to see I do my wooing - and a mighty poor wooing at that ! where have you engage a seat ? " 

 " I be on that hill . " 

 " quite in the back row , eh ? but her brother be well up to the front . do you see he come out on we ? " 

 " yes , I do . " 

 " do he ever strike you as be crazy - this brother of her ? " 

 " I can not   say that he ever do . " 

 " I dare say not . I always think he sane enough until to - day , but you can take it from I that either he or I ought to be in a straitjacket . what be the matter with I , anyhow ? you have   live near I for some week , Watson . tell I straight , now ! be there anything that would prevent I from make a good husband to a woman that I love ? " 

 " I should say not . " 

 " he can not   object to my worldly position , so it must be myself that he have this down on . what have he against I ? I never hurt man or woman in my life that I know of . and yet he would not so much as let I touch the tip of her finger . " 

 " do he say so ? " 

 " that , and a deal more . I tell you , Watson , I have   only know she these few week , but from the first I just feel that she be make for I , and she , too - she be happy when she be with I , and that I will swear . there be a light in a woman 's eye that speak louder than word . but he have never let we get together and it be only to - day for the first time that I see a chance of have a few word with she alone . she be glad to meet I , but when she do it be not love that she would talk about , and she would not   have let I talk about it either if she could have stop it . she keep come back to it that this be a place of danger , and that she would never be happy until I have leave it . I tell she that since I have see she I be in no hurry to leave it , and that if she really want I to go , the only way to work it be for she to arrange to go with I . with that I offer in as many word to marry she , but before she could answer , down come this brother of her , run at we with a face on he like a madman . he be just white with rage , and those light eye of his be blaze with fury . what be I do with the lady ? how dare I offer her attention which be distasteful to she ? do I think that because I be a baronet I could do what I like ? if he have not be her brother I should have know well how to answer he . as it be I tell he that my feeling towards his sister be such as I be not ashamed of , and that I hop that she might honour I by become my wife . that seem to make the matter no well , so then I lose my temper too , and I answer he rather more hotly than I should perhaps , consider- ing that she be stand by . so it end by his go off with she , as you see , and here be I as badly puzzle a man as any in this county . just tell I what it all mean , Watson , and I will owe you more than ever I can hope to pay . " 

 I try one or two explanation , but , indeed , I be completely puzzle myself . our friend 's title , his fortune , his age , his character , and his appearance be all in his favour , and I know nothing against he unless it be this dark fate which run in his family . that his advance should be reject so brusquely with- out any reference to the lady 's own wish and that the lady should accept the situation without protest be very amazing . however , our conjecture be set at rest by a visit from Stapleton himself that very afternoon . he have come to offer apology for his rudeness of the morning , and after a long private interview with Sir Henry in his study the upshot of their conversation be that the breach be quite heal , and that we be to dine at Merripit House next Friday as a sign of it . 

 " l do not   say now that he be not   a crazy man , " say Sir Henry " I can not   forget the look in his eye when he run at I this morning , but I must allow that no man could make a more handsome apology than he have do . " 

 " do he give any explanation of his conduct ? " 

 " his sister be everything in his life , he say . that be natural enough , and I be glad that he should understand her value . they have always be together , and accord to his account he have be a very lonely man with only she as a companion , so that the thought of lose she be really terrible to he . he have not understand , he say , that I be become attach to she , but when he see with his own eye that it be really so , and that she might be take away from he , it give he such a shock that for a time he be not responsible for what he say or do . he be very sorry for all that have pass , and he recognize how foolish and how selfish it be that he should imagine that he could hold a beautiful woman like his sister to himself for her whole life . if she have to leave he he have rather it be to a neighbour like myself than to anyone else . but in any case it be a blow to he and it would take he some time before he could prepare himself to meet it . he would withdraw all opposition upon his part if I would promise for three month to let the matter rest and to be content with cultivate the lady 's friendship during that time without claim her love . this I promise , and so the matter rest . " 

 so there be one of our small mystery clear up . it be something to have touch bottom anywhere in this bog in which we be flounder . we know now why Stapleton look with disfavour upon his sister 's suitor - even when that suitor be so eligible a one as Sir Henry . and now I pass on to another thread which I have extricate out of the tangled skein , the mystery of the sob in the night , of the tear - stain face of Mrs. Barrymore , of the secret journey of the butler to the western lattice window . congratulate I , my dear Holmes , and tell I that I have not disappoint you as an agent - that you do not regret the confi- dence which you show in I when you send I down . all these thing have by one night 's work be thoroughly clear . 

 I have say " by one night 's work , " but , in truth , it be by two night ' work , for on the first we draw entirely blank . I sit up with Sir Henry in his room until nearly three o'clock in the morning , but no sound of any sort do we hear except the chime clock upon the stair . it be a most melancholy vigil and end by each of we fall asleep in our chair . fortunately we be not discourage , and we determine to try again . the next night we lower the lamp and sit smoke cigarette without make the least sound . it be incredible how slowly the hour crawl by , and yet we be help through it by the same sort of patient interest which the hunter must feel as he watch the trap into which he hop the game may wander . one strike , and two , and we have almost for the second time give it up in despair when in an instant we both sit bolt upright in our chair with all our weary sens keenly on the alert once more . we have hear the creak of a step in the passage . 

 very stealthily we hear it pass along until it die away in the distance . then the baronet gently open his door and we set out in pursuit . already our man have go round the gallery and the corridor be all in darkness . softly we steal along untii we have come into the other wing . we be just in time to catch a glimpse of the tall , black - bearded figure , his shoulder round as he tiptoe down the passage . then he pass through the same door as before , and the light of the candle frame it in the darkness and shoot one single yellow beam across the gloom of the corridor . we shuffle cautiously towards it , try every plank before we dare to put our whole weight upon it . we have take the precaution of leave our boot behind we , but , even so , the old board snap and creak beneath our tread . Some- time it seem impossible that he should fail to hear our ap- proach . however , the man be fortunately rather deaf , and he be entirely preoccupy in that which he be do . when at last we reach the door and peep through we find he crouch at the window , candle in hand , his white , intent face press against the pane , exactly as I have see he two night before . 

 we have arrange no plan of campaign , but the baronet be a man to whom the most direct way be always the most natural . he walk into the room , and as he do so Barrymore spring up from the window with a sharp hiss of his breath and stand , livid and trembling , before we . his dark eye , glare out of the white mask of his face , be full of horror and astonishment as he gaze from Sir Henry to I . 

 " what be you do here , Barrymore ? " 

 " nothing , sir . " his agitation be so great that he could hardly speak , and the shadow spring up and down from the shaking of his candle . " it be the window , sir . I go round at night to see that they be fasten . " 

 " on the second floor ? " 

 " yes , sir , all the window . " 

 " look here , Barrymore , " say Sir Henry sternly , " we have make up our mind to have the truth out of you , so it will save you trouble to tell it soon rather than later . come , now ! no lie ! what be you do at that window ? ? ' 

 the fellow look at we in a helpless way , and he wring his hand together like one who be in the last extremity of doubt and misery . 

 " I be do no harm , sir . I be hold a candle to the window . " 

 " and why be you hold a candle to the window ? " 

 " do not   ask I , Sir Henry - do not   ask I ! I give you my word , sir , that it be not my secret , and that I can not tell it . if it concern no one but myself I would not try to keep it from you . " 

 a sudden idea occur to I , and I take the candle from the tremble hand of the butler . 

 " he must have be hold it as a signal , " say i. " let we see if there be any answer . " I hold it as he have do , and star out into the darkness of the night . vaguely I could discern the black bank of the tree and the light expanse of the moor , for the moon be behind the cloud . and then I give a cry of exultation , for a tiny pin - point of yellow light have suddenly transfix the dark veil , and glow steadily in the centre of the black square frame by the window . 

 " there it be ! " I cry . 

 " no , no , sir , it be nothing - nothing at all ! " the butler break in ; " I assure you , sir - " 

 " move your light across the window , Watson ! " cry the baronet . " see , the other move also ! now , you rascal , do you deny that it be a signal ? come , speak up ! who be your confeder- eat out yonder , and what be this conspiracy that be go on ? " 

 the man 's face become openly defiant . 

 " it be my business , and not your . I will not tell . " 

 " then you leave my employment right away . " 

 " very good , sir . if I must I must . " 

 " and you go in disgrace . by thunder , you may well be ashamed of yourself . your family have live with mine for over a hundred year under this roof , and here I find you deep in some dark plot against I . " 

 " no , no , sir ; no , not against you ! " it be a woman 's voice , and Mrs. Barrymore , paler and more horror - strike than her husband , be stand at the door . her bulky figure in a shawl and skirt might have be comic be it not for the intensity of feeling upon her face . 

 " we have to go , Eliza . this be the end of it . you can pack our thing , " say the butler . 

 " oh , John , John , have I bring you to this ? it be my doing , Sir Henry - all mine . he have do nothing except for my sake and because I ask he . " 

 " speak out , then ! what do it mean ? " 

 " my unhappy brother be starve on the moor . we can not let he perish at our very gate . the light be a signal to he that food be ready for he , and his light out yonder be to show the spot to which to bring it . " 

 " then your brother be - " 

 " the escaped convict , sir - Selden , the criminal . " 

 " that be the truth , sir , " say Barrymore . " I say that it be not my secret and that I could not tell it to you . but now you have hear it , and you will see that if there be a plot it be not against you . " 

 this , then , be the explanation of the stealthy expedition at night and the light at the window . Sir Henry and I both star at the woman in amazement . be it possible that this stolidly respectable person be of the same blood as one of the most notorious criminal in the country ? 

 " yes , sir , my name be Selden , and he be my young brother . we humour he too much when he be a lad and give he his own way in everything until he come to think that the world be make for his pleasure , and that he could do what he like in it . then as he grow old he meet wicked companion , and the devil enter into he until he break my mother 's heart and drag our name in the dirt . from crime to crime he sink lower and low until it be only the mercy of God which have snatch he from the scaffold ; but to I , sir , he be always the little curly - head boy that I have nurse and play with as an eld sister would . that be why he break prison , sir . he know that I be here and that we could not refuse to help he . when he drag himself here one night , weary and starving , with the warder hard at his heel , what could we do ? we take he in and feed he and care for he . then you return , sir , and my brother think he would be safe on the moor than anywhere else until the hue and cry be over , so he lie in hiding there . but every second night we make sure if he be still there by put a light in the window , and if there be an answer my husband take out some bread and meat to he . every day we hop that he be go , but as long as he be there we could not desert he . that be the whole truth , as I be an honest christian woman and you will see that if there be blame in the matter it do not lie with my husband but with I , for whose sake he have do all that he have . " 

 the woman 's word come with an intense earnestness which carry conviction with they . 

 " be this true , Barrymore ? " 

 " yes , Sir Henry . every word of it . " 

 " well , I can not blame you for stand by your own wife . forget what I have say . go to your room , you two , and we shall talk far about this matter in the morning . " 

 when they be go we look out of the window again . Sir Henry have fling it open , and the cold night wind beat in upon our face . far away in the black distance there still glow that one tiny point of yellow light . 

 " I wonder he dare , " say Sir Henry . 

 " it may be so place as to be only visible from here . " 

 " very likely . how far do you think it be ? " 

 " out by the Cleft Tor , I think . " 

 " not more than a mile or two off . " 

 " hardly that . " 

 " well , it can not be far if Barrymore have to carry out the food to it . and he be wait , this villain , beside that candle . by thunder , Watson , I be go out to take that man ! " 

 the same thought have cross my own mind . it be not as if the Barrymores have take we into their confidence . their secret have be force from they . the man be a danger to the community , an unmitigated scoundrel for whom there be nei- ther pity nor excuse . we be only do our duty in take this chance of put he back where he could do no harm . with his brutal and violent nature , other would have to pay the price if we hold our hand . any night , for example , our neighbour the Stapletons might be attack by he , and it may have be the thought of this which make Sir Henry so keen upon the adventure . 

 " I will come , " say I. 

 " then get your revolver and put on your boot . the soon we start the well , as the fellow may put out his light and be off . " 

 in five minute we be outside the door , start upon our expedition . we hurry through the dark shrubbery , amid the dull moaning of the autumn wind and the rustle of the fall leaf . the night air be heavy with the smell of damp and decay . now and again the moon peep out for an instant , but cloud be drive over the face of the sky , and just as we come out on the moor a thin rain begin to fall . the light still burn steadily in front . 

 " be you arm ? " I ask . 

 " I have a hunting - crop . " 

 " we must close in on he rapidly , for he be say to be a desperate fellow . we shall take he by surprise and have he at our mercy before he can resist . " 

 " I say , Watson , " say the baronet , " what would Holmes say to this ? how about that hour of darkness in which the power of evil be exalt ? " 

 as if in answer to his word there rise suddenly out of the vast gloom of the moor that strange cry which I have already hear upon the border of the great Grimpen Mire . it come with the wind through the silence of the night , a long , deep mutter then a rise howl , and then the sad moan in which it die away . again and again it sound , the whole air throb with it , strident , wild , and menacing . the baronet catch my sleeve and his face glimmer white through the darkness . 

 " my God , what be that , Watson ? " 

 " I do not   know . it be a sound they have on the moor . I hear it once before . " 

 it die away , and an absolute silence close in upon we . we stand strain our ear , but nothing come . 

 " Watson , " say the baronet , " it be the cry of a hound . " 

 my blood run cold in my vein , for there be a break in his voice which tell of the sudden horror which have seize he . 

 " what do they call this sound ? " he ask . 

 " who ? " 

 " the folk on the countryside . " 

 " oh , they be ignorant people . why should you mind what they call it ? " 

 " tell I , Watson . what do they say of it ? " 

 I hesitate but could not escape the question . 

 " they say it be the cry of the Hound of the Baskervilles . " 

 he groan and be silent for a few moment . 

 " a hound it be , " he say at last , " but it seem to come from mile away , over yonder , I think . " 

 " it be hard to say whence it come . " 

 " it rise and fall with the wind . be not   that the direction of the great Grimpen Mire ? " 

 " yes , it be . " 

 " well , it be up there . come now , Watson , do not   you think yourself that it be the cry of a hound ? I be not a child . you need not fear to speak the truth . " 

 " Stapleton be with I when I hear it last . he say that it might be the calling of a strange bird . " 

 " no , no , it be a hound . my God , can there be some truth in all these story ? be it possible that I be really in danger from so dark a cause ? you do not   believe it , do you , Watson ? " 

 " no , no . " 

 " and yet it be one thing to laugh about it in London , and it be another to stand out here in the darkness of the moor and to hear such a cry as that . and my uncle ! there be the footprint of the hound beside he as he lay . it all fit together . I do not   think that I be a coward , Watson , but that sound seem to freeze my very blood . feel my hand ! " 

 it be as cold as a block of marble . 

 " you will be all right to - morrow . " 

 " I do not   think I will get that cry out of my head . what do you advise that we do now ? " 

 " shall we turn back ? " 

 " no , by thunder ; we have come out to get our man , and we will do it . we after the convict , and a hell - hound , as likely as not , after we . come on ! we will see it through if all the fiend of the pit be loose upon the moor . " 

 we stumble slowly along in the darkness , with the black loom of the craggy hill around we , and the yellow speck of light burn steadily in front . there be nothing so deceptive as the distance of a light upon a pitch - dark night , and sometimes the glimmer seem to be far away upon the horizon and sometimes it might have be within a few yard of we . but at last we could see whence it come , and then we know that we be indeed very close . a gutter candle be stick in a crevice of the rock which flank it on each side so as to keep the wind from it and also to prevent it from be visible , save in the direction of Baskerville Hall . a boulder of granite conceal our approach , and crouch behind it we gaze over it at the signal light . it be strange to see this single candle burn there in the middle of the moor , with no sign of life near it - just the one straight yellow flame and the gleam of the rock on each side of it . 

 " what shall we do now ? " whisper Sir Henry . 

 " wait here . he must be near his light . let we see if we can get a glimpse of he . " 

 the word be hardly out of my mouth when we both see he . over the rock , in the crevice of which the candle burn , there be thrust out an evil yellow face , a terrible animal face , all seam and score with vile passion . Foul with mire , with a bristling beard , and hang with matted hair , it might well have belong to one of those old savage who dwelt in the burrow on the hillside . the light beneath he be reflect in his small , cunning eye which peer fiercely to right and leave through the darkness like a crafty and savage animal who have hear the step of the hunter . 

 something have evidently arouse his suspicion . it may have be that Barrymore have some private signal which we have neglect to give , or the fellow may have have some other reason for think that all be not well , but I could read his fear upon his wicked face . any instant he might dash out the light and vanish in the darkness . I spring forward therefore , and Sir Henry do the same . at the same moment the convict scream out a curse at we and hurl a rock which splinter up against the boulder which have shelter we . I catch one glimpse of his short , squat , strongly build figure as he spring to his foot and turn to run . at the same moment by a lucky chance the moon break through the cloud . we rush over the brow of the hill , and there be our man run with great speed down the other side , spring over the stone in his way with the activity of a mountain goat . a lucky long shot of my revolver might have cripple he , but I have bring it only to defend myself if attack and not to shoot an unarmed man who be run away . 

 we be both swift runner and in fairly good training , but we soon find that we have no chance of overtake he . we see he for a long time in the moonlight until he be only a small speck move swiftly among the boulder upon the side of a distant hill . we run and run until we be completely blow , but the space between we grow ever wide . finally we stop and sit pant on two rock , while we watch he disappear in the distance . 

 and it be at this moment that there occur a most strange and unexpected thing . we have rise from our rock and be turn to go home , have abandon the hopeless chase . the moon be low upon the right , and the jagged pinnacle of a granite tor stand up against the low curve of its silver disc . there , outline as black as an ebony statue on that shin background , I see the figure of a man upon the tor . do not think that it be a delusion , Holmes . I assure you that I have never in my life see anything more clearly . as far as I could judge , the figure be that of a tall , thin man . he stand with his leg a little separate , his arm fold , his head bow , as if he be brood over that enormous wilderness of peat and granite which lie before he . he might have be the very spirit of that terrible place . it be not the convict . this man be far from the place where the latter have disappear . besides , he be a much tall man . with a cry of surprise I point he out to the baronet , but in the instant during which I have turn to grasp his arm the man be go . there be the sharp pinnacle of granite still cut the low edge of the moon , but its peak bear no trace of that silent and motionless figure . 

 I wish to go in that direction and to search the tor , but it be some distance away . the baronet 's nerve be still quiver from that cry , which recall the dark story of his family , and he be not in the mood for fresh adventure . he have not see this lonely man upon the tor and could not feel the thrill which his strange presence and his commanding attitude have give to I . " a warder , no doubl , " say he . " the moor have be thick with they since this fellow escape . " well , perhaps his explanation may be the right one , but I should like to have some further proof of it . to - day we mean to communicate to the Princetown people where they should look for their missing man , but it be hard line that we have not actually have the triumph of bring he back as our own prisoner . such be the adventure of last night , and you must acknowledge , my dear Holmes , that I have do you very well in the matter of a report . much of what I tell you be no doubt quite irrelevant , but still I feel that it be good that I should let you have all the fact and leave you to select for yourself those which will be of most service to you in help you to your conclusilon . we be certainly make some prog- ress . so far as the Barrymores go we have find the motive of their action , and that have clear up the situation very much . but the moor with its mystery and its strange inhabitant re- main as inscrutable as ever . perhaps in my next I may be able to throw some light upon this also . good of all would it be if you could come down to we . in any case you will hear from I again in the course of the next few day . 



 chapter 10 

 extract from the Diary of Dr. Watson 

  so far I have be able to quote from the report which I have forward during these early day to Sherlock Holmes . now , however , I have arrive at a point in my narrative where I be compel to abandon this method and to trust once more to my recollection , aid by the diary which I keep at the time . a few extract from the latter will carry I on to those scene which be indelibly fix in every detail upon my memory . I proceed , then , from the morning which follow our abortive chase of the convict and our other strange experience upon the moor . 

 October 16th . a dull and foggy day with a drizzle of rain . the house be bank in with rolling cloud , which rise now and then to show the dreary curve of the moor , with thin , silver vein upon the side of the hill , and the distant boulder gleam where the light strike upon their wet face . it be melancholy outside and in . the baronet be in a black reaction after the excitement of the night . I be conscious myself of a weight at my heart and a feeling of impend danger - ever present dan- ger , which be the more terrible because I be unable to define it . 

 and have I not cause for such a feeling ? consider the long sequence of incident which have all point to some sinister influence which be at work around we . there be the death of the last occupant of the Hall , fulfil so exactly the condition of the family legend , and there be the repeat report from peas- ant of the appearance of a strange creature upon the moor . twice I have with my own ear hear the sound which resem- bleed the distant baying of a hound . it be incredible , impossible , that it should really be outside the ordinary law of nature . a spectral hound which leave material footmark and fill the air with its howling be surely not to be think of . Stapleton may fall in with such a superstition , and Mortimer also , but if I have one quality upon earth it be common sense , and nothing will persuade I to believe in such a thing . to do so would be to descend to the level of these poor peasant , who be not content with a mere fiend dog but must need describe he with hell - fire shooting from his mouth and eye . Holmes would not listen to such fancy , and I be his agent . but fact be fact , and I have twice hear this cry upon the moor . suppose that there be really some huge hound loose upon it ; that would go far to explain everything . but where could such a hound lie conceal , where do it get its food , where do it come from , how be it that no one see it by day ? it must be confess that the natural explana- tion offer almost as many difficulty as the other . and always , apart from the hound , there be the fact of the human agency in London , the man in the cab , and the letter which warn Sir Henry against the moor . this at least be real , but it might have be the work of a protect friend as easily as of an enemy . where be that friend or enemy now ? have he remain in London , or have he follow we down here ? could he - could he be the stranger whom I see upon the tor ? 

 it be true that I have have only the one glance at he , and yet there be some thing to which I be ready to swear . he be no one whom I have see down here , and I have now meet all the neighbour . the figure be far tall than that of Stapleton , far thin than that of Frankland . barrymore it might possibly have be , but we have leave he behind we , and I be certain that he could not have follow we . a stranger then be still dog we , just as a stranger dog we in London . we have never shake he off . if I could lay my hand upon that man , then at last we might find ourselves at the end of all our difficulty . to this one purpose I must now devote all my energy . 

 my first impulse be to tell Sir Henry all my plan . my second and wise one be to play my own game and speak as little as possible ta anyone . he be silent and distrait . his nerve have be strangely shake by that sound upon the moor . I will say nothing to add to his anxiety , but I will take my own step to attain my own end . 

 we have a small scene this morning after breakfast . Barrymore ask leave to speak with Sir Henry , and they be closet in his study some little time . sit in the billiard - room I more than once hear the sound of voice raise , and I have a pretty good idea what the point be which be under discussion . after a time the baronet open his door and call for I . 

 " barrymore consider that he have a grievance , " he say . " he think that it be unfair on our part to hunt his brother - in - law down when he , of his own free will , have tell we the secret . " 

 the butler be stand very pale but very collect before we . 

 " I may have speak too warmly , sir , " say he , " and if I have , I be sure that I beg your pardon . at the same time , I be very much surprised when I hear you two gentleman come back this morning and learn that you have be chase Selden . the poor fellow have enough to fight against without my put more upon his track . " 

 " if you have tell we of your own free will it would have be a different thing , " say the baronet , " you only tell we , or rather your wife only tell we , when it be force from you and you could not help yourself . " 

 " I do not   think you would have take advantage of it , Sir Henry - indeed I do not . " 

 " the man be a public danger . there be lonely house scat- tere over the moor , and he be a fellow who would stick at nothing . you only want to get a glimpse of his face to see that . look at Mr. Stapleton 's house , for example , with no one but himself to defend it . there be no safety for anyone untill he be under lock and key . " 

 " he will break into no house , sir . I give you my solemn word upon that . but he will never trouble anyone in this country again . I assure you , Sir Henry , that in a very few day the necessary arrangement will have be make and he will be on his way to South America . for God 's sake , sir , I beg of you not to let the police know that he be still on the moor . they have give up the chase there , and he can lie quiet until the ship be ready for he . you can not   tell on he without get my wife and I into trouble . I beg you , sir , to say nothing to the police . " 

 " what do you say , Watson ? " 

 I shrug my shoulder . " if he be safely out of the country it would relieve the tax - payer of a burden . " 

 " but how about the chance of his hold someone up before he go ? " 

 " he would not do anything so mad , sir . we have provide he with all that he can want . to commit a crime would be to show where he be hide . " 

 " that be true , " say Sir Henry . " well , Barrymore - " 

 " God bless you , sir , and thank you from my heart ! it would have kill my poor wife have he be take again . " 

 " I guess we be aid and abet a felony , Watson ? but , after what we have hear I do not   feel as if I could give the man up , so there be an end of it . all right , Barrymore , you can go . " 

 with a few broken word of gratitude the man turn , but he hesitate and then come back . 

 " you have   be so kind to we , sir , that I should like to do the good I can for you in return . I know something , Sir Henry , and perhaps I should have say it before , but it be long after the inquest that I find it out . I have   never breathe a word about it yet to mortal man . it be about poor Sir Charles 's death . " 

 the baronet and I be both upon our foot . " do you know how he die ? " 

 " no , sir , I do not   know that . " 

 " what then ? " 

 " I know why he be at the gate at that hour . it be to meet a woman . " 

 " to meet a woman ! he ? " 

 " yes , sir . " 

 " and the woman 's name ? " 

 " I can not   give you the name , sir , but I can give you the initial . her initial be L. L. " 

 " how do you know this , Barrymore ? " 

 " well , Sir Henry , your uncle have a letter that morning . he have usually a great many letter , for he be a public man and well know for his kind heart , so that everyone who be in trouble be glad to turn to he . but that morning , as it chance , there be only this one letter , so I take the more notice of it . it be from Coombe Tracey , and it be address in a woman 's hand . " 

 " well ? " 

 " well , sir , I think no more of the matter , and never would have do have it not be for my wife . only a few week ago she be clean out Sir Charles 's study - it have never be touch since his death - and she find the ash of a burn letter in the back of the grate . the great part of it be char to piece , but one little slip , the end of a page , hang together , and the writing could still be read , though it be gray on a black ground . it seem to we to be a postscript at the end of the letter and it say : ' please , please , as you be a gentleman , burn this letter , and be at the gate by ten o clock . beneath it be sign the initial L. L. " 

 " have you get that slip ? " 

 " no , sir , it crumble all to bit after we move it . " 

 " have Sir Charles receive any other lettef in the same writting ? " 

 " well , sir , I take no particular notice of his letter . I should not have notice this one , only it happen to come alone . " 

 " and you have no idea who L. L. be ? " 

 " no , sir . no more than you have . but I expect if we could lay our hand upon that lady we should know more about Sir Charles 's death . " 

 " I can not understand , Barrymore , how you come to conceal this important information . " 

 " well , sir , it be immediately after that our own trouble come to we . and then again , sir , we be both of we very fond of Sir Charles , as we well might be consider all that he have do for we . to rake this up could not   help our poor master , and it be well to go carefully when there be a lady in the case . even the good of we - " 

 " you think it might injure his reputation ? " 

 " well , sir , I think no good could come of it . but now you have be kind to we , and I feel as if it would be treat you unfairly not to tell you all that I know about the matter . " 

 " very good , Barrymore ; you can go . " when the butler have leave we Sir Henry turn to I . " well , Watson , what do you think of this new light ? " 

 " it seem to leave the darkness rather blacker than before . " 

 " so I think . but if we can only trace L. L. it should clear up the whole business . we have gain that much . we know that there be someone who have the fact if we can only find she . what do you think we should do ? " 

 " let Holmes know all about it at once . it will give he the clue for which he have be seek . I be much mistaken if it do not bring he down . " 

 I go at once to my room and draw up my report of the morning 's conversation for Holmes . it be evident to I that he have be very busy of late , for the note which I have from Baker Street be few and short , with no comment upon the informa- tion which I have supply and hardly any reference to my mis- sion . no doubt his blackmailing case be absorb all his faculty . and yet this new factor must surely arrest his attention and renew his interest . I wish that he be here . 

 October 17th . all day to - day the rain pour down , rustle on the ivy and dripping from the eave . I think of the convict out upon the bleak , cold , shelterless moor . poor devil ! whatever his crime , he have suffer something to atone for they . and then I think of that other one - the face in the cab , the figure against the moon . be he also out in that deluge - the unseen watcher , the man of darkness ? in the evening I put on my waterproof and I walk far upon the sodden moor , full of dark imagining , the rain beat upon my face and the wind whis- tle about my ear . God help those who wander into the great mire now , for even the firm upland be become a morass . I find the black tor upon which I have see the solitary watcher , and from its craggy summit I look out myself across the melancholy down . rain squall drift across their russet face , and the heavy , slate - colour cloud hang low over the land- scape , trail in gray wreath down the side of the fantastic hill . in the distant hollow on the left , half hide by the mist , the two thin tower of Baskerville Hall rise above the tree . they be the only sign of human life which I could see , save only those prehistoric hut which lie thickly upon the slope of the hill . nowhere be there any trace of that lonely man whom I have see on the same spot two night before . 

 as I walk back I be overtake by Dr. Mortimer drive in his dog - cart over a rough moorland track which lead from the outlying farmhouse of Foulmire . he have be very attentive to we , and hardly a day have pass that he have not call at the Hall to see how we be get on . he insist upon my climbing into his dog - cart , and he give I a lift homeward . I find he much trouble over the disappearance of his little spaniel . it have wander on to the moor and have never come back . I give he such consolation as I might , but I think of the pony on the Grimpen Mire , and I do not fancy that he will see his little dog again . 

 " by the way , Mortimer , " say I as we jolt along the rough road , " I suppose there be few people live within driving distance of this whom you do not know ? " 

 " hardly any , I think . " 

 " can you , then , tell I the name of any woman whose initial be L. L. ? " 

 he think for a few minute . 

 " no , " say he . " there be a few gipsy and labour folk for whom I can not   answer , but among the farmer or gentry there be no one whose initial be those . wait a bit though , " he add after a pause . " there be Laura Lyons - her initial be L. L. - but she live in Coombe Tracey . " 

 " who be she ? " I ask . 

 " she be Frankland 's daughter . " 

 " what ! Old Frankland the crank ? " 

 " exactly . she marry an artist name Lyons , who come sketch on the moor . he prove to be a blackguard and desert she . the fault from what I hear may not have be entirely on one side . her father refuse to have anything to do with she because she have marry without his consent and per- hap for one or two other reason as well . so , between the old sinner and the young one the girl have have a pretty bad time . " 

 " how do she live ? " 

 " I fancy old Frankland allow she a pittance , but it can not be more , for his own affair be considerably involve . whatever she may have deserve one could not allow she to go hopelessly to the bad . her story get about , and several of the people here do something to enable she to earn an honest living . Stapleton do for one , and Sir Charles for another . I give a trifle myself . it be to set she up in a typewrite business . " 

 he want to know the object of my inquiry , but I manage to satisfy his curiosity without tell he too much , for there be no reason why we should take anyone into our confidence . to - morrow morning I shall find my way to Coombe Tracey , and if I can see this Mrs. Laura Lyons , of equivocal reputation , a long step will have be make towards clear one incident in this chain of mystery . I be certainly develop the wisdom of the serpent , for when Mortimer press his question to an inconvenient extent I ask he casually to what type Frank- land 's skull belong , and so hear nothing but craniology for the rest of our drive . I have not live for year with Sherlock Holmes for nothing . 

 I have only one other incident to record upon this tempestuous and melancholy day . this be my conversation with Barrymore just now , which give I one more strong card which I can play in due time . 

 Mortimer have stay to dinner , and he and the baronet play ecarte afterwards . the butler bring I my coffee into the library , and I take the chance to ask he a few question . 

 " well , " say I , " have this precious relation of yours depart , or be he still lurk out yonder ? " 

 " I do not   know , sir . I hope to heaven that he have go , for he have bring nothing but trouble here ! I have   not hear of he since I leave out food for he last , and that be three day ago . " 

 " do you see he then ? " 

 " no , sir , but the food be go when next I go that way . " 

 " then he be certainly there ? " 

 " so you would think , sir , unless it be the other man who take it . " 

 I sit with my coffee - cup halfway to my lip and star at Barrymore . 

 " you know that there be another man then ? " 

 " yes , sir ; there be another man upon the moor . " 

 " have you see he ? " 

 " no , sir . " 

 " how do you know of he then ? " 

 " Selden tell I of he , sir , a week ago or more . he be in hiding , too , but he be not a convict as far as I can make out . I do not   like it , Dr. Watson - I tell you straight , sir , that I do not   like it . " he speak with a sudden passion of earnestness . 

 " now , listen to I , Barrymore ! I have no interest in this matter but that of your master . I have come here with no object except to help he . tell I , frankly , what it be that you do not   like . " 

 Barrymore hesitate for a moment , as if he regret his outburst or find it difficult to express his own feeling in word . 

 " it be all these going - on , sir , " he cry at last , wave his hand towards the rain - lash window which face the moor . " there be foul play somewhere , and there be black villainy brew- ing , to that I will swear ! very glad I should be , sir , to see Sir Henry on his way back to London again ! " 

 " but what be it that alarm you ? " 

 " look at Sir Charles 's death ! that be bad enough , for all that the coroner say . look at the noise on the moor at night . there be not a man would cross it after sundown if he be pay for it . look at this stranger hide out yonder , and watch and wait ! what be he wait for ? what do it mean ? it mean no good to anyone of the name of Baskerville , and very glad I shall be to be quit of it all on the day that Sir Henry 's new servant be ready to take over the Hall . " 

 " but about this stranger , " say i. " can you tell I anything about he ? what do Selden say ? do he find out where he hide , or what he be do ? " 

 " he see he once or twice , but he be a deep one and give nothing away . at first he think that he be the police , but soon he find that he have some lay of his own . a kind of gentleman he be , as far as he could see , but what he be do he could not make out . " 

 " and where do he say that he live ? " 

 " among the old house on the hillside - the stone hut where the old folk use to live . " 

 " but how about his food ? " 

 " Selden find out that he have get a lad who work for he and bring all he need . I dare say he go to Coombe Tracey for what he want . " 

 " very good , Barrymore . we may talk far of this some other time . " when the butler have go I walk over to the black window , and I look through a blurred pane at the drive cloud and at the tossing outline of the wind - sweep tree . it be a wild night indoor , and what must it be in a stone hut upon the moor . what passion of hatred can it be which lead a man to lurk in such a place at such a time ! and what deep and earnest purpose can he have which call for such a trial ! there , in that hut upon the moor , seem to lie the very centre of that problem which have vex I so sorely . I swear that another day shall not have pass before I have do all that man can do to reach the heart of the mystery . 

  chapter 11 

 the Man on the Tor 

  the extract from my private diary which form the last chapter have bring my narrative up to the eighteenth of October , a time when these strange event begin to move swiftly towards their terrible conclusion . the incident of the next few day be indelibly grave upon my recollection , and I can tell they without reference to the note make at the time . I start they from the day which succeed that upon which I have establish two fact of great importance , the one that Mrs. Laura Lyons of Coombe Tracey have write to Sir Charles Baskerville and make an appointment with he at the very place and hour that he meet his death , the other that the lurk man upon the moor be to be find among the stone hut upon the hillside . with these two fact in my possession I feel that either my intelligence or my courage must be deficient if I could not throw some further light upon these dark place . 

 I have no opportunity to tell the baronet what I have learn about Mrs. Lyons upon the evening before , for Dr. Mortimer remain with he at card until it be very late . at breakfast , however , I inform he about my discovery and ask he whether he would care to accompany I to Coombe Tracey . at first he be very eager to come , but on second thought it seem to both of we that if I go alone the result might be well . the more formal we make the visit the less information we might obtain . I leave Sir Henry behind , therefore , not without some pricking of conscience , and drive off upon my new quest . 

 when I reach Coombe Tracey I tell Perkins to put up the horse , and I make inquiry for the lady whom I have come to interrogate . I have no difficulty in find her room , which be central and well appoint . a maid show I in without cere- mony , and as I enter the sitting - room a lady , who be sit before a Remington typewriter , spring up with a pleasant smile of welcome . her face fall , however , when she see that I be a stranger , and she sit down again and ask I the object of my visit . 

 the first impression leave by Mrs. Lyons be one of extreme beauty . her eye and hair be of the same rich hazel colour , and her cheek , though considerably freckle , be flush with the exquisite bloom of the brunette , the dainty pink which lurk at the heart of the sulphur rise . admiration be , I repeat , the first impression . but the second be criticism . there be some- thing subtly wrong with the face , some coarseness of expres- sion , some hardness , perhaps , of eye , some looseness of lip which mar its perfect beauty . but these , of course , be after- thought . at the moment I be simply conscious that I be in the presence of a very handsome woman , and that she be ask I the reason for my visit . I have not quite understand until that instant how delicate my mission be . 

 " I have the pleasure , " say I , " of know your father . " it be a clumsy introduction , and the lady make I feel it . 

 " there be nothing in common between my father and I , " she say . " I owe he nothing , and his friend be not mine . if it be not for the late Sir Charles Baskerville and some other kind heart I might have starve for all that my father care . " 

 " it be about the late Sir Charles Baskerville that I have come here to see you . " 

 the freckle start out on the lady 's face . 

 " what can I tell you about he ? " she ask , and her finger play nervously over the stop of her typewriter . 

 " you know he , do you not ? " 

 " I have already say that I owe a great deal to his kindness . if I be able to support myself it be largely due to the interest which he take in my unhappy situation . " 

 " do you correspond with he ? " 

 the lady look quickly up with an angry gleam in her hazel eye . 

 " what be the object of these question ? " she ask sharply . 

 " the object be to avoid a public scandal . it be well that I should ask they here than that the matter should pass outside our control . " 

 she be silent and her face be still very pale . at last she look up with something reckless and defiant in her manner . 

 " well , I will answer , " she say . " what be your question ? " 

 " do you correspond with Sir Charles ? " 

 " I certainly write to he once or twice to acknowledge his delicacy and his generosity . " 

 " have you the date of those letter ? " 

 " no . " 

 " have you ever meet he ? " 

 " yes , once or twice , when he come into Coombe Tracey . he be a very retiring man , and he prefer to do good by stealth . " 

 " but if you see he so seldom and write so seldom , how do he know enough about your affair to be able to help you , as you say that he have do ? " 

 she meet my difficulty with the utmost readiness . 

 " there be several gentleman who know my sad history and unite to help I . one be Mr. Stapleton , a neighbour and intimate friend of Sir Charles 's . he be exceedingly kind , and it be through he that Sir Charles learn about my affair . " 

 I know already that Sir Charles Baskerville have make Stapleton his almoner upon several occasion , so the lady 's statement bear the impress of truth upon it . 

 " do you ever write to Sir Charles ask he to meet you ? " I continue . 

 Mrs. Lyons flush with anger again . 

 " really , sir , this be a very extraordinary question . " 

 " I be sorry , madam , but I must repeat it . " 

 " then I answer , certainly not . " 

 " not on the very day of Sir Charles 's death ? " 

 the flush have fade in an instant , and a deathly face be before I . her dry lip could not speak the " no " which I see rather than hear . 

 " surely your memory deceive you , " say I. " I could even quote a passage of your letter . it run ' please , please , as you be a gentleman , burn this letter , and be at the gate by ten o'clock . ' " 

 I think that she have faint , but she recover herself by a supreme effort . 

 " be there no such thing as a gentleman ? " she gasp . 

 " you do Sir Charles an injustice . he do burn the letter . but sometimes a letter may be legible even when burn . you acknowledge now that you write it ? " 

 " yes , I do write it , " she cry , pour out her soul in a torrent of word . " I do write it . why should I deny it ? I have no reason to be ashamed of it . I wish he to help I . I believe that if I have an interview I could gain his help , so I ask he to meet I . " 

 " but why at such an hour ? " 

 " because I have only just learn that he be go to London next day and might be away for month . there be reason why I could not get there early . " 

 " but why a rendezvous in the garden instead of a visit to the house ? " 

 " do you think a woman could go alone at that hour to a bachelor 's house ? " 

 " well , what happen when you do get there ? " 

 " I never go . " 

 " Mrs. Lyons ! " 

 " no , I swear it to you on all I hold sacred . I never go . something intervene to prevent my going . " 

 " what be that ? " 

 " that be a private matter . I can not tell it . " 

 " you acknowledge then that you make an appointment with Sir Charles at the very hour and place at which he meet his death , but you deny that you keep the appointment . " 

 " that be the truth . " 

 again and again I cross - question she , but I could never get past that point . 

 " Mrs. Lyons , " say I as I rise from this long and inconclu- sive interview , " you be take a very great responsibility and put yourself in a very false position by not make an absolutely clean breast of all that you know . if I have to call in the aid of the police you will find how seriously you be compro- mise . if your position be innocent , why do you in the first instance deny have write to Sir Charles upon that date ? " 

 " because I fear that some false conclusion might be draw from it and that I might find myself involve in a scandal . " 

 " and why be you so press that Sir Charles should destroy your letter ? " 

 " if you have read the letter you will know . " 

 " I do not say that I have read all the letter . " 

 " you quote some of it . " 

 " I quote the postscript . the letter have , as I say , be burn and it be not all legible . I ask you once again why it be that you be so press that Sir Charles should destroy this letter which he receive on the day of his death . " 

 " the matter be a very private one . " 

 " the more reason why you should avoid a public investigation . " 

 " I will tell you , then . if you have hear anything of my unhappy history you will know that I make a rash marriage and have reason to regret it . " 

 " I have hear so much . " 

 " my life have be one incessant persecution from a husband whom I abhor . the law be upon his side , and every day I be face by the possibility that he may force I to live with he . at the time that I write this letter to Sir Charles I have learn that there be a prospect of my regain my freedom if certain expense could be meet . it mean everything to I - peace of mind , happiness , self - respect - everything . I know Sir Charles 's generosity , and I think that if he hear the story from my own lip he would help I . " 

 " then how be it that you do not go ? " 

 " because I receive help in the interval from another source . " 

 " why then , do you not write to Sir Charles and explain this ? " 

 " so I should have do have I not see his death in the paper next morning . " 

 the woman 's story hang coherently together , and all my question be unable to shake it . I could only check it by find if she have , indeed , institute divorce proceeding against her husband at or about the time of the tragedy . 

 it be unlikely that she would dare to say that she have not be to Baskerville Hall if she really have be , for a trap would be necessary to take she there , and could not have return to Coombe Tracey until the early hour of the morning . such an excursion could not be keep secret . the probability be , there- fore , that she be tell the truth , or , at least , a part of the truth . I come away baffled and dishearten . once again I have reach that dead wall which seem to be build across every path by which I try to get at the object of my mission . and yet the more I think of the lady 's face and of her manner the more I feel that something be be hold back from I . why should she turn so pale ? why should she fight against every admission until it be force from she ? why should she have be so reticent at the time of the tragedy ? surely the explanation of all this could not be as innocent as she would have I believe . for the moment I could proceed no far in that direction , but must turn back to that other clue which be to be seek for among the stone hut upon the moor . 

 and that be a most vague direction . I realize it as I drive back and note how hill after hill show trace of the ancient people . Barrymore 's only indication have be that the stranger live in one of these abandon hut , and many hundred of they be scatter throughout the length and breadth of the moor . but I have my own experience for a guide since it have show I the man himself stand upon the summit of the Black Tor . that , then , should be the centre of my search . from there I should explore every hut upon the moor until I light upon the right one . if this man be inside it I should find out from his own lip , at the point of my revolver if necessary , who he be and why he have dog we so long . he might slip away from we in the crowd of Regent Street , but it would puzzle he to do so upon the lonely moor . on the other hand , if I should find the hut and its tenant should not be within it I must remain there , however long the vigil , until he return . Holmes have miss he in London . it would indeed be a triumph for I if I could run he to earth where my master have fail . 

 Luck have be against we again and again in this inquiry , but now at last it come to my aid . and the messenger of good fortune be none other than Mr. Frankland , who be stand , gray - whisker and red - faced , outside the gate of bis garden , which open on to the highroad along which I travel . 

 " good - day , Dr. Watson , " cry he with unwonted good humour , " you must really give your horse a rest and come in to have a glass of wine and to congratulate I . " 

 my feeling towards he be very far from be friendly after what I have hear of his treatment of his daughter , but I be anxious to send Perkins and the wagonette home , and the oppor- tunity be a good one . I alight and send a message to Sir Henry that I should walk over in time for dinner . then I fol- low Frankland into his dining - room . 

 " it be a great day for I , sir - one of the red - letter day of my life , " he cry with many chuckle . " I have bring off a double event . I mean to teach they in these part that law be law , and that there be a man here who do not fear to invoke it . I have establish a right of way through the centre of old Middleton 's park , slap across it , sir , within a hundred yard of his own front door . what do you think of that ? we will teach these magnate that they can not ride roughshod over the right of the commoner , confound they ! and I have   close the wood where the Fernworthy folk use to picnic . these infernal people seem to think that there be no right of property , and that they can swarm where they like with their paper and their bottle . both case decide Dr. Watson , and both in my favour . I have not   have such a day since I have Sir John Morland for trespass because he shoot in his own warren . " 

 " how on earth do you do that ? " 

 " look it up in the book , sir . it will repay reading - Frankland v. Morland , Court of Queen 's Bench . it cost I 200 pound , but I get my verdict . " 

 " do it do you any good ? " 

 " none , sir , none . I be proud to say that I have no interest in the matter . I act entirely from a sense of public duty . I have no doubt , for example , that the Fernworthy people will burn I in effigy to - night . I tell the police last time they do it that they should stop these disgraceful exhibition . the County Constabu- lary be in a scandalous state , sir , and it have not afford I the protection to which I be entitle . the case of Frankland v. Regina will bring the matter before the attention of the public . I tell they that they would have occasion to regret their treatment of I , and already my word have come true . " 

 " how so ? " I ask . 

 the oId man put on a very knowing expression . 

 " because I could tell they what they be die to know ; but nothing would induce I to help the rascal in any way . " 

 I have be cast round for some excuse by which I could get away from his gossip , but now I begin to wish to hear more of it . I have see enough of the contrary nature of the old sinner to understand that any strong sign of interest would be the sure way to stop his confidence . 

 " some poaching case , no doubt ? " say I with an indifferent manner 

 " ha , ha , my boy , a very much more important matter than that ! what about the convict on the moor ? " 

 I star . " you do not   mean that you know where he be ? " say I. 

 " I may not know exactly where he be , but I be quite sure that I could help the police to lay their hand on he . have it never strike you that the way to catch that man be to find out where he get his food and so trace it to he ? " 

 he certainly seem to be get uncomfortably near the truth . " no doubt , " say I ; " but how do you know that he be anywhere upon the moor ? " 

 " I know it because I have see with my own eye the messenger who take he his food . " 

 my heart sink for Barrymore . it be a serious thing to be in the power of this spiteful old busybody . but his next remark take a weight from my mind . 

 " you will be surprised to hear that his food be take to he by a child . I see he every day through my telescope upon the roof . he pass along the same path at the same hour , and to whom should he be go except to the convict ? " 

 here be luck indeed ! and yet I suppress all appearance of interest . a child ! Barrymore have say that our unknown be supply by a boy . it be on his track , and not upon the convict 's , that Frankland have stumble . if I could get his knowl- edge it might save I a long and weary hunt . but incredulity and indifference be evidently my strong card . 

 " I should say that it be much more likely that it be the son of one of the moorland shepherd take out his father 's dinner . " 

 the least appearance of opposition strike fire out of the old autocrat . his eye look malignantly at I , and his gray whis- ker bristle like those of an angry cat . 

 " indeed , sir ! " say he , point out over the wide - stretching moor . " do you see that Black Tor over yonder ? well , do you see the low hill beyond with the thornbush upon it ? it be the stony part of the whole moor . be that a place where a shepherd would be likely to take his station ? your suggestion , sir , be a most absurd one . " 

 I meekly answer that I have speak without know all the fact . my submission please he and lead he to further confidence . 

 " you may be sure , sir , that I have very good ground before I come to an opinion . I have see the boy again and again with his bundle . every day , and sometimes twice a day , I have be able - but wait a moment , Dr. Watson . do my eye deceive I , or be there at the present moment something move upon that hillside ? " 

 it be several mile off , but I could distinctly see a small dark dot against the dull green and gray . 

 " come , sir , come ! " cry Frankland , rush upstairs . " you will see with your own eye and judge for yourself . " 

 the telescope , a formidable instrument mount upon a tri- pod , stand upon the flat lead of the house . Frankland clap his eye to it and give a cry of satisfaction . 

 " Quick , Dr. Watson , quick , before he pass over the hill ! " 

 there he be , sure enough , a small urchin with a little bundle upon his shoulder , toil slowly up the hill . when he reach the crest I see the ragged uncouth figure outline for an instant against the cold blue sky . he look round he with a furtive and stealthy air , as one who dread pursuit . then he vanish over the hill . 

 " well ! be I right ? " 

 " certainly , there be a boy who seem to have some secret errand . " 

 " and what the errand be even a county constable could guess . but not one word shall they have from I , and I bind you to secrecy also , Dr. Watson . not a word ! you understand ! " 

 " just as you wish . " 

 " they have treat I shamefully - shamefully . when the fact come out in Frankland v. Regina I venture to think that a thrill of indignation will run through the country . nothing would induce I to help the police in any way . for all they care it might have be I , instead of my effigy , which these rascal burn at the stake . surely you be not go ! you will help I to empty the decant in honour of this great occasion ! " 

 but I resist all his solicitation and succeed in dissuade he from his announce intention of walk home with I . I keep the road as long as his eye be on I , and then I strike off across the moor and make for the stony hill over which the boy have disappear . everything be work in my favour , and I swear that it should not be through lack of energy or persever- ance that I should miss the chance which fortune have throw in my way . 

 the sun be already sink when I reach the summit of the hill , and the long slope beneath I be all golden - green on one side and gray shadow on the other . a haze lie low upon the farth sky - line , out of which jut the fantastic shape of Belliver and Vixen Tor . over the wide expanse there be no sound and no movement . one great gray bird , a gull or curlew , soar aloft in the blue heaven . he and I seem to be the only live thing between the huge arch of the sky and the desert beneath it . the barren scene , the sense of loneliness , and the mystery and urgency of my task all strike a chill into my heart . the boy be nowhere to be see . but down beneath I in a cleft of the hill there be a circle of the old stone hut , and in the middle of they there be one which retain sufficient roof to act as a screen against the weather . my heart leap within I as I see it . this must be the burrow where the stranger lurk . at last my foot be on the threshold of his hiding place - his secret be within my grasp . 

 as I approach the hut , walk as warily as Stapleton would do when with poised net he draw near the settled butterfly , I satisfy myself that the place have indeed be use as a habita- tion . a vague pathway among the boulder lead to the dilapidated opening which serve as a door . all be silent within . the unknown might be lurk there , or he might be prowl on the moor . my nerve tingle with the sense of adventure . throw aside my cigarette , I close my hand upon the butt of my revolver and , walk swiftly up to the door , I look in . the place be empty . 

 but there be ample sign that I have not come upon a false scent . this be certainly where the man live . some blanket roll in a waterproof lie upon that very stone slab upon which neolithic man have once slumber . the ash of a fire be heap in a rude grate . beside it lie some cooking utensil and a bucket half - full of water . a litter of empty tin show that the place have be occupy for some time , and I see , as my eye become accustomed to the checker light , a pannikin and a half - full bottle of spirit stand in the corner . in the middle of the hut a flat stone serve the purpose of a table , and upon this stand a small cloth bundle - the same , no doubt , which I have see through the telescope upon the shoulder of the boy . it contain a loaf of bread , a tin tongue , and two tin of preserve peach . as I set it down again , after have examine it , my heart leap to see that beneath it there lie a sheet of paper with write upon it . I raise it , and this be what I read , roughly scrawl in pencil : " Dr. Watson have go to Coombe Tracey . " 

 for a minute I stand there with the paper in my hand think out the meaning of this curt message . it be I , then , and not Sir Henry , who be be aogge by this secret man . he have not follow I himself , but he have set an agent - the boy , perhaps - upon my track , and this be his report . possibly I have take no step since I have be upon the moor which have not be observe and report . always there be this feeling of an unseen force , a fine net draw round we with infinite skill and delicacy , hold we so lightly that it be only at some supreme moment that one realize that one be indeed - entangle in its mesh . 

 if there be one report there might be other , so I look round the hut in search of they . there be no trace , however , of anything of the kind , nor could I discover any sign which might indicate the character or intention of the man who live in this singular place , save that he must be of spartan habit and care little for the comfort of life . when I think of the heavy rain and look at the gap roof I understand how strong and immutable must be the purpose which have keep he in that inhospitable abode . be he our malignant enemy , or be he by chance our guardian angel ? I swear that I would not leave the hut until I know . 

 outside the sun be sink low and the west be blaze with scarlet and gold . its reflection be shoot back in ruddy patch by the distant pool which lie amid the great Grimpen Mire . there be the two tower of Baskerville Hall , and there a distant blur of smoke which mark the village of Grimpen . between the two , behind the hill , be the house of the Stapletons . all be sweet and mellow and peaceful in the golden evening light , and yet as I look at they my soul share none of the peace of Nature but quiver at the vagueness and the terror of that interview which every instant be bring nearer . with tingle nerve but a fix purpose , I sit in the dark recess of the hut and wait with sombre patience for the coming of its tenant . 

 and then at last I hear he . far away come the sharp clink of a boot strike upon a stone . then another and yet another , come nearer and nearer . I shrink back into the dark corner and cock the pistol in my pocket , determine not to discover myself until I have an opportunity of see something of the stranger . there be a long pause which show that he have stop . then once more the footstep approach and a shadow fall across the opening of the hut . 

 " it be a lovely evening , my dear Watson , " say a well - know voice . " I really think that you will be more comfortable outside than in . " 

  chapter 12 

 death on the Moor 

  for a moment or two I sit breathless , hardly able to believe my ear . then my sens and my voice come back to I , while a crush weight of responsibility seem in an instant to be lift from my soul . that cold , incisive , ironical voice could belong to but one man in all the world . 

 " Holmes ! " I cry - " Holmes ! " 

 " come out , " say he , " and please be careful with the revolver . " 

 I stoop under the rude lintel , and there he sit upon a stone outside , his gray eye dance with amusement as they fall upon my astonished feature . he be thin and worn , but clear and alert , his keen face bronze by the sun and roughen by the wind . in his tweed suit and cloth cap he look like any other tourist upon the moor , and he have contrive , with that catlike love of personal cleanliness which be one of his characteristic , that his chin should be as smooth and his linen as perfect as if he be in Baker Street . 

 " I never be more glad to see anyone in my life , " say I as I wring he by the hand . 

 " or more astonished , eh ? " 

 " well , I must confess to it . " 

 " the surprise be not all on one side , I assure you . I have no idea that you have find my occasional retreat , still less that you be inside it , until I be within twenty pace of the door . " 

 " my footprint , I presume ? " 

 " no , Watson , I fear that I could not undertake to recognize your footprint amid all the footprint of the world . if you seri- ously desire to deceive I you must change your tobacconist ; for when I see the stub of a cigarette mark Bradley , Oxford Street , I know that my friend Watson be in the neighbourhood . you will see it there beside the path . you throw it down , no doubt , at that supreme moment when you charge into the empty hut . " 

 " exactly . " 

 " I think as much - and know your admirable tenacity I be convince that you be sit in ambush , a weapon within reach , wait for the tenant to return . so you actually think that I be the criminal ? " 

 " I do not know who you be , but I be determined to find out . " 

 " Excellent , Watson ! and how do you localize I ? you see I , perhaps , on the night of the convict hunt , when I be so imprudent as to allow the moon to rise behind I ? " 

 " yes , I see you then . " 

 " and have no doubt search all the hut until you come to this one ? " 

 " no , your boy have be observe , and that give I a guide where to look . " 

 " the old gentleman with the telescope , no doubt . I could not make it out when first I see the light flash upon the lens . " he rise and peep into the hut . " ha , I see that Cartwright have bring up some supply . what be this paper ? so you have be to Coombe Tracey , have you ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " to see Mrs. Laura Lyons ? " 

 " exactly . " 

 " well do ! our research have evidently be run on parallel line , and when we unite our result I expect we shall have a fairly full knowledge of the case . " 

 " well , I be glad from my heart that you be here , for indeed the responsibility and the mystery be both become too much for my nerve . but how in the name of wonder do you come here , and what have you be do ? I think that you be in Baker Street work out that case of blackmailing . " 

 " that be what I wish you to think . " 

 " then you use I , and yet do not trust I ! " I cry with some bitterness . " I think that I have deserve well at your hand , Holmes . " 

 " my dear fellow , you have be invaluable to I in this as in many other case , and I beg that you will forgive I if I have seem to play a trick upon you . in truth , it be partly for your own sake that I do it , and it be my appreciation of the danger which you run which lead I to come down and examine the matter for myself . have I be with Sir Henry and you it be confident that my point of view would have be the same as your , and my presence would have warn our very formidable opponent to be on their guard . as it be , I have be able to get about as I could not possibly have do have I be live in the Hall , and I remain an unknown factor in the business , ready to throw in all my weight at a critical moment . " 

 " but why keep I in the dark ? " 

 " for you to know could not have help we and might possi- bly have lead to my discovery . you would have wish to tell I something , or in your kindness you would have bring I out some comfort or other , and so an unnecessary risk would be run . I bring Cartwright down with I - you remember the little chap at the express office - and he have see after my simple want : a loaf of bread and a clean collar . what do man want more ? he have give I an extra pair of eye upon a very active pair of foot , and both have be invaluable . " 

 " then my report have all be waste ! " - my voice trem- bleed as I recall the pain and the pride with which I have compose they . 

 Holmes take a bundle of paper from his pocket . 

 " here be your report , my dear fellow , and very well thumb , I assure you . I make excellent arrangement , and they be only delay one day upon their way . I must compliment you ex- ceedingly upon the zeal and the intelligence which you have show over an extraordinarily difficult case . " 

 I be still rather raw over the deception which have be practise upon I , but the warmth of Holmes 's praise drive my anger from my mind . I feel also in my heart that he be right in what he say and that it be really good for our purpose that I should not have know that he be upon the moor . 

 " that be well , " say he , see the shadow rise from my face . " and now tell I the result of your visit to Mrs. Laura Lyons - it be not difficult for I to guess that it be to see she that you have go , for I be already aware that she be the one person in Coombe Tracey who might be of service to we in the matter . in fact , if you have not go to - day it be exceedingly probable that I should have go to - morrow . " 

 the sun have set and dusk be settle over the moor . the air have turn chill and we withdraw into the hut for warmth . there sit together in the twilight , I tell Holmes of my conversation with the lady . so interested be he that I have to repeat some of it twice before he be satisfied . 

 " this be most important , " say he when I have conclude . " it fill up a gap which I have be unable to bridge in this most complex affair . you be aware , perhaps , that a close intimacy exist between this lady and the man Stapleton ? " 

 " I do not know of a close intimacy . " 

 " there can be no doubt about the matter . they meet , they write , there be a complete understanding between they . now , this put a very powerful weapon into our hand . if I could only use it to detach his wife " 

 " his wife ? " 

 " I be give you some information now , in return for all that you have give I . the lady who have pass here as Miss Stapleton be in reality his wife . " 

 " good heaven , Holmes ! be you sure of what you say ? how could he have permit Sir Henry to fall in love with she ? " 

 " Sir Henry 's fall in love could do no harm to anyone except Sir Henry . he take particular care that Sir Henry do not make love to she , as you have yourself observe . I repeat that the lady be his wife and not his sister . " 

 " but why this elaborate deception ? " 

 " because he foresee that she would be very much more useful to he in the character of a free woman . " 

 all my unspoken instinct , my vague suspicion , suddenly take shape and centre upon the naturalist . in that impassive colourless man , with his straw hat and his butterfly - net , I seem to see something terrible - a creature of infinite patience and craft , with a smile face and a murderous heart . 

 " it be he , then , who be our enemy - it be he who dog we in London ? " 

 " so I read the riddle . " 

 " and the warning - it must have come from she ! " 

 " exactly . " 

 the shape of some monstrous villainy , half see , half guess , loom through the darkness which have gird I so long . 

 " but be you sure of this , Holmes ? how do you know that the woman be his wife ? " 

 " because he so far forget himself as to tell you a true piece of autobiography upon the occasion when he first meet you , and I dare say he have many a time regret it since . he be once a schoolmaster in the north of England . now , there be no one more easy to trace than a schoolmaster . there be scholastic agency by which one may identify any man who have be in the profession . a little investigation show I that a school have come to grief under atrocious circumstance , and that the man who have own it - the name be different - have disappear with his wife . the description agree . when I learn that the miss man be devoted to entomology the identification be complete . " 

 the darkness be rise , but much be still hide by the shadow . 

 " if this woman be in truth his wife , where do Mrs. Laura Lyons come in ? " I ask . 

 " that be one of the point upon which your own research have shed a light . your interview with the lady have clear the situation very much . I do not know about a project divorce between herself and her husband . in that case , regard Stapleton as an unmarried man , she count no doubt upon become his wife . " 

 " and when she be undeceive ? " 

 " why , then we may find the lady of service . it must be our first duty to see she - both of we - to - morrow . do not   you think , Watson , that you be away from your charge rather long ? your place should be at Baskerville Hall . " 

 the last red streak have fade away in the west and night have settle upon the moor . a few faint star be gleam in a violet sky . 

 " one last question , Holmes , " I say as I rise . " surely there be no need of secrecy between you and I . what be the meaning of it all ? what be he after ? " 

 Holmes 's voice sink as he answer : 

 " it be murder , Watson - refine , cold - blooded , deliberate mur- der . do not ask I for particular . my net be close upon he , even as his be upon Sir Henry , and with your help he be already almost at my mercy . there be but one danger which can threaten we . it be that he should strike before we be ready to do so . another day - two at the most - and I have my case com- plete , but until then guard your charge as closely as ever a fond mother watch her ail child . your mission to - day have justi- fie itself , and yet I could almost wish that you have not leave his side . Hark ! " 

 a terrible scream - a prolonged yell of horror and anguish burst out of the silence of the moor . that frightful cry turn the blood to ice in my vein . 

 " oh , my God ! " I gasp . " what be it ? what do it mean ? " 

 Holmes have spring to his foot , and I see his dark , athletic outline at the door of the hut , his shoulder stoop , his head thrust forward , his face peer into the darkness . 

 " hush ! " he whisper . " hush ! " 

 the cry have be loud on account of its vehemence , but it have peal out from somewhere far off on the shadowy plain . now it burst upon our ear , nearer , loud , more urgent than before . 

 " where be it ? " Holmes whisper ; and I know from the thrill of his voice that he , the man of iron , be shake to the soul . " where be it , Watson ? " 

 " there , I think . " I point into the darkness . 

 " no , there ! " 

 again the agonized cry sweep through the silent night , loud and much near than ever . and a new sound mingle with it , a deep , muttered rumble , musical and yet menacing , rise and fall like the low , constant murmur of the sea . 

 " the hound ! " cry Holmes . " Come , Watson , come ! great heaven , if we be too late ! " 

 he have start run swiftly over the moor , and I have follow at his heel . but now from somewhere among the broken ground immediately in front of we there come one last despair yell , and then a dull , heavy thud . we halt and listen . not another sound break the heavy silence of the windless night . 

 I see Holmes put his hand to his forehead like a man dis- tracte . he stamp his foot upon the ground . 

 " he have beat we , Watson . we be too late . " 

 " no , no , surely not ! " 

 " fool that I be to hold my hand . and you , Watson , see what come of abandon your charge ! but , by Heaven , if the bad have happen we will avenge he ! " 

 blindly we run through the gloom , blunder against boul- der , force our way through gorse bush , pant up hill and rush down slope , head always in the direction whence those dreadful sound have come . at every rise Holmes look eagerly round he , but the shadow be thick upon the moor , and nothing move upon its dreary face . 

 " can you see anything ? " 

 " nothing . " 

 " but , hark , what be that ? " 

 a low moan have fall upon our ear . there it be again upon our left ! on that side a ridge of rock end in a sheer cliff which overlook a stone - strew slope . on its jagged face be spread - eagle some dark , irregular object . as we run towards it the vague outline harden into a definite shape . it be a pros- trate man face downward upon the ground , the head double under he at a horrible angle , the shoulder round and the body hunch together as if in the act of throw a somersault . so grotesque be the attitude that I could not for the instant realize that that moan have be the passing of his soul . not a whisper , not a rustle , rise now from the dark figure over which we stoop . Holmes lay his hand upon he and hold it up again with an exclamation of horror . the gleam of the match which he strike shine upon his clot finger and upon the ghastly pool which widen slowly from the crush skull of the victim . and it shine upon something else which turn our heart sick and faint within us - the body of Sir Henry Baskerville ! 

 there be no chance of either of we forget that peculiar ruddy tweed suit - the very one which he have wear on the first morning that we have see he in Baker Street . we catch the one clear glimpse of it , and then the match flicker and go out , even as the hope have go out of our soul . Holmes groan , and his face glimmer white through the darkness . 

 " the brute ! the brute ! " I cry with clench hand . " oh Holmes , I shall never forgive myself for have leave he to his fate . " 

 " I be more to blame than you , Watson . in order to have my case well rounded and complete , I have throw away the life of my client . it be the great blow which have befall I in my career . but how could I know - how could l know - that he would risk his life alone upon the moor in the face of all my warning ? " 

 " that we should have hear his scream - my God , those scream ! - and yet have be unable to save he ! where be this brute of a hound which drive he to his death ? it may be lurk among these rock at this instant . and Stapleton , where be he ? he shall answer for this deed . " 

 " he shall . I will see to that . Uncle and nephew have be murder - the one frighten to death by the very sight of a beast which he think to be supernatural , the other drive to his end in his wild flight to escape from it . but now we have to prove the connection between the man and the beast . save from what we hear , we can not even swear to the existence of the latter , since Sir Henry have evidently die from the fall . but , by heaven , cunning as he be , the fellow shall be in my power before another day be past ! " 

 we stand with bitter heart on either side of the mangled body , overwhelm by this sudden and irrevocable disaster which have bring all our long and weary labour to so piteous an end . then as the moon rise we climb to the top of the rock over which our poor friend have fall , and from the summit we gaze out over the shadowy moor , half silver and half gloom . far away , mile off , in the direction of Grimpen , a single steady yellow light be shin . it could only come from the lonely abode of the Stapletons . with a bitter curse I shake my fist at it as I gaze . 

 " why should we not seize he at once ? " 

 " our case be not complete . the fellow be wary and cunning to the last degree . it be not what we know , but what we can prove . if we make one false move the villain may escape we yet . " 

 " what can we do ? " 

 " there will be plenty for we to do to - morrow . to - night we can only perform the last office to our poor friend . " 

 together we make our way down the precipitous slope and approach the body , black and clear against the silver stone . the agony of those contorted limb strike I with a spasm of pain and blur my eye with tear . 

 " we must send for help , Holmes ! we can not carry he all the way to the Hall . good heaven , be you mad ? " 

 he have utter a cry and bent over the body . now he be dance and laugh and wring my hand . could this be my stern , self - contain friend ? these be hide fire , indeed ! 

 " a beard ! a beard ! the man have a beard ! " 

 " a beard ? " 

 " it be not the baronet - it be - why , it be my neighbour , the convict ! " 

 with feverish haste we have turn the body over , and that dripping beard be point up to the cold , clear moon . there could be no doubt about the beetle forehead , the sunken animal eye . it be indeed the same face which have glare upon I in the light of the candle from over the rock - the face of Selden , the criminal . 

 then in an instant it be all clear to I . I remember how the baronet have tell I that he have hand his old wardrobe to Barrymore . Barrymore have pass it on in order to help Selden in his escape . boot , shirt , cap - it be all Sir Henry 's . the tragedy be still black enough , but this man have at least de- serve death by the law of his country . I tell Holmes how the matter stand , my heart bubble over with thankfulness and joy . 

 " then the clothe have be the poor devil 's death , " say he . " it be clear enough that the hound have be lay on from some article of Sir Henry 's - the boot which be abstract in the hotel , in all probability - and so run this man down . there be one very singular thing , however : how come Selden , in the dark- ness , to know that the hound be on his trail ? " 

 " he hear he . " 

 " to hear a hound upon the moor would not work a hard man like this convict into such a paroxysm of terror that he would risk recapture by scream wildly for help . by his cry he must have run a long way after he know the animal be on his track . how do he know ? " 

 " a great mystery to I be why this hound , presume that all our conjecture be correct - " 

 " I presume nothing . " 

 " well , then , why this hound should be loose to - night . I suppose that it do not always run loose upon the moor . Stapleton would not let it go unless he have reason to think that Sir Henry would be there . " 

 " my difficulty be the more formidable of the two , for I think that we shall very shortly get an explanation of your , while mine may remain forever a mystery . the question now be , what shall we do with this poor wretch 's body ? we can not leave it here to the fox and the raven . " 

 " I suggest that we put it in one of the hut until we can communicate with the police . " 

 " exactly . I have no doubt that you and I could carry it so far . Halloa , Watson , what be this ? it be the man himself , by all that be wonderful and audacious ! not a word to show yow suspicion - not a word , or my plan crumble to the ground . " 

 a figure be approach we over the moor , and I see the dull red glow of a cigar . the moon shine upon he , and I could distinguish the dapper shape and jaunty walk of the naturalist . he stop when he see we , and then come on again . 

 " why , Dr. Watson , that be not you , be it ? you be the last man that I should have expect to see out on the moor at this time of night . but , dear I , what be this ? somebody hurt ? not - do not   tell I that it be our friend Sir Henry ! " he hurry past I and stoop over the dead man . I hear a sharp intake of his breath and the cigar fall from his finger . 

 " who - who be this ? " he stammer . 

 " it be Selden , the man who escape from Princetown . " 

 Stapleton turn a ghastly face upon we , but by a supreme effort he have overcome his amazement and his disappointment . he look sharply from Holmes to I . 

 " dear I ! what a very shocking affair ! how do he die ? " 

 " he appear to have break his neck by fall over these rock . my friend and I be stroll on the moor when we hear a cry . " 

 " I hear a cry also . that be what bring I out . I be uneasy about Sir Henry . " 

 " why about Sir Henry in particular ? " I could not help ask . 

 " because I have suggest that he should come over . when he do not come I be surprised , and I naturally become alarmed for his safety when I hear cry upon the moor . by the way " - his eye dart again from my face to Holmes 's - " do you hear anything else besides a cry ? " 

 " no , " say Holmes ; " do you ? " 

 " no . " 

 " what do you mean , then ? " 

 " oh , you know the story that the peasant tell about a phantom hound , and so on . it be say to be hear at night upon the moor . I be wonder if there be any evidence of such a sound to - night . " 

 " we hear nothing of the kind , " say I. 

 " and what be your theory of this poor fellow 's death ? " 

 " I have no doubt that anxiety and exposure have drive he off his head . he have rush about the moor in a crazy state and eventually fall over here and break his neck . " 

 " that seem the most reasonable theory , " say Stapleton , and he give a sigh which I take to indicate his relief . " what do you think about it , Mr. Sherlock Holmes ? " 

 my friend bow his compliment . 

 " you be quick at identification , " say he . 

 " we have be expect you in these part since Dr. Watson come down . you be in time to see a tragedy . " 

 " yes , indeed . I have no doubt that my friend 's explanation will cover the fact . I will take an unpleasant remembrance back to London with I to - morrow . " 

 " oh , you return to - morrow ? " 

 " that be my intention . " 

 " I hope your visit have cast some light upon those occurrence which have puzzle we ? " 

 Holmes shrug his shoulder . 

 " one can not always have the success for which one hop . an investigator need fact and not legend or rumour . it have not be a satisfactory case . " 

 my friend speak in his frank and most unconcerned man- ner . Stapleton still look hard at he . then he turn to I . 

 " I would suggest carry this poor fellow to my house , but it would give my sister such a fright that I do not feel justified in do it . I think that if we put something over his face he will be safe until morning . " 

 and so it be arrange . Resisting Stapleton 's offer of hospi- tality , Holmes and I set off to Baskerville Hall , leave the naturalist to return alone . look back we see the figure mov- ing slowly away over the broad moor , and behind he that one black smudge on the silvered slope which show where the man be lie who have come so horribly to his end . 

  chapter 13 

 fix the net 

  " we be at close grip at last , " say Holmes as we walk together across the moor . " what a nerve the fellow have ! how he pull himself together in the face of what must have be a paralyze shock when he find that the wrong man have fall a victim to his plot . I tell you in London , Watson , and I tell you now again , that we have never have a foeman more worthy of our steel . " 

 " I be sorry that he have see you . " 

 " and so be I at first . but there be no get out of it . " 

 " what effect do you think it will have upon his plan now that he know you be here ? " 

 " it may cause he to be more cautious , or it may drive he to desperate measure at once . like most clever criminal , he may be too confident in his own cleverness and imagine that he have completely deceive we . " 

 " why should we not arrest he at once ? " 

 " my dear Watson , you be bear to be a man of action . your instinct be always to do something energetic . but supposing , for argument 's sake , that we have he arrest to - night , what on earth the well off should we be for that ? we could prove nothing against he . there be the devilish cunning of it ! if he be act through a human agent we could get some evidence , but if we be to drag this great dog to the light of day it would not help we in put a rope round the neck of its master . " 

 " surely we have a case . " 

 " not a shadow of one - only surmise and conjecture . we should be laugh out of court if we come with such a story and such evidence . " 

 " there be Sir Charles 's death . " 

 " find dead without a mark upon he . you and I know that he die of sheer fright , and we know also what frighten he but how be we to get twelve stolid juryman to know it ? what sign be there of a hound ? where be the mark of its fang ? of course we know that a hound do not bite a dead body and that Sir Charles be dead before ever the brute overtake he . but we have to prove all this , and we be not in a position to do it . " 

 " well , then , to - night ? " 

 " we be not much well off to - night . again , there be no direct connection between the hound and the man 's death . we never see the hound . we hear it , but we could not prove that it be run upon this man 's trail . there be a complete absence of motive . no , my dear fellow ; we must reconcile ourselves to the fact that we have no case at present , and that it be worth our while to run any risk in order to establish one . " 

 " and how do you propose to do so ? " 

 " I have great hope of what Mrs. Laura Lyons may do for we when the position of affair be make clear to she . and I have my own plan as well . sufficient for to - morrow be the evil thereof ; but I hope before the day be past to have the upper hand at last . " 

 I could draw nothing far from he , and he walk , lose in thought , as far as the Baskerville gate . 

 " be you come up ? " 

 " yes ; I see no reason for further concealment . but one last word , Watson . say nothing of the hound to Sir Henry . let he think that Selden 's death be as Stapleton would have we be- lieve . he will have a well nerve for the ordeal which he will have to undergo to - morrow , when he be engage , if I remember your report aright , to dine with these people . " 

 " and so be I. " 

 " then you must excuse yourself and he must go alone . that will be easily arrange . and now , if we be too late for dinner , I think that we be both ready for our supper . " 

 Sir Henry be more pleased than surprised to see Sherlock Holmes , for he have for some day be expect that recent event would bring he down from London . he do raise his eyebrow , however , when he find that my friend have neither any luggage nor any explanation for its absence . between we we soon supply his want , and then over a belated supper we explain to the baronet as much of our experience as it seem desirable that he should know . but first I have the unpleasant duty of break the news to Barrymore and his wife . to he it may have be an unmitigated relief , but she weep bitterly in her apron . to all the world he be the man of violence , half animal and half demon ; but to she he always remain the little wilful boy of her own girlhood , the child who have clung to her hand . evil indeed be the man who have not one woman to mourn he . 

 " I have   be mop in the house all day since Watson go off in the morning , " say the baronet . " I guess I should have some credit , for I have keep my promise . if I have not   swear not to go about alone I might have have a more lively evening , for I have a message from Stapleton ask I over there . " 

 " I have no doubt that you would have have a more lively evening , " say Holmes drily . " by the way , I do not   suppose you appreciate that we have be mourn over you as have break your neck ? " 

 Sir Henry open his eye . " how be that ? " 

 " this poor wretch be dress in your clothe . I fear your servant who give they to he may get into trouble with the police . " 

 " that be unlikely . there be no mark on any of they , as far as I know . " 

 " that be lucky for he - in fact , it be lucky for all of you , since you be all on the wrong side of the law in this matter . I be not sure that as a conscientious detective my first duty be not to arrest the whole household . Watson 's report be most incriminate document . " 

 " but how about the case ? " ask the baronet . " have you make anything out of the tangle ? I do not   know that Watson and I be much the wise since we come down . " 

 " I think that I shall be in a position to make the situation rather more clear to you before long . it have be an exceedingly difficult and most complicated business . there be several point upon which we still want light - but it be come all the same . " 

 " we have   have one experience , as Watson have no doubt tell you . we hear the hound on the moor , so I can swear that it be not all empty superstition . I have something to do with dog when I be out West , and I know one when I hear one . if you can muzzle that one and put he on a chain I will be ready to swear you be the great detective of all time . " 

 " I think I will muzzle he and chain he all right if you will give I your help . " 

 " whatever you tell I to do I will do . " 

 " very good ; and I will ask you also to do it blindly , without always ask the reason . " 

 " just as you like . " 

 " if you will do this I think the chance be that our little problem will soon be solve . I have no doubt " 

 he stop suddenly and star fixedly up over my head into the air . the lamp beat upon his face , and so intent be it and so still that it might have be that of a clear - cut classical statue , a personification of alertness and expectation . 

 " what be it ? " we both cry . 

 I could see as he look down that he be repress some internal emotion . his feature be still compose , but his eye shine with amused exultation . 

 " excuse the admiration of a connoisseur , " say he as he wave his hand towards the line of portrait which cover the opposite wall . " Watson will not   allow that I know anything of art but that be mere jealousy because our view upon the subject differ . now , these be a really very fine series of portrait . " 

 " well , I be glad to hear you say so , " say Sir Henry , glance with some surprise at my friend . " I do not   pretend to know much about these thing , and I would be a well judge of a horse or a steer than of a picture . I do not   know that you find time for such thing . " 

 " I know what be good when I see it , and I see it now . that be a Kneller , I will swear , that lady in the blue silk over yonder , and the stout gentleman with the wig ought to be a Reynolds . they be all family portrait , I presume ? " 

 " every one . " 

 " do you know the name ? " 

 " barrymore have be coach I in they , and I think I can say my lesson fairly well . " 

 " who be the gentleman with the telescope ? " 

 " that be Rear - Admiral Baskerville , who serve under Rodney in the West Indies . the man with the blue coat and the roll of paper be Sir William Baskerville , who be Chairman of Commit- tee of the House of Commons under Pitt . " 

 " and this cavalier opposite to I - the one with the black velvet and the lace ? " 

 " ah , you have a right to know about he . that be the cause of all the mischief , the wicked Hugo , who start the Hound of the Baskervilles . we be not likely to forget he . " 

 I gaze with interest and some surprise upon the portrait . 

 " dear I ! " say Holmes , " he seem a quiet , meek - mannered man enough , but I dare say that there be a lurk devil in his eye . I have picture he as a more robust and ruffianly person . " 

 " there be no doubt about the authenticity , for the name and the date , 1647 , be on the back of the canvas . " 

 Holmes say little more , but the picture of the old roysterer seem to have a fascination for he , and his eye be continu- ally fix upon it during supper . it be not until later , when Sir Henry have go to his room , that I be able to follow the trend of his thought . he lead I back into the banqueting - hall , his bedroom candle in his hand , and he hold it up against the time - stain portrait on the wall . 

 " do you see anything there ? " 

 I look at the broad plume hat , the curl love - lock , the white lace collar , and the straight , severe face which be frame between they . lt be not a brutal countenance , but it be prim hard , and stern , with a firm - set , thin - lipped mouth , and a coldly intolerant eye . 

 " be it like anyone you know ? " 

 " there be something of Sir Henry about the jaw . " 

 " just a suggestion , perhaps . but wait an instant ! " he stand upon a chair , and , hold up the light in his left hand , he curve his right arm over the broad hat and round the long ringlet . 

 " good heaven ! " I cry in amazement . 

 the face of Stapleton have spring out of the canvas . 

 " ha , you see it now . my eye have be train to examine face and not their trimming . it be the first quality of a criminal investigator that he should see through a disguise . " 

 " but this be marvellous . it might be his portrait . " 

 " yes , it be an interesting instance of a throwback , which appear to be both physical and spiritual . a study of family portrait be enough to convert a man to the doctrine of reincarna- tion . the fellow be a Baskerville - that be evident . " 

 " with design upon the succession . " 

 " exactly . this chance of the picture have supply we with one of our most obvious missing link . we have he , Watson , we have he , and I dare swear that before to - morrow night he will be flutter in our net as helpless as one of his own butterfly . a pin , a cork , and a card , and we add he to the Baker Street collection ! " he burst into one of his rare fit of laughter as he turn away from the picture . I have not hear he laugh often , and it have always bode ill to somebody . 

 I be up betime in the morning , but Holmes be afoot early still , for I see he as I dress , come up the drive . 

 " yes , we should have a full day to - day , " he remark , and he rub his hand with the joy of action . " the net be all in place , and the drag be about to begin . we will know before the day be out whether we have catch our big , leanjawe pike , or whether he have get through the mesh . " 

 " have you be on the moor already ? " 

 " I have send a report from Grimpen to Princetown as to the death of Selden . I think I can promise that none of you will be trouble in the matter . and I have also communicate with my faithful Cartwright , who would certainly have pin away at the door of my hut , as a dog do at his master 's grave , if I have not set his mind at rest about my safety . " 

 " what be the next move ? " 

 " to see Sir Henry . ah , here he be ! " 

 " good - morning , Holmes , " say the baronet . " you look like a general who be plan a battle with his chief of the staff . " 

 " that be the exact situation . Watson be ask for order . " 

 " and so do I. " 

 " very good . you be engage , as I understand , to dine with our friend the Stapletons to - night . " 

 " I hope that you will come also . they be very hospitable people , and I be sure that they would be very glad to see you . " 

 " I fear that Watson and I must go to London . " 

 " to London ? " 

 " yes , I think that we should be more useful there at the present juncture . " 

 the baronet 's face perceptibly lengthen . 

 " I hop that you be go to see I through this business . the Hall and the moor be not very pleasant place when one be alone . " 

 " my dear fellow , you must trust I implicitly and do exactly what I tell you . you can tell your friend that we should have be happy to have come with you , but that urgent business require we to be in town . we hope very soon to return to Devonshire . will you remember to give they that message ? " 

 " if you insist upon it . " 

 " there be no alternative , I assure you . " 

 I see by the baronet 's clouded brow that he be deeply hurt by what he regard as our desertion . 

 " when do you desire to go ? " he ask coldly . 

 " immediately after breakfast . we will drive in to Coombe Tracey , but Watson will leave his thing as a pledge that he will come back to you . Watson , you will send a note to Stapleton to tell he that you regret that you can not come . " 

 " I have a good mind to go to London with you , " say the baronet . " why should I stay here alone ? " 

 " because it be your post of duty . because you give I your word that you would do as you be tell , and I tell you to stay . " 

 " all right , then , I will stay . " 

 " one more direction ! I wish you to drive to Merripit House send back your trap , however , and let they know that you intend to walk home . " 

 " to walk across the moor ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " but that be the very thing which you have so often caution I not to do . " 

 " this time you may do it with safety . if I have not every confidence in your nerve and courage I would not suggest it , but it be essential that you should do it . " 

 " then I will do it . " 

 " and as you value your life do not go across the moor in any direction save along the straight path which lead from Merripit House to the Grimpen Road , and be your natural way home . " 

 " I will do just what you say . " 

 " very good . I should be glad to get away as soon after breakfast as possible , so as to reach London in the afternoon . " 

 I be much astounded by this programme , though I remem- bere that Holmes have say to Stapleton on the night before that his visit would terminate next day . it have not cross my mind however , that he would wish I to go with he , nor could I understand how we could both be absent at a moment which he himself declare to be critical . there be nothing for it , how- ever , but implicit obedience ; so we bade good - bye to our rueful friend , and a couple of hour afterwards we be at the station of Coombe Tracey and have dispatch the trap upon its return journey . a small boy be wait upon the platform . 

 " any order , sir ? " 

 " you will take this train to town , Cartwright . the moment you arrive you will send a wire to Sir Henry Baskerville , in my name , to say that if he find the pocketbook which I have drop he be to send it by registered post to Baker Street . " 

 " yes , sir . " 

 " and ask at the station office if there be a message for I . " 

 the boy return with a telegram , which Holmes hand to I . it run : 

  Wire receive . come down with unsigned warrant . 

 arrive five - forty . 

 Lestrade . 

  " that be in answer to mine of this morning . he be the good of the professional , I think , and we may need his assistance . now , Watson , I think that we can not employ our time well than by call upon your acquaintance , Mrs. Laura Lyons . " 

 his plan of campaign be begin to be evident . he would use the baronet in order to convince the Stapletons that we be really go , while we should actually return at the instant when we be likely to be need . that telegram from London , if mention by Sir Henry to the Stapletons , must remove the last suspicion from their mind . already I seem to see our net draw close around that leanjawe pike . 

 Mrs. Laura Lyons be in her office , and Sherlock Holmes open his interview with a frankness and directness which considerably amaze she . 

 " I be investigate the circumstance which attend the death of the late Sir Charles Baskerville , " say he . " my friend here , Dr. Watson , have inform I of what you have communi- cat , and also of what you have withhold in connection with that matter . " 

 " what have I withhold ? " she ask defiantly . 

 " you have confess that you ask Sir Charles to be at the gate at ten o'clock . we know that that be the place and hour of his death . you have withhold what the connection be between these event . " 

 " there be no connection . " 

 " in that case the coincidence must indeed be an extraordinary one . but I think that we shall succeed in establish a connec- tion , after all . I wish to be perfectly frank with you , Mrs. Lyons . we regard this case as one of murder , and the evidence may implicate not only your friend Mr. Stapleton but his wife as well . " 

 the lady spring from her chair . 

 " his wife ! " she cry . 

 " the fact be no long a secret . the person who have pass for his sister be really his wife . " 

 Mrs. Lyons have resume her seat . her hand be grasp the arm of her chair , and I see that the pink nail have turn white with the pressure of her grip . 

 " his wife ! " she say again . " his wife ! he be not a married man . " 

 Sherlock Holmes shrug his shoulder . 

 " prove it to I ! prove it to I ! and if you can do so - ! " the fierce flash of her eye say more than any word . 

 " I have come prepared to do so , " say Holmes , draw several paper from his pocket . " here be a photograph of the couple take in York four year ago . it be indorse ' Mr. and Mrs. Vandeleur , ' but you will have no difficulty in recognize he , and she also , if you know she by sight . here be three write description by trustworthy witness of Mr. and Mrs. Vandeleur , who at that time keep St. Oliver 's private school . read they and see if you can doubt the identity of these people . " 

 she glance at they , and then look up at we with the set rigid face of a desperate woman . 

 " Mr. Holmes , " she say , " this man have offer I marriage on condition that I could get a divorce from my husband . he have lie to I , the villain , in every conceivable way . not one word of truth have he ever tell I . and why - why ? I imagine that all be for my own sake . but now I see that I be never anything but a tool in his hand . why should I preserve faith with he who never keep any with I ? why should I try to shield he from the consequence of his own wicked act ? ask I what you like , and there be nothing which I shall hold back . one thing I swear to you , and that be that when I write the letter I never dream of any harm to the old gentleman , who have be my kind friend . " 

 " I entirely believe you , madam , " say Sherlock Holmes . 

 " the recital of these event must be very painful to you , and perhaps it will make it easy if I tell you what occur , and you can check I if I make any material mistake . the sending of this letter be suggest to you by Stapleton ? " 

 " he dictate it . " 

 " I presume that the reason he give be that you would receive help from Sir Charles for the legal expense connect with your divorce ? " 

 " exactly . " 

 " and then after you have send the letter he dissuade you from keep the appointment ? " 

 " he tell I that it would hurt his self - respect that any other man should find the money for such an object , and that though he be a poor man himself he would devote his last penny to remove the obstacle which divide we . " 

 " he appear to be a very consistent character . and then you hear nothing until you read the report of the death in the paper ? " 

 " no . " 

 " and he make you swear to say nothing about your appoint- ment with Sir Charles ? " 

 " he do . he say that the death be a very mysterious one , and that I should certainly be suspect if the fact come out . he frighten I into remain silent . " 

 " quite so . but you have your suspicion ? " 

 she hesitate and look down . 

 " I know he , " she say . " but if he have keep faith with I I should always have do so with he . " 

 " I think that on the whole you have have a fortunate escape , " say Sherlock Holmes . " you have have he in your power and he know it , and yet you be alive . you have be walk for some month very near to the edge of a precipice . we must wish you good - morning now , Mrs. Lyons , and it be probable that you will very shortly hear from we again . " 

  " our case become rounded off , and difficulty after difficulty thin away in front of we , " say Holmes as we stand wait for the arrival of the express from town . " I shall soon be in the position of be able to put into a single connect narrative one of the most singular and sensational crime of modern time . student of criminology will remember the analogous incident in Godno , in Little Russia , in the year ' 66 , and of course there be the Anderson murder in North Carolina , but this case possess some feature which be entirely its own . even now we have no clear case against this very wily man . but I shall be very much surprised if it be not clear enough before we go to bed this night . " 

 the London express come roar into the station , and a small , wiry bulldog of a man have spring from a first - class carriage . we all three shake hand , and I see at once from the reverential way in which Lestrade gaze at my companion that he have learn a good deal since the day when they have first work together . I could well remember the scorn which the theory of the reasoner use then to excite in the practical man . 

 " anything good ? " he ask . 

 " the big thing for year , " say Holmes . " we have two hour before we need think of start . I think we might employ it in get some dinner and then , Lestrade , we will take the London fog out of your throat by give you a breath of the pure night air of Dartmoor . never be there ? ah , well , I do not   suppose you will forget your first visit . " 

  Chapter 14 

 the Hound of the Baskervilles 

  one of Sherlock Holmes 's defect - if , indeed , one may call it a defect - be that he be exceedingly loath to communicate his full plan to any other person until the instant of their fulfilment . partly it come no doubt from his own masterful nature , which love to dominate and surprise those who be around he . partly also from his professional caution , which urge he never to take any chance . the result , however , be very try for those who be act as his agent and assistant . I have often suffer under it , but never more so than during that long drive in the darkness . the great ordeal be in front of we ; at last we be about to make our final effort , and yet Holmes have say nothing , and I could only surmise what his course of action would be . my nerve thrill with anticipation when at last the cold wind upon our face and the dark , void space on either side of the narrow road tell I that we be back upon the moor once again . every stride of the horse and every turn of the wheel be take we near to our supreme adventure . 

 our conversation be hamper by the presence of the driver of the hire wagonette , so that we be force to talk of trivial matter when our nerve be tense with emotion and anticipa- tion . it be a relief to I , after that unnatural restraint , when we at last pass Frankland 's house and know that we be draw near to the Hall and to the scene of action . we do not drive up to the door but get down near the gate of the avenue . the wagonette be pay off and order to return to Coombe Tracey forthwith , while we start to walk to Merripit House . 

 " be you arm , Lestrade ? " 

 the little detective smile . 

 " as long as I have my trouser I have a hip - pocket , and as long as I have my hip - pocket I have something in it . " 

 " good ! my friend and I be also ready for emergency . " 

 " you be mighty close about this affair , Mr. Holmes . what be the game now ? " 

 " a waiting game . " 

 " my word , it do not seem a very cheerful place , " say the detective with a shiver , glance round he at the gloomy slope of the hill and at the huge lake of fog which lie over the Grimpen Mire . " I see the light of a house ahead of we . " 

 " that be Merripit House and the end of our journey . I must request you to walk on tiptoe and not to talk above a whisper . " 

 we move cautiously along the track as if we be bind for the house , but Holmes halt we when we be about two hundred yard from it . 

 " this will do , " say he . " these rock upon the right make an admirable screen . " 

 " we be to wait here ? " 

 " yes , we shall make our little ambush here . get into this hollow , Lestrade . you have be inside the house , have you not , Watson ? can you tell the position of the room ? what be those lattice window at this end ? " 

 " I think they be the kitchen window . " 

 " and the one beyond , which shin so brightly ? " 

 " that be certainly the dining - room . " 

 " the blind be up . you know the lie of the land well . Creep forward quietly and see what they be do - but for heaven 's sake do not   let they know that they be watch ! " 

 I tiptoe down the path and stoop behind the low wall which surround the stunt orchard . creep in its shadow I reach a point whence I could look straight through the uncurtained window . 

 there be only two man in the room , Sir Henry and Stapleton . they sit with their profile towards I on either side of the round table . both of they be smoke cigar , and coffee and wine be in front of they . Stapleton be talk with anima- tion , but the baronet look pale and distrait . perhaps the thought of that lonely walk across the ill - omen moor be weigh heavily upon his mind . 

 as I watch they Stapleton rise and leave the room , while Sir Henry fill his glass again and lean back in his chair , puff at his cigar . I hear the creak of a door and the crisp sound of boot upon gravel . the step pass along the path on the other side of the wall under which I crouch . look over , I see the naturalist pause at the door of an out - house in the corner of the orchard . a key turn in a lock , and as he pass in there be a curious scuffling noise from within . he be only a minute or so inside , and then I hear the key turn once more and he pass I and reentere the house . I see he rejoin his guest , and I creep quietly back to where my companion be wait to tell they what I have see . 

 " you say , Watson , that the lady be not there ? " Holmes ask when I have finish my report . 

 " no . " 

 " where can she be , then , since there be no light in any other room except the kitchen ? " 

 " I can not think where she be . " 

 I have say that over the great Grimpen Mire there hang a dense , white fog . it be drift slowly in our direction and bank itself up like a wall on that side of we , low but thick and well define . the moon shine on it , and it look like a great shimmering ice - field , with the head of the distant tor as rock bear upon its surface . Holmes 's face be turn towards it , and he mutter impatiently as he watch its sluggish drift . 

 " it be move towards we , Watson . " 

 " be that serious ? " 

 " very serious , indeed - the one thing upon earth which could have disarrange my plan . he can not   be very long , now . it be already ten o'clock . our success and even his life may depend upon his come out before the fog be over the path . " 

 the night be clear and fine above we . the star shine cold and bright , while a half - moon bath the whole scene in a soft , uncertain light . before we lie the dark bulk of the house , its serrate roof and bristle chimney hard outline against the silver - spangled sky . broad bar of golden light from the low window stretch across the orchard and the moor . one of they be suddenly shut off . the servant have leave the kitchen . there only remain the lamp in the dining - room where the two man , the muderous host and the unconscious guest , still chat over their cigar . 

 every minute that white woolly plain which cover one - half of the moor be drift close and close to the house . already the first thin wisps of it be curl across the golden square of the lighted window . the farth wall of the orchard be already invisible , and the tree be stand out of a swirl of white vapour . as we watch it the fog - wreath come crawl round both corner of the house and roll slowly into one dense bank on which the upper floor and the roof float like a strange ship upon a shadowy sea . Holmes strike his hand passionately upon the rock in front of we and stamp his foot in his impatience . 

 " if he be not   out in a quarter of an hour the path will be cover . in half an hour we will not   be able to see our hand in front of we . " 

 " shall we move far back upon high ground ? " 

 " yes , I think it would be as well . " 

 so as the fog - bank flow onward we fall back before it until we be half a mile from the house , and still that dense white sea , with the moon silver its upper edge , sweep slowly and inexorably on . 

 " we be go too far , " say Holmes . " we dare not take the chance of his be overtake before he can reach we . at all cost we must hold our ground where we be . " he drop on his knee and clap his ear to the ground . " thank God , I think that I hear he come . " 

 a sound of quick step break the silence of the moor . Crouch- ing among the stone we star intently at the silver - tip bank in front of we . the step grow louder , and through the fog , as through a curtain , there step the man whom we be await- ing . he look round he in surprise as he emerge into the clear , starlit night . then he come swiftly along the path , pass close to where we lay , and go on up the long slope behind we . as he walk he glance continually over either shoulder , like a man who be ill at ease . 

 " Hist ! " cry Holmes , and I hear the sharp click of a cock- ing pistol . " look out ! it be come ! " 

 there be a thin , crisp , continuous patter from somewhere in the heart of that crawl bank . the cloud be within fifty yard of where we lay , and we glare at it , all three , uncertain what horror be about to break from the heart of it . I be at Holmes 's elbow , and I glance for an instant at his face . it be pale and exultant , his eye shin brightly in the moonlight . but sud- denly they start forward in a rigid , fix stare , and his lip part in amazement . at the same instant Lestrade give a yell of terror and throw himself face downward upon the ground . I spring to my foot , my inert hand grasp my pistol , my mind paralyze by the dreadful shape which have spring out upon we from the shadow of the fog . a hound it be , an enormous coal - black hound , but not such a hound as mortal eye have ever see . fire burst from its open mouth , its eye glow with a smoulder glare , its muzzle and hackle and dewlap be outline in flicker flame . never in the delirious dream of a disorder brain could anything more savage , more appalling , more hellish be conceive than that dark form and savage face which break upon we out of the wall of fog . 

 with long bound the huge black creatwe be leap down the track , follow hard upon the footstep of our friend . so paralyzed be we by the apparition that we allow he to pass before we have recover our nerve . then Holmes and I both fire together , and the creature give a hideous howl , which show that one at least have hit he . he do not pause , however , but bound onward . far away on the path we see Sir Henry look back , his face white in the moonlight , his hand raise in horror , glare helplessly at the frightful thing which be hunt- e he down . 

 but that cry of pain from the hound have blow all our fear to the wind . if he be vulnerable he be mortal , and if we could wound he we could kill he . never have I see a man run as Holmes run that night . I be reckon fleet of foot , but he outpace I as much as I outpace the little professional . in front of we as we fly up the track we hear scream after scream from Sir Henry and the deep roar of the hound . I be in time to see the beast spring upon its victim , hurl he to the ground , and worry at his throat . but the next instant Holmes have empty five barrel of his revolver into the creature 's flank . with a last howl of agony and a vicious snap in the air , it roll upon its back , four foot paw furiously , and then fall limp upon its side . I stoop , pant , and press my pistol to the dreadful , shimmering head , but it be useless to press the trigger . the giant hound be dead . 

 Sir Henry lie insensible where he have fall . we tear away his collar , and Holmes breathe a prayer of gratitude when we see . that there be no sign of a wound and that the rescue have be in time . already our friend 's eyelid shiver and he make a feeble effort to move . Lestrade thrust his brandy - flask between the baronet 's tooth , and two frightened eye be look up at we . 

 " my God ! " he whisper . " what be it ? what , in heaven 's name , be it ? " 

 " it be dead , whatever it be , " say Holmes . " we have   lay the family ghost once and forever . " 

 in mere size and strength it be a terrible creature which be lie stretch before we . it be not a pure bloodhound and it be not a pure mastiff ; but it appear to be a combination of the two - gaunt , savage , and as large as a small lioness . even now in the stillness of death , the huge jaw seem to be dripping with a bluish flame and the small , deep - set , cruel eye be ring with fire . I place my hand upon the glowing muzzle , and as I hold they up my own finger smoulder and gleam in the darkness . 

 " Phosphorus , " I say . 

 " a cunning preparation of it , " say Holmes , sniff at the dead animal . " there be no smell which might have interfere with his power of scent . we owe you a deep apology , Sir Henry , for have expose you to this fright . I be prepare for a hound , but not for such a creature as this . and the fog give we little time to receive he . " 

 " you have save my life . " 

 " have first endanger it . be you strong enough to stand ? " 

 " give I another mouthful of that brandy and I shall be ready for anything . so ! now , if you will help I up . what do you propose to do ? " 

 " to leave you here . you be not fit for further adventure to - night . if you will wait , one or other of we will go back with you to the Hall . " 

 he try to stagger to his foot ; but he be still ghastly pale and tremble in every limb . we help he to a rock , where he sit shiver with his face bury in his hand . 

 " we must leave you now , " say Holmes . " the rest of our work must be do , and every moment be of importance . we have our case , and now we only want our man . 

 " it be a thousand to one against our find he at the house , " he continue as we retrace our step swiftly down the path . " those shot must have tell he that the game be up . " 

 " we be some distance off , and this fog may have deaden they . " 

 " he follow the hound to call he off - of that you may be certain . no , no , he be go by this time ! but we will search the house and make sure . " 

 the front door be open , so we rush in and hurry from room to room to the amazement of a doddering old manservant , who meet we in the passage . there be no light save in the dining - room , but Holmes catch up the lamp and leave no corner of the house unexplored . no sign could we see of the man whom we be chase . on the upper floor , however , one of the bedroom door be lock . 

 " there be someone in here , " cry Lestrade . " I can hear a movement . open this door ! " 

 a faint moaning and rustling come from within . Holmes strike the door just over the lock with the flat of his foot and it fly open . pistol in hand , we all three rush into the room . 

 but there be no sign within it of that desperate and defiant villain whom we expect to see . instead we be face by an object so strange and so unexpected that we stand for a moment star at it in amazement . 

 the room have be fashion into a small museum , and the wall be line by a number of glass - top case full of that collection of butterfly and moth the formation of which have be the relaxation of this complex and dangerous man . in the centre of this room there be an upright beam , which have be place at some period as a support for the old worm - eat baulk of timber which span the roof . to this post a figure be tie , so swathe and muffle in the sheet which have be use to secure it that one could not for the moment tell whether it be that of a man or a woman . one towel pass round the throat and be secure at the back of the pillar . another cover the low part of the face , and over it two dark eye - eye full of grief and shame and a dreadful questioning - star back at we . in a minute we have tear off the gag , unswathe the bond , and Mrs. Stapleton sink upon the floor in front of we . as her beautiful head fall upon her chest I see the clear red weal of a whiplash across her neck . 

 " the brute ! " cry Holmes . " here , Lestrade , your brandy- bottle ! put she in the chair ! she have faint from ill - usage and exhaustion . " 

 she open her eye again . 

 " be he safe ? " she ask . " have he escape ? " 

 " he can not escape we , madam . " 

 " no , no , I do not mean my husband . Sir Henry ? be he safe ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " and the hound ? " 

 " it be dead . " 

 she give a long sigh of satisfaction . 

 " thank God ! thank God ! oh , this villain ! see how he have treat I ! " she shoot her arm out from her sleeve , and we see with horror that they be all mottle with bruise . " but this be nothing - nothing ! it be my mind and soul that he have torture and defile . I could endure it all , ill - usage , solitude , a life of deception , everything , as long as I could still cling to the hope that I have his love , but now I know that in this also I have be his dupe and his tool . " she break into passionate sobbing as she speak . 

 " you bear he no good will , madam , " say Holmes . " tell we then where we shall find he . if you have ever aid he in evil , help we now and so atone . " 

 " there be but one place where he can have flee , " she an- swere . " there be an old tin mine on an island in the heart of the mire . it be there that he keep his hound and there also he have make preparation so that he might have a refuge . that be where he would fly . " 

 the fog - bank lie like white wool against the window . Holmes hold the lamp towards it . 

 " see , " say he . " no one could find his way into the Grimpen Mire to - night . " 

 she laugh and clap her hand . her eye and tooth gleam with fierce merriment 

 " he may find his way in , but never out , " she cry . " how can he see the guide wand to - night ? we plant they to- gether , he and I , to mark the pathway through the mire . oh , if I could only have pluck they out to - day . then indeed you would have have he at your mercy ! " 

 it be evident to we that all pursuit be in vain until the fog have lift . meanwhile we leave Lestrade in possession of the house while Holmes and I go back with the baronet to Baskerville Hall . the story of the Stapletons could no long be withhold from he , but he take the blow bravely when he learn the truth about the woman whom he have love . but the shock of the night 's adventure have shatter his nerve , and before morning he lie delirious in a high fever under the care of Dr. Mortimer . the two of they be destine to travel together round the world before Sir Henry have become once more the hale , hearty man that he have be before he become master of that ill - omen estate . 

  and now I come rapidly to the conclusion of this singular narrative , in which I have try to make the reader share those dark fear and vague surmise which cloud our life so long and end in so tragic a manner . on the morning after the death of the hound the fog have lift and we be guide by Mrs. Stapleton to the point where they have find a pathway through the bog . it help we to realize the horror of this woman 's life when we see the eagerness and joy with which she lay we on her husband 's track . we leave she stand upon the thin peninsula of firm , peaty soil which taper out into the widespread bog . from the end of it a small wand plant here and there show where the path zigzag from tuft to tuft of rush among those green - scummed pit and foul quagmire which bar the way to the stranger . rank reed and lush , slimy water - plant send an odour of decay and a heavy miasmatic vapour onto our face , while a false step plunge we more than once thigh - deep into the dark , quivering mire , which shake for yard in soft undulation around our foot . its tenacious grip pluck at our heel as we walk , and when we sink into it it be as if some malignant hand be tug we down into those obscene depth , so grim and purposeful be the clutch in which it hold we . once only we see a trace that someone have pass that perilous way before we . from amid a tuft of cotton grass which bear it up out of the slime some dark thing be project . Holmes sink to his waist as he step from the path to seize it , and have we not be there to drag he out he could never have set his foot upon firm land again . he hold an old black boot in the air . " Meyers , Toronto , " be print on the leather inside . 

 " it be worth a mud bath , " say he . " it be our friend Sir Henry 's miss boot . " 

 " throw there by Stapleton in his flight . " 

 " exactly . he retain it in his hand after use it to set the hound upon the track . he flee when he know the game be up , still clutch it . and he hurl it away at this point of his flight . we know at least that he come so far in safety . " 

 but more than that we be never destine to know , though there be much which we might surmise . there be no chance of find footstep in the mire , for the rise mud ooze swiftly in upon they , but as we at last reach firm ground beyond the morass we all look eagerly for they . but no slight sign of they ever meet our eye . if the earth tell a true story , then Stapleton never reach that island of refuge towards which he struggle through the fog upon that last night . somewhere in the heart of the great Grimpen Mire , down in the foul slime of the huge morass which have suck he in , this cold and cruel- hearted man be forever bury . 

 many trace we find of he in the bog - girt island where he have hide his savage ally . a huge driving - wheel and a shaft half - fill with rubbish show the position of an abandon mine . beside it be the crumble remain of the cottage of the miner , drive away no doubt by the foul reek of the surround swamp . in one of these a staple and chain with a quantity of gnaw bone show where the animal have be confine . a skeleton with a tangle of brown hair adhere to it lie among the debris . 

 " a dog ! " say Holmes . " by Jove , a curly - haired spaniel . poor Mortimer will never see his pet again . well , I do not know that this place contain any secret which we have not already fath- ome . he could hide his hound , but he could not hush its voice , and hence come those cry which even in daylight be not pleasant to hear . on an emergency he could keep the hound in the out - house at Merripit , but it be always a risk , and it be only on the supreme day , which he regard as the end of all his effort , that he dare do it . this paste in the tin be no doubt the luminous mixture with which the creature be daub . it be suggest , of course , by the story of the family hell - hound , and by the desire to frighten old Sir Charles to death . no wonder the poor devil of a convict run and scream , even as our friend do , and as we ourselves might have do , when he see such a creature bounding through the darkness of the moor upon his track . it be a cunning device , for , apart from the chance of drive your victim to his death , what peasant would venture to inquire too closely into such a creature should he get sight of it , as many have do , upon the moor ? I say it in London , Watson , and I say it again now , that never yet have we help to hunt down a more dangerous man than he who be lie yonder " - he sweep his long arm towards the huge mottled expanse of green- splotch bog which stretch away until it merge into the russet slope of the moor . 

  chapter 15 

 a retrospection 

  it be the end of November , and Holmes and I sit , upon a raw and foggy night , on either side of a blaze fire in our sitting- room in Baker Street . since the tragic upshot of our visit to Devonshire he have be engage in two affair of the utmost importance , in the first of which he have expose the atrocious conduct of Colonel Upwood in connection with the famous card scandal of the Nonpareil Club , while in the second he have defend the unfortunate Mme . Montpensier from the charge of murder which hang over she in connection with the death of her step - daughter , Mlle . Carere , the young lady who , as it will be remember , be find six month later alive and marry in New York . my friend be in excellent spirit over the success which have attend a succession of difficult and important case , so that I be able to induce he to discuss the detail of the Baskerville mystery . I have wait patiently for the opportunity for I be aware that he would never permit case to overlap , and that his clear and logical mind would not be draw from its present work to dwell upon memory of the past . Sir Henry and Dr. Mortimer be , however , in London , on their way to that long voyage which have be recommend for the restoration of his shattered nerve . they have call upon we that very after- noon , so that it be natural that the subject should come up for discussion . 

 " the whole course of event , " say Holmes , " from the point of view of the man who call himself Stapleton be simple and direct , although to we , who have no mean in the beginning of know the motif of his action and could only learn part of the fact , it all appear exceedingly complex . I have have the advantage of two conversation with Mrs. Stapleton , and the case have now be so entirely clear up that I be not aware that there be anything which have remain a secret to we . you will find a few note upon the matter under the heading b in my indexed list of case . " 

 " perhaps you would kindly give I a sketch of the course of event from memory . " 

 " certainly , though I can not guarantee that I carry all the fact in my mind . intense mental concentration have a curious way of blot out what have pass . the barrister who have his case at his finger ' end and be able to argue with an expert upon his own subject find that a week or two of the court will drive it all out of his head once more . so each of my case displace the last , and Mlle . Carere have blur my recollection of Baskerville Hall . to - morrow some other little problem may be submit to my notice which will in turn dispossess the fair french lady and the infamous Upwood . so far as the case of the hound go , however , I will give you the course of event as nearly as I can , and you will suggest anything which I may have forget . 

 " my inquiry show beyond all question that the family por- trait do not lie , and that this fellow be indeed a Baskerville . he be a son of that Rodger Baskerville , the young brother of Sir Charles , who flee with a sinister reputation to South America , where he be say to have die unmarried . he do , as a matter of fact , marry , and have one child , this fellow , whose real name be the same as his father 's . he marry Beryl Garcia , one of the beauty of Costa Rica , and , have purloin a considerable sum of public money , he change his name to Vandeleur and flee to England , where he establish a school in the east of Yorkshire . his reason for attempt this special line of business be that he have strike up an acquaintance with a consumptive tutor upon the voyage home , and that he have use this man 's ability to make the undertaking a success . Fraser , the tutor , die however , and the school which have begin well sink from disre- pute into infamy . the Vandeleurs find it convenient to change their name to Stapleton , and he bring the remain of his fortune , his scheme for the future , and his taste for entomology to the south of England . I learn at the British Museum that he be a recognize authority upon the subject , and that the name of Vandeleur have be permanently attach to a certain moth which he have , in his Yorkshire day , be the first to describe . 

 " we now come to that portion of his life which have prove to be of such intense interest to we . the fellow have evidently make inquiry and find that only two life intervene between he and a valuable estate . when he go to devonshire his plan be , I believe , exceedingly hazy , but that he mean mischief from the first be evident from the way in which he take his wife with he in the character of his sister . the idea of use she as a decoy be clearly already in his mind , though he may not have be certain how the detail of his plot be to be arrange . he mean in the end to have the estate , and he be ready to use any tool or run any risk for that end . his first act be to establish himself as near to his ancestral home as he could , and his second be to cultivate a friendship with Sir Charles Baskerville and with the neighbour . 

 " the baronet himself tell he about the family hound , and so prepare the way for his own death . Stapleton , as I will continue to call he , know that the old man 's heart be weak and that a shock would kill he . so much he have learn from Dr. Morti- mer . he have hear also that Sir Charles be superstitious and have take this grim legend very seriously . his ingenious mind instantly suggest a way by which the baronet could be do to death , and yet it would be hardly possible to bring home the guilt to the real murderer . 

 " have conceive the idea he proceed to carry it out with considerable finesse . an ordinary schemer would have be content to work with a savage hound . the use of artificial mean to make the creature diabolical be a flash of genius upon his part . the dog he buy in London from Ross and Mangles , the dealer in Fulham Road . it be the strong and most savage in their possession . he bring it down by the North Devon line and walk a great distance over the moor so as to get it home without exciting any remark . he have already on his insect hunt learn to penetrate the Grimpen Mire , and so have find a safe hiding - place for the creature . here he kennel it and wait his chance . 

 " but it be some time come . the old gentleman could not be decoy outside of his ground at night . several time Stapleton lurk about with his hound , but without avail . it be during these fruitless quest that he , or rather his ally , be see by peasant , and that the legend of the demon dog receive a new confirmation . he have hop that his wife might lure Sir Charles to his ruin , but here she prove unexpectedly independent . she would not endeavour to entangle the old gentleman in a senti- mental attachment which might deliver he over to his enemy . threat and even , I be sorry to say , blow refuse to move she . she would have nothing to do with it , and for a time Stapleton be at a deadlock . 

 " he find a way out of his difficulty through the chance that Sir Charles , who have conceive a friendship for he , make he the minister of his charity in the case of this unfortunate woman , Mrs. Laura Lyons . by represent himself as a single man he acquire complete influence over she , and he give she to understand.that in the event of she obtain a divorce from her husband he would marry she . his plan be suddenly bring to a head by his knowledge that Sir Charles be about to leave the Hall on the advice of Dr. Mortimer , with whose opinion he himself pretend to coincide . he must act at once , or his victim might get beyond his power . he therefore put pressure upon Mrs. Lyons to write this letter , implore the old man to give she an interview on the evening before his departure for London . he then , by a specious argument , prevent she from go , and so have the chance for which he have wait . 

 " drive back in the evening from Coombe Tracey he be in time to get his hound , to treat it with his infernal paint , and to bring the beast round to the gate at which he have reason to expect that he would find the old gentleman wait . the dog , incite by its master , spring over the wicket - gate and pursue the unfortunate baronet , who flee scream down the yew alley . in that gloomy tunnel it must indeed have be a dreadful sight to see that huge black creature , with its flaming jaw and blaze eye , bound after its victim . he fall dead at the end of the alley from heart disease and terror . the hound have keep upon the grassy border while the baronet have run down the path , so that no track but the man 's be visible . on see he lie still the creature have probably approach to sniff at he , but find he dead have turn away again . it be then that it leave the print which be actually observe by Dr. Mortimer . the hound be call off and hurry away to its lair in the Grimpen Mire , and a mystery be leave which puzzle the authority , alarm the countryside , and finally bring the case within the scope of our observation . 

 " so much for the death of Sir Charles Baskerville . you perceive the devilish cunning of it , for really it would be almost impossible to make a case against the real murderer . his only accomplice be one who could never give he away , and the grotesque , inconceivable nature of the device only serve to make it more effective . both of the woman concern in the case , Mrs. Stapleton and Mrs. Laura Lyons , be leave with a strong suspicion against Stapleton . Mrs. Stapleton know that he have design upon the old man , and also of the existence of the hound . Mrs. Lyons know neither of these thing , but have be impress by the death occur at the time of an uncancelle appointment which be only know to he . however , both of they be under his influence , and he have nothing to fear from they . the first half of his task be successfully accomplish but the more difficult still remain . 

 " it be possible that Stapleton do not know of the existence of an heir in Canada . in any case he would very soon learn it from his friend Dr. Mortimer , and he be tell by the latter all detail about the arrival of Henry Baskerville . Stapleton 's first idea be that this young stranger from Canada might possibly be do to death in London without come down to Devonshire at all . he distrust his wife ever since she have refuse to help he in lay a trap for the old man , and he dare not leave she long out of his sight for fear he should lose his influence over she . it be for this reason that he take she to London with he . they lodge , I find , at the Mexborough Private Hotel , in Craven Street , which be actually one of those call upon by my agent in search of evidence . here he keep his wife imprison in her room while he , disguise in a beard , follow Dr. Mortimer to Baker Street and afterwards to the station and to the North- umberland Hotel . his wife have some inkling of his plan ; but she have such a fear of her husband - a fear found upon brutal ill - treatment - that she dare not write to warn the man whom she know to be in danger . if the letter should fall into Stapleton 's hand her own life would not be safe . eventually , as we know , she adopt the expedient of cut out the word which would form the message , and address the letter in a disguised hand . it reach the baronet , and give he the first warning of his danger . 

 " it be very essential for Stapleton to get some article of Sir Henry 's attire so that , in case he be drive to use the dog , he might always have the mean of set he upon his track . with characteristic promptness and audacity he set about this at once , and we can not doubt that the boot or chamber - maid of the hotel be well bribe to help he in his design . by chance , however , the first boot which be procure for he be a new one and , therefore , useless for his purpose . he then have it return and obtain another - a most instructive incident , since it prove conclusively to my mind that we be deal with a real hound , as no other supposition could explain this anxiety to obtain an old boot and this indifference to a new one . the more outre and grotesque an incident be the more carefully it deserve to be examine , and the very point which appear to complicate a case be , when duly consider and scientifically handle , the one which be most likely to elucidate it . 

 " then we have the visit from our friend next morning , shad- owe always by Stapleton in the cab . from his knowledge of our room and of my appearance , as well as from his general con- duct , I be inclined to think that Stapleton 's career of crime have be by no mean limit to this single Baskerville affair . it be suggestive that during the last three year there have be four considerable burglary in the west country , for none of which be any criminal ever arrest . the last of these , at Folkestone Court , in May , be remarkable for the cold - blooded pistolling of the page , who surprise the masked and solitary burglar . I can not doubt that Stapleton recruit his wan resource in this fashion , and that for year he have be a desperate and dangerous man . 

 " we have an example of his readiness of resource that morning when he get away from we so successfully , and also of his audacity in send back my own name to I through the cabman . from that moment he understand that I have take over the case in London , and that therefore there be no chance for he there . he return to Dartmoor and await the arrival of the baronet . " 

 " one moment ! " say I. " you have , no doubt , describe the sequence of event correctly , but there be one point which you have leave unexplained . what become of the hound when its master be in London ? " 

 " I have give some attention to this matter and it be undoubt- edly of importance . there can be no question that Stapleton have a confidant , though it be unlikely that he ever place himself in his power by share all his plan with he . there be an old manservant at Merripit House , whose name be Anthony . his connection with the Stapletons can be trace for several year , as far back as the schoolmastere day , so that he must have be aware that his master and mistress be really husband and wife . this man have disappear and have escape from the country . it be suggestive that Anthony be not a common name in England , while Antonio be so in all spanish or spanish - American coun- try . the man , like Mrs. Stapleton herself , speak good English , but with a curious lisping accent . I have myself see this old man cross the Grimpen Mire by the path which Stapleton have mark out . it be very probable , therefore , that in the absence of his master it be he who care for the hound , though he may never have know the purpose for which the beast be use . 

 " the Stapletons then go down to Devonshire , whither they be soon follow by Sir Henry and you . one word now as to how I stand myself at that time . it may possibly recur to your memory that when I examine the paper upon which the print word be fasten I make a close inspection for the water- mark . in do so I hold it within a few inch of my eye , and be conscious of a faint smell of the scent know as white jessamine . there be seventy - five perfume , which it be very necessary that a criminal expert should be able to distinguish from each other , and case have more than once within my own experience depend upon their prompt recognition . the scent suggest the presence of a lady , and already my thought begin to turn towards the stapleton . thus I have make certain of the hound , and have guess at the criminal before ever we go to the west country . 

 " it be my game to watch Stapleton . it be evident , how- ever , that I could not do this if I be with you , since he would be keenly on his guard . I deceive everybody , therefore , your- self include , and I come down secretly when I be suppose to be in London . my hardship be not so great as you imagine , though such trifling detail must never interfere with the investi- gation of a case . I stay for the most part at Coombe Tracey , and only use the hut upon the moor when it be necessary to be near the scene of action . cartwright have come down with I , and in his disguise as a country boy he be of great assistance to I . I be dependent upon he for food and clean linen . when I be watch stapleton , Cartwright be frequently watch you , so that I be able to keep my hand upon all the string . 

 " I have already tell you that your report reach I rapidly , be forward instantly from Baker Street to Coombe Tracey . they be of great service to I , and especially that one inci- dentally truthful piece of biography of Stapleton 's . I be able to establish the identity of the man and the woman and know at last exactly how I stand . the case have be considerably compli- cat through the incident of the escape convict and the rela- tion between he and the Barrymores . this also you clear up in a very effective way , though I have already come to the same conclusion from my own observation . 

 " by the time that you discover I upon the moor I have a complete knowledge of the whole business , but I have not a case which could go to a jury . even Stapleton 's attempt upon Sir Henry that night which end in the death of the unfortunate convict do not help we much in prove murder against our man . there seem to be no alternative but to catch he red - handed , and to do so we have to use Sir Henry , alone and apparently unprotected , as a bait . we do so , and at the cost of a severe shock to our client we succeed in complete our case and drive Stapleton to his destruction . that Sir Henry should have be expose to this be , I must confess , a reproach to my management of the case , but we have no mean of foresee the terrible and paralyze spectacle which the beast present , nor could we predict the fog which enable he to burst upon we at such short notice . we succeed in our object at a cost which both the specialist and Dr. Mortimer assure I will be a tempo- rary one . a long journey may enable our friend to recover not only from his shattered nerve but also from his wound feel- ing . his love for the lady be deep and sincere , and to he the sad part of all this black business be that he should have be deceive by she . 

 " it only remain to indicate the part which she have play throughout . there can be no doubt that Stapleton exercise an influence over she which may have be love or may have be fear , or very possibly both , since they be by no mean incom- patible emotion . it be , at least , absolutely effective . at his command she consent to pass as his sister , though he find the limit of his power over she when he endeavour to make she the direct accessory to murder . she be ready to warn Sir Henry so far as she could without implicate her husband , and again and again she try to do so . Stapleton himself seem to have be capable of jealousy , and when he see the baronet pay court to the lady , even though it be part of his own plan , still he could not help interrupt with a passionate out- burst which reveal the fiery soul which his self - contain manner so cleverly conceal . by encourage the intimacy he make it certain that Sir Henry would frequently come to Merripit House and that he would soon or later get the opportunity which he desire . on the day of the crisis , however , his wife turn suddenly against he . she have learn something of the death of the convict , and she know that the hound be be keep in the outhouse on the evening that Sir Henry be come to dinner . she tax her husband with his intended crime , and a furious scene follow in which he show she for the first time that she have a rival in his love . her fidelity turn in an instant to bitter hatred , and he see that she would betray he . he tie she up , therefore , that she might have no chance of warn Sir Henry , and he hop , no doubt , that when the whole countryside put down the baronet 's death to the curse of his family , as they certainly would do , he could win his wife back to accept an accomplished fact and to keep silent upon what she know . in this I fancy that in any case he make a miscalculation , and that , if we have not be there , his doom would none the less have be seal . a woman of spanish blood do not condone such an irjury so lightly . and now , my dear Watson , without refer to my note , I can not give you a more detailed account of this curious case . I do not know that anything essential have be leave unexplained . " 

 " he could not hope to frighten Sir Henry to death as he have do the old uncle with his bogie hound . " 

 " the beast be savage and half - starve . if its appearance do not frighten its victim to death , at least it would paralyze the resistance which might be offer . " 

 " no doubt . there only remain one difficulty . if Stapleton come into the succession , how could he explain the fact that he , the heir , have be live unannounced under another name so close to the property ? how could he claim it without cause suspicion and inquiry ? " 

 " it be a fomlidable difficulty , and I fear that you ask too much when you expect I to solve it . the past and the present be within the field of my inquiry , but what a man may do in the future be a hard question to answer . Mrs. Stapleton have hear her husband discuss the problem on several occasion . there be three possible course . he might claim the property from South America , establish his identity before the british authority there and so obtain the fortune without ever come to England at all , or he might adopt an elaborate disguise during the short time that he need be in London ; or , again , he might furnish an accomplice with the proof and paper , put he in as heir , and retain a claim upon some proportion of his income . we can not doubt from what we know of he that he would have find some way out of the difficulty . and now , my dear Watson , we have have some week of severe work , and for one evening , I think , we may turn our thought into more pleasant channel . I have a box for ' Les huguenot . ' have you hear the De Reszkes ? might I trouble you then to be ready in half an hour , and we can stop at Marcini 's for a little dinner on the way ? " 

 
