ADAM BEDE 
 by George Eliot 
 Book one 
 chapter I 
 the Workshop 
 with a single drop of ink for a mirror , the egyptian sorcerer undertake 
 to reveal to any chance comer far - reach vision of the past . this be 
 what I undertake to do for you , reader . with this drop of ink at the 
 end of my pen , I will show you the roomy workshop of Mr. Jonathan Burge , 
 carpenter and builder , in the village of Hayslope , as it appear on the 
 eighteenth of June , in the year of our Lord 1799 . 
 the afternoon sun be warm on the five workman there , busy upon door 
 and window - frame and wainscoting . a scent of pine - wood from a tentlike 
 pile of plank outside the open door mingle itself with the scent of 
 the eld - bush which be spread their summer snow close to 
 the open window opposite ; the slanting sunbeam shine through the 
 transparent shaving that fly before the steady plane , and light up the 
 fine grain of the oak panelling which stand prop against the wall . 
 on a heap of those soft shaving a rough , grey shepherd dog have 
 make himself a pleasant bed , and be lie with his nose between his 
 fore - paw , occasionally wrinkle his brow to cast a glance at the 
 tall of the five workman , who be carve a shield in the centre of 
 a wooden mantelpiece . it be to this workman that the strong barytone 
 belong which be hear above the sound of plane and hammer singing - 
 Awake , my soul , and with the sun 
 Thy daily stage of duty run ; 
 shake off dull sloth ... 
 here some measurement be to be take which require more concentrated 
 attention , and the sonorous voice subside into a low whistle ; but it 
 presently break out again with renew vigour - 
 let all thy converse be sincere , 
 thy conscience as the noonday clear . 
 such a voice could only come from a broad chest , and the broad chest 
 belong to a large - boned , muscular man nearly six foot high , with a 
 back so flat and a head so well poise that when he draw himself up 
 to take a more distant survey of his work , he have the air of a soldier 
 stand at ease . the sleeve roll up above the elbow show an arm 
 that be likely to win the prize for feat of strength ; yet the long 
 supple hand , with its broad finger - tip , look ready for work of 
 skill . in his tall stalwartness Adam Bede be a Saxon , and justify his 
 name ; but the jet - black hair , make the more noticeable by its contrast 
 with the light paper cap , and the keen glance of the dark eye that 
 shine from under strongly mark , prominent and mobile eyebrow , 
 indicate a mixture of celtic blood . the face be large and roughly 
 hew , and when in repose have no other beauty than such as belong to an 
 expression of good - humour honest intelligence . 
 it be clear at a glance that the next workman be Adam 's brother . he be 
 nearly as tall ; he have the same type of feature , the same hue of hair 
 and complexion ; but the strength of the family likeness seem only to 
 render more conspicuous the remarkable difference of expression both in 
 form and face . Seth 's broad shoulder have a slight stoop ; his eye 
 be grey ; his eyebrow have less prominence and more repose than his 
 brother 's ; and his glance , instead of be keen , be confide and 
 benign . he have throw off his paper cap , and you see that his hair be 
 not thick and straight , like Adam 's , but thin and wavy , allow you 
 to discern the exact contour of a coronal arch that predominate very 
 decidedly over the brow . 
 the idle tramp always feel sure they could get a copper from Seth ; they 
 scarcely ever speak to Adam . 
 the concert of the tool and Adam 's voice be at last break by Seth , 
 who , lift the door at which he have be work intently , place 
 it against the wall , and say , " there ! I have   finish my door to - day , 
 anyhow . " 
 the workman all look up ; Jim Salt , a burly , red - haired man know as 
 Sandy Jim , pause from his planing , and Adam say to Seth , with a sharp 
 glance of surprise , " what ! dost think thee'st finish the door ? " 
 " aye , sure , " say Seth , with answering surprise ; " what be awante to't ? " 
 a loud roar of laughter from the other three workman make Seth look 
 round confusedly . Adam do not join in the laughter , but there be a 
 slight smile on his face as he say , in a gentler tone than before , 
 " why , thee'st forget the panel . " 
 the laughter burst out afresh as Seth clap his hand to his head , and 
 colour over brow and crown . 
 " Hoorray ! " shout a small lithe fellow call Wiry Ben , run forward 
 and seize the door . " we will hang up th ' door at fur end o ' th ' shop an ' 
 write on't   ' Seth Bede , the Methody , his work . ' here , Jim , lend 's hould 
 o ' th ' red pot . " 
 " nonsense ! " say Adam . " let it alone , Ben Cranage . you will mayhap be 
 make such a slip yourself some day ; you will laugh o ' th ' other side o ' 
 your mouth then . " 
 " catch I at it , Adam . it will be a good while afore my head 's full o ' th ' 
 methodie , " say Ben . 
 " Nay , but it be often full o ' drink , and that be bad . " 
 Ben , however , have now get the " red pot " in his hand , and be about 
 to begin write his inscription , make , by way of preliminary , an 
 imaginary s in the air . 
 " let it alone , will you ? " Adam call out , lay down his tool , 
 stride up to Ben , and seize his right shoulder . " let it alone , or 
 I will shake the soul out o ' your body . " 
 Ben shake in Adam 's iron grasp , but , like a plucky small man as he be , 
 he do not   mean to give in . with his left hand he snatch the brush from 
 his powerless right , and make a movement as if he would perform the feat 
 of write with his left . in a moment Adam turn he round , seize his 
 other shoulder , and , push he along , pin he against the wall . but 
 now Seth speak . 
 " let be , Addy , let be . Ben will be joke . why , he be I ' the right to 
 laugh at I - I canna help laugh at myself . " 
 " I shall not   loose he till he promise to let the door alone , " say Adam . 
 " Come , Ben , lad , " say Seth , in a persuasive tone , " do not   let us have a 
 quarrel about it . you know Adam will have his way . you may be well try 
 to turn a waggon in a narrow lane . say you will leave the door alone , and 
 make an end on't . " 
 " I binna fright at Adam , " say Ben , " but I donna mind sayin ' as I will 
 let ' t alone at your askin ' , Seth . " 
 " come , that be wise of you , Ben , " say Adam , laugh and relax his 
 grasp . 
 they all return to their work now ; but Wiry Ben , have have the bad 
 in the bodily contest , be bent on retrieve that humiliation by a 
 success in sarcasm . 
 " which be ye thinkin ' on , Seth , " he begin - " the pretty parson 's face or 
 her sarmunt , when ye forget the panel ? " 
 " come and hear she , Ben , " say Seth , good - humouredly ; ' she be go to 
 preach on the Green to - night ; happen ye'd get something to think on 
 yourself then , instead o ' those wicked song you be so fond on . ye might 
 get religion , and that ' ud be the good day 's earning y ' ever make . " 
 " all I ' good time for that , Seth ; I will think about that when I be a - go 
 to settle I ' life ; bachelor do not   want such heavy earnin 's . happen 
 I shall do the coortin ' an ' the religion both together , as ye do , Seth ; 
 but ye wouldna ha ' I get convert an ' chop in atween ye an ' the pretty 
 preacher , an ' carry her aff ? " 
 " no fear o ' that , Ben ; she be neither for you nor for I to win , I doubt . 
 only you come and hear she , and you will not   speak lightly on she again . " 
 " well , I be half a mind t ' ha ' a look at she to - night , if there be not 
 good company at th ' Holly Bush . what will she take for her text ? happen ye 
 can tell I , Seth , if so be as I shouldna come up I ' time for't . will't 
 be - what come ye out for to see ? a prophetess ? yea , I say unto you , and 
 more than a prophetess - a uncommon pretty young woman . " 
 " Come , Ben , " say Adam , rather sternly , " you let the word o ' the Bible 
 alone ; you be go too far now . " 
 " what ! be ye a - turnin ' roun ' , Adam ? I think ye war dead again th ' 
 woman preachin ' , a while agoo ? " 
 " Nay , I be not turnin ' noway . I say nought about the woman preachin ' . 
 I say , you let the Bible alone : you have   get a jest - book , han't   you , as 
 you be rare and proud on ? keep your dirty finger to that . " 
 " why , y ' be gettin ' as big a saint as Seth . Y ' be go to th ' 
 preachin ' to - night , I should think . Ye'll do finely t ' lead the singin ' . 
 but I don ' know what Parson Irwine ' ull say at his gran ' favright Adam 
 Bede a - turnin ' Methody . " 
 " never do you bother yourself about I , Ben . I be not a - go to turn 
 Methodist any more nor you be - though it be like enough you will turn 
 to something bad . Mester Irwine 's get more sense nor to meddle wi ' 
 people 's do as they like in religion . that be between themselves and 
 God , as he be say to I many a time . " 
 " aye , aye ; but he be none so fond o ' your dissenter , for all that . " 
 " maybe ; I be none so fond o ' Josh Tod 's thick ale , but I do not   hinder you 
 from make a fool o ' yourself wi't . " 
 there be a laugh at this thrust of Adam 's , but Seth say , very 
 seriously . " Nay , nay , Addy , thee mustna say as anybody 's religion 's 
 like thick ale . Thee dostna believe but what the dissenter and the 
 Methodists have get the root o ' the matter as well as the church folk . " 
 " Nay , Seth , lad ; I be not for laugh at no man 's religion . let them 
 follow their conscience , that be all . only I think it ' ud be well if 
 their conscience ' ud let them stay quiet I ' the church - there be a deal 
 to be learn there . and there be such a thing as be oversperitial ; we 
 must have something beside Gospel I ' this world . look at the canal , an ' 
 th ' aqueduc 's , an ' th ' coal - pit engine , and Arkwright 's mill there at 
 Cromford ; a man must learn summat beside Gospel to make they thing , I 
 reckon . but t ' hear some o ' them preacher , you would think as a man must be 
 do nothing all 's life but shut 's eye and look what be agoe 
 on inside he . I know a man must have the love o ' God in his soul , and 
 the Bible 's God 's word . but what do the Bible say ? why , it say as God 
 put his sperrit into the workman as build the tabernacle , to make he do 
 all the carve work and thing as want a nice hand . and this be my 
 way o ' look at it : there be the sperrit o ' God in all thing and all 
 times - weekday as well as Sunday - and I ' the great work and invention , 
 and I ' the figuring and the mechanic . and God help we with our 
 headpiece and our hand as well as with our soul ; and if a man do 
 bit o ' job out o ' work hour - build a oven for 's wife to save she 
 from go to the bakehouse , or scrat at his bit o ' garden and make 
 two potato grow istead o ' one , he be do more good , and he be just as 
 near to God , as if he be run after some preacher and a - pray and 
 a - groaning . " 
 " well do , Adam ! " say Sandy Jim , who have pause from his planing to 
 shift his plank while Adam be speak ; " that be the good sarmunt I have 
 hear this long while . by th ' same token , my wife 's be a - plaguin ' on 
 I to build she a oven this twelvemont . " 
 " there be reason in what thee say'st , Adam , " observe Seth , gravely . " but 
 thee know'st thyself as it be hear the preacher thee find'st so much 
 fault with have turn many an idle fellow into an industrious un . it be 
 the preacher as empty th ' alehouse ; and if a man get religion , he will 
 do his work none the bad for that . " 
 " On'y he will lave the panel out o ' th ' door sometimes , eh , Seth ? " say 
 Wiry Ben . 
 " ah , Ben , you have   get a joke again ' I as will last you your life . but it 
 isna religion as be I ' fault there ; it be Seth Bede , as be allay a 
 wool - gathering chap , and religion hasna cure he , the more be the pity . " 
 " Ne'er hee I , Seth , " say Wiry Ben , " y ' be a down - right good - hearte 
 chap , panel or no panel ; an ' ye donna set up your bristle at every 
 bit o ' fun , like some o ' your kin , as be mayhap cliverer . " 
 " Seth , lad , " say Adam , take no notice of the sarcasm against himself , 
 " thee mustna take I unkind . I wasna drive at thee in what I say just 
 now . some be get one way o ' look at thing and some be get another . " 
 " Nay , nay , Addy , thee mean'st I no unkindness , " say Seth , " I know that 
 well enough . thee't like thy dog Gyp - thee bark'st at I sometimes , but 
 thee allay lick'st my hand after . " 
 all hand work on in silence for some minute , until the church clock 
 begin to strike six . before the first stroke have die away , Sandy Jim 
 have loose his plane and be reach his jacket ; Wiry Ben have leave a 
 screw half drive in , and throw his screwdriver into his tool - basket ; 
 Mum Taft , who , true to his name , have keep silence throughout the 
 previous conversation , have fling down his hammer as he be in the act 
 of lift it ; and Seth , too , have straighten his back , and be put 
 out his hand towards his paper cap . Adam alone have go on with his work 
 as if nothing have happen . but observe the cessation of the tool , he 
 look up , and say , in a tone of indignation , " look there , now ! I can not 
 abide to see man throw away their tool I ' that way , the minute the 
 clock begin to strike , as if they take no pleasure I ' their work and 
 be afraid o ' do a stroke too much . " 
 Seth look a little conscious , and begin to be slow in his 
 preparation for go , but Mum Taft break silence , and say , " aye , aye , 
 Adam lad , ye talk like a young un . when y ' be six - an'-forty like I , 
 istid o ' six - an'-twenty , ye wonna be so flush o ' workin ' for nought . " 
 " nonsense , " say Adam , still wrathful ; " what be age get to do with it , I 
 wonder ? ye arena get stiff yet , I reckon . I hate to see a man 's arm 
 drop down as if he be shoot , before the clock 's fairly strike , just as 
 if he would never a bit o ' pride and delight in 's work . the very grindstone 
 ' ull go on turn a bit after you loose it . " 
 " Bodderation , Adam ! " exclaim Wiry Ben ; " lave a chap aloon , will ' ee ? 
 Ye war afinde faut wi ' preacher a while agoo - y ' be fond enough o ' 
 preachin ' yoursen . Ye may like work well nor play , but I like play 
 well nor work ; that will ' commodate ye - it lave ye th ' more to do . " 
 with this exit speech , which he consider effective , Wiry Ben 
 shoulder his basket and leave the workshop , quickly follow by Mum 
 Taft and Sandy Jim . Seth linger , and look wistfully at Adam , as if 
 he expect he to say something . 
 " Shalt go home before thee go'st to the preaching ? " Adam ask , look 
 up . 
 " Nay ; I have   get my hat and thing at Will Maskery 's . I shall not   be home 
 before go for ten . I will happen see Dinah Morris safe home , if she be 
 willing . there 's nobody come with she from Poyser 's , thee know'st . " 
 " then I will tell mother not to look for thee , " say Adam . 
 " Thee artna go to Poyser 's thyself to - night ? " say Seth rather 
 timidly , as he turn to leave the workshop . 
 " Nay , I be go to th ' school . " 
 Hitherto Gyp have keep his comfortable bed , only lift up his head and 
 watch Adam more closely as he notice the other workman depart . 
 but no soon do Adam put his ruler in his pocket , and begin to twist 
 his apron round his waist , than Gyp run forward and look up in his 
 master 's face with patient expectation . if Gyp have have a tail he would 
 doubtless have wag it , but be destitute of that vehicle for his 
 emotion , he be like many other worthy personage , destine to appear 
 more phlegmatic than nature have make he . 
 " what ! art ready for the basket , eh , Gyp ? " say Adam , with the same 
 gentle modulation of voice as when he speak to Seth . 
 Gyp jump and give a short bark , as much as to say , " of course . " poor 
 fellow , he have not a great range of expression . 
 the basket be the one which on workday hold Adam 's and Seth 's dinner ; 
 and no official , walk in procession , could look more resolutely 
 unconscious of all acquaintance than Gyp with his basket , trot at 
 his master 's heel . 
 on leave the workshop Adam lock the door , take the key out , and 
 carry it to the house on the other side of the woodyard . it be a 
 low house , with smooth grey thatch and buff wall , look pleasant 
 and mellow in the evening light . the leaded window be bright and 
 speckless , and the door - stone be as clean as a white boulder at ebb 
 tide . on the door - stone stand a clean old woman , in a dark - strip linen 
 gown , a red kerchief , and a linen cap , talk to some speckled fowl 
 which appear to have be draw towards she by an illusory expectation 
 of cold potato or barley . the old woman 's sight seem to be dim , for 
 she do not recognize Adam till he say , " here be the key , dolly ; lay it 
 down for I in the house , will you ? " 
 " aye , sure ; but wunna ye come in , Adam ? Miss Mary 's I ' th ' house , and 
 Mester Burge ' ull be back anon ; he would be glad t ' ha ' ye to supper wi'm , 
 I will be 's warrand . " 
 " no , dolly , thank you ; I be off home . good evening . " 
 Adam hasten with long stride , Gyp close to his heel , out of the 
 workyard , and along the highroad lead away from the village and down 
 to the valley . as he reach the foot of the slope , an elderly horseman , 
 with his portmanteau strap behind he , stop his horse when Adam 
 have pass he , and turn round to have another long look at the 
 stalwart workman in paper cap , leather breech , and dark - blue worst 
 stocking . 
 Adam , unconscious of the admiration he be exciting , presently strike 
 across the field , and now break out into the tune which have all day 
 long be run in his head : 
 let all thy converse be sincere , 
 thy conscience as the noonday clear ; 
 for God 's all - see eye survey 
 Thy secret thought , thy work and way . 
 Chapter II 
 the preaching 
 about a quarter to seven there be an unusual appearance of excitement 
 in the village of Hayslope , and through the whole length of its 
 little street , from the Donnithorne Arms to the churchyard gate , the 
 inhabitant have evidently be draw out of their house by something 
 more than the pleasure of lounge in the evening sunshine . the 
 Donnithorne Arms stand at the entrance of the village , and a small 
 farmyard and stackyard which flank it , indicate that there be a 
 pretty take of land attach to the inn , give the traveller a promise 
 of good feed for himself and his horse , which might well console he 
 for the ignorance in which the weather - beat sign leave he as to the 
 heraldic bearing of that ancient family , the donnithorne . Mr. Casson , 
 the landlord , have be for some time stand at the door with his hand 
 in his pocket , balance himself on his heel and toe and look 
 towards a piece of unenclosed ground , with a maple in the middle of it , 
 which he know to be the destination of certain grave - look man and 
 woman whom he have observe pass at interval . 
 Mr. Casson 's person be by no mean of that common type which can be 
 allow to pass without description . on a front view it appear to 
 consist principally of two sphere , bear about the same relation to 
 each other as the earth and the moon : that be to say , the low sphere 
 might be say , at a rough guess , to be thirteen time large than the 
 upper which naturally perform the function of a mere satellite and 
 tributary . but here the resemblance cease , for Mr. Casson 's head be 
 not at all a melancholy - look satellite nor be it a ' spotty globe , " 
 as Milton have irreverently call the moon ; on the contrary , no head and 
 face could look more sleek and healthy , and its expression - which be 
 chiefly confine to a pair of round and ruddy cheek , the slight 
 knot and interruption form the nose and eye be scarcely worth 
 mention - be one of jolly contentment , only temper by that sense of 
 personal dignity which usually make itself feel in his attitude and 
 bearing . this sense of dignity could hardly be consider excessive in 
 a man who have be butler to " the family " for fifteen year , and who , in 
 his present high position , be necessarily very much in contact with 
 his inferior . how to reconcile his dignity with the satisfaction of his 
 curiosity by walk towards the Green be the problem that Mr. Casson 
 have be revolve in his mind for the last five minute ; but when 
 he have partly solve it by take his hand out of his pocket , and 
 thrust they into the armhole of his waistcoat , by throw his 
 head on one side , and provide himself with an air of contemptuous 
 indifference to whatever might fall under his notice , his thought be 
 divert by the approach of the horseman whom we lately see pausing to 
 have another look at our friend Adam , and who now pull up at the door 
 of the Donnithorne Arms . 
 " take off the bridle and give he a drink , ostler , " say the traveller 
 to the lad in a smock - frock , who have come out of the yard at the sound 
 of the horse 's hoof . 
 " why , what be up in your pretty village , landlord ? " he continue , get 
 down . " there seem to be quite a stir . " 
 " it be a Methodis ' preaching , sir ; it be be gev hout as a young woman 's 
 a - go to preach on the Green , " answer Mr. Casson , in a treble and 
 wheezy voice , with a slightly mince accent . " will you please to step 
 in , sir , an ' tek somethink ? " 
 " no , I must be get on to Rosseter . I only want a drink for my horse . 
 and what do your parson say , I wonder , to a young woman preach just 
 under his nose ? " 
 " Parson Irwine , sir , do not   live here ; he live at Brox'on , over the 
 hill there . the parsonage here be a tumble - down place , sir , not fit for 
 gentry to live in . he come here to preach of a Sunday afternoon , sir , 
 an ' put up his hoss here . it be a grey cob , sir , an ' he set great store 
 by't . he be allay put up his hoss here , sir , iver since before I he d the 
 Donnithorne Arms . I be not this countryman , you may tell by my tongue , 
 sir . they be cur'ous talker I ' this country , sir ; the gentry 's hard 
 work to hunderstand them . I be bring hup among the gentry , sir , an ' 
 get the turn o ' their tongue when I be a bye . why , what do you think 
 the folk here say for ' hevn't   you ? ' - the gentry , you know , say , 
 ' hevn't   you ' - well , the people about here say ' hanna yey . ' it be what 
 they call the dileck as be speak hereabout , sir . that be what I have   hear 
 Squire Donnithorne say many a time ; it be the dileck , say he . " 
 " aye , aye , " say the strange , smile . " I know it very well . but you have 
 not get many Methodists about here , surely - in this agricultural spot ? I 
 should have think there would hardly be such a thing as a Methodist to 
 be find about here . you be all farmer , be not   you ? the Methodists can 
 seldom lay much hold on they . " 
 " why , sir , there be a pretty lot o ' workman round about , sir . there be 
 Mester Burge as own the timber - yard over there , he undertek a good bit 
 o ' build an ' repair . an ' there be the stone - pit not far off . there be 
 plenty of emply I ' this countryside , sir . an ' there be a fine batch o ' 
 methodisse at Treddles'on - that be the market town about three mile 
 off - you will maybe ha ' come through it , sir . there be pretty nigh a score 
 of them on the Green now , as come from there . that be where our people 
 get it from , though there be only two man of them in all Hayslope : that be 
 will Maskery , the wheelwright , and Seth Bede , a young man as work at 
 the carpenterin ' . " 
 " the preacher come from Treddleston , then , do she ? " 
 " Nay , sir , she come out o ' Stonyshire , pretty nigh thirty mile off . 
 but she be a - visitin ' hereabout at Mester Poyser 's at the Hall Farm - it be 
 they barn an ' big walnut - trees , right away to the left , sir . she be own 
 niece to Poyser 's wife , an ' they will be fine an ' vex at she for make 
 a fool of herself I ' that way . but I have   hear as there be no holding 
 these Methodisses when the maggit 's once get I ' their head : many of them 
 go stark starin ' mad wi ' their religion . though this young woman 's 
 quiet enough to look at , by what I can make out ; I have   not see she 
 myself . " 
 " well , I wish I have time to wait and see she , but I must get on . I have 
 be out of my way for the last twenty minute to have a look at that 
 place in the valley . it be Squire Donnithorne 's , I suppose ? " 
 " yes , sir , that be Donnithorne Chase , that be . fine hoak there , be not 
 there , sir ? I should know what it be , sir , for I have   live butler there 
 a - go I ' fifteen year . it be Captain Donnithorne as be th ' heir , 
 sir - Squire Donnithorne 's grandson . he will be comin ' of hage this 
 ' ay-'arvest , sir , an ' we shall hev fine doin 's . he own all the land 
 about here , sir , Squire Donnithorne do . " 
 " well , it be a pretty spot , whoever may own it , " say the traveller , 
 mount his horse ; " and one meet some fine strap fellow about 
 too . I meet as fine a young fellow as ever I see in my life , about 
 half an hour ago , before I come up the hill - a carpenter , a tall , 
 broad - shoulder fellow with black hair and black eye , march along 
 like a soldier . we want such fellow as he to lick the French . " 
 " Aye , sir , that be Adam Bede , that is , I will be bind - Thias Bede 's son 
 everybody know he hereabout . he be an uncommon clever stiddy fellow , 
 an ' wonderful strong . Lord bless you , sir - if you will hexcuse I for 
 say so - he can walk forty mile a - day , an ' lift a matter o ' sixty 
 ston ' . he be an uncommon favourite wi ' the gentry , sir : captain 
 Donnithorne and Parson Irwine mek a fine fuss wi ' he . but he be a 
 little lift up an ' peppery - like . " 
 " well , good evening to you , landlord ; I must get on . " 
 " your servant , sir ; good evenin ' . " 
 the traveller put his horse into a quick walk up the village , but when 
 he approach the Green , the beauty of the view that lie on his right 
 hand , the singular contrast present by the group of villager with 
 the knot of Methodists near the maple , and perhaps yet more , curiosity 
 to see the young female preacher , prove too much for his anxiety to get 
 to the end of his journey , and he pause . 
 the Green lie at the extremity of the village , and from it the road 
 branch off in two direction , one lead far up the hill by the 
 church , and the other wind gently down towards the valley . on the 
 side of the Green that lead towards the church , the broken line of 
 thatch cottage be continue nearly to the churchyard gate ; but on 
 the opposite northwestern side , there be nothing to obstruct the view 
 of gently swell meadow , and woode valley , and dark mass of distant 
 hill . that rich undulating district of Loamshire to which Hayslope 
 belong lie close to a grim outskirt of Stonyshire , overlook by its 
 barren hill as a pretty bloom sister may sometimes be see link in 
 the arm of a rugged , tall , swarthy brother ; and in two or three hour ' 
 ride the traveller might exchange a bleak treeless region , intersect 
 by line of cold grey stone , for one where his road wind under the 
 shelter of wood , or up swell hill , muffle with hedgerow and long 
 meadow - grass and thick corn ; and where at every turn he come upon some 
 fine old country - seat nestle in the valley or crown the slope , some 
 homestead with its long length of barn and its cluster of golden rick , 
 some grey steeple look out from a pretty confusion of tree and 
 thatch and dark - red tile . it be just such a picture as this last 
 that Hayslope Church have make to the traveller as he begin to mount the 
 gentle slope lead to its pleasant upland , and now from his station 
 near the Green he have before he in one view nearly all the other 
 typical feature of this pleasant land . high up against the horizon be 
 the huge conical mass of hill , like giant mound intend to fortify 
 this region of corn and grass against the keen and hungry wind of the 
 north ; not distant enough to be clothe in purple mystery , but with 
 sombre greenish side visibly speck with sheep , whose motion be only 
 reveal by memory , not detect by sight ; woo from day to day by the 
 change hour , but respond with no change in themselves - leave for 
 ever grim and sullen after the flush of morning , the wing gleam of 
 the April noonday , the parting crimson glory of the ripen summer 
 sun . and directly below they the eye rest on a more advanced line of 
 hang wood , divide by bright patch of pasture or furrow crop , 
 and not yet deepen into the uniform leafy curtain of high summer , but 
 still show the warm tint of the young oak and the tender green of 
 the ash and lime . then come the valley , where the wood grow thick , 
 as if they have roll down and hurry together from the patch leave 
 smooth on the slope , that they might take the well care of the tall 
 mansion which lift its parapet and send its faint blue summer smoke 
 among they . Doubtless there be a large sweep of park and a broad glassy 
 pool in front of that mansion , but the swell slope of meadow would 
 not let our traveller see they from the village green . he see instead 
 a foreground which be just as lovely - the level sunlight lie like 
 transparent gold among the gently curve stem of the feather grass 
 and the tall red sorrel , and the white ambel of the hemlock line 
 the bushy hedgerow . it be that moment in summer when the sound of 
 the scythe be whet make we cast more lingering look at the 
 flower - sprinkle tress of the meadow . 
 he might have see other beauty in the landscape if he have turn 
 a little in his saddle and look eastward , beyond Jonathan Burge 's 
 pasture and woodyard towards the green corn - field and walnut - tree of 
 the Hall Farm ; but apparently there be more interest for he in the 
 live group close at hand . every generation in the village be there , 
 from old " Feyther Taft " in his brown worst night - cap , who be bent 
 nearly double , but seem tough enough to keep on his leg a long while , 
 lean on his short stick , down to the baby with their little round 
 head loll forward in quilt linen cap . now and then there be a 
 new arrival ; perhaps a slouch labourer , who , have eat his supper , 
 come out to look at the unusual scene with a slow bovine gaze , willing 
 to hear what any one have to say in explanation of it , but by no mean 
 excited enough to ask a question . but all take care not to join the 
 Methodists on the Green , and identify themselves in that way with the 
 expectant audience , for there be not one of they that would not have 
 disclaim the imputation of have come out to hear the " preacher 
 woman " - they have only come out to see " what war a - go on , like . " the 
 man be chiefly gather in the neighbourhood of the blacksmith 's shop . 
 but do not imagine they gather in a knot . villager never swarm : a 
 whisper be unknown among they , and they seem almost as incapable of an 
 undertone as a cow or a stag . your true rustic turn his back on his 
 interlocutor , throw a question over his shoulder as if he mean to 
 run away from the answer , and walk a step or two far off when the 
 interest of the dialogue culminate . so the group in the vicinity of the 
 blacksmith 's door be by no mean a close one , and form no screen in 
 front of Chad Cranage , the blacksmith himself , who stand with his black 
 brawny arm fold , lean against the door - post , and occasionally 
 send forth a bellowing laugh at his own joke , give they a 
 mark preference over the sarcasm of Wiry Ben , who have renounce the 
 pleasure of the Holly Bush for the sake of see life under a new 
 form . but both style of wit be treat with equal contempt by Mr. 
 Joshua Rann . Mr. Rann 's leathern apron and subdue griminess can leave 
 no one in any doubt that he be the village shoemaker ; the thrust out 
 of his chin and stomach and the twirling of his thumb be more subtle 
 indication , intend to prepare unwary stranger for the discovery that 
 they be in the presence of the parish clerk . " Old Joshway , " as he 
 be irreverently call by his neighbour , be in a state of simmer 
 indignation ; but he have not yet open his lip except to say , in a 
 resound bass undertone , like the tuning of a violoncello , " Sehon , 
 king of the Amorites ; for his mercy endureth for ever ; and Og the king 
 of Basan : for his mercy endureth for ever " - a quotation which may seem 
 to have slight bearing on the present occasion , but , as with every other 
 anomaly , adequate knowledge will show it to be a natural sequence . Mr. 
 Rann be inwardly maintain the dignity of the Church in the face of 
 this scandalous irruption of methodism , and as that dignity be bind up 
 with his own sonorous utterance of the response , his argument naturally 
 suggest a quotation from the psalm he have read the last Sunday 
 afternoon . 
 the strong curiosity of the woman have draw they quite to the edge of 
 the Green , where they could examine more closely the Quakerlike costume 
 and odd deportment of the female Methodists . underneath the maple there 
 be a small cart , which have be bring from the wheelwright 's to serve 
 as a pulpit , and round this a couple of bench and a few chair have 
 be place . some of the Methodists be rest on these , with their 
 eye close , as if wrapt in prayer or meditation . other choose to 
 continue stand , and have turn their face towards the villager 
 with a look of melancholy compassion , which be highly amusing to Bessy 
 cranage , the blacksmith 's buxom daughter , know to her neighbour as 
 Chad 's Bess , who wonder " why the folk war amakin ' face a that'ns . " 
 Chad 's Bess be the object of peculiar compassion , because her hair , 
 be turn back under a cap which be set at the top of her head , 
 expose to view an ornament of which she be much prouder than of her 
 red cheek - namely , a pair of large round ear - ring with false garnet 
 in they , ornament condemn not only by the Methodists , but by her own 
 cousin and namesake Timothy 's Bess , who , with much cousinly feeling , 
 often wish " they ear - ring " might come to good . 
 Timothy 's Bess , though retain her maiden appellation among her 
 familiar , have long be the wife of Sandy Jim , and possess a handsome 
 set of matronly jewel , of which it be enough to mention the heavy 
 baby she be rock in her arm , and the sturdy fellow of five in 
 knee - breech , and red leg , who have a rusty milk - can round his neck by 
 way of drum , and be very carefully avoid by Chad 's small terrier . 
 this young olive - branch , notorious under the name of Timothy 's Bess 's 
 Ben , be of an inquire disposition , unchecke by any false modesty , 
 have advance beyond the group of woman and child , and be walk 
 round the Methodists , look up in their face with his mouth wide 
 open , and beat his stick against the milk - can by way of musical 
 accompaniment . but one of the elderly woman bend down to take he by 
 the shoulder , with an air of grave remonstrance , Timothy 's Bess 's Ben 
 first kick out vigorously , then take to his heel and seek refuge 
 behind his father 's leg . 
 " ye gallow young dog , " say Sandy Jim , with some paternal pride , " if 
 ye donna keep that stick quiet , I will tek it from ye . what dy'e mane by 
 kickin ' foulk ? " 
 " here ! gie he here to I , Jim , " say Chad Cranage ; " I will tie hir up 
 an ' shoe he as I do th ' hosse . well , Mester Casson , " he continue , 
 as that personage saunter up towards the group of man , " how be ye 
 t ' naight ? be ye coom t ' help groon ? they say folk allay groon when 
 they be hearkenin ' to th ' Methodys , as if they war bad I ' th ' inside . 
 I mane to groon as loud as your cow do th ' other naight , an ' then the 
 praicher ' ull think I be I ' th ' raight way . " 
 " I would advise you not to be up to no nonsense , Chad , " say Mr. Casson , 
 with some dignity ; " Poyser would not   like to hear as his wife 's niece be 
 treat any way disrespectful , for all he may not   be fond of her taking 
 on herself to preach . " 
 " Aye , an ' she be a pleasant - look un too , " say Wiry Ben . " I will stick 
 up for the pretty woman preachin ' ; I know they would persuade I over a deal 
 soon nor th ' ugly man . I shouldna wonder if I turn Methody afore the 
 night 's out , an ' begin to coort the preacher , like Seth Bede . " 
 " why , Seth 's look rether too high , I should think , " say Mr. Casson . 
 " this woman 's kin would not   like she to demean herself to a common 
 carpenter . " 
 " Tchu ! " say Ben , with a long treble intonation , " what be folk 's kin get 
 to do wi't ? not a chip . Poyser 's wife may turn her nose up an ' forget 
 bygone , but this Dinah Morris , they tell I , be as poor as iver she 
 be - work at a mill , an 's much ado to keep hersen . a strappin ' young 
 carpenter as be a ready - make Methody , like Seth , wouldna be a bad match 
 for she . why , poyser make as big a fuss wi ' Adam Bede as if he war a 
 nevvy o ' their own . " 
 " idle talk ! idle talk ! " say Mr. Joshua Rann . " Adam an ' Seth 's two man ; 
 you wunna fit they two wi ' the same last . " 
 " maybe , " say Wiry Ben , contemptuously , " but Seth 's the lad for I , 
 though he war a Methody twice o'er . I be fair beat wi ' Seth , for I have 
 be teasin ' he iver sin ' we have   be workin ' together , an ' he bear I 
 no more malice nor a lamb . an ' he be a stout - hearted feller too , for when 
 we see the old tree all afire a - comin ' across the field one night , an ' 
 we think as it war a boguy , Seth make no more ado , but he up to't 
 as bold as a constable . why , there he come out o ' will Maskery 's ; an ' 
 there be Will hisself , lookin ' as meek as if he couldna knock a nail o ' 
 the head for fear o ' hurtin't . an ' there be the pretty preacher woman ! my 
 eye , she be get her bonnet off . I mun go a bit near . " 
 several of the man follow Ben 's lead , and the traveller push his 
 horse on to the Green , as Dinah walk rather quickly and in advance of 
 her companion towards the cart under the maple - tree . while she be near 
 Seth 's tall figure , she look short , but when she have mount the cart , 
 and be away from all comparison , she seem above the middle height of 
 woman , though in reality she do not exceed it - an effect which be due 
 to the slimness of her figure and the simple line of her black stuff 
 dress . the stranger be strike with surprise as he see her approach and 
 mount the cart - surprise , not so much at the feminine delicacy of 
 her appearance , as at the total absence of self - consciousness in her 
 demeanour . he have make up his mind to see her advance with a measured 
 step and a demure solemnity of countenance ; he have feel sure that she 
 face would be mantle with the smile of conscious saintship , or 
 else charge with denunciatory bitterness . he know but two type of 
 Methodist - the ecstatic and the bilious . but Dinah walk as simply as 
 if she be go to market , and seem as unconscious of her outward 
 appearance as a little boy : there be no blush , no tremulousness , which 
 say , " I know you think I a pretty woman , too young to preach " ; no 
 cast up or down of the eyelid , no compression of the lip , no 
 attitude of the arm that say , " but you must think of I as a saint . " 
 she hold no book in her ungloved hand , but let they hang down lightly 
 cross before she , as she stand and turn her grey eye on the people . 
 there be no keenness in the eye ; they seem rather to be shed 
 love than make observation ; they have the liquid look which tell that 
 the mind be full of what it have to give out , rather than impress by 
 external object . she stand with her left hand towards the descending 
 sun , and leafy bough screen she from its ray ; but in this sober 
 light the delicate colouring of her face seem to gather a calm 
 vividness , like flower at evening . it be a small oval face , of a 
 uniform transparent whiteness , with an egg - like line of cheek and chin , 
 a full but firm mouth , a delicate nostril , and a low perpendicular brow , 
 surmount by a rise arch of parting between smooth lock of pale 
 reddish hair . the hair be draw straight back behind the ear , and 
 cover , except for an inch or two above the brow , by a net Quaker cap . 
 the eyebrow , of the same colour as the hair , be perfectly horizontal 
 and firmly pencil ; the eyelash , though no darker , be long and 
 abundant - nothing be leave blur or unfinishe . it be one of those 
 face that make one think of white flower with light touch of colour 
 on their pure petal . the eye have no peculiar beauty , beyond that of 
 expression ; they look so simple , so candid , so gravely loving , that 
 no accuse scowl , no light sneer could help melt away before their 
 glance . Joshua Rann give a long cough , as if he be clear his throat 
 in order to come to a new understanding with himself ; Chad Cranage 
 lift up his leather skull - cap and scratch his head ; and Wiry Ben 
 wonder how Seth have the pluck to think of court she . 
 " a sweet woman , " the stranger say to himself , " but surely nature never 
 mean she for a preacher . " 
 perhaps he be one of those who think that nature have theatrical 
 property and , with the considerate view of facilitate art and 
 psychology , " make up , " her character , so that there may be no mistake 
 about they . but Dinah begin to speak . 
 " dear friend , " she say in a clear but not loud voice " let we pray for 
 a blessing . " 
 she close her eye , and hang her head down a little continue in the 
 same moderate tone , as if speak to some one quite near she : " saviour 
 of sinner ! when a poor woman laden with sin , go out to the well to 
 draw water , she find Thee sit at the well . she know Thee not ; she 
 have not seek Thee ; her mind be dark ; her life be unholy . but Thou 
 didst speak to she , Thou didst teach she , Thou didst show she that her 
 life lie open before Thee , and yet Thou wast ready to give she that 
 blessing which she have never seek . Jesus , Thou art in the midst of we , 
 and Thou know all man : if there be any here like that poor woman - if 
 their mind be dark , their life unholy - if they have come out not 
 seek Thee , not desire to be teach ; deal with they accord to the 
 free mercy which Thou didst show to her Speak to they , Lord , open their 
 ear to my message , bring their sin to their mind , and make they 
 thirst for that salvation which Thou art ready to give . 
 " Lord , Thou art with Thy people still : they see Thee in the 
 night - watch , and their heart burn within they as Thou talk with 
 they by the way . and Thou art near to those who have not know Thee : 
 open their eye that they may see Thee - see Thee weep over they , 
 and say ' ye will not come unto I that ye might have life ' - see Thee 
 hang on the cross and say , ' Father , forgive they , for they know 
 not what they do ' - see Thee as Thou wilt come again in Thy glory to 
 judge they at the last . amen . " 
 Dinah open her eye again and pause , look at the group of 
 villager , who be now gather rather more closely on her right hand . 
 " dear friend , " she begin , raise her voice a little , " you have all of 
 you be to church , and I think you must have hear the clergyman 
 read these word : ' the Spirit of the Lord be upon I , because he hath 
 anoint I to preach the gospel to the poor . ' Jesus Christ speak those 
 word - he say he come to preach the GOSPEL to the POOR . I do not   know 
 whether you ever think about those word much , but I will tell you 
 when I remember first hear they . it be on just such a sort of 
 evening as this , when I be a little girl , and my aunt as bring I up 
 take I to hear a good man preach out of door , just as we be here . I 
 remember his face well : he be a very old man , and have very long white 
 hair ; his voice be very soft and beautiful , not like any voice I have 
 ever hear before . I be a little girl and scarcely know anything , and 
 this old man seem to I such a different sort of a man from anybody 
 I have ever see before that I think he have perhaps come down from 
 the sky to preach to we , and I say , ' Aunt , will he go back to the sky 
 to - night , like the picture in the Bible ? ' 
 " that man of God be Mr. Wesley , who spend his life in do what our 
 bless Lord do - preach the Gospel to the poor - and he enter into 
 his rest eight year ago . I come to know more about he year after , but 
 I be a foolish thoughtless child then , and I remember only one thing 
 he tell we in his sermon . he tell we as ' Gospel ' mean ' good news . ' the 
 Gospel , you know , be what the Bible tell we about God . 
 " think of that now ! Jesus Christ do really come down from heaven , as 
 I , like a silly child , think Mr. Wesley do ; and what he come down 
 for be to tell good news about God to the poor . why , you and I , dear 
 friend , be poor . we have be bring up in poor cottage and have 
 be rear on oat - cake , and live coarse ; and we have not   be to school 
 much , nor read book , and we do not   know much about anything but what 
 happen just round we . we be just the sort of people that want to 
 hear good news . for when anybody be well off , they do not   much mind about 
 hear news from distant part ; but if a poor man or woman 's in trouble 
 and have hard work to make out a living , they like to have a letter to 
 tell them they have   get a friend as will help them . to be sure , we can not 
 help know something about God , even if we have   never hear the Gospel , 
 the good news that our Saviour bring we . for we know everything come 
 from God : do not   you say almost every day , ' this and that will happen , 
 please God , ' and ' we shall begin to cut the grass soon , please God to 
 send we a little more sunshine ' ? we know very well we be altogether 
 in the hand of God . we do not   bring ourselves into the world , we can not 
 keep ourselves alive while we be sleep ; the daylight , and the wind , 
 and the corn , and the cow to give we milk - everything we have come 
 from God . and he give we our soul and put love between parent and 
 child , and husband and wife . but be that as much as we want to know 
 about God ? we see he be great and mighty , and can do what he will : we 
 be lose , as if we be struggle in great water , when we try to think 
 of he . 
 " but perhaps doubt come into your mind like this : can God take much 
 notice of we poor people ? perhaps he only make the world for the great 
 and the wise and the rich . it do not   cost he much to give we our 
 little handful of victual and bit of clothing ; but how do we know he 
 care for we any more than we care for the worm and thing in the 
 garden , so as we rear our carrot and onion ? will God take care of we 
 when we die ? and have he any comfort for we when we be lame and sick and 
 helpless ? perhaps , too , he be angry with we ; else why do the blight 
 come , and the bad harvest , and the fever , and all sort of pain and 
 trouble ? for our life be full of trouble , and if God send we good , he 
 seem to send bad too . how be it ? how be it ? 
 " ah , dear friend , we be in sad want of good news about God ; and what 
 do other good news signify if we have not   that ? for everything else 
 come to an end , and when we die we leave it all . but God last when 
 everything else be go . what shall we do if he be not our friend ? " 
 then Dinah tell how the good news have be bring , and how the mind 
 of God towards the poor have be make manifest in the life of Jesus , 
 dwell on its lowliness and its act of mercy . 
 " so you see , dear friend , " she go on , " Jesus spend his time almost 
 all in do good to poor people ; he preach out of door to they , and 
 he make friend of poor workman , and teach they and take pain with 
 they . not but what he do good to the rich too , for he be full of love 
 to all man , only he see as the poor be more in want of his help . so 
 he cure the lame and the sick and the blind , and he work miracle to 
 feed the hungry because , he say , he be sorry for they ; and he be 
 very kind to the little child and comfort those who have lose their 
 friend ; and he speak very tenderly to poor sinner that be sorry for 
 their sin . 
 " ah , would not   you love such a man if you see he - if he be here in 
 this village ? what a kind heart he must have ! what a friend he would be 
 to go to in trouble ! how pleasant it must be to be teach by he . 
 " well , dear friend , who be this man ? be he only a good man - a very 
 good man , and no more - like our dear Mr. Wesley , who have be take from 
 us? ... he be the Son of God - ' in the image of the Father , ' the Bible 
 say ; that mean , just like God , who be the beginning and end of all 
 thing - the God we want to know about . so then , all the love that 
 Jesus show to the poor be the same love that God have for we . we can 
 understand what Jesus feel , because he come in a body like ours and 
 speak word such as we speak to each other . we be afraid to think what 
 God be before - the God who make the world and the sky and the thunder 
 and lightning . we could never see he ; we could only see the thing he 
 have make ; and some of these thing be very terrible , so as we might 
 well tremble when we think of he . but our blessed Saviour have show 
 we what God be in a way we poor ignorant people can understand ; he have 
 show we what God 's heart be , what be his feeling towards we . 
 " but let we see a little more about what Jesus come on earth for . 
 another time he say , ' I come to seek and to save that which be lose ' ; 
 and another time , ' I come not to call the righteous but sinner to 
 repentance . ' 
 " the LOST! ... SINNERS! ... ah , dear friend , do that mean you and I ? " 
 Hitherto the traveller have be chain to the spot against his will 
 by the charm of Dinah 's mellow treble tone , which have a variety of 
 modulation like that of a fine instrument touch with the unconscious 
 skill of musical instinct . the simple thing she say seem like 
 novelty , as a melody strike we with a new feeling when we hear 
 it sing by the pure voice of a boyish chorister ; the quiet depth of 
 conviction with which she speak seem in itself an evidence for the 
 truth of her message . he see that she have thoroughly arrest her 
 hearer . the villager have press nearer to she , and there be no 
 long anything but grave attention on all face . she speak slowly , 
 though quite fluently , often pause after a question , or before any 
 transition of idea . there be no change of attitude , no gesture ; the 
 effect of her speech be produce entirely by the inflection of her 
 voice , and when she come to the question , " will God take care of we 
 when we die ? " she utter it in such a tone of plaintive appeal that 
 the tear come into some of the hard eye . the stranger have cease 
 to doubt , as he have do at the first glance , that she could fix the 
 attention of her rougher hearer , but still he wonder whether she 
 could have that power of rouse their more violent emotion , which 
 must surely be a necessary seal of her vocation as a Methodist preacher , 
 until she come to the word , " Lost ! - Sinners ! " when there be a great 
 change in her voice and manner . she have make a long pause before the 
 exclamation , and the pause seem to be fill by agitate thought 
 that show themselves in her feature . her pale face become paler ; 
 the circle under her eye deepen , as they do when tear half - gather 
 without fall ; and the mild love eye take an expression of appalled 
 pity , as if she have suddenly discern a destroy angel hover over 
 the head of the people . her voice become deep and muffle , but there 
 be still no gesture . nothing could be less like the ordinary type of 
 the Ranter than Dinah . she be not preach as she hear other preach , 
 but speak directly from her own emotion and under the inspiration of 
 her own simple faith . 
 but now she have enter into a new current of feeling . her manner become 
 less calm , her utterance more rapid and agitated , as she try to bring 
 home to the people their guilt their wilful darkness , their state of 
 disobedience to God - as she dwelt on the hatefulness of sin , the Divine 
 holiness , and the suffering of the Saviour , by which a way have be 
 open for their salvation . at last it seem as if , in her yearning 
 desire to reclaim the lost sheep , she could not be satisfy by 
 address her hearer as a body . she appeal first to one and then to 
 another , beseech they with tear to turn to God while there be 
 yet time ; paint to they the desolation of their soul , lose in sin , 
 feed on the husk of this miserable world , far away from God their 
 Father ; and then the love of the Saviour , who be wait and watch 
 for their return . 
 there be many a responsive sigh and groan from her fellow - methodist , 
 but the village mind do not easily take fire , and a little smoulder 
 vague anxiety that might easily die out again be the utmost effect 
 Dinah 's preaching have work in they at present . yet no one have 
 retire , except the child and " old Feyther Taft , " who be too deaf 
 to catch many word , have some time ago go back to his inglenook . Wiry 
 Ben be feel very uncomfortable , and almost wish he have not come 
 to hear Dinah ; he think what she say would haunt he somehow . yet he 
 could not   help like to look at she and listen to she , though he dread 
 every moment that she would fix her eye on he and address he in 
 particular . she have already address Sandy Jim , who be now hold the 
 baby to relieve his wife , and the big soft - hearted man have rub away 
 some tear with his fist , with a confused intention of be a well 
 fellow , go less to the Holly Bush down by the stone - pit , and 
 clean himself more regularly of a Sunday . 
 in front of Sandy Jim stand Chad 's Bess , who have show an unwonted 
 quietude and fixity of attention ever since Dinah have begin to speak . 
 not that the matter of the discourse have arrest she at once , for she 
 be lose in a puzzling speculation as to what pleasure and satisfaction 
 there could be in life to a young woman who wear a cap like Dinah 's . 
 give up this inquiry in despair , she take to study Dinah 's nose , 
 eye , mouth , and hair , and wonder whether it be well to have such 
 a sort of pale face as that , or fat red cheek and round black eye like 
 her own . but gradually the influence of the general gravity tell upon 
 she , and she become conscious of what Dinah be say . the gentle 
 tone , the love persuasion , do not touch she , but when the more 
 severe appeal come she begin to be frightened . Poor Bessy have always 
 be consider a naughty girl ; she be conscious of it ; if it be 
 necessary to be very good , it be clear she must be in a bad way . she 
 could not   find her place at church as Sally Rann could , she have often 
 be titter when she " curcheye " to Mr. Irwine ; and these religious 
 deficiency be accompany by a corresponding slackness in the minor 
 moral , for Bessy belong unquestionably to that unsoaped lazy class of 
 feminine character with whom you may venture to " eat an egg , an apple , 
 or a nut . " all this she be generally conscious of , and hitherto have not 
 be greatly ashamed of it . but now she begin to feel very much as if 
 the constable have come to take she up and carry she before the justice 
 for some undefined offence . she have a terrified sense that God , whom she 
 have always think of as very far off , be very near to she , and that 
 Jesus be close by look at she , though she could not see he . for 
 Dinah have that belief in visible manifestation of Jesus , which be 
 common among the Methodists , and she communicate it irresistibly to her 
 hearer : she make they feel that he be among they bodily , and might at 
 any moment show himself to they in some way that would strike anguish 
 and penitence into their heart . 
 " see ! " she exclaim , turn to the left , with her eye fix on a 
 point above the head of the people . " see where our blessed Lord stand 
 and weep and stretch out his arm towards you . hear what he say : 
 ' how often would I have gather you as a hen gathereth her chicken 
 under her wing , and ye would not!' ... and ye would not , " she repeat , 
 in a tone of plead reproach , turn her eye on the people again . 
 " see the print of the nail on his dear hand and foot . it be your sin 
 that make they ! ah ! how pale and wear he look ! he have go through all 
 that great agony in the garden , when his soul be exceed sorrowful 
 even unto death , and the great drop of sweat fall like blood to the 
 ground . they spit upon he and buffet he , they scourge he , they 
 mock he , they lay the heavy cross on his bruised shoulder . then 
 they nail he up . ah , what pain ! his lip be parch with thirst , and 
 they mock he still in this great agony ; yet with those parch lip he 
 pray for they , ' Father , forgive they , for they know not what they do . ' 
 then a horror of great darkness fall upon he , and he feel what sinner 
 feel when they be for ever shut out from God . that be the last drop 
 in the cup of bitterness . ' my God , my God ! ' he cry , ' why hast Thou 
 forsake I ? ' 
 " all this he bear for you ! for you - and you never think of he ; for 
 you - and you turn your back on he ; you do not   care what he have go 
 through for you . yet he be not weary of toil for you : he have rise 
 from the dead , he be pray for you at the right hand of God - ' Father , 
 forgive they , for they know not what they do . ' and he be upon this earth 
 too ; he be among we ; he be there close to you now ; I see his wound 
 body and his look of love . " 
 here Dinah turn to Bessy Cranage , whose bonny youth and evident vanity 
 have touch she with pity . 
 " poor child ! poor child ! he be beseech you , and you do not   listen to 
 he . you think of ear - ring and fine gown and cap , and you never think 
 of the Saviour who die to save your precious soul . your cheek will be 
 shrivel one day , your hair will be grey , your poor body will be thin 
 and tottering ! then you will begin to feel that your soul be not save ; 
 then you will have to stand before God dress in your sin , in your 
 evil temper and vain thought . and Jesus , who stand ready to help you 
 now , will not   help you then ; because you will not   have he to be your Saviour , 
 he will be your judge . now he look at you with love and mercy and say , 
 ' come to I that you may have life ' ; then he will turn away from you , 
 and say , ' depart from I into ever - last fire ! ' " 
 Poor Bessy 's wide - open black eye begin to fill with tear , her great 
 red cheek and lip become quite pale , and her face be distort like a 
 little child 's before a burst of cry . 
 " ah , poor blind child ! " Dinah go on , " think if it should happen to you 
 as it once happen to a servant of God in the day of her vanity . she 
 think of her lace cap and save all her money to buy them ; she think 
 nothing about how she might get a clean heart and a right spirit - she 
 only want to have well lace than other girl . and one day when she 
 put her new cap on and look in the glass , she see a bleed face 
 crown with thorn . that face be look at you now " - here Dinah 
 point to a spot close in front of Bessy - " ah , tear off those folly ! 
 cast they away from you , as if they be sting adder . they be 
 sting you - they be poison your soul - they be drag you down 
 into a dark bottomless pit , where you will sink for ever , and for ever , 
 and for ever , far away from light and God . " 
 Bessy could bear it no long : a great terror be upon she , and 
 wrench her ear - ring from her ear , she throw they down before she , 
 sob aloud . her father , Chad , frighten lest he should be " lay hold 
 on " too , this impression on the rebellious Bess strike he as nothing 
 less than a miracle , walk hastily away and begin to work at his anvil 
 by way of reassure himself . " folk mun ha ' hoss - shoe , praichin ' or 
 no praichin ' : the divil canna lie hould o ' I for that , " he mutter to 
 himself . 
 but now Dinah begin to tell of the joy that be in store for the 
 penitent , and to describe in her simple way the divine peace and love 
 with which the soul of the believer be fill - how the sense of God 's 
 love turn poverty into rich and satisfie the soul so that no uneasy 
 desire vexe it , no fear alarm it : how , at last , the very temptation 
 to sin be extinguish , and heaven be begin upon earth , because no cloud 
 pass between the soul and God , who be its eternal sun . 
 " dear friend , " she say at last , " brother and sister , whom I love 
 as those for whom my Lord have die , believe I , I know what this great 
 blessedness be ; and because I know it , I want you to have it too . I be 
 poor , like you : I have to get my living with my hand ; but no lord nor 
 lady can be so happy as I , if they have not   get the love of God in their 
 soul . think what it be - not to hate anything but sin ; to be full of 
 love to every creature ; to be frighten at nothing ; to be sure that all 
 thing will turn to good ; not to mind pain , because it be our Father 's 
 will ; to know that nothing - no , not if the earth be to be burn up , or 
 the water come and drown we - nothing could part we from God who love 
 we , and who fill our soul with peace and joy , because we be sure that 
 whatever he will be holy , just , and good . 
 " dear friend , come and take this blessedness ; it be offer to you ; it 
 be the good news that Jesus come to preach to the poor . it be not like 
 the rich of this world , so that the more one get the less the rest 
 can have . God be without end ; his love be without end - " 
 its stream the whole creation reach , 
 so plenteous be the store ; 
 enough for all , enough for each , 
 enough for evermore . 
 Dinah have be speak at least an hour , and the redden light of the 
 parting day seem to give a solemn emphasis to her closing word . the 
 stranger , who have be interested in the course of her sermon as if 
 it have be the development of a drama - for there be this sort of 
 fascination in all sincere unpremeditated eloquence , which open to one 
 the inward drama of the speaker 's emotion - now turn his horse aside 
 and pursue his way , while Dinah say , " let we sing a little , dear 
 friend " ; and as he be still wind down the slope , the voice of the 
 Methodists reach he , rise and fall in that strange blending of 
 exultation and sadness which belong to the cadence of a hymn . 
 Chapter III 
 after the Preaching 
 in less than an hour from that time , Seth Bede be walk by Dinah 's 
 side along the hedgerow - path that skirt the pasture and green 
 corn - field which lie between the village and the Hall Farm . Dinah have 
 take off her little Quaker bonnet again , and be hold it in 
 her hand that she might have a free enjoyment of the cool evening 
 twilight , and Seth could see the expression of her face quite clearly as 
 he walk by her side , timidly revolve something he want to say to 
 she . it be an expression of unconscious placid gravity - of absorption 
 in thought that have no connection with the present moment or with her 
 own personality - an expression that be most of all discourage to a 
 lover . her very walk be discourage : it have that quiet elasticity that 
 ask for no support . Seth feel this dimly ; he say to himself , " she be 
 too good and holy for any man , let alone I , " and the word he have 
 be summon rush back again before they have reach his lip . but 
 another thought give he courage : " there be no man could love she well 
 and leave she free to follow the Lord 's work . " they have be silent for 
 many minute now , since they have do talk about Bessy Cranage ; 
 Dinah seem almost to have forget Seth 's presence , and her pace 
 be become so much quick that the sense of their be only a few 
 minute ' walk from the yard - gate of the Hall Farm at last give Seth 
 courage to speak . 
 " you have   quite make up your mind to go back to Snowfield o ' Saturday , 
 Dinah ? " 
 " yes , " say Dinah , quietly . " I be call there . it be bear in upon my 
 mind while I be meditate on Sunday night , as Sister Allen , who be in a 
 decline , be in need of I . I see she as plain as we see that bit of thin 
 white cloud , lift up her poor thin hand and beckon to I . and this 
 morning when I open the Bible for direction , the first word my 
 eye fall on be , ' and after we have see the vision , immediately we 
 endeavour to go into Macedonia . ' if it be not   for that clear showing 
 of the Lord 's will , I should be loath to go , for my heart yearn over 
 my aunt and her little one , and that poor wander lamb Hetty Sorrel . 
 I have   be much draw out in prayer for she of late , and I look on it as 
 a token that there may be mercy in store for she . " 
 " God grant it , " say Seth . " for I doubt Adam 's heart be so set on she , 
 he will never turn to anybody else ; and yet it ' ud go to my heart if he 
 be to marry she , for I canna think as she would make he happy . it be a deep 
 mystery - the way the heart of man turn to one woman out of all the rest 
 he be see I ' the world , and make it easy for he to work seven year 
 for she , like Jacob do for Rachel , soon than have any other woman for 
 th ' asking . I often think of they word , ' and Jacob serve seven year 
 for Rachel ; and they seem to he but a few day for the love he have 
 to she . ' I know those word ' ud come true with I , Dinah , if so be you would 
 give I hope as I might win you after seven year be over . I know you 
 think a husband ' ud be take up too much o ' your thought , because St. 
 Paul say , ' she that be married careth for the thing of the world how 
 she may please her husband ' ; and may happen you will think I overbold to 
 speak to you about it again , after what you tell I o ' your mind last 
 Saturday . but I have   be think it over again by night and by day , and 
 I have   pray not to be blind by my own desire , to think what be only 
 good for I must be good for you too . and it seem to I there be more 
 text for your marrying than ever you can find against it . for St. Paul 
 say as plain as can be in another place , ' I will that the young 
 woman marry , bear child , guide the house , give none occasion to the 
 adversary to speak reproachfully ' ; and then ' two be well than one ' ; 
 and that hold good with marriage as well as with other thing . for we 
 should be o ' one heart and o ' one mind , Dinah . we both serve the same 
 Master , and be strive after the same gift ; and I would never be the 
 husband to make a claim on you as could interfere with your do the 
 work God have fit you for . I would make a shift , and fend indoor and out , 
 to give you more liberty - more than you can have now , for you have   get to 
 get your own living now , and I be strong enough to work for we both . " 
 when Seth have once begin to urge his suit , he go on earnestly and 
 almost hurriedly , lest Dinah should speak some decisive word before he 
 have pour forth all the argument he have prepare . his cheek become 
 flush as he go on his mild grey eye fill with tear , and his 
 voice tremble as he speak the last sentence . they have reach one of 
 those very narrow pass between two tall stone , which perform the 
 office of a stile in Loamshire , and Dinah pause as she turn towards 
 Seth and say , in her tender but calm treble note , " Seth Bede , I thank 
 you for your love towards I , and if I could think of any man as more 
 than a christian brother , I think it would be you . but my heart be not 
 free to marry . that be good for other woman , and it be a great and a 
 bless thing to be a wife and mother ; but ' as God have distribute to 
 every man , as the Lord hath call every man , so let he walk . ' God have 
 call I to minister to other , not to have any joy or sorrow of my 
 own , but to rejoice with they that do rejoice , and to weep with those 
 that weep . he have call I to speak his word , and he have greatly own 
 my work . it could only be on a very clear show that I could leave the 
 brother and sister at Snowfield , who be favour with very little of 
 this world 's good ; where the tree be few , so that a child might count 
 they , and there be very hard live for the poor in the winter . it have 
 be give I to help , to comfort , and strengthen the little flock there 
 and to call in many wanderer ; and my soul be fill with these thing 
 from my rise up till my lie down . my life be too short , and God 's 
 work be too great for I to think of make a home for myself in this 
 world . I have   not turn a deaf ear to your word , Seth , for when I see as 
 your love be give to I , I think it might be a leading of providence 
 for I to change my way of life , and that we should be fellow - helper ; 
 and I spread the matter before the Lord . but whenever I try to fix my 
 mind on marriage , and our live together , other thought always come 
 in - the time when I have   pray by the sick and dying , and the happy 
 hour I have   have preach , when my heart be fill with love , and the 
 Word be give to I abundantly . and when I have   open the Bible for 
 direction , I have   always light on some clear word to tell I where my 
 work lay . I believe what you say , Seth , that you would try to be a help 
 and not a hindrance to my work ; but I see that our marriage be not God 's 
 will - he draw my heart another way . I desire to live and die without 
 husband or child . I seem to have no room in my soul for want and 
 fear of my own , it have please God to fill my heart so full with the 
 want and suffering of his poor people . " 
 Seth be unable to reply , and they walk on in silence . at last , as 
 they be nearly at the yard - gate , he say , " well , Dinah , I must seek 
 for strength to bear it , and to endure as see he who be invisible . 
 but I feel now how weak my faith be . it seem as if , when you be go , 
 I could never joy in anything any more . I think it be something pass 
 the love of woman as I feel for you , for I could be content without 
 your marry I if I could go and live at Snowfield and be near you . 
 I trust as the strong love God have give I towards you be a leading 
 for we both ; but it seem it be only mean for my trial . perhaps I feel 
 more for you than I ought to feel for any creature , for I often can not 
 help say of you what the hymn say - 
 in darkest shade if she appear , 
 my dawning be begin ; 
 she be my soul 's bright morning - star , 
 and she my rise sun . 
 that may be wrong , and I be to be teach well . but you would not   be 
 displeased with I if thing turn out so as I could leave this country 
 and go to live at Snowfield ? " 
 " no , Seth ; but I counsel you to wait patiently , and not lightly to 
 leave your own country and kindre . do nothing without the Lord 's clear 
 bidding . it be a bleak and barren country there , not like this land of 
 Goshen you have   be use to . we must not   be in a hurry to fix and choose 
 our own lot ; we must wait to be guide . " 
 " but you would let I write you a letter , Dinah , if there be anything I 
 want to tell you ? " 
 " yes , sure ; let I know if you be in any trouble . you will be continually 
 in my prayer . " 
 they have now reach the yard - gate , and Seth say , " I will not   go in , 
 Dinah , so farewell . " he pause and hesitate after she have give he 
 her hand , and then say , " there be no knowing but what you may see thing 
 different after a while . there may be a new leading . " 
 " let we leave that , Seth . it be good to live only a moment at a time , as 
 I have   read in one of Mr. Wesley 's book . it be not   for you and I to lay 
 plan ; we have   nothing to do but to obey and to trust . farewell . " 
 Dinah press his hand with rather a sad look in her love eye , and 
 then pass through the gate , while Seth turn away to walk lingeringly 
 home . but instead of take the direct road , he choose to turn back along 
 the field through which he and Dinah have already pass ; and I think 
 his blue linen handkerchief be very wet with tear long before he 
 have make up his mind that it be time for he to set his face steadily 
 homeward . he be but three - and - twenty , and have only just learn what 
 it be to love - to love with that adoration which a young man give to a 
 woman whom he feel to be great and well than himself . love of this 
 sort be hardly distinguishable from religious feeling . what deep and 
 worthy love be so , whether of woman or child , or art or music . our 
 caress , our tender word , our still rapture under the influence 
 of autumn sunset , or pillare vista , or calm majestic statue , or 
 beethoven symphony all bring with they the consciousness that they be 
 mere wave and ripple in an unfathomable ocean of love and beauty ; our 
 emotion in its keen moment pass from expression into silence , our 
 love at its high flood rush beyond its object and lose itself in 
 the sense of divine mystery . and this blessed gift of venerate love 
 have be give to too many humble craftsman since the world begin for 
 we to feel any surprise that it should have exist in the soul of a 
 Methodist carpenter half a century ago , while there be yet a lingering 
 after - glow from the time when Wesley and his fellow - labourer feed on the 
 hip and haw of the Cornwall hedge , after exhaust limb and lung 
 in carry a divine message to the poor . 
 that afterglow have long fade away ; and the picture we be apt to make 
 of Methodism in our imagination be not an amphitheatre of green hill , 
 or the deep shade of broad - leave sycamore , where a crowd of rough 
 man and weary - hearted woman drink in a faith which be a rudimentary 
 culture , which link their thought with the past , lift their 
 imagination above the sordid detail of their own narrow life , and 
 suffuse their soul with the sense of a pitying , love , infinite 
 Presence , sweet as summer to the houseless needy . it be too possible 
 that to some of my reader Methodism may mean nothing more than 
 low - pitch gable up dingy street , sleek grocer , sponge preacher , 
 and hypocritical jargon - element which be regard as an exhaustive 
 analysis of Methodism in many fashionable quarter . 
 that would be a pity ; for I can not pretend that Seth and Dinah be 
 anything else than Methodists - not indeed of that modern type which 
 read quarterly review and attend in chapel with pillare portico , 
 but of a very old - fashioned kind . they believe in present miracle , in 
 instantaneous conversion , in revelation by dream and vision ; they 
 draw lot , and seek for divine guidance by open the Bible at 
 hazard ; have a literal way of interpret the scripture , which be 
 not at all sanction by approve commentator ; and it be impossible 
 for I to represent their diction as correct , or their instruction as 
 liberal . still - if I have read religious history aright - faith , 
 hope , and charity have not always be find in a direct ratio with a 
 sensibility to the three concord , and it be possible - thank Heaven ! - to 
 have very erroneous theory and very sublime feeling . the raw bacon 
 which clumsy Molly spare from her own scanty store that she may carry 
 it to her neighbour 's child to ' stop the fit , " may be a piteously 
 inefficacious remedy ; but the generous stirring of neighbourly kindness 
 that prompt the deed have a beneficent radiation that be not lose . 
 consider these thing , we can hardly think Dinah and Seth beneath our 
 sympathy , accustom as we may be to weep over the loftier sorrow 
 of heroine in satin boot and crinoline , and of hero rid fiery 
 horse , themselves ride by still more fiery passion . 
 Poor Seth ! he be never on horseback in his life except once , when he 
 be a little lad , and Mr. Jonathan Burge take he up behind , tell 
 he to " hold on tight " ; and instead of burst out into wild accusing 
 apostrophe to God and destiny , he be resolve , as he now walk 
 homeward under the solemn starlight , to repress his sadness , to be less 
 bent on have his own will , and to live more for other , as Dinah do . 
 Chapter IV 
 Home and its sorrow 
 a green valley with a brook run through it , full almost to 
 overflow with the late rain , overhang by low stoop willow . 
 across this brook a plank be throw , and over this plank Adam Bede be 
 pass with his undoubting step , follow close by Gyp with the basket ; 
 evidently make his way to the thatched house , with a stack of timber 
 by the side of it , about twenty yard up the opposite slope . 
 the door of the house be open , and an elderly woman be look out ; but 
 she be not placidly contemplate the evening sunshine ; she have be 
 watch with dim eye the gradually enlarging speck which for the last 
 few minute she have be quite sure be her darle son Adam . Lisbeth 
 Bede love her son with the love of a woman to whom her first - bear have 
 come late in life . she be an anxious , spare , yet vigorous old woman , 
 clean as a snowdrop . her grey hair be turn neatly back under a pure 
 linen cap with a black band round it ; her broad chest be cover with a 
 buff neckerchief , and below this you see a sort of short bedgown make of 
 blue - checker linen , tie round the waist and descend to the hip , 
 from whence there be a considerable length of linsey - woolsey petticoat . 
 for Lisbeth be tall , and in other point too there be a strong 
 likeness between she and her son Adam . her dark eye be somewhat dim 
 now - perhaps from too much crying - but her broadly mark eyebrow be 
 still black , her tooth be sound , and as she stand knit rapidly and 
 unconsciously with her work - harden hand , she have as firmly upright 
 an attitude as when she be carry a pail of water on her head from the 
 spring . there be the same type of frame and the same keen activity of 
 temperament in mother and son , but it be not from she that Adam get his 
 well - fill brow and his expression of large - hearted intelligence . 
 family likeness have often a deep sadness in it . nature , that great 
 tragic dramatist , knit we together by bone and muscle , and divide we 
 by the subtler web of our brain ; blend yearning and repulsion ; 
 and tie we by our heart - string to the being that jar we at every 
 movement . we hear a voice with the very cadence of our own utter the 
 thought we despise ; we see eye - ah , so like our mother 's ! - avert 
 from we in cold alienation ; and our last darling child startle we with 
 the air and gesture of the sister we part from in bitterness long 
 year ago . the father to whom we owe our good heritage - the mechanical 
 instinct , the keen sensibility to harmony , the unconscious skill of the 
 modelling hand - gall we and put we to shame by his daily error ; the 
 long - lose mother , whose face we begin to see in the glass as our own 
 wrinkle come , once fret our young soul with her anxious humour and 
 irrational persistence . 
 it be such a fond anxious mother 's voice that you hear , as Lisbeth say , 
 " well , my lad , it be go seven by th ' clock . Thee't allay stay till the 
 last child be bear . Thee want thy supper , I will warrand . where be Seth ? 
 go arter some o 's chapellin ' , I reckon ? " 
 " aye , aye , Seth 's at no harm , mother , thee mayst be sure . but where be 
 father ? " say Adam quickly , as he enter the house and glance into the 
 room on the left hand , which be use as a workshop . " have not   he do the 
 coffin for Tholer ? there be the stuff stand just as I leave it this 
 morning . " 
 " do the coffin ? " say Lisbeth , follow he , and knitting 
 uninterruptedly , though she look at her son very anxiously . " eh , my 
 lad , he go aff to Treddles'on this forenoon , an 's niver come back . I 
 doubt he be get to th ' ' Waggin Overthrow ' again . " 
 a deep flush of anger pass rapidly over Adam 's face . he say nothing , 
 but throw off his jacket and begin to roll up his shirt - sleeve again . 
 " what art go to do , Adam ? " say the mother , with a tone and look 
 of alarm . " thee wouldstna go to work again , wi'out ha'in thy bit o ' 
 supper ? " 
 Adam , too angry to speak , walk into the workshop . but his mother throw 
 down her knitting , and , hurry after he , take hold of his arm , and 
 say , in a tone of plaintive remonstrance , " Nay , my lad , my lad , thee 
 munna go wi'out thy supper ; there be the tater wi ' the gravy in them , 
 just as thee lik'st them . I save them o ' purpose for thee . come an ' ha ' 
 thy supper , come . " 
 " let be ! " say Adam impetuously , shake she off and seize one of 
 the plank that stand against the wall . " it be fine talk about have 
 supper when here be a coffin promise to be ready at Brox'on by seven 
 o'clock to - morrow morning , and ought to ha ' be there now , and not a 
 nail strike yet . my throat be too full to swallow victual . " 
 " why , thee canstna get the coffin ready , " say Lisbeth . " thee't work 
 thyself to death . it ' ud take thee all night to do't . " 
 " what signify how long it take I ? be not   the coffin promise ? can 
 they bury the man without a coffin ? I would work my right hand off soon 
 than deceive people with lie I ' that way . it make I mad to think 
 on't . I shall overrun these doing before long . I have   stand enough of 
 them . " 
 Poor Lisbeth do not hear this threat for the first time , and if she have 
 be wise she would have go away quietly and say nothing for the next 
 hour . but one of the lesson a woman most rarely learn be never to talk 
 to an angry or a drunken man . Lisbeth sit down on the chop bench 
 and begin to cry , and by the time she have cry enough to make her voice 
 very piteous , she burst out into word . 
 " Nay , my lad , my lad , thee wouldstna go away an ' break thy mother 's 
 heart , an ' leave thy feyther to ruin . Thee wouldstna ha ' them carry I to 
 th ' churchyard , an ' thee not to follow I . I shanna rest I ' my grave 
 if I donna see thee at th ' last ; an ' how be they to let thee know as I be 
 a - dyin ' , if thee't go a - workin ' I ' distant part , an ' Seth belike go 
 arter thee , and thy feyther not able to hold a pen for 's hand shakin ' , 
 besides not knowin ' where thee art ? Thee mun forgie thy feyther - thee 
 munna be so bitter again ' he . he war a good feyther to thee afore he 
 take to th ' drink . he be a clever workman , an ' teach thee thy trade , 
 remember , an 's niver gen I a blow nor so much as an ill word - no , 
 not even in 's drink . Thee wouldstna ha ' ' m go to the workhus - thy own 
 feyther - an ' he as be a fine - grow man an ' handy at everythin ' amost 
 as thee art thysen , five - an'-twenty ' ear ago , when thee wast a baby at 
 the breast . " 
 Lisbeth 's voice become louder , and choke with sob - a sort of wail , 
 the most irritating of all sound where real sorrow be to be bear and 
 real work to be do . Adam break in impatiently . 
 " now , Mother , do not   cry and talk so . have not   I get enough to vex I 
 without that ? what be th ' use o ' tell I thing as I only think too 
 much on every day ? if I didna think on them , why should I do as I do , for 
 the sake o ' keep thing together here ? but I hate to be talk where 
 it be no use : I like to keep my breath for do i'stead o ' talk . " 
 " I know thee dost thing as nobody else ' ud do , my lad . but thee't 
 allay so hard upo ' thy feyther , Adam . Thee think'st nothing too much 
 to do for Seth : thee snapp'st I up if iver I find faut wi ' th ' lad . but 
 thee't so angered wi ' thy feyther , more nor wi ' anybody else . " 
 " that be well than speak soft and let thing go the wrong way , 
 I reckon , be not   it ? if I be not   sharp with he he would sell every bit o ' 
 stuff I ' th ' yard and spend it on drink . I know there be a duty to be 
 do by my father , but it be not   my duty to encourage he in run 
 headlong to ruin . and what have Seth get to do with it ? the lad do no 
 harm as I know of . but leave I alone , Mother , and let I get on with 
 the work . " 
 Lisbeth dare not say any more ; but she get up and call Gyp , think 
 to console herself somewhat for Adam 's refusal of the supper she have 
 spread out in the love expectation of look at he while he eat it , 
 by feed Adam 's dog with extra liberality . but Gyp be watch his 
 master with wrinkle brow and ear erect , puzzle at this unusual course 
 of thing ; and though he glance at Lisbeth when she call he , and 
 move his fore - paw uneasily , well know that she be invite he to 
 supper , he be in a divided state of mind , and remain seat on his 
 haunch , again fix his eye anxiously on his master . Adam notice 
 Gyp 's mental conflict , and though his anger have make he less tender 
 than usual to his mother , it do not prevent he from care as much as 
 usual for his dog . we be apt to be kind to the brute that love we 
 than to the woman that love we . be it because the brute be dumb ? 
 " go , Gyp ; go , lad ! " Adam say , in a tone of encourage command ; and 
 Gyp , apparently satisfied that duty and pleasure be one , follow 
 Lisbeth into the house - place . 
 but no soon have he lick up his supper than he go back to his 
 master , while Lisbeth sit down alone to cry over her knitting . woman 
 who be never bitter and resentful be often the most querulous ; and 
 if Solomon be as wise as he be repute to be , I feel sure that when 
 he compare a contentious woman to a continual dropping on a very rainy 
 day , he have not a vixen in his eye - a fury with long nail , acrid and 
 selfish . depend upon it , he mean a good creature , who have no joy but 
 in the happiness of the love one whom she contribute to make 
 uncomfortable , put by all the tid - bit for they and spend nothing 
 on herself . such a woman as Lisbeth , for example - at once patient and 
 complain , self - renounce and exact , brood the livelong day 
 over what happen yesterday and what be likely to happen to - morrow , 
 and cry very readily both at the good and the evil . but a certain 
 awe mingle itself with her idolatrous love of Adam , and when he say , 
 " leave I alone , " she be always silence . 
 so the hour pass , to the loud ticking of the old day - clock and the 
 sound of Adam 's tool . at last he call for a light and a draught 
 of water   beer be a thing only to be drunk on holiday , and Lisbeth 
 venture to say as she take it in , " Thy supper stan 's ready for thee , 
 when thee lik'st . " 
 " Donna thee sit up , mother , " say Adam , in a gentle tone . he have work 
 off his anger now , and whenever he wish to be especially kind to his 
 mother , he fall into his strong native accent and dialect , with which 
 at other time his speech be less deeply ting . " I will see to Father 
 when he come home ; maybe he wonna come at all to - night . I shall be 
 easy if thee't I ' bed . " 
 " Nay , I will bide till Seth come . he wonna be long now , I reckon . " 
 it be then past nine by the clock , which be always in advance of 
 the day , and before it have strike ten the latch be lift and Seth 
 enter . he have hear the sound of the tool as he be approach . 
 " why , Mother , " he say , " how be it as Father 's work so late ? " 
 " it be none o ' thy feyther as be a - workin ' - thee might know that well 
 anoof if thy head warna full o ' chapellin ' - it be thy brother as do 
 iverything , for there be niver nobody else I ' th ' way to do nothing . " 
 Lisbeth be go on , for she be not at all afraid of Seth , and usually 
 pour into his ear all the querulousness which be repress by her 
 awe of Adam . Seth have never in his life speak a harsh word to his 
 mother , and timid people always wreak their peevishness on the gentle . 
 but Seth , with an anxious look , have pass into the workshop and say , 
 " Addy , how be this ? what ! Father 's forget the coffin ? " 
 " aye , lad , th ' old tale ; but I shall get it do , " say Adam , look up 
 and cast one of his bright keen glance at his brother . " why , what be 
 the matter with thee ? thee't in trouble . " 
 Seth 's eye be red , and there be a look of deep depression on his 
 mild face . 
 " yes , Addy , but it be what must be bear , and can not   be help . why , 
 thee'st never be to the school , then ? " 
 " school ? no , that screw can wait , " say Adam , hammer away again . 
 " let I take my turn now , and do thee go to bed , " say Seth . 
 " no , lad , I would rather go on , now I be in harness . thee't help I to carry 
 it to Brox'on when it be do . I will call thee up at sunrise . go and eat 
 thy supper , and shut the door so as I may not   hear Mother 's talk . " 
 Seth know that Adam always mean what he say , and be not to be 
 persuade into mean anything else . so he turn , with rather a heavy 
 heart , into the house - place . 
 " Adam 's niver touch a bit o ' victual sin ' home he be come , " say 
 Lisbeth . " I reckon thee'st he d thy supper at some o ' thy Methody folk . " 
 " Nay , Mother , " say Seth , " I have   have no supper yet . " 
 " come , then , " say Lisbeth , " but donna thee eat the tater , for Adam 
 ' ull happen eat them if I leave them stannin ' . he love a bit o ' tater 
 an ' gravy . but he be be so sore an ' anger , he would not   eat them , for 
 all I would putten them by o ' purpose for he . an ' he be be a - threatenin ' 
 to go away again , " she go on , whimpering , " an ' I be fast sure he will go 
 some dawnin ' afore I be up , an ' niver let I know aforehand , an ' he will 
 niver come back again when once he be go . an ' I would well niver ha ' 
 have a son , as be like no other body 's son for the deftness an ' th ' 
 handiness , an ' so look on by th ' grit folk , an ' tall an ' upright like 
 a poplar - tree , an ' I to be part from he an ' niver see ' m no more . " 
 " come , Mother , donna grieve thyself in vain , " say Seth , in a soothe 
 voice . " Thee'st not half so good reason to think as Adam ' ull go away 
 as to think he will stay with thee . he may say such a thing when he be in 
 wrath - and he be get excuse for be wrathful sometimes - but his heart 
 ' ud never let he go . think how he be stand by we all when it be be none 
 so easy - pay his saving to free I from go for a soldier , an ' 
 turnin ' his earnin 's into wood for father , when he be get plenty o ' us 
 for his money , and many a young man like he ' ud ha ' be marry and 
 settle before now . he will never turn round and knock down his own work , 
 and forsake they as it be be the labour of his life to stand by . " 
 " Donna talk to I about 's marr'in ' , " say Lisbeth , cry afresh . " he be 
 set 's heart on that Hetty Sorrel , as ' ull niver save a penny , an ' ' ull 
 toss up her head at 's old mother . an ' to think as he might ha ' Mary 
 Burge , an ' be take partner , an ' be a big man wi ' workman under he , 
 like Mester Burge - Dolly 's tell I so o'er and o'er again - if it warna 
 as he be set 's heart on that bit of a wench , as be o ' no more use nor the 
 gillyflower on the wall . an ' he so wise at bookin ' an ' figurin ' , an ' not 
 to know no well nor that ! " 
 " but , Mother , thee know'st we canna love just where other folk ' ud have 
 we . there be nobody but God can control the heart of man . I could ha ' 
 wish myself as Adam could ha ' make another choice , but I would not 
 reproach he for what he can not   help . and I be not sure but what he try 
 to o'ercome it . but it be a matter as he do not   like to be speak to 
 about , and I can only pray to the Lord to bless and direct he . " 
 " Aye , thee't allay ready enough at prayin ' , but I donna see as thee 
 get much wi ' thy prayin ' . Thee wotna get double earnin 's o ' this side 
 Yule . Th ' Methodies will niver make thee half the man thy brother be , for 
 all they be a - makin ' a preacher on thee . " 
 " it be partly truth thee speak'st there , Mother , " say Seth , mildly ; 
 " Adam 's far before I , an 's do more for I than I can ever do for he . 
 God distribute talent to every man accord as he see good . but thee 
 mustna undervally prayer . prayer mayna bring money , but it bring we 
 what no money can buy - a power to keep from sin and be content with 
 God 's will , whatever he may please to send . if thee wouldst pray to God 
 to help thee , and trust in his goodness , thee wouldstna be so uneasy 
 about thing . " 
 " Unaisy ? I be I ' th ' right on't   to be unaisy . it be well see on THEE what 
 it be niver to be unaisy . thee't gi ' away all thy earnin 's , an ' niver be 
 unaisy as thee'st nothing lay up again ' a rainy day . if Adam have be 
 as aisy as thee , he would niver ha ' have no money to pay for thee . take 
 no thought for the morrow - take no thought - that be what thee't allay 
 sayin ' ; an ' what come on't ? why , as Adam have to take thought for thee . " 
 " those be the word o ' the Bible , Mother , " say Seth . " they do not 
 mean as we should be idle . they mean we should not   be overanxious and 
 worrete ourselves about what will happen to - morrow , but do our duty and 
 leave the rest to God 's will . " 
 " aye , aye , that be the way wi ' thee : thee allay make a peck o ' thy own 
 word out o ' a pint o ' the Bible 's . I donna see how thee't to know as 
 ' take no thought for the morrow ' mean all that . an ' when the Bible 's 
 such a big book , an ' thee canst read all thro't , an ' ha ' the pick o ' the 
 texe , I canna think why thee dostna pick well word as donna mean so 
 much more nor they say . Adam doesna pick a that'n ; I can understan ' the 
 tex as he be allay a - sayin ' , ' God help they as help theirsen . ' " 
 " Nay , Mother , " say Seth , " that be no text o ' the Bible . it come out of 
 a book as Adam pick up at the stall at Treddles'on . it be write by 
 a knowing man , but overworldly , I doubt . however , that say 's partly 
 true ; for the Bible tell we we must be worker together with God . " 
 " well , how'm I to know ? it sound like a tex . but what be th ' matter wi ' 
 th ' lad ? thee't hardly atin ' a bit o ' supper . Dostna mean to ha ' no more 
 nor that bit o ' oat - cake ? an ' thee lookst as white as a flick o ' new 
 bacon . what be th ' matter wi ' thee ? " 
 " nothing to mind about , Mother ; I be not hungry . I will just look in at 
 Adam again , and see if he will let I go on with the coffin . " 
 " ha ' a drop o ' warm broth ? " say Lisbeth , whose motherly feeling now get 
 the well of her " nattering " habit . " I will set two - three stick a - light 
 in a minute . " 
 " Nay , Mother , thank thee ; thee't very good , " say Seth , gratefully ; and 
 encourage by this touch of tenderness , he go on : " let I pray a 
 bit with thee for Father , and Adam , and all of we - it will comfort thee , 
 happen , more than thee thinkst . " 
 " well , I have   nothing to say again ' it . " 
 Lisbeth , though dispose always to take the negative side in her 
 conversation with Seth , have a vague sense that there be some comfort 
 and safety in the fact of his piety , and that it somehow relieve she 
 from the trouble of any spiritual transaction on her own behalf . 
 so the mother and son kneel down together , and Seth pray for the poor 
 wandering father and for those who be sorrow for he at home . and 
 when he come to the petition that Adam might never be call to set 
 up his tent in a far country , but that his mother might be cheer and 
 comfort by his presence all the day of her pilgrimage , Lisbeth 's 
 ready tear flow again , and she weep aloud . 
 when they rise from their knee , Seth go to Adam again and say , " Wilt 
 only lie down for an hour or two , and let I go on the while ? " 
 " no , Seth , no . make Mother go to bed , and go thyself . " 
 Meantime Lisbeth have dry her eye , and now follow Seth , hold 
 something in her hand . it be the brown - and - yellow platter contain 
 the baked potato with the gravy in they and bit of meat which she have 
 cut and mix among they . those be dear time , when wheaten bread 
 and fresh meat be delicacy to work people . she set the dish down 
 rather timidly on the bench by Adam 's side and say , " thee canst pick a 
 bit while thee't workin ' . I will bring thee another drop o ' water . " 
 " Aye , Mother , do , " say Adam , kindly ; " I be get very thirsty . " 
 in half an hour all be quiet ; no sound be to be hear in the house but 
 the loud ticking of the old day - clock and the ringing of Adam 's tool . 
 the night be very still : when Adam open the door to look out at 
 twelve o'clock , the only motion seem to be in the glowing , twinkle 
 star ; every blade of grass be asleep . 
 bodily haste and exertion usually leave our thought very much at the 
 mercy of our feeling and imagination ; and it be so to - night with Adam . 
 while his muscle be work lustily , his mind seem as passive as a 
 spectator at a diorama : scene of the sad past , and probably sad 
 future , float before he and give place one to the other in swift 
 succession . 
 he see how it would be to - morrow morning , when he have carry the coffin 
 to Broxton and be at home again , have his breakfast : his father 
 perhaps would come in ashamed to meet his son 's glance - would sit down , 
 look old and more tottering than he have do the morning before , 
 and hang down his head , examine the floor - quarry ; while Lisbeth 
 would ask he how he suppose the coffin have be get ready , that he have 
 slink off and leave undo - for Lisbeth be always the first to utter 
 the word of reproach , although she cry at Adam 's severity towards his 
 father . 
 " so it will go on , worsen and worsen , " think Adam ; " there be no 
 slip uphill again , and no standing still when once you ' ve   begin 
 to slip down . " and then the day come back to he when he be a little 
 fellow and use to run by his father 's side , proud to be take out 
 to work , and prouder still to hear his father boast to his 
 fellow - workman how " the little chap have an uncommon notion o ' 
 carpentering . " what a fine active fellow his father be then ! when 
 people ask Adam whose little lad he be , he have a sense of distinction 
 as he answer , " I be Thias Bede 's lad . " he be quite sure everybody 
 know Thias Bede - do not   he make the wonderful pigeon - house at Broxton 
 parsonage ? those be happy day , especially when Seth , who be three 
 year the young , begin to go out work too , and Adam begin to be a 
 teacher as well as a learner . but then come the day of sadness , when 
 Adam be someway on in his teen , and Thias begin to loiter at the 
 public - house , and Lisbeth begin to cry at home , and to pour forth her 
 plaint in the hearing of her son . Adam remember well the night of 
 shame and anguish when he first see his father quite wild and foolish , 
 shout a song out fitfully among his drunken companion at the " Waggon 
 Overthrown . " he have run away once when he be only eighteen , make 
 his escape in the morning twilight with a little blue bundle over 
 his shoulder , and his " mensuration book " in his pocket , and say 
 to himself very decidedly that he could bear the vexation of home no 
 long - he would go and seek his fortune , set up his stick at the 
 crossway and bend his step the way it fall . but by the time he get 
 to Stoniton , the thought of his mother and Seth , leave behind to endure 
 everything without he , become too importunate , and his resolution 
 fail he . he come back the next day , but the misery and terror his 
 mother have go through in those two day have haunt she ever since . 
 " no ! " Adam say to himself to - night , " that must never happen again . it 
 ' ud make a poor balance when my doing be cast up at the last , if my 
 poor old mother stand o ' the wrong side . my back 's broad enough and 
 strong enough ; I should be no well than a coward to go away and leave 
 the trouble to be bear by they as be not   half so able . ' they that be 
 strong ought to bear the infirmity of those that be weak , and not to 
 please themselves . ' there be a text want no candle to show't ; it shin 
 by its own light . it be plain enough you get into the wrong road I ' this 
 life if you run after this and that only for the sake o ' make thing 
 easy and pleasant to yourself . a pig may poke his nose into the trough 
 and think o ' nothing outside it ; but if you have   get a man 's heart and 
 soul in you , you can not   be easy a - make your own bed an ' leave the 
 rest to lie on the stone . Nay , nay , I will never slip my neck out o ' the 
 yoke , and leave the load to be draw by the weak uns . Father 's a sore 
 cross to I , an 's likely to be for many a long year to come . what then ? 
 I have   get th ' health , and the limb , and the sperrit to bear it . " 
 at this moment a smart rap , as if with a willow wand , be give at the 
 house door , and Gyp , instead of bark , as might have be expect , 
 give a loud howl . Adam , very much startle , go at once to the door 
 and open it . nothing be there ; all be still , as when he open it 
 an hour before ; the leaf be motionless , and the light of the star 
 show the placid field on both side of the brook quite empty of 
 visible life . Adam walk round the house , and still see nothing except 
 a rat which dart into the woodshed as he pass . he go in again , 
 wonder ; the sound be so peculiar that the moment he hear it it 
 call up the image of the willow wand strike the door . he could not 
 help a little shudder , as he remember how often his mother have tell 
 he of just such a sound come as a sign when some one be die . Adam 
 be not a man to be gratuitously superstitious , but he have the blood of 
 the peasant in he as well as of the artisan , and a peasant can no 
 more help believe in a traditional superstition than a horse can help 
 tremble when he see a camel . besides , he have that mental combination 
 which be at once humble in the region of mystery and keen in the region 
 of knowledge : it be the depth of his reverence quite as much as 
 his hard common sense which give he his disinclination to doctrinal 
 religion , and he often check Seth 's argumentative spiritualism by 
 say , " eh , it be a big mystery ; thee know'st but little about it . " and 
 so it happen that Adam be at once penetrate and credulous . if a 
 new building have fall down and he have be tell that this be a divine 
 judgment , he would have say , " may be ; but the bear o ' the roof and 
 wall be not   right , else it would not   ha ' come down " ; yet he believe 
 in dream and prognostic , and to his die day he bat his breath a 
 little when he tell the story of the stroke with the willow wand . I 
 tell it as he tell it , not attempt to reduce it to its natural 
 element - in our eagerness to explain impression , we often lose our 
 hold of the sympathy that comprehend they . 
 but he have the good antidote against imaginative dread in the necessity 
 for get on with the coffin , and for the next ten minute his hammer 
 be ring so uninterruptedly , that other sound , if there be any , 
 might well be overpower . a pause come , however , when he have to take 
 up his ruler , and now again come the strange rap , and again Gyp howl . 
 Adam be at the door without the loss of a moment ; but again all be 
 still , and the starlight show there be nothing but the dew - laden 
 grass in front of the cottage . 
 Adam for a moment think uncomfortably about his father ; but of late 
 year he have never come home at dark hour from Treddleston , and 
 there be every reason for believe that he be then sleep off his 
 drunkenness at the " Waggon Overthrown . " besides , to Adam , the conception 
 of the future be so inseparable from the painful image of his father 
 that the fear of any fatal accident to he be exclude by the deeply 
 infixed fear of his continual degradation . the next thought that 
 occur to he be one that make he slip off his shoe and tread 
 lightly upstairs , to listen at the bedroom door . but both Seth and his 
 mother be breathe regularly . 
 Adam come down and set to work again , say to himself , " I will not   open 
 the door again . it be no use star about to catch sight of a sound . 
 maybe there be a world about we as we can not   see , but th ' ear 's quick 
 than the eye and catch a sound from't now and then . some people think 
 they get a sight on't   too , but they be mostly folk whose eye be not 
 much use to them at anything else . for my part , I think it be well to 
 see when your perpendicular 's true than to see a ghost . " 
 such thought as these be apt to grow strong and strong as daylight 
 quench the candle and the bird begin to sing . by the time the red 
 sunlight shine on the brass nail that form the initial on the lid of 
 the coffin , any linger foreboding from the sound of the willow 
 wand be merge in satisfaction that the work be do and the promise 
 redeem . there be no need to call Seth , for he be already move 
 overhead , and presently come downstairs . 
 " now , lad , " say Adam , as Seth make his appearance , " the coffin 's do , 
 and we can take it over to Brox'on , and be back again before half after 
 six . I will take a mouthful o ' oat - cake , and then we will be off . " 
 the coffin be soon prop on the tall shoulder of the two brother , 
 and they be make their way , follow close by Gyp , out of the little 
 woodyard into the lane at the back of the house . it be but about a mile 
 and a half to Broxton over the opposite slope , and their road wound very 
 pleasantly along lane and across field , where the pale woodbine and 
 the dog - rose be scent the hedgerow , and the bird be twitter 
 and trill in the tall leafy bough of oak and elm . it be a strangely 
 mingle picture - the fresh youth of the summer morning , with its 
 Edenlike peace and loveliness , the stalwart strength of the two brother 
 in their rusty working clothe , and the long coffin on their shoulder . 
 they pause for the last time before a small farmhouse outside the 
 village of Broxton . by six o'clock the task be do the coffin nail 
 down , and Adam and Seth be on their way home . they choose a short 
 way homeward , which would take they across the field and the brook in 
 front of the house . Adam have not mention to Seth what have happen in 
 the night , but he still retain sufficient impression from it himself 
 to say , " Seth , lad , if Father be not   come home by the time we have   have our 
 breakfast , I think it will be as well for thee to go over to Treddles'on 
 and look after he , and thee canst get I the brass wire I want . never 
 mind about lose an hour at thy work ; we can make that up . what dost 
 say ? " 
 " I be willing , " say Seth . " but see what cloud have gather since we 
 set out . I be think we shall have more rain . it will be a sore time for 
 th ' haymake if the meadow be flood again . the brook 's fine and 
 full now : another day 's rain ' ud cover the plank , and we should have to 
 go round by the road . " 
 they be come across the valley now , and have enter the pasture 
 through which the brook run . 
 " why , what be that stick against the willow ? " continue Seth , 
 begin to walk fast . Adam 's heart rise to his mouth : the vague 
 anxiety about his father be change into a great dread . he make no 
 answer to Seth , but run forward precede by Gyp , who begin to bark 
 uneasily ; and in two moment he be at the bridge . 
 this be what the omen mean , then ! and the grey - haired father , of whom 
 he have think with a sort of hardness a few hour ago , as certain to 
 live to be a thorn in his side be perhaps even then struggle with 
 that watery death ! this be the first thought that flash through 
 Adam 's conscience , before he have time to seize the coat and drag out 
 the tall heavy body . Seth be already by his side , help he , and 
 when they have it on the bank , the two son in the first moment knelt and 
 look with mute awe at the glaze eye , forget that there be need 
 for action - forget everything but that their father lie dead before 
 they . Adam be the first to speak . 
 " I will run to Mother , " he say , in a loud whisper . " I will be back to thee 
 in a minute . " 
 Poor Lisbeth be busy prepare her son ' breakfast , and their porridge 
 be already steam on the fire . her kitchen always look the pink of 
 cleanliness , but this morning she be more than usually bent on make 
 her hearth and breakfast - table look comfortable and inviting . 
 " the lad ' ull be fine an ' hungry , " she say , half - aloud , as she stir 
 the porridge . " it be a good step to Brox'on , an ' it be hungry air o'er 
 the hill - wi ' that heavy coffin too . eh ! it be heavy now , wi ' poor Bob 
 Tholer in't . Howiver , I have   make a drap more porridge nor common this 
 mornin ' . the feyther ' ull happen come in arter a bit . not as he will ate 
 much porridge . he swaller sixpenn'orth o ' ale , an ' save a hap'orth o ' 
 por - ridge - that be his way o ' layin ' by money , as I have   tell he many a 
 time , an ' am likely to tell he again afore the day 's out . eh , poor mon , 
 he take it quiet enough ; there be no denyin ' that . " 
 but now Lisbeth hear the heavy " thud " of a running footstep on the 
 turf , and , turn quickly towards the door , she see Adam enter , look 
 so pale and overwhelm that she scream aloud and rush towards he 
 before he have time to speak . 
 " Hush , mother , " Adam say , rather hoarsely , " do not   be frighten . 
 Father 's tumble into the water . belike we may bring he round again . 
 Seth and I be go to carry he in . get a blanket and make it hot as 
 the fire . " 
 in reality Adam be convince that his father be dead but he know there 
 be no other way of repress his mother 's impetuous wail grief than 
 by occupy she with some active task which have hope in it . 
 he run back to Seth , and the two son lift the sad burden in 
 heart - stricken silence . the wide - open glaze eye be grey , like 
 Seth 's , and have once look with mild pride on the boy before whom 
 Thias have live to hang his head in shame . Seth 's chief feeling be awe 
 and distress at this sudden snatch away of his father 's soul ; but 
 Adam 's mind rush back over the past in a flood of relent and pity . 
 when death , the great Reconciler , have come , it be never our tenderness 
 that we repent of , but our severity . 
 chapter V 
 the Rector 
 before twelve o'clock there have be some heavy storm of rain , and the 
 water lie in deep gutter on the side of the gravel walk in the garden 
 of Broxton Parsonage ; the great Provence rose have be cruelly toss 
 by the wind and beat by the rain , and all the delicate - stem border 
 flower have be dash down and stain with the wet soil . a melancholy 
 morning - because it be nearly time hay - harvest should begin , and 
 instead of that the meadow be likely to be flood . 
 but people who have pleasant home get indoor enjoyment that they would 
 never think of but for the rain . if it have not be a wet morning , Mr. 
 Irwine would not have be in the dining - room playing at chess with his 
 mother , and he love both his mother and chess quite well enough to pass 
 some cloudy hour very easily by their help . let I take you into that 
 dining - room and show you the Rev. Adolphus Irwine , Rector of Broxton , 
 Vicar of Hayslope , and Vicar of Blythe , a pluralist at whom the severe 
 Church reformer would have find it difficult to look sour . we will 
 enter very softly and stand still in the open doorway , without awake 
 the glossy - brown setter who be stretch across the hearth , with her 
 two puppy beside she ; or the pug , who be doze , with his black muzzle 
 aloft , like a sleepy president . 
 the room be a large and lofty one , with an ample mullione oriel window 
 at one end ; the wall , you see , be new , and not yet paint ; but the 
 furniture , though originally of an expensive sort , be old and scanty , 
 and there be no drapery about the window . the crimson cloth over the 
 large dining - table be very threadbare , though it contrast pleasantly 
 enough with the dead hue of the plaster on the wall ; but on this cloth 
 there be a massive silver waiter with a decanter of water on it , of the 
 same pattern as two large one that be prop up on the sideboard 
 with a coat of arm conspicuous in their centre . you suspect at once 
 that the inhabitant of this room have inherit more blood than wealth , 
 and would not be surprised to find that Mr. Irwine have a finely cut 
 nostril and upper lip ; but at present we can only see that he have a 
 broad flat back and an abundance of powdered hair , all throw backward 
 and tie behind with a black ribbon - a bit of conservatism in costume 
 which tell you that he be not a young man . he will perhaps turn round 
 by and by , and in the meantime we can look at that stately old lady , his 
 mother , a beautiful aged brunette , whose rich - toned complexion be well 
 set off by the complex wrapping of pure white cambric and lace about 
 her head and neck . she be as erect in she comely embonpoint as a statue 
 of Ceres ; and her dark face , with its delicate aquiline nose , firm proud 
 mouth , and small , intense , black eye , be so keen and sarcastic in its 
 expression that you instinctively substitute a pack of card for the 
 chess - man and imagine she tell your fortune . the small brown hand 
 with which she be lift her queen be laden with pearl , diamond , and 
 turquoise ; and a large black veil be very carefully adjust over the 
 crown of her cap , and fall in sharp contrast on the white fold 
 about her neck . it must take a long time to dress that old lady in the 
 morning ! but it seem a law of nature that she should be dress so : she 
 be clearly one of those child of royalty who have never doubt their 
 right divine and never meet with any one so absurd as to question it . 
 " there , Dauphin , tell I what that be ! " say this magnificent old lady , 
 as she deposit her queen very quietly and fold her arm . " I should be 
 sorry to utter a word disagreeable to your feeling . " 
 " ah , you witch - mother , you sorceress ! how be a christian man to win a 
 game off you ? I should have sprinkle the board with holy water before 
 we begin . you have   not win that game by fair mean , now , so do not   pretend 
 it . " 
 " yes , yes , that be what the beat have always say of great conqueror . 
 but see , there be the sunshine fall on the board , to show you more 
 clearly what a foolish move you make with that pawn . come , shall I give 
 you another chance ? " 
 " no , Mother , I shall leave you to your own conscience , now it be clearing 
 up . we must go and plash up the mud a little , mus'n't   we , Juno ? " this 
 be address to the brown setter , who have jump up at the sound of the 
 voice and lay her nose in an insinuating way on her master 's leg . " but 
 I must go upstairs first and see Anne . I be call away to Tholer 's 
 funeral just when I be go before . " 
 " it be of no use , child ; she can not   speak to you . Kate say she have one of 
 her bad headache this morning . " 
 " oh , she like I to go and see she just the same ; she be never too ill 
 to care about that . " 
 if you know how much of human speech be mere purposeless impulse or 
 habit , you will not wonder when I tell you that this identical objection 
 have be make , and have receive the same kind of answer , many hundred 
 time in the course of the fifteen year that Mr. Irwine 's sister Anne 
 have be an invalid . splendid old lady , who take a long time to dress 
 in the morning , have often slight sympathy with sickly daughter . 
 but while Mr. Irwine be still seat , lean back in his chair and 
 stroke Juno 's head , the servant come to the door and say , " if 
 you please , sir , Joshua Rann wish to speak with you , if you be at 
 liberty . " 
 " let he be show in here , " say Mrs. Irwine , take up her knitting . 
 " I always like to hear what Mr. Rann have get to say . his shoe will be 
 dirty , but see that he wipe they Carroll . " 
 in two minute Mr. Rann appear at the door with very deferential bow , 
 which , however , be far from conciliate Pug , who give a sharp bark 
 and run across the room to reconnoitre the stranger 's leg ; while the 
 two puppy , regard Mr. Rann 's prominent calf and rib worsted 
 stocking from a more sensuous point of view , plunge and growl over 
 they in great enjoyment . meantime , Mr. Irwine turn round his chair and 
 say , " well , Joshua , anything the matter at Hayslope , that you have   come 
 over this damp morning ? sit down , sit down . never mind the dog ; give 
 they a friendly kick . here , Pug , you rascal ! " 
 it be very pleasant to see some man turn round ; pleasant as a sudden 
 rush of warm air in winter , or the flash of firelight in the chill dusk . 
 Mr. Irwine be one of those man . he bear the same sort of resemblance to 
 his mother that our love memory of a friend 's face often bear to the 
 face itself : the line be all more generous , the smile brighter , the 
 expression heartier . if the outline have be less finely cut , his face 
 might have be call jolly ; but that be not the right word for its 
 mixture of bonhomie and distinction . 
 " thank your reverence , " answer Mr. Rann , endeavour to look 
 unconcerned about his leg , but shake they alternately to keep off the 
 puppy ; " I will stand , if you please , as more become . I hope I see you 
 an ' Mrs. Irwine well , an ' Miss Irwine - an ' Miss Anne , I hope 's as well 
 as usual . " 
 " yes , Joshua , thank you . you see how bloom my mother look . she beat 
 we young people hollow . but what be the matter ? " 
 " why , sir , I have to come to Brox'on to deliver some work , and I think 
 it but right to call and let you know the goin - on as there be be I ' 
 the village , such as I hanna see I ' my time , and I have   live in it man 
 and boy sixty year come St. Thomas , and collect th ' Easter due for 
 Mr. Blick before your Reverence come into the parish , and be at the 
 ringin ' o ' every bell , and the diggin ' o ' every grave , and sing I ' the 
 choir long afore Bartle Massey come from nobody know where , wi ' his 
 counter - singin ' and fine anthem , as put everybody out but himself - one 
 takin ' it up after another like sheep a - bleatin ' I ' th ' fold . I know 
 what belong to bein ' a parish clerk , and I know as I should be wantin ' 
 I ' respect to your Reverence , an ' church , an ' king , if I be t ' allow 
 such goin - on wi'out speakin ' . I be take by surprise , an ' know 
 nothing on it beforehand , an ' I be so flustered , I be clean as if I would 
 lose my tool . I hanna slep ' more nor four hour this night as be past 
 an ' go ; an ' then it be nothing but nightmare , as tired I bad nor 
 wakin ' . " 
 " why , what in the world be the matter , Joshua ? have the thief be at 
 the church lead again ? " 
 " thief ! no , sir - an ' yet , as I may say , it be thief , an ' a - thievin ' 
 the church , too . it be the Methodisses as be like to get th ' upper hand 
 I ' th ' parish , if your Reverence an ' his Honour , Squire Donnithorne , 
 doesna think well to say the word an ' forbid it . not as I be a - dictatin ' 
 to you , sir ; I be not forgettin ' myself so far as to be wise above my 
 better . Howiver , whether I be wise or no , that be neither here nor there , 
 but what I have   get to say I say - as the young Methodis woman as be at 
 Mester Poyser 's be a - preachin ' an ' a - prayin ' on the Green last night , 
 as sure as I be a - stannin ' afore your Reverence now . " 
 " preach on the Green ! " say Mr. Irwine , look surprised but quite 
 serene . " what , that pale pretty young woman I have   see at Poyser 's ? I see 
 she be a Methodist , or Quaker , or something of that sort , by her dress , 
 but I do not   know she be a preacher . " 
 " it be a true word as I say , sir , " rejoin Mr. Rann , compress his 
 mouth into a semicircular form and pause long enough to indicate three 
 note of exclamation . " she preach on the Green last night ; an ' she be 
 lay hold of Chad 's Bess , as the girl be be I ' fit welly iver sin ' . " 
 " well , Bessy Cranage be a hearty - look lass ; I daresay she will come 
 round again , Joshua . do anybody else go into fit ? " 
 " no , sir , I canna say as they do . but there be no knowin ' what will come , 
 if we be t ' have such preachin 's as that a - go on ivery week - there will 
 be no livin ' I ' th ' village . for they Methodisses make folk believe 
 as if they take a mug o ' drink extry , an ' make theirselve a bit 
 comfortable , they will have to go to hell for't as sure as they be bear . 
 I be not a tipplin ' man nor a drunkard - nobody can say it on I - but I 
 like a extry quart at Easter or Christmas time , as be nat'ral when we be 
 go the round a - singin ' , an ' folk offer't you for nothing ; or 
 when I be a - collectin ' the due ; an ' I like a pint wi ' my pipe , an ' a 
 neighbourly chat at Mester Casson 's now an ' then , for I be bring 
 up I ' the Church , thank God , an ' ha ' be a parish clerk this 
 two - an'-thirty year : I should know what the church religion be . " 
 " well , what be your advice , Joshua ? what do you think should be do ? " 
 " well , your reverence , I be not for takin ' any measure again ' the young 
 woman . she be well enough if she would let alone preachin ' ; an ' I hear as 
 she be a - go away back to her own country soon . she be Mr. Poyser 's 
 own niece , an ' I donna wish to say what be anyways disrespectful o ' th ' 
 family at th ' Hall Farm , as I have   measure for shoe , little an ' big , 
 welly iver sin ' I have   be a shoemaker . but there be that Will Maskery , 
 sir as be the rampageous Methodis as can be , an ' I make no doubt it 
 be he as stir up th ' young woman to preach last night , an ' he will be 
 a - bringin ' other folk to preach from Treddles'on , if his comb be not 
 cut a bit ; an ' I think as he should be let know as he isna t ' have the 
 makin ' an ' mendin ' o ' church cart an ' impleman 's , let alone stayin ' I ' 
 that house an ' yard as be Squire Donnithorne 's . " 
 " well , but you say yourself , Joshua , that you never know any one come to 
 preach on the Green before ; why should you think they will come again ? the 
 Methodists do not   come to preach in little village like Hayslope , where 
 there be only a handful of labourer , too tired to listen to they . they 
 might almost as well go and preach on the Binton Hills . will Maskery be 
 no preacher himself , I think . " 
 " Nay , sir , he be no gift at stringin ' the word together wi'out book ; 
 he would be stick fast like a cow I ' wet clay . but he be get tongue enough 
 to speak disrespectful about 's neebor , for he say as I be a blind 
 Pharisee - a - usin ' the Bible I ' that way to find nick - name for folk as 
 be his elder an ' better ! - and what be bad , he be be hear to say 
 very unbecomin ' word about your reverence ; for I could bring they as 
 ' ud swear as he call you a ' dumb dog , ' an ' a ' idle shepherd . ' you will 
 forgi'e I for sayin ' such thing over again . " 
 " well not , well not , Joshua . let evil word die as soon as they be 
 speak . will Maskery might be a great deal bad fellow than he be . he 
 use to be a wild drunken rascal , neglect his work and beat his 
 wife , they tell I ; now he be thrifty and decent , and he and his wife 
 look comfortable together . if you can bring I any proof that he 
 interfere with his neighbour and create any disturbance , I shall 
 think it my duty as a clergyman and a magistrate to interfere . but it 
 would not   become wise people like you and I to be make a fuss about 
 trifle , as if we think the Church be in danger because will Maskery 
 let his tongue wag rather foolishly , or a young woman talk in a 
 serious way to a handful of people on the Green . we must ' live and let 
 live , ' Joshua , in religion as well as in other thing . you go on do 
 your duty , as parish clerk and sexton , as well as you have   always do 
 it , and make those capital thick boot for your neighbour , and thing 
 will not   go far wrong in Hayslope , depend upon it . " 
 " your Reverence be very good to say so ; an ' I be sensable as , you not 
 livin ' I ' the parish , there be more upo ' my shoulder . " 
 " to be sure ; and you must mind and not lower the Church in people 's eye 
 by seem to be frightened about it for a little thing , Joshua . I shall 
 trust to your good sense , now to take no notice at all of what will 
 Maskery say , either about you or I . you and your neighbour can go on 
 take your pot of beer soberly , when you have   do your day 's work , like 
 good churchman ; and if will Maskery do not   like to join you , but to go 
 to a prayer - meeting at Treddleston instead , let he ; that be no business 
 of your , so long as he do not   hinder you from do what you like . and 
 as to people say a few idle word about we , we must not mind that , 
 any more than the old church - steeple mind the rook caw about 
 it . will Maskery come to church every Sunday afternoon , and do his 
 wheelwright 's business steadily in the weekday , and as long as he do 
 that he must be let alone . " 
 " ah , sir , but when he come to church , he sit an ' shake his head , an ' 
 look as sour an ' as coxy when we be a - singin ' as I should like to fetch 
 he a rap across the jowl - God forgi'e I - an ' Mrs. Irwine , an ' your 
 Reverence too , for speakin ' so afore you . an ' he say as our Christmas 
 singin ' be no well nor the cracklin ' o ' thorn under a pot . " 
 " well , he be get a bad ear for music , Joshua . when people have wooden 
 head , you know , it can not   be help . he will not   bring the other people in 
 Hayslope round to his opinion , while you go on singing as well as you 
 do . " 
 " yes , sir , but it turn a man 's stomach t ' hear the scripture misuse I ' 
 that way . I know as much o ' the word o ' the Bible as he do , an ' could 
 say the Psalms right through I ' my sleep if you be to pinch I ; but I 
 know well nor to take them to say my own say wi ' . I might as well take 
 the Sacriment - cup home and use it at meal . " 
 " that be a very sensible remark of your , Joshua ; but , as I say 
 before - - " 
 while Mr. Irwine be speak , the sound of a booted step and the clink 
 of a spur be hear on the stone floor of the entrance - hall , and Joshua 
 Rann move hastily aside from the doorway to make room for some one who 
 pause there , and say , in a ring tenor voice , 
 " Godson Arthur - may he come in ? " 
 " come in , come in , godson ! " Mrs. Irwine answer , in the deep 
 half - masculine tone which belong to the vigorous old woman , and there 
 enter a young gentleman in a riding - dress , with his right arm in 
 a sling ; whereupon follow that pleasant confusion of laugh 
 interjection , and hand - shaking , and " how be you 's ? " mingle with 
 joyous short bark and wagging of tail on the part of the canine 
 member of the family , which tell that the visitor be on the good term 
 with the visited . the young gentleman be Arthur Donnithorne , know 
 in Hayslope , variously , as " the young squire , " " the heir , " and " the 
 captain . " he be only a captain in the Loamshire Militia , but to the 
 Hayslope tenant he be more intensely a captain than all the young 
 gentleman of the same rank in his Majesty 's regular - he outshine they 
 as the planet Jupiter outshine the Milky Way . if you want to know 
 more particularly how he look , call to your remembrance some 
 tawny - whisker , brown - locked , clear - complexion young Englishman 
 whom you have meet with in a foreign town , and be proud of as a 
 fellow - countryman - well - wash , high - breed , white - handed , yet look as 
 if he could deliver well from ' the left shoulder and floor his man : I 
 will not be so much of a tailor as to trouble your imagination with the 
 difference of costume , and insist on the striped waistcoat , long - tail 
 coat , and low top - boot . 
 turn round to take a chair , Captain Donnithorne say , " but do not   let 
 I interrupt Joshua 's business - he have something to say . " 
 " humbly beg your Honour 's pardon , " say Joshua , bow low , " there 
 be one thing I have to say to his Reverence as other thing have drive 
 out o ' my head . " 
 " out with it , Joshua , quickly ! " say Mr. Irwine . 
 " belike , sir , you havena hear as Thias Bede 's dead - drownde this 
 morning , or more like overnight , I ' the Willow Brook , again ' the bridge 
 right I ' front o ' the house . " 
 " ah ! " exclaim both the gentleman at once , as if they be a good deal 
 interested in the information . 
 " An ' Seth Bede 's be to I this morning to say he wish I to tell 
 your Reverence as his brother Adam beg of you particular t ' allow his 
 father 's grave to be dig by the White Thorn , because his mother 's set 
 her heart on it , on account of a dream as she have ; an ' they would ha ' 
 come theirselve to ask you , but they have   so much to see after with the 
 crowner , an ' that ; an ' their mother 's take on so , an ' want them to make 
 sure o ' the spot for fear somebody else should take it . an ' if your 
 Reverence see well and good , I will send my boy to tell them as soon as I 
 get home ; an ' that be why I make bold to trouble you wi ' it , his Honour 
 be present . " 
 " to be sure , Joshua , to be sure , they shall have it . I will ride round to 
 Adam myself , and see he . send your boy , however , to say they shall 
 have the grave , lest anything should happen to detain I . and now , good 
 morning , Joshua ; go into the kitchen and have some ale . " 
 " poor old Thias ! " say Mr. Irwine , when Joshua be go . " I be afraid 
 the drink help the brook to drown he . I should have be glad for the 
 load to have be take off my friend Adam 's shoulder in a less painful 
 way . that fine fellow have be prop up his father from ruin for the 
 last five or six year . " 
 " he be a regular trump , be Adam , " say Captain Donnithorne . " when I be 
 a little fellow , and Adam be a strapping lad of fifteen , and teach I 
 carpentering , I use to think if ever I be a rich sultan , I would make 
 Adam my grand - vizier . and I believe now he would bear the exaltation as 
 well as any poor wise man in an eastern story . if ever I live to be a 
 large - acred man instead of a poor devil with a mortgaged allowance of 
 pocket - money , I will have Adam for my right hand . he shall manage my wood 
 for I , for he seem to have a well notion of those thing than any 
 man I ever meet with ; and I know he would make twice the money of they 
 that my grandfather do , with that miserable old Satchell to manage , 
 who understand no more about timber than an old carp . I have   mention 
 the subject to my grandfather once or twice , but for some reason or 
 other he have a dislike to Adam , and I can do nothing . but come , your 
 Reverence , be you for a ride with I ? it be splendid out of door now . 
 we can go to Adam 's together , if you like ; but I want to call at the 
 Hall Farm on my way , to look at the whelp Poyser be keep for I . " 
 " you must stay and have lunch first , Arthur , " say Mrs. Irwine . " it be 
 nearly two . carroll will bring it in directly . " 
 " I want to go to the Hall Farm too , " say Mr. Irwine , " to have another 
 look at the little Methodist who be stay there . Joshua tell I she 
 be preach on the Green last night . " 
 " oh , by Jove ! " say Captain Donnithorne , laugh . " why , she look as 
 quiet as a mouse . there be something rather strike about she , though . I 
 positively feel quite bashful the first time I see she - she be sit 
 stoop over her sewing in the sunshine outside the house , when I ride 
 up and call out , without notice that she be a stranger , ' is Martin 
 Poyser at home ? ' I declare , when she get up and look at I and just 
 say , ' he be in the house , I believe : I will go and call he , ' I feel 
 quite ashamed of have speak so abruptly to she . she look like St. 
 Catherine in a Quaker dress . it be a type of face one rarely see among 
 our common people . " 
 " I should like to see the young woman , Dauphin , " say Mrs. Irwine . " make 
 she come here on some pretext or other . " 
 " I do not   know how I can manage that , Mother ; it will hardly do for I 
 to patronize a Methodist preacher , even if she would consent to be 
 patronize by an idle shepherd , as will Maskery call I . you should 
 have come in a little soon , Arthur , to hear Joshua 's denunciation of 
 his neighbour will Maskery . the old fellow want I to excommunicate the 
 wheelwright , and then deliver he over to the civil arm - that be to say , 
 to your grandfather - to be turn out of house and yard . if I choose to 
 interfere in this business , now , I might get up as pretty a story of 
 hatred and persecution as the Methodists need desire to publish in 
 the next number of their magazine . it would not   take I much trouble to 
 persuade Chad Cranage and half a dozen other bull - head fellow that 
 they would be do an acceptable service to the Church by hunt will 
 maskery out of the village with rope - end and pitchfork ; and then , when 
 I have furnish they with half a sovereign to get gloriously drunk after 
 their exertion , I should have put the climax to as pretty a farce as 
 any of my brother clergy have set go in their parish for the last 
 thirty year . " 
 " it be really insolent of the man , though , to call you an ' idle 
 shepherd ' and a ' dumb dog , ' " say Mrs. Irwine . " I should be incline to 
 check he a little there . you be too easy - temper , Dauphin . " 
 " why , Mother , you do not   think it would be a good way of sustain my 
 dignity to set about vindicate myself from the aspersion of Will 
 maskery ? besides , I be not so sure that they be aspersion . I be a lazy 
 fellow , and get terribly heavy in my saddle ; not to mention that I be 
 always spend more than I can afford in brick and mortar , so that 
 I get savage at a lame beggar when he ask I for sixpence . those poor 
 lean cobbler , who think they can help to regenerate mankind by set 
 out to preach in the morning twilight before they begin their day 's 
 work , may well have a poor opinion of I . but come , let we have our 
 luncheon . be not   Kate come to lunch ? " 
 " Miss Irwine tell Bridget to take her lunch upstairs , " say Carroll ; 
 ' she can not   leave Miss Anne . " 
 " oh , very well . tell Bridget to say I will go up and see Miss Anne 
 presently . you can use your right arm quite well now , Arthur , " Mr. 
 Irwine continue , observe that Captain Donnithorne have take his arm 
 out of the sling . 
 " yes , pretty well ; but Godwin insist on my keep it up constantly for 
 some time to come . I hope I shall be able to get away to the regiment , 
 though , in the beginning of August . it be a desperately dull business 
 be shut up at the Chase in the summer month , when one can neither 
 hunt nor shoot , so as to make one 's self pleasantly sleepy in the 
 evening . however , we be to astonish the echo on the 30th of July . my 
 grandfather have give I carte blanche for once , and I promise you the 
 entertainment shall be worthy of the occasion . the world will not see 
 the grand epoch of my majority twice . I think I shall have a lofty 
 throne for you , Godmamma , or rather two , one on the lawn and another in 
 the ballroom , that you may sit and look down upon we like an olympian 
 goddess . " 
 " I mean to bring out my good brocade , that I wear at your christening 
 twenty year ago , " say Mrs. Irwine . " ah , I think I shall see your poor 
 mother flit about in her white dress , which look to I almost like 
 a shroud that very day ; and it be her shroud only three month after ; 
 and your little cap and christen dress be bury with she too . she 
 have set her heart on that , sweet soul ! thank God you take after your 
 mother 's family , Arthur . if you have be a puny , wiry , yellow baby , I 
 would not   have stand godmother to you . I should have be sure you would 
 turn out a Donnithorne . but you be such a broad - face , broad - cheste , 
 loud - scream rascal , I know you be every inch of you a Tradgett . " 
 " but you might have be a little too hasty there , Mother , " say Mr. 
 Irwine , smile . " do not   you remember how it be with Juno 's last pup ? 
 one of they be the very image of its mother , but it have two or three 
 of its father 's trick notwithstanding . nature be clever enough to cheat 
 even you , Mother . " 
 " nonsense , child ! nature never make a ferret in the shape of a mastiff . 
 you will never persuade I that I can not   tell what man be by their 
 outside . if I do not   like a man 's look , depend upon it I shall never 
 like HIM . I do not   want to know people that look ugly and disagreeable , 
 any more than I want to taste dish that look disagreeable . if they 
 make I shudder at the first glance , I say , take they away . an ugly , 
 piggish , or fishy eye , now , make I feel quite ill ; it be like a bad 
 smell . " 
 " talk of eye , " say Captain Donnithorne , " that remind I that I have 
 get a book I mean to bring you , Godmamma . it come down in a parcel from 
 London the other day . I know you be fond of queer , wizardlike story . 
 it be a volume of poem , ' Lyrical ballad . ' Most of they seem to be 
 twaddle stuff , but the first be in a different style - ' the Ancient 
 Mariner ' be the title . I can hardly make head or tail of it as a story , 
 but it be a strange , strike thing . I will send it over to you ; and there 
 be some other book that you may like to see , irwine - pamphlet about 
 Antinomianism and Evangelicalism , whatever they may be . I can not   think 
 what the fellow mean by send such thing to I . I have   write to he 
 to desire that from henceforth he will send I no book or pamphlet on 
 anything that end in ISM . " 
 " well , I do not   know that I be very fond of ism myself ; but I may as well 
 look at the pamphlet ; they let one see what be go on . I have   a little 
 matter to attend to , Arthur , " continue Mr. Irwine , rise to leave the 
 room , " and then I shall be ready to set out with you . " 
 the little matter that Mr. Irwine have to attend to take he up the old 
 stone staircase   part of the house be very old   and make he pause 
 before a door at which he knock gently . " come in , " say a woman 's 
 voice , and he enter a room so darken by blind and curtain that 
 Miss Kate , the thin middle - aged lady stand by the bedside , would not 
 have have light enough for any other sort of work than the knitting which 
 lie on the little table near she . but at present she be do what 
 require only the dim light - sponge the aching head that lie on 
 the pillow with fresh vinegar . it be a small face , that of the poor 
 sufferer ; perhaps it have once be pretty , but now it be wear and 
 sallow . Miss Kate come towards her brother and whisper , " do not   speak 
 to she ; she can not   bear to be speak to to - day . " Anne 's eye be closed , 
 and her brow contract as if from intense pain . Mr. Irwine go to the 
 bedside and take up one of the delicate hand and kiss it , a slight 
 pressure from the small finger tell he that it be worth - while to have 
 come upstairs for the sake of do that . he linger a moment , look 
 at she , and then turn away and leave the room , tread very gently - he 
 have take off his boot and put on slipper before he come upstairs . 
 whoever remember how many thing he have decline to do even for 
 himself , rather than have the trouble of put on or take off his 
 boot , will not think this last detail insignificant . 
 and Mr. Irwine 's sister , as any person of family within ten mile of 
 Broxton could have testify , be such stupid , unintereste woman ! 
 it be quite a pity handsome , clever Mrs. Irwine should have have such 
 commonplace daughter . that fine old lady herself be worth drive ten 
 mile to see , any day ; her beauty , her well - preserve faculty , and her 
 old - fashioned dignity make she a graceful subject for conversation in 
 turn with the King 's health , the sweet new pattern in cotton dress , 
 the news from Egypt , and Lord Dacey 's lawsuit , which be fret poor 
 Lady Dacey to death . but no one ever think of mention the Miss 
 Irwines , except the poor people in Broxton village , who regard they 
 as deep in the science of medicine , and speak of they vaguely as " the 
 gentlefolk . " if any one have ask old Job Dummilow who give he his 
 flannel jacket , he would have answer , " the gentlefolk , last 
 winter " ; and widow Steene dwelt much on the virtue of the ' stuff " the 
 gentlefolk give she for her cough . under this name too , they be use 
 with great effect as a means of tame refractory child , so that at 
 the sight of poor Miss Anne 's sallow face , several small urchin have a 
 terrified sense that she be cognizant of all their bad misdemeanours , 
 and know the precise number of stone with which they have intend to 
 hit Farmer Britton 's duck . but for all who see they through a 
 less mythical medium , the Miss Irwines be quite superfluous 
 existence - inartistic figure crowd the canvas of life without 
 adequate effect . Miss Anne , indeed , if her chronic headache could have 
 be account for by a pathetic story of disappointed love , might have 
 have some romantic interest attach to she : but no such story have either 
 be know or invent concern she , and the general impression be 
 quite in accordance with the fact , that both the sister be old maid 
 for the prosaic reason that they have never receive an eligible offer . 
 nevertheless , to speak paradoxically , the existence of insignificant 
 people have very important consequence in the world . it can be show to 
 affect the price of bread and the rate of wage , to call forth many evil 
 temper from the selfish and many heroism from the sympathetic , and , 
 in other way , to play no small part in the tragedy of life . and if that 
 handsome , generous - blooded clergyman , the Rev. Adolphus Irwine , have not 
 have these two hopelessly maiden sister , his lot would have be shape 
 quite differently : he would very likely have take a comely wife in his 
 youth , and now , when his hair be get grey under the powder , would 
 have have tall son and bloom daughter - such possession , in short , 
 as man commonly think will repay they for all the labour they take under 
 the sun . as it be - have with all his three living no more than seven 
 hundred a - year , and see no way of keep his splendid mother and his 
 sickly sister , not to reckon a second sister , who be usually speak of 
 without any adjective , in such ladylike ease as become their birth 
 and habit , and at the same time provide for a family of his own - he 
 remain , you see , at the age of eight - and - forty , a bachelor , not 
 make any merit of that renunciation , but say laughingly , if any one 
 allude to it , that he make it an excuse for many indulgence which a 
 wife would never have allow he . and perhaps he be the only person in 
 the world who do not think his sister unintereste and superfluous ; 
 for his be one of those large - hearted , sweet - blooded nature that never 
 know a narrow or a grudging thought ; Epicurean , if you will , with no 
 enthusiasm , no self - scourging sense of duty ; but yet , as you have see , 
 of a sufficiently subtle moral fibre to have an unwearye tenderness 
 for obscure and monotonous suffering . it be his large - hearted 
 indulgence that make he ignore his mother 's hardness towards her 
 daughter , which be the more striking from its contrast with her doting 
 fondness towards himself ; he hold it no virtue to frown at irremediable 
 fault . 
 see the difference between the impression a man make on you when you 
 walk by his side in familiar talk , or look at he in his home , and the 
 figure he make when see from a lofty historical level , or even in the 
 eye of a critical neighbour who think of he as an embody system 
 or opinion rather than as a man . Mr. Roe , the " travel preacher " 
 station at Treddleston , have include Mr. Irwine in a general statement 
 concern the Church clergy in the surround district , whom he 
 describe as man give up to the lust of the flesh and the pride of 
 life ; hunt and shooting , and adorn their own house ; ask what 
 shall we eat , and what shall we drink , and wherewithal shall we be 
 clothe ? - careless of dispense the bread of life to their flock , 
 preach at good but a carnal and soul - benumb morality , and 
 trafficking in the soul of man by receive money for discharge the 
 pastoral office in parish where they do not so much as look on the 
 face of the people more than once a - year . the ecclesiastical historian , 
 too , look into parliamentary report of that period , find honourable 
 member zealous for the Church , and untainted with any sympathy for 
 the " tribe of canting Methodists , " make statement scarcely less 
 melancholy than that of Mr. Roe . and it be impossible for I to say that 
 Mr. Irwine be altogether belie by the generic classification assign 
 he . he really have no very lofty aim , no theological enthusiasm : if I 
 be closely question , I should be oblige to confess that he feel 
 no serious alarm about the soul of his parishioner , and would have 
 think it a mere loss of time to talk in a doctrinal and awakening 
 manner to old " Feyther Taft , " or even to Chad Cranage the blacksmith . 
 if he have be in the habit of speak theoretically , he would perhaps 
 have say that the only healthy form religion could take in such mind 
 be that of certain dim but strong emotion , suffuse themselves as a 
 hallow influence over the family affection and neighbourly duty . 
 he think the custom of baptism more important than its doctrine , and 
 that the religious benefit the peasant draw from the church where his 
 father worship and the sacred piece of turf where they lie bury 
 be but slightly dependent on a clear understanding of the Liturgy or 
 the sermon . clearly the rector be not what be call in these day an 
 " earnest " man : he be fonder of church history than of divinity , and have 
 much more insight into man 's character than interest in their opinion ; 
 he be neither laborious , nor obviously self - deny , nor very copious 
 in alm - giving , and his theology , you perceive , be lax . his mental 
 palate , indeed , be rather pagan , and find a savouriness in a quotation 
 from Sophocles or Theocritus that be quite absent from any text in 
 Isaiah or Amos . but if you feed your young setter on raw flesh , how 
 can you wonder at its retain a relish for uncooked partridge in 
 after - life ? and Mr. Irwine 's recollection of young enthusiasm and 
 ambition be all associate with poetry and ethic that lie aloof from 
 the Bible . 
 on the other hand , I must plead , for I have an affectionate partiality 
 towards the rector 's memory , that he be not vindictive - and some 
 philanthropist have be so ; that he be not intolerant - and there be a 
 rumour that some zealous theologian have not be altogether free from 
 that blemish ; that although he would probably have decline to give his 
 body to be burn in any public cause , and be far from bestow all 
 his good to feed the poor , he have that charity which have sometimes 
 be lack to very illustrious virtue - he be tender to other man 's 
 failing , and unwilling to impute evil . he be one of those man , 
 and they be not the commonest , of whom we can know the good only by 
 follow they away from the marketplace , the platform , and the pulpit , 
 enter with they into their own home , hear the voice with which 
 they speak to the young and aged about their own hearthstone , and 
 witness their thoughtful care for the everyday want of everyday 
 companion , who take all their kindness as a matter of course , and not 
 as a subject for panegyric . 
 such man , happily , have live in time when great abuse flourish , and 
 have sometimes even be the live representative of the abuse . 
 that be a thought which might comfort we a little under the opposite 
 fact - that it be well sometimes not to follow great reformer of 
 abuse beyond the threshold of their home . 
 but whatever you may think of Mr. Irwine now , if you have meet he that 
 June afternoon rid on his grey cob , with his dog run beside 
 he - portly , upright , manly , with a good - natured smile on his finely 
 turn lip as he talk to his dash young companion on the bay mare , 
 you must have feel that , however ill he harmonize with sound theory 
 of the clerical office , he somehow harmonize extremely well with that 
 peaceful landscape . 
 see they in the bright sunlight , interrupt every now and then by 
 rolling mass of cloud , ascend the slope from the Broxton side , 
 where the tall gable and elm of the rectory predominate over the tiny 
 whitewash church . they will soon be in the parish of Hayslope ; the 
 grey church - tower and village roof lie before they to the left , and 
 far on , to the right , they can just see the chimney of the Hall 
 Farm . 
 Chapter VI 
 the Hall Farm 
 EVIDENTLY that gate be never open , for the long grass and the great 
 hemlock grow close against it , and if it be open , it be so rusty 
 that the force necessary to turn it on its hinge would be likely to 
 pull down the square stone - build pillar , to the detriment of the two 
 stone lioness which grin with a doubtful carnivorous affability above 
 a coat of arm surmount each of the pillar . it would be easy enough , 
 by the aid of the nick in the stone pillar , to climb over the brick 
 wall with its smooth stone cop ; but by put our eye close to the 
 rusty bar of the gate , we can see the house well enough , and all but 
 the very corner of the grassy enclosure . 
 it be a very fine old place , of red brick , soften by a pale powdery 
 lichen , which have disperse itself with happy irregularity , so as 
 to bring the red brick into term of friendly companionship with the 
 limestone ornament surround the three gable , the window , and the 
 door - place . but the window be patch with wooden pane , and the door , 
 I think , be like the gate - it be never open . how it would groan and 
 grate against the stone floor if it be ! for it be a solid , heavy , 
 handsome door , and must once have be in the habit of shut with a 
 sonorous bang behind a liveried lackey , who have just see his master and 
 mistress off the ground in a carriage and pair . 
 but at present one might fancy the house in the early stage of a 
 chancery suit , and that the fruit from that grand double row of 
 walnut - tree on the right hand of the enclosure would fall and rot among 
 the grass , if it be not that we hear the booming bark of dog echo 
 from great building at the back . and now the half - wean calf that 
 have be shelter themselves in a gorse - build hovel against the 
 leave - hand wall come out and set up a silly answer to that terrible bark , 
 doubtless suppose that it have reference to bucket of milk . 
 yes , the house must be inhabit , and we will see by whom ; for 
 imagination be a licensed trespasser : it have no fear of dog , but may 
 climb over wall and peep in at window with impunity . put your face 
 to one of the glass pane in the right - hand window : what do you see ? a 
 large open fireplace , with rusty dog in it , and a bare board floor ; 
 at the far end , fleece of wool stack up ; in the middle of the floor , 
 some empty corn - bag . that be the furniture of the dining - room . and 
 what through the left - hand window ? several clothe - horse , a pillion , 
 a spinning - wheel , and an old box wide open and stuff full of coloured 
 rag . at the edge of this box there lie a great wooden doll , which , so 
 far as mutilation be concern , bear a strong resemblance to the fine 
 greek sculpture , and especially in the total loss of its nose . near it 
 there be a little chair , and the butt end of a boy 's leather long - lash 
 whip . 
 the history of the house be plain now . it be once the residence of 
 a country squire , whose family , probably dwindle down to mere 
 spinsterhood , get merge in the more territorial name of Donnithorne . it 
 be once the Hall ; it be now the Hall Farm . like the life in some 
 coast town that be once a watering - place , and be now a port , where the 
 genteel street be silent and grass - grow , and the dock and warehouse 
 busy and resonant , the life at the Hall have change its focus , and no 
 long radiate from the parlour , but from the kitchen and the farmyard . 
 Plenty of life there , though this be the drowsy time of the year , 
 just before hay - harvest ; and it be the drowsy time of the day too , 
 for it be close upon three by the sun , and it be half - past three by Mrs. 
 Poyser 's handsome eight - day clock . but there be always a strong sense 
 of life when the sun be brilliant after rain ; and now he be pour 
 down his beam , and make sparkle among the wet straw , and lighting 
 up every patch of vivid green moss on the red tile of the cow - shed , and 
 turn even the muddy water that be hurry along the channel to the 
 drain into a mirror for the yellow - bill duck , who be seize the 
 opportunity of get a drink with as much body in it as possible . 
 there be quite a concert of noise ; the great bull - dog , chain against 
 the stable , be throw into furious exasperation by the unwary approach 
 of a cock too near the mouth of his kennel , and send forth a thunder 
 bark , which be answer by two fox - hound shut up in the opposite 
 cow - house ; the old top - knot hen , scratch with their chick among 
 the straw , set up a sympathetic croaking as the discomfited cock join 
 they ; a sow with her brood , all very muddy as to the leg , and curl as 
 to the tail , throw in some deep staccato note ; our friend the calf 
 be bleat from the home croft ; and , under all , a fine ear discern 
 the continuous hum of human voice . 
 for the great barn - door be throw wide open , and man be busy 
 there mend the harness , under the superintendence of Mr. Goby , 
 the " whittaw , " otherwise saddler , who entertain they with the late 
 Treddleston gossip . it be certainly rather an unfortunate day that 
 Alick , the shepherd , have choose for have the whittaw , since the 
 morning turn out so wet ; and Mrs. Poyser have speak her mind pretty 
 strongly as to the dirt which the extra number of man 's shoe bring 
 into the house at dinnertime . indeed , she have not yet recover she 
 equanimity on the subject , though it be now nearly three hour since 
 dinner , and the house - floor be perfectly clean again ; as clean as 
 everything else in that wonderful house - place , where the only chance of 
 collect a few grain of dust would be to climb on the salt - coffer , 
 and put your finger on the high mantel - shelf on which the glitter 
 brass candlestick be enjoy their summer sinecure ; for at this time 
 of year , of course , every one go to bed while it be yet light , or 
 at least light enough to discern the outline of object after you 
 have bruise your shin against they . surely nowhere else could an 
 oak clock - case and an oak table have get to such a polish by the hand : 
 genuine " elbow polish , " as Mrs. Poyser call it , for she thank God 
 she never have any of your varnished rubbish in her house . Hetty Sorrel 
 often take the opportunity , when her aunt 's back be turn , of look 
 at the pleasing reflection of herself in those polished surface , for 
 the oak table be usually turn up like a screen , and be more for 
 ornament than for use ; and she could see herself sometimes in the great 
 round pewter dish that be range on the shelf above the long 
 deal dinner - table , or in the hob of the grate , which always shine like 
 jasper . 
 everything be look at its bright at this moment , for the sun 
 shine right on the pewter dish , and from their reflect surface 
 pleasant jet of light be throw on mellow oak and bright brass - and 
 on a still pleasanter object than these , for some of the ray fall on 
 Dinah 's finely mould cheek , and light up her pale red hair to auburn , 
 as she bend over the heavy household linen which she be mend for her 
 aunt . no scene could have be more peaceful , if Mrs. Poyser , who be 
 iron a few thing that still remain from the Monday 's wash , have 
 not be make a frequent clinking with her iron and move to and 
 fro whenever she want it to cool ; carry the keen glance of her 
 blue - grey eye from the kitchen to the dairy , where Hetty be make 
 up the butter , and from the dairy to the back kitchen , where Nancy be 
 take the pie out of the oven . do not suppose , however , that Mrs. 
 Poyser be elderly or shrewish in her appearance ; she be a good - look 
 woman , not more than eight - and - thirty , of fair complexion and sandy 
 hair , well - shapen , light - footed . the most conspicuous article in her 
 attire be an ample checker linen apron , which almost cover she 
 skirt ; and nothing could be plainer or less noticeable than her cap 
 and gown , for there be no weakness of which she be less tolerant than 
 feminine vanity , and the preference of ornament to utility . the family 
 likeness between she and her niece Dinah Morris , with the contrast 
 between her keenness and Dinah 's seraphic gentleness of expression , 
 might have serve a painter as an excellent suggestion for a Martha and 
 Mary . their eye be just of the same colour , but a striking test of 
 the difference in their operation be see in the demeanour of Trip , the 
 black - and - tan terrier , whenever that much - suspect dog unwarily expose 
 himself to the freezing arctic ray of Mrs. Poyser 's glance . her tongue 
 be not less keen than her eye , and , whenever a damsel come within 
 earshot , seem to take up an unfinished lecture , as a barrel - organ 
 take up a tune , precisely at the point where it have leave off . 
 the fact that it be churn day be another reason why it be 
 inconvenient to have the whittaw , and why , consequently , Mrs. 
 Poyser should scold molly the housemaid with unusual severity . to all 
 appearance molly have get through her after - dinner work in an exemplary 
 manner , have " clean herself " with great dispatch , and now come to ask , 
 submissively , if she should sit down to her spinning till milk time . 
 but this blameless conduct , accord to Mrs. Poyser , shroud a secret 
 indulgence of unbecoming wish , which she now drag forth and hold up 
 to Molly 's view with cut eloquence . 
 " Spinning , indeed ! it be not   spin as you would be at , I will be bind , and 
 let you have your own way . I never know your equal for gallowsness . to 
 think of a gell o ' your age want to go and sit with half - a - dozen man ! 
 I would ha ' be ashamed to let the word pass over my lip if I have be you . 
 and you , as have be here ever since last Michaelmas , and I hire you 
 at Treddles'on stattit , without a bit o ' character - as I say , you might 
 be grateful to be hire in that way to a respectable place ; and you know 
 no more o ' what belong to work when you come here than the mawkin I ' 
 the field . as poor a two - fiste thing as ever I see , you know you be . 
 who teach you to scrub a floor , I should like to know ? why , you would leave 
 the dirt in heap I ' the corner - anybody ' ud think you would never be 
 bring up among Christians . and as for spinning , why , you have   waste 
 as much as your wage I ' the flax you have   spoil learning to spin . 
 and you have   a right to feel that , and not to go about as gap and as 
 thoughtless as if you be behold to nobody . comb the wool for the 
 whittaw , indeed ! that be what you would like to be do , be it ? that be the 
 way with you - that be the road you would all like to go , headlong to ruin . 
 you be never easy till you have   get some sweetheart as be as big a fool as 
 yourself : you think you will be finely off when you be married , I daresay , 
 and have get a three - legged stool to sit on , and never a blanket to 
 cover you , and a bit o ' oat - cake for your dinner , as three child be 
 a - snatching at . " 
 " I be sure I donna want t ' go wi ' the whittaw , " say Molly , whimpering , 
 and quite overcome by this dantean picture of her future , " on'y we 
 allay use to comb the wool for ' n at Mester Ottley 's ; an ' so I just 
 ax ye . I donna want to set eye on the whittaw again ; I wish I may 
 never stir if I do . " 
 " Mr. Ottley 's , indeed ! it be fine talk o ' what you do at Mr. 
 Ottley 's . your missis there might like her floor dirte wi ' whittaw 
 for what I know . there be no knowing what people wonna like - such way as 
 I have   hear of ! I never have a gell come into my house as seem to know 
 what cleaning be ; I think people live like pig , for my part . and as to 
 that Betty as be dairymaid at Trent 's before she come to I , she would ha ' 
 leave the cheese without turn from week 's end to week 's end , and the 
 dairy thrall , I might ha ' write my name on them , when I come downstairs 
 after my illness , as the doctor say it be inflammation - it be a mercy 
 I get well of it . and to think o ' your know no well , Molly , and 
 be here a - go I ' nine month , and not for want o ' talk to , 
 neither - and what be you stanne there for , like a jack as be run 
 down , instead o ' get your wheel out ? you be a rare un for sit 
 down to your work a little while after it be time to put by . " 
 " Munny , my iron 's twite tell ; pease put it down to warm . " 
 the small chirrup voice that utter this request come from a little 
 sunny - haired girl between three and four , who , seat on a high chair 
 at the end of the iron table , be arduously clutch the handle of 
 a miniature iron with her tiny fat fist , and iron rag with an 
 assiduity that require she to put her little red tongue out as far as 
 anatomy would allow . 
 " Cold , be it , my darling ? bless your sweet face ! " say Mrs. Poyser , who 
 be remarkable for the facility with which she could relapse from her 
 official objurgatory to one of fondness or of friendly converse . " never 
 mind ! Mother 's do she iron now . she be go to put the iron 
 thing away . " 
 " Munny , I tould ' ike to do into de barn to Tommy , to see de whittawd . " 
 " no , no , no ; Totty ' ud get her foot wet , " say Mrs. Poyser , carry 
 away her iron . " run into the dairy and see cousin Hetty make the 
 butter . " 
 " I tould ' ike a bit o ' pum - take , " rejoin Totty , who seem to be 
 provide with several relay of request ; at the same time , take the 
 opportunity of her momentary leisure to put her finger into a bowl 
 of starch , and drag it down so as to empty the content with tolerable 
 completeness on to the iron sheet . 
 " do ever anybody see the like ? " scream Mrs. Poyser , run towards 
 the table when her eye have fall on the blue stream . " the child 's 
 allay I ' mischief if your back be turn a minute . what shall I do to 
 you , you naughty , naughty gell ? " 
 Totty , however , have descend from her chair with great swiftness , and 
 be already in retreat towards the dairy with a sort of waddle run , 
 and an amount of fat on the nape of her neck which make she look like 
 the metamorphosis of a white suckling pig . 
 the starch have be wipe up by Molly 's help , and the iron 
 apparatus put by , Mrs. Poyser take up her knitting which always lay 
 ready at hand , and be the work she like well , because she could carry 
 it on automatically as she walk to and fro . but now she come and sit 
 down opposite Dinah , whom she look at in a meditative way , as she 
 knit her grey worst stocking . 
 " you look th ' image o ' your Aunt Judith , Dinah , when you sit a - sewing . I 
 could almost fancy it be thirty year back , and I be a little gell 
 at home , look at Judith as she sit at her work , after she have do 
 the house up ; only it be a little cottage , Father 's be , and not a big 
 ramble house as get dirty I ' one corner as fast as you clean it in 
 another - but for all that , I could fancy you be your Aunt Judith , only 
 her hair be a deal dark than your , and she be stouter and broad 
 I ' the shoulder . Judith and I allay hang together , though she have 
 such queer way , but your mother and she never could agree . ah , your 
 mother little thought as she would have a daughter just cut out after the 
 very pattern o ' Judith , and leave she an orphan , too , for Judith to 
 take care on , and bring up with a spoon when she be in the graveyard at 
 Stoniton . I allay say that o ' Judith , as she would bear a pound weight 
 any day to save anybody else carry a ounce . and she be just the same 
 from the first o ' my remember she ; it make no difference in she , as 
 I could see , when she take to the Methodists , only she talk a bit 
 different and wear a different sort o ' cap ; but she would never in her life 
 spend a penny on herself more than keep herself decent . " 
 " she be a blessed woman , " say Dinah ; " God have give she a love , 
 self - forget nature , and he perfect it by grace . and she be very 
 fond of you too , Aunt Rachel . I often hear her talk of you in the same 
 sort of way . when she have that bad illness , and I be only eleven 
 year old , she use to say , ' you will have a friend on earth in your Aunt 
 Rachel , if I be take from you , for she have a kind heart , ' and I be sure 
 I have   find it so . " 
 " I do not   know how , child ; anybody ' ud be cunning to do anything for you , 
 I think ; you be like the bird o ' th ' air , and live nobody know how . 
 I would ha ' be glad to behave to you like a mother 's sister , if you would come 
 and live I ' this country where there be some shelter and victual for 
 man and beast , and folk do not   live on the naked hill , like poultry 
 a - scratching on a gravel bank . and then you might get married to some 
 decent man , and there would be plenty ready to have you , if you would only leave 
 off that preaching , as be ten time bad than anything your Aunt Judith 
 ever do . and even if you would marry Seth Bede , as be a poor wool - gathering 
 Methodist and be never like to have a penny beforehand , I know your 
 uncle ' ud help you with a pig , and very like a cow , for he be allay be 
 good - natur'd to my kin , for all they be poor , and make them welcome to 
 the house ; and ' ud do for you , I will be bind , as much as ever he would do 
 for Hetty , though she be his own niece . and there be linen in the house 
 as I could well spare you , for I have   get lot o ' sheet and 
 table - clothing , and towel , as be not   make up . there be a piece o ' 
 sheet I could give you as that squint Kitty spin - she be a rare 
 girl to spin , for all she squint , and the child could not   abide she ; 
 and , you know , the spinning be go on constant , and there be new linen 
 weave twice as fast as the old wear out . but where be the use o ' talking , 
 if ye wonna be persuade , and settle down like any other woman in her 
 sens , i'stead o ' wear yourself out with walk and preaching , 
 and give away every penny you get , so as you have   nothing save against 
 sickness ; and all the thing you have   get I ' the world , I verily believe , 
 ' ud go into a bundle no big nor a double cheese . and all because 
 you have   get notion I ' your head about religion more nor what be I ' the 
 Catechism and the Prayer - book . " 
 " but not more than what be in the Bible , Aunt , " say Dinah . 
 " yes , and the Bible too , for that matter , " Mrs. Poyser rejoin , rather 
 sharply ; " else why should not   they as know good what be in the Bible - the 
 parson and people as have get nothing to do but learn it - do the same 
 as you do ? but , for the matter o ' that , if everybody be to do like 
 you , the world must come to a standstill ; for if everybody try to 
 do without house and home , and with poor eating and drinking , and be 
 allay talk as we must despise the thing o ' the world as you say , I 
 should like to know where the pick o ' the stock , and the corn , and the 
 good new - milk cheese ' ud have to go . everybody ' ud be want bread 
 make o ' tail end and everybody ' ud be run after everybody else 
 to preach to them , istead o ' bring up their family , and lay by 
 against a bad harvest . it stand to sense as that can not   be the right 
 religion . " 
 " Nay , dear aunt , you never hear I say that all people be call to 
 forsake their work and their family . it be quite right the land should 
 be plough and sow , and the precious corn store , and the thing 
 of this life care for , and right that people should rejoice in their 
 family , and provide for they , so that this be do in the fear of the 
 Lord , and that they be not unmindful of the soul 's want while they be 
 care for the body . we can all be servant of God wherever our lot be 
 cast , but he give we different sort of work , accord as he fit we 
 for it and call we to it . I can no more help spend my life in try 
 to do what I can for the soul of other , than you could help run if 
 you hear little Totty cry at the other end of the house ; the voice 
 would go to your heart , you would think the dear child be in trouble or 
 in danger , and you could not   rest without run to help she and comfort 
 she . " 
 " ah , " say Mrs. Poyser , rise and walk towards the door , " I know it 
 ' ud be just the same if I be to talk to you for hour . you would make I 
 the same answer , at th ' end . I might as well talk to the run brook 
 and tell it to stan ' still . " 
 the causeway outside the kitchen door be dry enough now for Mrs. Poyser 
 to stand there quite pleasantly and see what be go on in the yard , 
 the grey worst stocking make a steady progress in her hand all the 
 while . but she have not be stand there more than five minute before 
 she come in again , and say to Dinah , in rather a flurry , awe - stricken 
 tone , " if there be not   Captain Donnithorne and Mr. Irwine a - come into 
 the yard ! I will lay my life they be come to speak about your preaching 
 on the Green , Dinah ; it be you must answer them , for I be dumb . I have   say 
 enough a'ready about your bring such disgrace upo ' your uncle 's 
 family . I would not   ha ' minded if you have be Mr. Poyser 's own 
 niece - folk must put up wi ' their own kin , as they put up wi ' their own 
 nose - it be their own flesh and blood . but to think of a niece o ' mine 
 be cause o ' my husband 's be turn out of his farm , and I bring 
 he no fortin but my savin 's - - " 
 " Nay , dear Aunt Rachel , " say Dinah gently , " you have   no cause for such 
 fear . I have   strong assurance that no evil will happen to you and my 
 uncle and the child from anything I have   do . I do not   preach without 
 direction . " 
 " Direction ! I know very well what you mean by direction , " say Mrs. 
 Poyser , knit in a rapid and agitated manner . " when there be a big 
 maggot than usual in your head you call it ' direction ' ; and then nothing 
 can stir you - you look like the statty o ' the outside o ' Treddles'on 
 church , a - starin ' and a - smilin ' whether it be fair weather or foul . I 
 hanna common patience with you . " 
 by this time the two gentleman have reach the paling and have get 
 down from their horse : it be plain they mean to come in . Mrs. Poyser 
 advance to the door to meet they , curtsy low and tremble between 
 anger with Dinah and anxiety to conduct herself with perfect propriety 
 on the occasion . for in those day the keen of bucolic mind feel a 
 whisper awe at the sight of the gentry , such as of old man feel when 
 they stand on tiptoe to watch the god pass by in tall human shape . 
 " well , Mrs. Poyser , how be you after this stormy morning ? " say Mr. 
 Irwine , with his stately cordiality . " our foot be quite dry ; we shall 
 not soil your beautiful floor . " 
 " oh , sir , do not   mention it , " say Mrs. Poyser . " will you and the captain 
 please to walk into the parlour ? " 
 " no , indeed , thank you , Mrs. Poyser , " say the captain , look eagerly 
 round the kitchen , as if his eye be seek something it could not 
 find . " I delight in your kitchen . I think it be the most charming room 
 I know . I should like every farmer 's wife to come and look at it for a 
 pattern . " 
 " oh , you be pleased to say so , sir . pray take a seat , " say Mrs. 
 Poyser , relieve a little by this compliment and the captain 's evident 
 good - humour , but still glance anxiously at Mr. Irwine , who , she see , 
 be look at Dinah and advance towards she . 
 " Poyser be not at home , be he ? " say Captain Donnithorne , seat 
 himself where he could see along the short passage to the open 
 dairy - door . 
 " no , sir , he be not ; he be go to Rosseter to see Mr. West , the factor , 
 about the wool . but there be Father i ' the barn , sir , if he would be of any 
 use . " 
 " no , thank you ; I will just look at the whelp and leave a message about 
 they with your shepherd . I must come another day and see your husband ; I 
 want to have a consultation with he about horse . do you know when he be 
 likely to be at liberty ? " 
 " why , sir , you can hardly miss he , except it be o ' Treddles'on 
 market - day - that be of a Friday , you know . for if he be anywhere on the 
 farm we can send for he in a minute . if we have get rid o ' the Scantlands , 
 we should have no outlying field ; and I should be glad of it , for if 
 ever anything happen , he be sure to be go to the Scantlands . thing 
 allay happen so contrairy , if they have   a chance ; and it be an unnat'ral 
 thing to have one bit o ' your farm in one county and all the rest in 
 another . " 
 " ah , the Scantlands would go much well with Choyce 's farm , especially 
 as he want dairyland and you have   get plenty . I think yours be the 
 prettiest farm on the estate , though ; and do you know , Mrs. Poyser , if I 
 be go to marry and settle , I should be tempt to turn you out , and 
 do up this fine old house , and turn farmer myself . " 
 " oh , sir , " say Mrs. Poyser , rather alarmed , " you would not   like it at 
 all . as for farming , it be put money into your pocket wi ' your 
 right hand and fetch it out wi ' your left . as fur as I can see , it be 
 raise victual for other folk and just get a mouthful for yourself 
 and your child as you go along . not as you would be like a poor man as 
 want to get his bread - you could afford to lose as much money as you 
 like I ' farming - but it be poor fun lose money , I should think , though 
 I understan ' it be what the great folk I ' London play at more than 
 anything . for my husband hear at market as Lord Dacey 's eld son have 
 lose thousand upo ' thousand to the Prince o ' Wales , and they say 
 my lady be go to pawn her jewel to pay for he . but you know more 
 about that than I do , sir . but , as for farming , sir , I canna think as 
 you would like it ; and this house - the draught in it be enough to cut you 
 through , and it be my opinion the floor upstairs be very rotten , and 
 the rat I ' the cellar be beyond anything . " 
 " why , that be a terrible picture , Mrs. Poyser . I think I should be do 
 you a service to turn you out of such a place . but there be no chance 
 of that . I be not likely to settle for the next twenty year , till I be a 
 stout gentleman of forty ; and my grandfather would never consent to part 
 with such good tenant as you . " 
 " well , sir , if he think so well o ' Mr. Poyser for a tenant I wish you 
 could put in a word for he to allow we some new gate for the five 
 close , for my husband 's be ask and ask till he be tired , and to 
 think o ' what he be do for the farm , and be never have a penny allow 
 he , be the time bad or good . and as I have   say to my husband often and 
 often , I be sure if the captain have anything to do with it , it would not 
 be so . not as I wish to speak disrespectful o ' they as have get the 
 power I ' their hand , but it be more than flesh and blood ' ull bear 
 sometimes , to be toil and strive , and up early and down late , and 
 hardly sleep a wink when you lie down for think as the cheese 
 may swell , or the cow may slip their calf , or the wheat may grow green 
 again I ' the sheaf - and after all , at th ' end o ' the year , it be like 
 as if you have be cook a feast and have get the smell of it for your 
 pain . " 
 Mrs. Poyser , once launch into conversation , always sail along 
 without any check from her preliminary awe of the gentry . the confidence 
 she feel in her own power of exposition be a motive force that 
 overcome all resistance . 
 " I be afraid I should only do harm instead of good , if I be to speak 
 about the gate , Mrs. Poyser , " say the captain , " though I assure you 
 there be no man on the estate I would soon say a word for than your 
 husband . I know his farm be in well order than any other within 
 ten mile of we ; and as for the kitchen , " he add , smile , " I do not 
 believe there be one in the kingdom to beat it . by the by , I have   never 
 see your dairy : I must see your dairy , Mrs. Poyser . " 
 " indeed , sir , it be not fit for you to go in , for Hetty 's in the middle 
 o ' make the butter , for the churning be throw late , and I be quite 
 ashamed . " this Mrs. Poyser say blushing , and believe that the captain 
 be really interested in her milk - pan , and would adjust his opinion of 
 she to the appearance of her dairy . 
 " oh , I have   no doubt it be in capital order . take I in , " say the captain , 
 himself lead the way , while Mrs. Poyser follow . 
 Chapter VII 
 the Dairy 
 the dairy be certainly worth look at : it be a scene to sicken for 
 with a sort of calenture in hot and dusty street - such coolness , such 
 purity , such fresh fragrance of new - press cheese , of firm butter , of 
 wooden vessel perpetually bath in pure water ; such soft colouring of 
 red earthenware and creamy surface , brown wood and polished tin , grey 
 limestone and rich orange - red rust on the iron weight and hook and 
 hinge . but one get only a confused notion of these detail when they 
 surround a distractingly pretty girl of seventeen , stand on little 
 patten and round her dimpled arm to lift a pound of butter out of 
 the scale . 
 Hetty blush a deep rose - colour when Captain Donnithorne enter the 
 dairy and speak to she ; but it be not at all a distressed blush , for 
 it be inwreathe with smile and dimple , and with sparkle from under 
 long , curl , dark eyelash ; and while her aunt be discourse to he 
 about the limited amount of milk that be to be spar for butter and 
 cheese so long as the calf be not all wean , and a large quantity 
 but inferior quality of milk yield by the shorthorn , which have 
 be buy on experiment , together with other matter which must be 
 interesting to a young gentleman who would one day be a landlord , Hetty 
 toss and pat her pound of butter with quite a self - possess , 
 coquettish air , slyly conscious that no turn of her head be lose . 
 there be various order of beauty , cause man to make fool of 
 themselves in various style , from the desperate to the sheepish ; but 
 there be one order of beauty which seem make to turn the head not only 
 of man , but of all intelligent mammal , even of woman . it be a beauty 
 like that of kitten , or very small downy duck make gentle ripple 
 noise with their soft bill , or baby just begin to toddle and 
 to engage in conscious mischief - a beauty with which you can never be 
 angry , but that you feel ready to crush for inability to comprehend the 
 state of mind into which it throw you . Hetty Sorrel 's be that sort 
 of beauty . her aunt , Mrs. Poyser , who profess to despise all personal 
 attraction and intend to be the severest of mentor , continually 
 gaze at Hetty 's charm by the sly , fascinate in spite of herself ; and 
 after administer such a scolding as naturally flow from her anxiety 
 to do well by her husband 's niece - who have no mother of her own to scold 
 she , poor thing ! - she would often confess to her husband , when they be 
 safe out of hearing , that she firmly believe , " the naughty the little 
 huzzy behave , the pretty she look . " 
 it be of little use for I to tell you that Hetty 's cheek be like a 
 rose - petal , that dimple play about her pouting lip , that her large 
 dark eye hide a soft roguishness under their long lash , and that her 
 curly hair , though all push back under her round cap while she be at 
 work , steal back in dark delicate ring on her forehead , and about her 
 white shell - like ear ; it be of little use for I to say how lovely 
 be the contour of her pink - and - white neckerchief , tuck into her low 
 plum - colour stuff bodice , or how the linen butter - make apron , with 
 its bib , seem a thing to be imitate in silk by duchess , since it 
 fall in such charming line , or how her brown stocking and thick - sole 
 buckle shoe lose all that clumsiness which they must certainly have 
 have when empty of her foot and ankle - of little use , unless you have 
 see a woman who affect you as Hetty affect her beholder , for 
 otherwise , though you might conjure up the image of a lovely woman , she 
 would not in the least resemble that distract kittenlike maiden . I 
 might mention all the divine charm of a bright spring day , but if you 
 have never in your life utterly forget yourself in strain your eye 
 after the mount lark , or in wander through the still lane when 
 the fresh - open blossom fill they with a sacred silent beauty like 
 that of fretted aisle , where would be the use of my descriptive 
 catalogue ? I could never make you know what I mean by a bright spring 
 day . Hetty 's be a spring - tide beauty ; it be the beauty of young 
 frisking thing , round - limbe , gambolling , circumvent you by a 
 false air of innocence - the innocence of a young star - browe calf , for 
 example , that , be incline for a promenade out of bound , lead you 
 a severe steeplechase over hedge and ditch , and only come to a stand in 
 the middle of a bog . 
 and they be the pretty attitude and movement into which a pretty 
 girl be throw in make up butter - toss movement that give a 
 charming curve to the arm , and a sideward inclination of the round white 
 neck ; little pat and roll movement with the palm of the hand , 
 and nice adaptation and finishing which can not at all be effect 
 without a great play of the pouting mouth and the dark eye . and then 
 the butter itself seem to communicate a fresh charm - it be so pure , 
 so sweet - scented ; it be turn off the mould with such a beautiful 
 firm surface , like marble in a pale yellow light ! moreover , Hetty be 
 particularly clever at make up the butter ; it be the one performance 
 of hers that her aunt allow to pass without severe criticism ; so she 
 handle it with all the grace that belong to mastery . 
 " I hope you will be ready for a great holiday on the thirtieth of July , 
 Mrs. Poyser , " say Captain Donnithorne , when he have sufficiently admire 
 the dairy and give several improvise opinion on swede turnip and 
 shorthorn . " you know what be to happen then , and I shall expect you 
 to be one of the guest who come early and leave late . will you 
 promise I your hand for two dance , Miss Hetty ? if I do not   get your 
 promise now , I know I shall hardly have a chance , for all the smart 
 young farmer will take care to secure you . " 
 Hetty smile and blush , but before she could answer , Mrs. Poyser 
 interpose , scandalize at the mere suggestion that the young squire 
 could be exclude by any mean partner . 
 " indeed , sir , you be very kind to take that notice of she . and I be 
 sure , whenever you be pleased to dance with she , she will be proud and 
 thankful , if she stand still all the rest o ' th ' evening . " 
 " oh no , no , that would be too cruel to all the other young fellow who 
 can dance . but you will promise I two dance , will not   you ? " the captain 
 continue , determined to make Hetty look at he and speak to he . 
 Hetty drop the prettiest little curtsy , and steal a half - shy , 
 half - coquettish glance at he as she say , " yes , thank you , sir . " 
 " and you must bring all your child , you know , Mrs. Poyser ; your 
 little Totty , as well as the boy . I want all the young child on 
 the estate to be there - all those who will be fine young man and woman 
 when I be a bald old fellow . " 
 " oh dear , sir , that ' ull be a long time first , " say Mrs. Poyser , quite 
 overcome at the young squire 's speak so lightly of himself , and 
 think how her husband would be interested in hear her recount this 
 remarkable speciman of high - bear humour . the captain be think to 
 be " very full of his joke , " and be a great favourite throughout the 
 estate on account of his free manner . every tenant be quite sure 
 thing would be different when the rein get into his hand - there 
 be to be a millennial abundance of new gate , allowance of lime , and 
 return of ten per cent . 
 " but where be Totty to - day ? " he say . " I want to see she . " 
 " where be the little un , Hetty ? " say Mrs. Poyser . " she come in here not 
 long ago . " 
 " I do not   know . she go into the brewhouse to Nancy , I think . " 
 the proud mother , unable to resist the temptation to show her Totty , 
 pass at once into the back kitchen , in search of she , not , however , 
 without misgiving lest something should have happen to render she 
 person and attire unfit for presentation . 
 " and do you carry the butter to market when you have   make it ? " say the 
 Captain to Hetty , meanwhile . 
 " oh no , sir ; not when it be so heavy . I be not strong enough to carry it . 
 Alick take it on horseback . " 
 " no , I be sure your pretty arm be never mean for such heavy weight . 
 but you go out a walk sometimes these pleasant evening , do not   you ? 
 why do not   you have a walk in the Chase sometimes , now it be so green and 
 pleasant ? I hardly ever see you anywhere except at home and at church . " 
 " aunt do not   like I to go a - walk only when I be go somewhere , " 
 say Hetty . " but I go through the Chase sometimes . " 
 " and do not   you ever go to see Mrs. Best , the housekeeper ? I think I see 
 you once in the housekeeper 's room . " 
 " it be not   Mrs. Best , it be Mrs. Pomfret , the lady 's maid , as I go to see . 
 she be teach I tent - stitch and the lace - mending . I be go to tea 
 with she to - morrow afternoon . " 
 the reason why there have be space for this tete - a - tete can only be 
 know by look into the back kitchen , where Totty have be discover 
 rub a stray blue - bag against her nose , and in the same moment 
 allow some liberal indigo drop to fall on her afternoon pinafore . 
 but now she appear hold her mother 's hand - the end of her round 
 nose rather shiny from a recent and hurried application of soap and 
 water . 
 " here she be ! " say the captain , lift she up and set she on the 
 low stone shelf . " here be Totty ! by the by , what be her other name ? she 
 be not   christen Totty . " 
 " oh , sir , we call she sadly out of her name . Charlotte 's her christen 
 name . it be a name I ' Mr. Poyser 's family : his grandmother be name 
 Charlotte . but we begin with call she Lotty , and now it be get to 
 Totty . to be sure it be more like a name for a dog than a Christian 
 child . " 
 " Totty 's a capital name . why , she look like a Totty . have she get a 
 pocket on ? " say the captain , feel in his own waistcoat pocket . 
 Totty immediately with great gravity lift up her frock , and show a 
 tiny pink pocket at present in a state of collapse . 
 " it dot notin ' in it , " she say , as she look down at it very 
 earnestly . 
 " no ! what a pity ! such a pretty pocket . well , I think I have   get some 
 thing in mine that will make a pretty jingle in it . yes ! I declare I have 
 get five little round silver thing , and hear what a pretty noise they 
 make in Totty 's pink pocket . " here he shake the pocket with the five 
 sixpence in it , and Totty show her tooth and wrinkle her nose in 
 great glee ; but , divine that there be nothing more to be get by 
 stay , she jump off the shelf and run away to jingle her pocket in 
 the hearing of Nancy , while her mother call after she , " oh for shame , 
 you naughty gell ! not to thank the captain for what he be give you I be 
 sure , sir , it be very kind of you ; but she be spoil shameful ; her father 
 will not   have she say nay in anything , and there be no manage she . it be 
 be the young , and th ' only gell . " 
 " oh , she be a funny little fatty ; I would not   have she different . but I 
 must be go now , for I suppose the rector be wait for I . " 
 with a " good - bye , " a bright glance , and a bow to Hetty Arthur leave the 
 dairy . but he be mistake in imagine himself wait for . the rector 
 have be so much interested in his conversation with Dinah that he would 
 not have choose to close it early ; and you shall hear now what they 
 have be say to each other . 
 Chapter VIII 
 a Vocation 
 DINAH , who have rise when the gentleman come in , but still keep hold of 
 the sheet she be mend , curtsy respectfully when she see Mr. Irwine 
 look at she and advance towards she . he have never yet speak to 
 she , or stand face to face with she , and her first thought , as her eye 
 meet his , be , " what a well - favour countenance ! oh that the good seed 
 might fall on that soil , for it would surely flourish . " the agreeable 
 impression must have be mutual , for Mr. Irwine bow to she with a 
 benignant deference , which would have be equally in place if she have 
 be the most dignified lady of his acquaintance . 
 " you be only a visitor in this neighbourhood , I think ? " be his first 
 word , as he seat himself opposite to she . 
 " no , sir , I come from Snowfield , in Stonyshire . but my aunt be very 
 kind , want I to have rest from my work there , because I have be ill , 
 and she invite I to come and stay with she for a while . " 
 " ah , I remember Snowfield very well ; I once have occasion to go there . 
 it be a dreary bleak place . they be build a cotton - mill there ; but 
 that be many year ago now . I suppose the place be a good deal change by 
 the employment that mill must have bring . " 
 " it be change so far as the mill have bring people there , who get a 
 livelihood for themselves by work in it , and make it well for the 
 tradesfolk . I work in it myself , and have reason to be grateful , for 
 thereby I have enough and to spare . but it be still a bleak place , as you 
 say , sir - very different from this country . " 
 " you have relation live there , probably , so that you be attach to 
 the place as your home ? " 
 " I have an aunt there once ; she bring I up , for I be an orphan . but 
 she be take away seven year ago , and I have no other kindre that I 
 know of , besides my Aunt Poyser , who be very good to I , and would 
 have I come and live in this country , which to be sure be a good land , 
 wherein they eat bread without scarceness . but I be not free to leave 
 Snowfield , where I be first plant , and have grow deep into it , like 
 the small grass on the hill - top . " 
 " ah , I daresay you have many religious friend and companion there ; you 
 be a Methodist - a Wesleyan , I think ? " 
 " yes , my aunt at Snowfield belong to the Society , and I have cause 
 to be thankful for the privilege I have have thereby from my early 
 childhood . " 
 " and have you be long in the habit of preach ? for I understand you 
 preach at Hayslope last night . " 
 " I first take to the work four year since , when I be twenty - one . " 
 " your Society sanction woman 's preaching , then ? " 
 " it do not   forbid they , sir , when they have   a clear call to the work , 
 and when their ministry be own by the conversion of sinner and the 
 strengthening of God 's people . Mrs. Fletcher , as you may have hear 
 about , be the first woman to preach in the Society , I believe , before 
 she be marry , when she be Miss Bosanquet ; and Mr. Wesley approve 
 of she undertake the work . she have a great gift , and there be many 
 other now live who be precious fellow - helper in the work of the 
 ministry . I understand there be be voice raise against it in the 
 Society of late , but I can not but think their counsel will come to 
 nought . it be not   for man to make channel for God 's Spirit , as they 
 make channel for the watercourse , and say , ' flow here , but flow not 
 there . ' " 
 " but do not   you find some danger among your people - I do not   mean to say 
 that it be so with you , far from it - but do not   you find sometimes that 
 both man and woman fancy themselves channel for God 's Spirit , and be 
 quite mistaken , so that they set about a work for which they be unfit 
 and bring holy thing into contempt ? " 
 " Doubtless it be so sometimes ; for there have be evil - doer among we 
 who have seek to deceive the brother , and some there be who deceive 
 their own self . but we be not without discipline and correction to 
 put a check upon these thing . there be a very strict order keep among 
 we , and the brother and sister watch for each other 's soul as they 
 that must give account . they do not   go every one his own way and say , ' be 
 I my brother 's keeper ? ' " 
 " but tell I - if I may ask , and I be really interested in know 
 it - how you first come to think of preach ? " 
 " indeed , sir , I do not   think of it at all - I have be use from the time 
 I be sixteen to talk to the little child , and teach they , and 
 sometimes I have have my heart enlarge to speak in class , and be much 
 draw out in prayer with the sick . but I have feel no call to preach , for 
 when I be not greatly work upon , I be too much give to sit still and 
 keep by myself . it seem as if I could sit silent all day long with the 
 thought of God overflow my soul - as the pebble lie bath in the 
 Willow Brook . for thought be so great - be not   they , sir ? they seem to 
 lie upon we like a deep flood ; and it be my besetment to forget where 
 I be and everything about I , and lose myself in thought that I could 
 give no account of , for I could neither make a beginning nor end of 
 they in word . that be my way as long as I can remember ; but sometimes 
 it seem as if speech come to I without any will of my own , and word 
 be give to I that come out as the tear come , because our heart 
 be full and we can not   help it . and those be always time of great 
 blessing , though I have never think it could be so with I before 
 a congregation of people . but , sir , we be lead on , like the little 
 child , by a way that we know not . I be call to preach quite 
 suddenly , and since then I have never be leave in doubt about the work 
 that be lay upon I . " 
 " but tell I the circumstance - just how it be , the very day you begin 
 to preach . " 
 " it be one Sunday I walk with brother Marlowe , who be an aged 
 man , one of the local preacher , all the way to Hetton - Deeps - that be a 
 village where the people get their living by work in the lead - mine , 
 and where there be no church nor preacher , but they live like sheep 
 without a shepherd . it be well than twelve mile from Snowfield , so 
 we set out early in the morning , for it be summertime ; and I have a 
 wonderful sense of the divine love as we walk over the hill , where 
 there be no tree , you know , sir , as there be here , to make the sky look 
 small , but you see the heaven stretch out like a tent , and you feel 
 the everlaste arm around you . but before we get to Hetton , brother 
 Marlowe be seize with a dizziness that make he afraid of fall , for 
 he overwork himself sadly , at his year , in watch and pray , 
 and walk so many mile to speak the Word , as well as carry on his 
 trade of linen - weaving . and when we get to the village , the people be 
 expect he , for he have appoint the time and the place when he be 
 there before , and such of they as care to hear the Word of Life be 
 assemble on a spot where the cottage be thick , so as other might 
 be draw to come . but he feel as he could not   stand up to preach , and 
 he be force to lie down in the first of the cottage we come to . so I 
 go to tell the people , think we would go into one of the house , and I 
 would read and pray with they . but as I pass along by the cottage and 
 see the aged and tremble woman at the door , and the hard look of the 
 man , who seem to have their eye no more fill with the sight of the 
 Sabbath morning than if they have be dumb oxen that never look up to 
 the sky , I feel a great movement in my soul , and I tremble as if I 
 be shake by a strong spirit enter into my weak body . and I go to 
 where the little flock of people be gather together , and step on 
 the low wall that be build against the green hillside , and I speak the 
 word that be give to I abundantly . and they all come round I out 
 of all the cottage , and many weep over their sin , and have since be 
 join to the Lord . that be the beginning of my preaching , sir , and 
 I have   preach ever since . " 
 Dinah have let her work fall during this narrative , which she utter in 
 her usual simple way , but with that sincere articulate , thrill treble 
 by which she always master her audience . she stoop now to gather up 
 her sewing , and then go on with it as before . Mr. Irwine be deeply 
 interested . he say to himself , " he must be a miserable prig who would 
 act the pedagogue here : one might as well go and lecture the tree for 
 grow in their own shape . " 
 " and you never feel any embarrassment from the sense of your youth - that 
 you be a lovely young woman on whom man 's eye be fix ? " he say 
 aloud . 
 " no , I have   no room for such feeling , and I do not   believe the people ever 
 take notice about that . I think , sir , when God make his presence feel 
 through we , we be like the burn bush : Moses never take any heed 
 what sort of bush it be - he only see the brightness of the Lord . I have 
 preach to as rough ignorant people as can be in the village about 
 Snowfield - man that look very hard and wild - but they never say an 
 uncivil word to I , and often thank I kindly as they make way for I 
 to pass through the midst of they . " 
 " that I can believe - that I can well believe , " say Mr. Irwine , 
 emphatically . " and what do you think of your hearer last night , now ? 
 do you find they quiet and attentive ? " 
 " very quiet , sir , but I see no sign of any great work upon they , except 
 in a young girl name Bessy Cranage , towards whom my heart yearn 
 greatly , when my eye first fall on her bloom youth , give up 
 to folly and vanity . I have some private talk and prayer with she 
 afterwards , and I trust her heart be touch . but I have   notice that 
 in these village where the people lead a quiet life among the green 
 pasture and the still water , till the ground and tend the 
 cattle , there be a strange deadness to the Word , as different as can 
 be from the great town , like Leeds , where I once go to visit a holy 
 woman who preach there . it be wonderful how rich be the harvest of 
 soul up those high - walled street , where you seem to walk as in a 
 prison - yard , and the ear be deafen with the sound of worldly toil . 
 I think maybe it be because the promise be sweet when this life be so 
 dark and weary , and the soul get more hungry when the body be ill at 
 ease . " 
 " why , yes , our farm - labourer be not easily rouse . they take life 
 almost as slowly as the sheep and cow . but we have some intelligent 
 workman about here . I daresay you know the Bedes ; Seth Bede , by the by , 
 be a Methodist . " 
 " yes , I know Seth well , and his brother Adam a little . Seth be a 
 gracious young man - sincere and without offence ; and Adam be like the 
 patriarch Joseph , for his great skill and knowledge and the kindness he 
 show to his brother and his parent . " 
 " perhaps you do not   know the trouble that have just happen to they ? 
 their father , Matthias Bede , be drown in the Willow Brook last night , 
 not far from his own door . I be go now to see Adam . " 
 " ah , their poor aged mother ! " say Dinah , drop her hand and look 
 before she with pity eye , as if she see the object of her sympathy . 
 " she will mourn heavily , for Seth have tell I she be of an anxious , 
 troubled heart . I must go and see if I can give she any help . " 
 as she rise and be begin to fold up her work , Captain Donnithorne , 
 have exhaust all plausible pretext for remain among the 
 milk - pan , come out of the dairy , follow by Mrs. Poyser . Mr. Irwine 
 now rise also , and , advance towards Dinah , hold out his hand , and 
 say , " good - bye . I hear you be go away soon ; but this will not be 
 the last visit you will pay your aunt - so we shall meet again , I hope . " 
 his cordiality towards Dinah set all Mrs. Poyser 's anxiety at rest , 
 and her face be bright than usual , as she say , " I have   never ask 
 after Mrs. Irwine and the Miss Irwines , sir ; I hope they be as well as 
 usual . " 
 " yes , thank you , Mrs. Poyser , except that Miss Anne have one of her bad 
 headache to - day . by the by , we all like that nice cream - cheese you 
 send we - my mother especially . " 
 " I be very glad , indeed , sir . it be but seldom I make one , but I 
 remember Mrs. Irwine be fond of them . please to give my duty to she , 
 and to Miss Kate and Miss Anne . they have   never be to look at my poultry 
 this long while , and I have   get some beautiful speckled chicken , black 
 and white , as Miss Kate might like to have some of amongst her . " 
 " well , I will tell she ; she must come and see they . good - bye , " say the 
 rector , mount his horse . 
 " just ride slowly on , Irwine , " say Captain Donnithorne , mount also . 
 " I will overtake you in three minute . I be only go to speak to the 
 shepherd about the whelp . good - bye , Mrs. Poyser ; tell your husband I 
 shall come and have a long talk with he soon . " 
 Mrs. Poyser curtsy duly , and watch the two horse until they have 
 disappear from the yard , amidst great excitement on the part of the 
 pig and the poultry , and under the furious indignation of the bull - dog , 
 who perform a pyrrhic dance , that every moment seem to threaten the 
 breaking of his chain . Mrs. Poyser delight in this noisy exit ; it be 
 a fresh assurance to she that the farm - yard be well guard , and that 
 no loiterer could enter unobserved ; and it be not until the gate have 
 close behind the captain that she turn into the kitchen again , where 
 Dinah stand with her bonnet in her hand , wait to speak to her aunt , 
 before she set out for Lisbeth Bede 's cottage . 
 Mrs. Poyser , however , though she notice the bonnet , defer remarking 
 on it until she have disburden herself of her surprise at Mr. Irwine 's 
 behaviour . 
 " why , Mr. Irwine be not   angry , then ? what do he say to you , Dinah ? 
 do not   he scold you for preach ? " 
 " no , he be not at all angry ; he be very friendly to I . I be quite 
 draw out to speak to he ; I hardly know how , for I have always think 
 of he as a worldly Sadducee . but his countenance be as pleasant as the 
 morning sunshine . " 
 " Pleasant ! and what else do y ' expect to find he but pleasant ? " say 
 Mrs. Poyser impatiently , resume her knitting . " I should think his 
 countenance be pleasant indeed ! and he a gentleman bear , and be get a 
 mother like a picter . you may go the country round and not find such 
 another woman turn sixty - six . it be summat - like to see such a man as 
 that I ' the desk of a Sunday ! as I say to Poyser , it be like look at 
 a full crop o ' wheat , or a pasture with a fine dairy o ' cow in it ; it 
 make you think the world 's comfortable - like . but as for such creatur 
 as you methodisse run after , I would as soon go to look at a lot o ' 
 bare - rib runt on a common . fine folk they be to tell you what be 
 right , as look as if they have never taste nothing well than bacon - sword 
 and sour - cake I ' their life . but what do Mr. Irwine say to you about 
 that fool 's trick o ' preaching on the Green ? " 
 " he only say he would hear of it ; he do not   seem to feel any displeasure 
 about it . but , dear aunt , do not   think any more about that . he tell I 
 something that I be sure will cause you sorrow , as it do I . Thias Bede 
 be drown last night in the Willow Brook , and I be think that the 
 aged mother will be greatly in need of comfort . perhaps I can be of use 
 to she , so I have fetch my bonnet and be go to set out . " 
 " dear heart , dear heart ! but you must have a cup o ' tea first , child , " 
 say Mrs. Poyser , fall at once from the key of b with five sharp to 
 the frank and genial C. " the kettle 's boiling - we will have it ready in 
 a minute ; and the young uns ' ull be in and want theirs directly . I be 
 quite willing you should go and see th ' old woman , for you be one as 
 be allay welcome in trouble , Methodist or no Methodist ; but , for the 
 matter o ' that , it be the flesh and blood folk be make on as make the 
 difference . some cheese be make o ' skim milk and some o ' new milk , 
 and it be no matter what you call them , you may tell which be which by the 
 look and the smell . but as to Thias Bede , he be well out o ' the way nor 
 in - God forgi ' I for say so - for he be do little this ten year but 
 make trouble for they as belong to he ; and I think it ' ud be well 
 for you to take a little bottle o ' rum for th ' old woman , for I daresay 
 she be get never a drop o ' nothing to comfort she inside . sit down , 
 child , and be easy , for you shall not   stir out till you have   have a cup o ' 
 tea , and so I tell you . " 
 during the latter part of this speech , Mrs. Poyser have be reach 
 down the tea - thing from the shelf , and be on her way towards 
 the pantry for the loaf   follow close by Totty , who have make she 
 appearance on the rattling of the tea - cup , when Hetty come out of 
 the dairy relieve her tired arm by lift they up , and clasp her 
 hand at the back of her head . 
 " molly , " she say , rather languidly , " just run out and get I a bunch of 
 dock - leaf : the butter 's ready to pack up now . " 
 " d ' you hear what be happen , Hetty ? " say her aunt . 
 " no ; how should I hear anything ? " be the answer , in a pettish tone . 
 " not as you would care much , I daresay , if you do hear ; for you be too 
 feather - head to mind if everybody be dead , so as you could stay 
 upstairs a - dress yourself for two hour by the clock . but anybody 
 besides yourself ' ud mind about such thing happen to they as think 
 a deal more of you than you deserve . but Adam Bede and all his kin might 
 be drownde for what you would care - you would be perk at the glass the next 
 minute . " 
 " Adam Bede - drown ? " say Hetty , let her arm fall and look 
 rather bewildered , but suspect that her aunt be as usual 
 exaggerate with a didactic purpose . 
 " no , my dear , no , " say Dinah kindly , for Mrs. Poyser have pass on to 
 the pantry without deign more precise information . " not Adam . Adam 's 
 father , the old man , be drown . he be drown last night in the Willow 
 Brook . Mr. Irwine have just tell I about it . " 
 " oh , how dreadful ! " say Hetty , look serious , but not deeply 
 affect ; and as Molly now enter with the dock - leaf , she take they 
 silently and return to the dairy without ask further question . 
 chapter IX 
 Hetty 's World 
 while she adjust the broad leaf that set off the pale fragrant 
 butter as the primrose be set off by its nest of green I be afraid Hetty 
 be think a great deal more of the look Captain Donnithorne have cast 
 at she than of Adam and his trouble . bright , admire glance from 
 a handsome young gentleman with white hand , a gold chain , occasional 
 regimental , and wealth and grandeur immeasurable - those be the 
 warm ray that set poor Hetty 's heart vibrate and play its little 
 foolish tune over and over again . we do not hear that Memnon 's statue 
 give forth its melody at all under the rushing of the mighty wind , 
 or in response to any other influence divine or human than certain 
 short - live sunbeam of morning ; and we must learn to accommodate 
 ourselves to the discovery that some of those cunningly fashion 
 instrument call human soul have only a very limited range of music , 
 and will not vibrate in the least under a touch that fill other with 
 tremulous rapture or quivering agony . 
 Hetty be quite use to the thought that people like to look at she . 
 she be not blind to the fact that young Luke Britton of Broxton come to 
 Hayslope Church on a Sunday afternoon on purpose that he might see she ; 
 and that he would have make much more decided advance if her uncle 
 Poyser , thinking but lightly of a young man whose father 's land be so 
 foul as old Luke Britton 's , have not forbid her aunt to encourage he 
 by any civility . she be aware , too , that Mr. Craig , the gardener at 
 the Chase , be over head and ear in love with she , and have lately make 
 unmistakable avowal in luscious strawberry and hyperbolical pea . 
 she know still well , that Adam Bede - tall , upright , clever , brave Adam 
 Bede - who carry such authority with all the people round about , and 
 whom her uncle be always delighted to see of an evening , say that 
 " Adam know a fine sight more o ' the natur o ' thing than those as 
 think themselves his better " - she know that this Adam , who be often 
 rather stern to other people and not much give to run after the lass , 
 could be make to turn pale or red any day by a word or a look from 
 she . Hetty 's sphere of comparison be not large , but she could not   help 
 perceive that Adam be ' something like " a man ; always know what to say 
 about thing , could tell her uncle how to prop the hovel , and have mend 
 the churn in no time ; know , with only look at it , the value of the 
 chestnut - tree that be blow down , and why the damp come in the wall , 
 and what they must do to stop the rat ; and write a beautiful hand 
 that you could read off , and could do figure in his head - a degree 
 of accomplishment totally unknown among the rich farmer of that 
 countryside . not at all like that slouch Luke Britton , who , when 
 she once walk with he all the way from Broxton to Hayslope , have only 
 broken silence to remark that the grey goose have begin to lay . and as 
 for Mr. Craig , the gardener , he be a sensible man enough , to be sure , 
 but he be knock - kneed , and have a queer sort of sing - song in his talk ; 
 moreover , on the most charitable supposition , he must be far on the way 
 to forty . 
 Hetty be quite certain her uncle want she to encourage Adam , and 
 would be pleased for she to marry he . for those be time when there 
 be no rigid demarcation of rank between the farmer and the respectable 
 artisan , and on the home hearth , as well as in the public house , they 
 might be see take their jug of ale together ; the farmer have 
 a latent sense of capital , and of weight in parish affair , which 
 sustain he under his conspicuous inferiority in conversation . Martin 
 Poyser be not a frequenter of public house , but he like a friendly 
 chat over his own home - brew ; and though it be pleasant to lay down 
 the law to a stupid neighbour who have no notion how to make the good 
 of his farm , it be also an agreeable variety to learn something from 
 a clever fellow like Adam Bede . accordingly , for the last three 
 year - ever since he have superintend the building of the new 
 barn - Adam have always be make welcome at the Hall Farm , especially of 
 a winter evening , when the whole family , in patriarchal fashion , master 
 and mistress , child and servant , be assemble in that glorious 
 kitchen , at well - graduate distance from the blaze fire . and for the 
 last two year , at least , Hetty have be in the habit of hear she 
 uncle say , " Adam Bede may be work for wage now , but he will be a 
 master - man some day , as sure as I sit in this chair . Mester Burge be 
 in the right on't   to want he to go partner and marry his daughter , if 
 it be true what they say ; the woman as marry he ' ull have a good take , 
 be't Lady day or Michaelmas , " a remark which Mrs. Poyser always follow 
 up with her cordial assent . " ah , " she would say , " it be all very fine 
 have a ready - make rich man , but mayhappen he will be a ready - make fool ; 
 and it be no use fill your pocket full o ' money if you have   get a hole 
 in the corner . it will do you no good to sit in a spring - cart o ' your own , 
 if you have   get a soft to drive you : he will soon turn you over into the 
 ditch . I allay say I would never marry a man as have get no brain ; for 
 where be the use of a woman have brain of her own if she be tackle 
 to a geck as everybody be a - laugh at ? she might as well dress herself 
 fine to sit back'ard on a donkey . " 
 these expression , though figurative , sufficiently indicate the bent of 
 Mrs. Poyser 's mind with regard to Adam ; and though she and her husband 
 might have view the subject differently if Hetty have be a daughter 
 of their own , it be clear that they would have welcome the match with 
 Adam for a penniless niece . for what could Hetty have be but a servant 
 elsewhere , if her uncle have not take she in and bring she up as a 
 domestic help to her aunt , whose health since the birth of Totty have not 
 be equal to more positive labour than the superintendence of servant 
 and child ? but Hetty have never give Adam any steady encouragement . 
 even in the moment when she be most thoroughly conscious of his 
 superiority to her other admirer , she have never bring herself to 
 think of accept he . she like to feel that this strong , skilful , 
 keen - eyed man be in her power , and would have be indignant if he have 
 show the least sign of slip from under the yoke of her coquettish 
 tyranny and attach himself to the gentle Mary Burge , who would have 
 be grateful enough for the most trifling notice from he . " Mary Burge , 
 indeed ! such a sallow - face girl : if she put on a bit of pink ribbon , 
 she look as yellow as a crow - flower and her hair be as straight as a 
 hank of cotton . " and always when Adam stay away for several week from 
 the Hall Farm , and otherwise make some show of resistance to his passion 
 as a foolish one , Hetty take care to entice he back into the net by 
 little air of meekness and timidity , as if she be in trouble at his 
 neglect . but as to marry Adam , that be a very different affair ! 
 there be nothing in the world to tempt she to do that . her cheek never 
 grow a shade deeply when his name be mention ; she feel no thrill 
 when she see he pass along the causeway by the window , or advance 
 towards she unexpectedly in the footpath across the meadow ; she feel 
 nothing , when his eye rest on she , but the cold triumph of know 
 that he love she and would not care to look at Mary Burge . he could no 
 more stir in she the emotion that make the sweet intoxication of young 
 love than the mere picture of a sun can stir the spring sap in the 
 subtle fibre of the plant . she see he as he be - a poor man with old 
 parent to keep , who would not be able , for a long while to come , to 
 give she even such luxury as she share in her uncle 's house . and 
 Hetty 's dream be all of luxury : to sit in a carpet parlour , and 
 always wear white stocking ; to have some large beautiful ear - ring , 
 such as be all the fashion ; to have Nottingham lace round the top of 
 her gown , and something to make her handkerchief smell nice , like 
 Miss Lydia Donnithorne 's when she draw it out at church ; and not to be 
 oblige to get up early or be scold by anybody . she think , if Adam 
 have be rich and could have give she these thing , she love he well 
 enough to marry he . 
 but for the last few week a new influence have come over Hetty - vague , 
 atmospheric , shape itself into no self - confess hope or prospect , 
 but produce a pleasant narcotic effect , make she tread the ground 
 and go about her work in a sort of dream , unconscious of weight or 
 effort , and show she all thing through a soft , liquid veil , as if 
 she be live not in this solid world of brick and stone , but in a 
 beatified world , such as the sun light up for we in the water . Hetty 
 have become aware that Mr. Arthur Donnithorne would take a good deal of 
 trouble for the chance of see she ; that he always place himself at 
 church so as to have the full view of she both sit and stand ; 
 that he be constantly find reason for call at the Hall Farm , and 
 always would contrive to say something for the sake of make she speak 
 to he and look at he . the poor child no more conceive at present the 
 idea that the young squire could ever be her lover than a baker 's pretty 
 daughter in the crowd , whom a young emperor distinguish by an imperial 
 but admire smile , conceive that she shall be make empress . but the 
 baker 's daughter go home and dream of the handsome young emperor , and 
 perhaps weigh the flour amiss while she be think what a heavenly lot 
 it must be to have he for a husband . and so , poor Hetty have get a face 
 and a presence haunt she wake and sleeping dream ; bright , soft 
 glance have penetrate she , and suffuse her life with a strange , happy 
 languor . the eye that shed those glance be really not half so 
 fine as Adam 's , which sometimes look at she with a sad , beseech 
 tenderness , but they have find a ready medium in Hetty 's little 
 silly imagination , whereas Adam 's could get no entrance through that 
 atmosphere . for three week , at least , her inward life have consist of 
 little else than live through in memory the look and word Arthur have 
 direct towards she - of little else than recall the sensation with 
 which she hear his voice outside the house , and see he enter , and 
 become conscious that his eye be fix on she , and then become 
 conscious that a tall figure , look down on she with eye that seem 
 to touch she , be come near in clothe of beautiful texture with an 
 odour like that of a flower - garden borne on the evening breeze . foolish 
 thought ! but all this happen , you must remember , nearly sixty year 
 ago , and Hetty be quite uneducated - a simple farmer 's girl , to whom 
 a gentleman with a white hand be dazzle as an olympian god . until 
 to - day , she have never look far into the future than to the next 
 time Captain Donnithorne would come to the Farm , or the next Sunday when 
 she should see he at church ; but now she think , perhaps he would try 
 to meet she when she go to the Chase to - morrow - and if he should 
 speak to she , and walk a little way , when nobody be by ! that have never 
 happen yet ; and now her imagination , instead of retrace the past , 
 be busy fashion what would happen to - morrow - whereabout in the 
 Chase she should see he come towards she , how she should put her new 
 rose - colour ribbon on , which he have never see , and what he would say 
 to she to make she return his glance - a glance which she would be live 
 through in her memory , over and over again , all the rest of the day . 
 in this state of mind , how could Hetty give any feeling to Adam 's 
 trouble , or think much about poor old Thias be drown ? young soul , 
 in such pleasant delirium as hers be as unsympathetic as butterfly 
 sipping nectar ; they be isolate from all appeal by a barrier of 
 dream - by invisible look and impalpable arm . 
 while Hetty 's hand be busy pack up the butter , and her head fill 
 with these picture of the morrow , Arthur Donnithorne , rid by Mr. 
 Irwine 's side towards the valley of the Willow Brook , have also certain 
 indistinct anticipation , run as an undercurrent in his mind while 
 he be listen to Mr. Irwine 's account of Dinah - indistinct , yet 
 strong enough to make he feel rather conscious when Mr. Irwine suddenly 
 say , " what fascinate you so in Mrs. Poyser 's dairy , Arthur ? have you 
 become an amateur of damp quarry and skim dish ? " 
 Arthur know the rector too well to suppose that a clever invention would 
 be of any use , so he say , with his accustomed frankness , " no , I go to 
 look at the pretty butter - maker Hetty Sorrel . she be a perfect Hebe ; and 
 if I be an artist , I would paint she . it be amazing what pretty girl 
 one see among the farmer ' daughter , when the man be such clown . 
 that common , round , red face one see sometimes in the man - all cheek 
 and no feature , like Martin Poyser 's - come out in the woman of the 
 famuly as the most charming phiz imaginable . " 
 " well , I have no objection to your contemplating Hetty in an artistic 
 light , but I must not have you feed her vanity and fill her little 
 noddle with the notion that she be a great beauty , attractive to fine 
 gentleman , or you will spoil she for a poor man 's wife - honest Craig 's , 
 for example , whom I have see bestow soft glance on she . the little 
 puss seem already to have air enough to make a husband as miserable 
 as it be a law of nature for a quiet man to be when he marry a beauty . 
 Apropos of marry , I hope our friend Adam will get settle , now the 
 poor old man 's go . he will only have his mother to keep in future , and 
 I have   a notion that there be a kindness between he and that nice modest 
 girl , Mary Burge , from something that fall from old Jonathan one day 
 when I be talk to he . but when I mention the subject to Adam he 
 look uneasy and turn the conversation . I suppose the love - making 
 do not   run smooth , or perhaps Adam hang back till he be in a well 
 position . he have independence of spirit enough for two man - rather an 
 excess of pride , if anything . " 
 " that would be a capital match for Adam . he would slip into old Burge 's 
 shoe and make a fine thing of that building business , I will answer for 
 he . I should like to see he well settle in this parish ; he would be 
 ready then to act as my grand - vizier when I want one . we could plan 
 no end of repair and improvement together . I have   never see the girl , 
 though , I think - at least I have   never look at she . " 
 " look at she next Sunday at church - she sit with her father on the 
 left of the reading - desk . you need not   look quite so much at Hetty Sorrel 
 then . when I have   make up my mind that I can not   afford to buy a tempting 
 dog , I take no notice of he , because if he take a strong fancy to 
 I and look lovingly at I , the struggle between arithmetic and 
 inclination might become unpleasantly severe . I pique myself on my 
 wisdom there , Arthur , and as an old fellow to whom wisdom have become 
 cheap , I bestow it upon you . " 
 " thank you . it may stand I in good stead some day though I do not 
 know that I have any present use for it . bless I ! how the brook have 
 overflow . suppose we have a canter , now we be at the bottom of the 
 hill . " 
 that be the great advantage of dialogue on horseback ; it can be merge 
 any minute into a trot or a canter , and one might have escape from 
 Socrates himself in the saddle . the two friend be free from the 
 necessity of further conversation till they pull up in the lane behind 
 Adam 's cottage . 
 Chapter X 
 Dinah Visits Lisbeth 
 AT five o'clock Lisbeth come downstairs with a large key in her hand : 
 it be the key of the chamber where her husband lie dead . throughout the 
 day , except in her occasional outburst of wail grief , she have be 
 in incessant movement , perform the initial duty to she dead with 
 the awe and exactitude that belong to religious rite . she have bring 
 out her little store of bleached linen , which she have for long year 
 keep in reserve for this supreme use . it seem but yesterday - that time 
 so many midsummer ago , when she have tell Thias where this linen lay , 
 that he might be sure and reach it out for she when she die , for she 
 be the elder of the two . then there have be the work of cleanse to 
 the strict purity every object in the sacred chamber , and of remove 
 from it every trace of common daily occupation . the small window , which 
 have hitherto freely let in the frosty moonlight or the warm summer 
 sunrise on the work man 's slumber , must now be darken with a fair 
 white sheet , for this be the sleep which be as sacred under the bare 
 rafter as in ceile house . Lisbeth have even mend a long - neglect 
 and unnoticeable rent in the checkered bit of bed - curtain ; for the 
 moment be few and precious now in which she would be able to do the 
 small office of respect or love for the still corpse , to which in all 
 her thought she attribute some consciousness . our dead be never dead 
 to we until we have forget they : they can be injure by we , they can 
 be wound ; they know all our penitence , all our aching sense that their 
 place be empty , all the kiss we bestow on the small relic of their 
 presence . and the aged peasant woman most of all believe that her dead 
 be conscious . decent burial be what Lisbeth have be think of for 
 herself through year of thrift , with an indistinct expectation that she 
 should know when she be be carry to the churchyard , follow by 
 her husband and her son ; and now she feel as if the great work of 
 her life be to be do in see that Thias be bury decently before 
 she - under the white thorn , where once , in a dream , she have think she 
 lie in the coffin , yet all the while see the sunshine above and smell 
 the white blossom that be so thick upon the thorn the Sunday she go 
 to be church after Adam be bear . 
 but now she have do everything that could be do to - day in the chamber 
 of death - have do it all herself , with some aid from her son in 
 lifting , for she would let no one be fetched to help she from the 
 village , not be fond of female neighbour generally ; and her 
 favourite dolly , the old housekeeper at Mr. Burge 's , who have come to 
 condole with she in the morning as soon as she hear of Thias 's death , 
 be too dim - sighted to be of much use . she have lock the door , and now 
 hold the key in her hand , as she throw herself wearily into a chair 
 that stand out of its place in the middle of the house floor , where in 
 ordinary time she would never have consent to sit . the kitchen have 
 have none of her attention that day ; it be soil with the tread of 
 muddy shoe and untidy with clothe and other object out of place . but 
 what at another time would have be intolerable to Lisbeth 's habit 
 of order and cleanliness seem to she now just what should be : it be 
 right that thing should look strange and disorder and wretche , now 
 the old man have come to his end in that sad way ; the kitchen ought not 
 to look as if nothing have happen . Adam , overcome with the agitation 
 and exertion of the day after his night of hard work , have fall asleep 
 on a bench in the workshop ; and Seth be in the back kitchen make a 
 fire of stick that he might get the kettle to boil , and persuade his 
 mother to have a cup of tea , an indulgence which she rarely allow 
 herself . 
 there be no one in the kitchen when Lisbeth enter and throw herself 
 into the chair . she look round with blank eye at the dirt and 
 confusion on which the bright afternoon 's sun shine dismally ; it be 
 all of a piece with the sad confusion of her mind - that confusion which 
 belong to the first hour of a sudden sorrow , when the poor human soul 
 be like one who have be deposit sleep among the ruin of a vast 
 city , and wake up in dreary amazement , not know whether it be 
 the growing or the die day - not know why and whence come this 
 illimitable scene of desolation , or why he too find himself desolate in 
 the midst of it . 
 at another time Lisbeth 's first thought would have be , " where be 
 Adam ? " but the sudden death of her husband have restore he in 
 these hour to that first place in her affection which he have hold 
 six - and - twenty year ago . she have forget his fault as we forget the 
 sorrow of our depart childhood , and think of nothing but the young 
 husband 's kindness and the old man 's patience . her eye continue 
 to wander blankly until Seth come in and begin to remove some of the 
 scatter thing , and clear the small round deal table that he might set 
 out his mother 's tea upon it . 
 " what art go to do ? " she say , rather peevishly . 
 " I want thee to have a cup of tea , Mother , " answer Seth , tenderly . 
 " it will do thee good ; and I will put two or three of these thing away , and 
 make the house look more comfortable . " 
 " comfortable ! how canst talk o ' ma'in ' thing comfortable ? let a - be , let 
 a - be . there be no comfort for I no more , " she go on , the tear come 
 when she begin to speak , " now thy poor feyther 's gone , as i'n wash for 
 and mend , an ' get 's victual for he for thirty ' ear , an ' him allay 
 so pleased wi ' iverything I do for he , an ' use to be so handy an ' do 
 the job for I when I war ill an ' cumbered wi ' th ' babby , an ' make I 
 the posset an ' bring it upstairs as proud as could be , an ' carry the 
 lad as war as heavy as two child for five mile an ' ne'er grumble , 
 all the way to Warson Wake , 'cause I want to go an ' see my sister , as 
 war dead an ' go the very next Christmas as e'er come . an ' he to be 
 drownde in the brook as we pass o'er the day we war marry an ' 
 come home together , an ' he have make they lot o ' shelf for I to put my 
 plate an ' thing on , an ' show them I as proud as could be , 'cause he 
 know'd I should be please . an ' he war to die an ' I not to know , but to 
 be a - sleepin ' I ' my bed , as if I caredna nought about it . eh ! an ' I to 
 live to see that ! an ' we as war young folk once , an ' thought we should 
 do rarely when we war marry . let a - be , lad , let a - be ! I wonna ha ' 
 no tay . I carena if I ne'er ate nor drink no more . when one end o ' th ' 
 bridge tumble down , where be th ' use o ' th ' other stannin ' ? I may be well 
 die , an ' foller my old man . there be no knowin ' but he will want I . " 
 here Lisbeth break from word into moan , sway herself backwards and 
 forward on her chair . Seth , always timid in his behaviour towards his 
 mother , from the sense that he have no influence over she , feel it be 
 useless to attempt to persuade or soothe she till this passion be past ; 
 so he content himself with tend the back kitchen fire and fold 
 up his father 's clothe , which have be hang out to dry since 
 morning - afraid to move about in the room where his mother be , lest he 
 should irritate she far . 
 but after Lisbeth have be rock herself and moan for some minute , 
 she suddenly pause and say aloud to herself , " I will go an ' see arter 
 Adam , for I canna think where he be get ; an ' I want he to go upstairs 
 wi ' I afore it be dark , for the minute to look at the corpse be like 
 the meltin ' snow . " 
 Seth overhear this , and come into the kitchen again , as his mother 
 rise from her chair , he say , " Adam 's asleep in the workshop , mother . 
 thee'dst well not wake he . he be o'erwrought with work and trouble . " 
 " wake he ? who be a - go to wake he ? I shanna wake he wi ' lookin ' at 
 he . I hanna see the lad this two hour - I would welly forget as he would e'er 
 grow up from a babby when 's feyther carry he . " 
 Adam be seat on a rough bench , his head support by his arm , which 
 rest from the shoulder to the elbow on the long planing - table in 
 the middle of the workshop . it seem as if he have sit down for a few 
 minute ' rest and have fall asleep without slip from his first 
 attitude of sad , fatigued thought . his face , unwashe since yesterday , 
 look pallid and clammy ; his hair be toss shaggily about his 
 forehead , and his closed eye have the sunken look which follow upon 
 watching and sorrow . his brow be knit , and his whole face have an 
 expression of weariness and pain . Gyp be evidently uneasy , for he sit 
 on his haunch , rest his nose on his master 's stretch - out leg , and 
 divide the time between lick the hand that hang listlessly down and 
 glance with a listen air towards the door . the poor dog be 
 hungry and restless , but would not leave his master , and be wait 
 impatiently for some change in the scene . it be owe to this feeling 
 on Gyp 's part that , when Lisbeth come into the workshop and advance 
 towards Adam as noiselessly as she could , her intention not to awaken 
 he be immediately defeat ; for Gyp 's excitement be too great to find 
 vent in anything short of a sharp bark , and in a moment Adam open his 
 eye and see his mother stand before he . it be not very unlike his 
 dream , for his sleep have be little more than live through again , in 
 a fevere delirious way , all that have happen since daybreak , and his 
 mother with her fretful grief be present to he through it all . the 
 chief difference between the reality and the vision be that in 
 his dream Hetty be continually come before he in bodily 
 presence - strangely mingle herself as an actor in scene with which 
 she have nothing to do . she be even by the Willow Brook ; she make his 
 mother angry by come into the house ; and he meet she with her smart 
 clothe quite wet through , as he walk in the rain to Treddleston , to 
 tell the coroner . but wherever Hetty come , his mother be sure to follow 
 soon ; and when he open his eye , it be not at all startling to see 
 her stand near he . 
 " eh , my lad , my lad ! " Lisbeth burst out immediately , her wail impulse 
 return , for grief in its freshness feel the need of associate its 
 loss and its lament with every change of scene and incident , " thee'st 
 get nobody now but thy old mother to torment thee and be a burden to 
 thee . Thy poor feyther ' ull ne'er anger thee no more ; an ' thy mother 
 may be well go arter he - the soon the well - for I be no good to 
 nobody now . one old coat ' ull do to patch another , but it be good for 
 nought else . thee'dst like to ha ' a wife to mend thy clothe an ' get thy 
 victual , well nor thy old mother . an ' I shall be nought but cumber , 
 a - sittin ' I ' th ' chimney - corner .   Adam wince and move uneasily ; he 
 dread , of all thing , to hear his mother speak of Hetty .   but if 
 thy feyther have live , he would ne'er ha ' want I to go to make room for 
 another , for he could no more ha ' do wi'out I nor one side o ' the 
 scissar can do wi'out th ' other . eh , we should ha ' be both fling away 
 together , an ' then I shouldna ha ' see this day , an ' one buryin ' ' ud ha ' 
 do for we both . " 
 here Lisbeth pause , but Adam sit in pained silence - he could not speak 
 otherwise than tenderly to his mother to - day , but he could not help 
 be irritate by this plaint . it be not possible for poor Lisbeth to 
 know how it affect Adam any more than it be possible for a wound 
 dog to know how his moan affect the nerve of his master . like all 
 complain woman , she complain in the expectation of be soothe , 
 and when Adam say nothing , she be only prompt to complain more 
 bitterly . 
 " I know thee couldst do well wi'out I , for thee couldst go where thee 
 likedst an ' marry they as thee likedst . but I donna want to say thee 
 nay , let thee bring home who thee wut ; I would ne'er open my lip to find 
 faut , for when folk be old an ' o ' no use , they may think theirsen well 
 off to get the bit an ' the sup , though they'n to swallow ill word wi't . 
 an ' if thee'st set thy heart on a lass as'll bring thee nought and waste 
 all , when thee mightst ha ' they as ' ud make a man on thee , I will say 
 nought , now thy feyther 's dead an ' drownde , for I be no well nor an 
 old haft when the blade 's go . " 
 Adam , unable to bear this any long , rise silently from the bench and 
 walk out of the workshop into the kitchen . but Lisbeth follow he . 
 " Thee wutna go upstairs an ' see thy feyther then ? I'n do everythin ' 
 now , an ' he would like thee to go an ' look at he , for he war allay so 
 please when thee wast mild to he . " 
 Adam turn round at once and say , " yes , mother ; let we go upstairs . 
 Come , Seth , let we go together . " 
 they go upstairs , and for five minute all be silence . then the key 
 be turn again , and there be a sound of footstep on the stair . but 
 Adam do not come down again ; he be too weary and wear - out to encounter 
 more of his mother 's querulous grief , and he go to rest on his bed . 
 Lisbeth no soon enter the kitchen and sit down than she throw she 
 apron over her head , and begin to cry and moan and rock herself as 
 before . Seth think , " she will be quieter by and by , now we have be 
 upstairs " ; and he go into the back kitchen again , to tend his little 
 fire , hop that he should presently induce she to have some tea . 
 Lisbeth have be rock herself in this way for more than five minute , 
 give a low moan with every forward movement of her body , when she 
 suddenly feel a hand place gently on her , and a sweet treble voice 
 say to she , " dear sister , the Lord have send I to see if I can be a 
 comfort to you . " 
 Lisbeth pause , in a listening attitude , without remove her apron from 
 her face . the voice be strange to she . could it be her sister 's spirit 
 come back to she from the dead after all those year ? she tremble and 
 dare not look . 
 Dinah , believe that this pause of wonder be in itself a relief for 
 the sorrow woman , say no more just yet , but quietly take off her 
 bonnet , and then , motion silence to Seth , who , on hear her voice , 
 have come in with a beat heart , lay one hand on the back of Lisbeth 's 
 chair and lean over she , that she might be aware of a friendly 
 presence . 
 slowly Lisbeth draw down her apron , and timidly she open her dim 
 dark eye . she see nothing at first but a face - a pure , pale face , with 
 love grey eye , and it be quite unknown to she . her wonder increase ; 
 perhaps it be an angel . but in the same instant Dinah have lay her hand 
 on Lisbeth 's again , and the old woman look down at it . it be a much 
 small hand than her own , but it be not white and delicate , for Dinah 
 have never wear a glove in her life , and her hand bear the trace of 
 labour from her childhood upwards . Lisbeth look earnestly at the hand 
 for a moment , and then , fix her eye again on Dinah 's face , say , 
 with something of restore courage , but in a tone of surprise , " why , 
 ye're a workin ' woman ! " 
 " yes , I be Dinah Morris , and I work in the cotton - mill when I be at 
 home . " 
 " ah ! " say Lisbeth slowly , still wonder ; " ye come in so light , like 
 the shadow on the wall , an ' speak I ' my ear , as I think ye might be a 
 sperrit . Ye've   get a'most the face o ' one as be a - sittin ' on the grave 
 I ' Adam 's new Bible . " 
 " I come from the Hall Farm now . you know Mrs. Poyser - she be my aunt , and 
 she have hear of your great affliction , and be very sorry ; and I be come 
 to see if I can be any help to you in your trouble ; for I know your son 
 Adam and Seth , and I know you have no daughter ; and when the clergyman 
 tell I how the hand of God be heavy upon you , my heart go out 
 towards you , and I feel a command to come and be to you in the place of 
 a daughter in this grief , if you will let I . " 
 " ah ! I know who y ' be now ; y ' be a Methody , like Seth ; he be tould 
 I on you , " say Lisbeth fretfully , her overpowering sense of pain 
 returning , now her wonder be go . " Ye'll make it out as trouble 's a 
 good thing , like he allay do . but where be the use o ' talkin ' to I 
 a - that'n ? ye canna make the smart less wi ' talkin ' . Ye'll ne'er make I 
 believe as it be well for I not to ha ' my old man die in 's bed , if he 
 must die , an ' ha ' the parson to pray by he , an ' I to sit by he , an ' 
 tell he ne'er to mind th ' ill word I have   gi'en he sometimes when I war 
 anger , an ' to gi ' he a bit an ' a sup , as long as a bit an ' a sup 
 he would swallow . but eh ! to die I ' the cold water , an ' us close to he , an ' 
 ne'er to know ; an ' I a - sleepin ' , as if I ne'er belong to he no more 
 nor if he have be a journeyman tramp from nobody know where ! " 
 here Lisbeth begin to cry and rock herself again ; and Dinah say , " yes , 
 dear friend , your affliction be great . it would be hardness of heart to 
 say that your trouble be not heavy to bear . God do not   send I to you 
 to make light of your sorrow , but to mourn with you , if you will let I . 
 if you have a table spread for a feast , and be make merry with your 
 friend , you would think it be kind to let I come and sit down and 
 rejoice with you , because you would think I should like to share those 
 good thing ; but I should like well to share in your trouble and your 
 labour , and it would seem hard to I if you deny I that . you will not 
 send I away ? you be not angry with I for come ? " 
 " Nay , nay ; anger ! who say I war anger ? it war good on you to come . 
 an ' Seth , why donna ye get she some tay ? ye war in a hurry to get some 
 for I , as have no need , but ye donna think o ' gettin ' ' t for they as 
 want it . sit ye down ; sit ye down . I thank you kindly for comin ' , for 
 it be little wage ye get by walkin ' through the wet field to see an old 
 woman like I .... nay , I'n get no daughter o ' my own - ne'er have one - an ' 
 I warna sorry , for they be poor queechy thing , gell be ; I allay 
 want to ha ' lad , as could fend for theirsen . an ' the lad ' ull be 
 marryin ' - I shall ha ' daughter eno ' , an ' too many . but now , do ye make 
 the tay as ye like it , for I'n get no taste I ' my mouth this day - it be 
 all one what I swaller - it be all get the taste o ' sorrow wi't . " 
 Dinah take care not to betray that she have have her tea , and accept 
 Lisbeth 's invitation very readily , for the sake of persuade the old 
 woman herself to take the food and drink she so much need after a day 
 of hard work and fast . 
 Seth be so happy now Dinah be in the house that he could not help 
 think her presence be worth purchase with a life in which grief 
 incessantly follow upon grief ; but the next moment he reproach 
 himself - it be almost as if he be rejoice in his father 's sad 
 death . nevertheless the joy of be with Dinah would triumph - it be 
 like the influence of climate , which no resistance can overcome . and the 
 feeling even suffuse itself over his face so as to attract his mother 's 
 notice , while she be drink her tea . 
 " Thee may'st well talk o ' trouble bein ' a good thing , Seth , for thee 
 thriv'st on't . Thee look'st as if thee know'dst no more o ' care an ' 
 cumber nor when thee wast a babby a - lyin ' awake I ' th ' cradle . for 
 thee'dst allay lie still wi ' thy eye open , an ' Adam ne'er ' ud lie 
 still a minute when he waken . Thee wast allay like a bag o ' meal as 
 can ne'er be bruise - though , for the matter o ' that , thy poor feyther 
 war just such another . but ye've   get the same look too "   here Lisbeth 
 turn to Dinah . " I reckon it be wi ' bein ' a Methody . not as I be 
 a - findin ' faut wi ' ye for't , for ye've   no call to be frettin ' , an ' 
 somehow ye looken sorry too . eh ! well , if the Methodies be fond o ' 
 trouble , they be like to thrive : it be a pity they canna ha't all , an ' 
 take it away from they as donna like it . I could ha ' gi'en them plenty ; 
 for when I have get my old man I war worrete from morn till night ; and 
 now he be go , I would be glad for the bad o'er again . " 
 " yes , " say Dinah , careful not to oppose any feeling of Lisbeth 's , for 
 her reliance , in her small word and deed , on a divine guidance , 
 always issue in that fine woman 's tact which proceed from acute and 
 ready sympathy ; " yes , I remember too , when my dear aunt die , I long 
 for the sound of her bad cough in the night , instead of the silence 
 that come when she be go . but now , dear friend , drink this other cup 
 of tea and eat a little more . " 
 " what ! " say Lisbeth , take the cup and speak in a less querulous 
 tone , " have ye get no feyther and mother , then , as ye war so sorry about 
 your aunt ? " 
 " no , I never know a father or mother ; my aunt bring I up from a baby . 
 she have no child , for she be never marry and she bring I up as 
 tenderly as if I have be her own child . " 
 " eh , she would fine work wi ' ye , I will warrant , bringin ' ye up from a babby , 
 an ' she a lone woman - it be ill bringin ' up a cade lamb . but I daresay 
 ye warna franzy , for ye look as if ye'd ne'er be anger I ' your life . 
 but what do ye do when your aunt die , an ' why didna ye come to live in 
 this country , bein ' as Mrs. Poyser 's your aunt too ? " 
 Dinah , see that Lisbeth 's attention be attract , tell she the story 
 of her early life - how she have be bring up to work hard , and 
 what sort of place Snowfield be , and how many people have a hard life 
 there - all the detail that she think likely to interest Lisbeth . the 
 old woman listen , and forget to be fretful , unconsciously subject to 
 the soothe influence of Dinah 's face and voice . after a while she be 
 persuade to let the kitchen be make tidy ; for Dinah be bent on this , 
 believe that the sense of order and quietude around she would help in 
 dispose Lisbeth to join in the prayer she long to pour forth at her 
 side . Seth , meanwhile , go out to chop wood , for he surmise that Dinah 
 would like to be leave alone with his mother . 
 Lisbeth sit watch she as she move about in she still quick way , and 
 say at last , " Ye've   get a notion o ' cleanin ' up . I wouldna mind ha'in 
 ye for a daughter , for ye wouldna spend the lad 's wage I ' fine clothe 
 an ' waste . Ye're not like the lass o ' this countryside . I reckon folk 
 be different at Snowfield from what they be here . " 
 " they have a different sort of life , many of them , " say Dinah ; " they 
 work at different thing - some in the mill , and many in the mine , in 
 the village round about . but the heart of man be the same everywhere , 
 and there be the child of this world and the child of light there 
 as well as elsewhere . but we have   many more Methodists there than in this 
 country . " 
 " well , I didna know as the Methody woman war like ye , for there be will 
 Maskery 's wife , as they say be a big Methody , isna pleasant to look at , 
 at all . I would as lief look at a tooad . an ' I be thinkin ' I wouldna mind if 
 ye'd stay an ' sleep here , for I should like to see ye I ' th ' house I ' 
 th ' mornin ' . but mayhappen they will be lookin for ye at Mester Poyser 's . " 
 " no , " say Dinah , " they do not   expect I , and I should like to stay , if 
 you will let I . " 
 " well , there 's room ; I'n get my bed lay I ' th ' little room o'er the 
 back kitchen , an ' ye can lie beside I . I would be glad to ha ' ye wi ' I to 
 speak to I ' th ' night , for ye've   get a nice way o ' talkin ' . it put I 
 I ' mind o ' the swallow as be under the thack last ' ear when they fust 
 begin to sing low an ' soft - like I ' th ' mornin ' . eh , but my old man war 
 fond o ' they bird ! an ' so war Adam , but they'n ne'er come again this 
 ' ear . Happen THEY'RE dead too . " 
 " there , " say Dinah , " now the kitchen look tidy , and now , dear 
 Mother - for I be your daughter to - night , you know - I should like you to 
 wash your face and have a clean cap on . do you remember what David do , 
 when God take away his child from he ? while the child be yet alive 
 he fast and pray to God to spare it , and he would neither eat nor 
 drink , but lie on the ground all night , beseech God for the child . 
 but when he know it be dead , he rise up from the ground and wash and 
 anoint himself , and change his clothe , and eat and drank ; and when 
 they ask he how it be that he seem to have leave off grieve now 
 the child be dead , he say , ' while the child be yet alive , I fast 
 and weep ; for I say , who can tell whether God will be gracious to I , 
 that the child may live ? but now he be dead , wherefore should I fast ? 
 can I bring he back again ? I shall go to he , but he shall not return 
 to I . ' " 
 " eh , that be a true word , " say Lisbeth . " yea , my old man wonna come back 
 to I , but I shall go to he - the soon the well . well , ye may do as 
 ye like wi ' me : there be a clean cap I ' that drawer , an ' I will go I ' the 
 back kitchen an ' wash my face . an ' Seth , thee may'st reach down Adam 's 
 new Bible wi ' th ' picter in , an ' she shall read we a chapter . eh , I 
 like they word - ' I shall go to he , but he wonna come back to I . ' " 
 Dinah and Seth be both inwardly offer thank for the great 
 quietness of spirit that have come over Lisbeth . this be what Dinah have 
 be try to bring about , through all her still sympathy and absence 
 from exhortation . from her girlhood upwards she have have experience among 
 the sick and the mourning , among mind harden and shrivel through 
 poverty and ignorance , and have gain the subtle perception of the 
 mode in which they could well be touch and soften into willingness 
 to receive word of spiritual consolation or warning . as Dinah express 
 it , ' she be never leave to herself ; but it be always give she when to 
 keep silence and when to speak . " and do we not all agree to call rapid 
 thought and noble impulse by the name of inspiration ? after our subtle 
 analysis of the mental process , we must still say , as Dinah do , that 
 our high thought and our good deed be all give to we . 
 and so there be earnest prayer - there be faith , love , and hope pour 
 forth that evening in the little kitchen . and poor , aged , fretful 
 Lisbeth , without grasp any distinct idea , without go through any 
 course of religious emotion , feel a vague sense of goodness and love , 
 and of something right lie underneath and beyond all this sorrow 
 life . she could not   understand the sorrow ; but , for these moment , under 
 the subduing influence of Dinah 's spirit , she feel that she must be 
 patient and still . 
 chapter XI 
 in the cottage 
 it be but half - past four the next morning when Dinah , tired of lie 
 awake listening to the bird and watch the grow light through the 
 little window in the garret roof , rise and begin to dress herself very 
 quietly , lest she should disturb Lisbeth . but already some one else be 
 astir in the house , and have go downstairs , precede by Gyp . the dog 's 
 pattering step be a sure sign that it be Adam who go down ; but Dinah 
 be not aware of this , and she think it be more likely to be Seth , 
 for he have tell she how Adam have stay up work the night before . 
 Seth , however , have only just awaken at the sound of the opening 
 door . the exciting influence of the previous day , heighten at last 
 by Dinah 's unexpected presence , have not be counteract by any bodily 
 weariness , for he have not do his ordinary amount of hard work ; and so 
 when he go to bed ; it be not till he have tire himself with hour of 
 toss wakefulness that drowsiness come , and lead on a heavy morning 
 sleep than be usual with he . 
 but Adam have be refresh by his long rest , and with his habitual 
 impatience of mere passivity , he be eager to begin the new day and 
 subdue sadness by his strong will and strong arm . the white mist lie in 
 the valley ; it be go to be a bright warm day , and he would start to 
 work again when he have have his breakfast . 
 " there be nothing but what be bearable as long as a man can work , " he say 
 to himself ; " the natur o ' thing do not   change , though it seem as if 
 one 's own life be nothing but change . the square o ' four be sixteen , 
 and you must lengthen your lever in proportion to your weight , be as 
 true when a man 's miserable as when he be happy ; and the good o ' working 
 be , it give you a grip hold o ' thing outside your own lot . " 
 as he dash the cold water over his head and face , he feel completely 
 himself again , and with his black eye as keen as ever and his thick 
 black hair all glisten with the fresh moisture , he go into the 
 workshop to look out the wood for his father 's coffin , intend that 
 he and Seth should carry it with they to Jonathan Burge 's and have the 
 coffin make by one of the workman there , so that his mother might not 
 see and hear the sad task go forward at home . 
 he have just go into the workshop when his quick ear detect a light 
 rapid foot on the stair - certainly not his mother 's . he have be in bed 
 and asleep when Dinah have come in , in the evening , and now he wonder 
 whose step this could be . a foolish thought come , and move he 
 strangely . as if it could be Hetty ! she be the last person likely to 
 be in the house . and yet he feel reluctant to go and look and have the 
 clear proof that it be some one else . he stand lean on a plank he 
 have take hold of , listen to sound which his imagination interpret 
 for he so pleasantly that the keen strong face become suffuse with a 
 timid tenderness . the light footstep move about the kitchen , follow 
 by the sound of the sweep brush , hardly make so much noise as the 
 light breeze that chase the autumn leave along the dusty path ; and 
 Adam 's imagination see a dimpled face , with dark bright eye and roguish 
 smile look backward at this brush , and a rounded figure just lean 
 a little to clasp the handle . a very foolish thought - it could not be 
 Hetty ; but the only way of dismiss such nonsense from his head be 
 to go and see who it be , for his fancy only get near and near to 
 belief while he stand there listen . he loose the plank and go to 
 the kitchen door . 
 " how do you do , Adam Bede ? " say Dinah , in her calm treble , pause from 
 her sweeping and fix her mild grave eye upon he . " I trust you feel 
 rest and strengthen again to bear the burden and heat of the day . " 
 it be like dream of the sunshine and awake in the moonlight . Adam 
 have see Dinah several time , but always at the Hall Farm , where he be 
 not very vividly conscious of any woman 's presence except Hetty 's , and 
 he have only in the last day or two begin to suspect that Seth be in 
 love with she , so that his attention have not hitherto be draw towards 
 she for his brother 's sake . but now her slim figure , her plain black 
 gown , and her pale serene face impress he with all the force that 
 belong to a reality contrast with a preoccupy fancy . for the 
 first moment or two he make no answer , but look at she with the 
 concentrated , examine glance which a man give to an object in which 
 he have suddenly begin to be interested . Dinah , for the first time in her 
 life , feel a painful self - consciousness ; there be something in the dark 
 penetrate glance of this strong man so different from the mildness and 
 timidity of his brother Seth . a faint blush come , which deepen as she 
 wonder at it . this blush recall Adam from his forgetfulness . 
 " I be quite take by surprise ; it be very good of you to come and see 
 my mother in her trouble , " he say , in a gentle grateful tone , for his 
 quick mind tell he at once how she come to be there . " I hope my mother 
 be thankful to have you , " he add , wonder rather anxiously what have 
 be Dinah 's reception . 
 " yes , " say Dinah , resume her work , ' she seem greatly comfort 
 after a while , and she be have a good deal of rest in the night , by time . 
 she be fast asleep when I leave she . " 
 " who be it take the news to the Hall Farm ? " say Adam , his thought 
 revert to some one there ; he wonder whether she have feel anything 
 about it . 
 " it be Mr. Irwine , the clergyman , tell I , and my aunt be grieve 
 for your mother when she hear it , and want I to come ; and so be my 
 uncle , I be sure , now he be hear it , but he be go out to rosseter all 
 yesterday . they will look for you there as soon as you have   get time to go , 
 for there 's nobody round that hearth but what be glad to see you . " 
 Dinah , with her sympathetic divination , know quite well that Adam be 
 longing to hear if Hetty have say anything about their trouble ; she be 
 too rigorously truthful for benevolent invention , but she have contrive 
 to say something in which Hetty be tacitly include . love have a way 
 of cheat itself consciously , like a child who play at solitary 
 hide - and - seek ; it be pleased with assurance that it all the while 
 disbelieve . Adam like what Dinah have say so much that his mind be 
 directly full of the next visit he should pay to the Hall Farm , when 
 Hetty would perhaps behave more kindly to he than she have ever do 
 before . 
 " but you will not   be there yourself any long ? " he say to Dinah . 
 " no , I go back to Snowfield on Saturday , and I shall have to set out to 
 Treddleston early , to be in time for the oakbourne carrier . so I must go 
 back to the farm to - night , that I may have the last day with my aunt and 
 her child . but I can stay here all to - day , if your mother would like 
 I ; and her heart seem inclined towards I last night . " 
 " ah , then , she be sure to want you to - day . if mother take to people at 
 the beginning , she be sure to get fond of them ; but she be a strange way of 
 not like young woman . though , to be sure , " Adam go on , smile , " she 
 not like other young woman be no reason why she should not   like you . " 
 Hitherto Gyp have be assist at this conversation in motionless 
 silence , seat on his haunch , and alternately look up in his 
 master 's face to watch its expression and observe Dinah 's movement 
 about the kitchen . the kind smile with which Adam utter the last word 
 be apparently decisive with Gyp of the light in which the stranger 
 be to be regard , and as she turn round after put aside her 
 sweeping - brush , he trot towards she and put up his muzzle against she 
 hand in a friendly way . 
 " you see Gyp bid you welcome , " say Adam , " and he be very slow to 
 welcome stranger . " 
 " poor dog ! " say Dinah , pat the rough grey coat , " I have   a strange 
 feeling about the dumb thing as if they want to speak , and it be a 
 trouble to them because they could not . I can not   help be sorry for the 
 dog always , though perhaps there be no need . but they may well have more 
 in they than they know how to make we understand , for we can not   say half 
 what we feel , with all our word . " 
 Seth come down now , and be pleased to find Adam talk with Dinah ; he 
 want Adam to know how much well she be than all other woman . 
 but after a few word of greeting , Adam draw he into the workshop to 
 consult about the coffin , and Dinah go on with her cleaning . 
 by six o'clock they be all at breakfast with Lisbeth in a kitchen as 
 clean as she could have make it herself . the window and door be open , 
 and the morning air bring with it a mingled scent of southernwood , 
 thyme , and sweet - briar from the patch of garden by the side of the 
 cottage . Dinah do not sit down at first , but move about , serve the 
 other with the warm porridge and the toasted oat - cake , which she have 
 get ready in the usual way , for she have ask Seth to tell she just what 
 his mother give they for breakfast . Lisbeth have be unusually silent 
 since she come downstairs , apparently require some time to adjust her 
 idea to a state of thing in which she come down like a lady to find 
 all the work do , and sit still to be wait on . her new sensation 
 seem to exclude the remembrance of her grief . at last , after taste 
 the porridge , she break silence : 
 " ye might ha ' make the parridge bad , " she say to Dinah ; " I can ate it 
 wi'out its turnin ' my stomach . it might ha ' be a trifle thick an ' no 
 harm , an ' I allay putten a sprig o ' mint in mysen ; but how be ye t ' know 
 that ? the lad arena like to get folk as will make their parridge as I'n 
 make it for them ; it be well if they get onybody as will make parridge at 
 all . but ye might do , wi ' a bit o ' showin ' ; for ye're a stirrin ' body 
 in a mornin ' , an ' ye've   a light heel , an ' ye've   clean th ' house well 
 enough for a ma'shift . " 
 " makeshift , mother ? " say Adam . " why , I think the house look beautiful . 
 I do not   know how it could look well . " 
 " thee dostna know ? Nay ; how be thee to know ? Th ' man ne'er know whether 
 the floor 's clean or cat - lick . but thee'lt know when thee get thy 
 parridge burn , as it be like enough to be when I'n gi'en o'er makin ' it . 
 Thee'lt think thy mother war good for summat then . " 
 " Dinah , " say Seth , " do come and sit down now and have your breakfast . 
 we be all serve now . " 
 " Aye , come an ' sit ye down - do , " say Lisbeth , " an ' eat a morsel ; ye'd 
 need , arter bein ' upo ' your leg this hour an ' half a'ready . come , 
 then , " she add , in a tone of complain affection , as Dinah sit down 
 by her side , " I will be loath for ye t ' go , but ye canna stay much long , 
 I doubt . I could put up wi ' ye I ' th ' house well nor wi ' most folk . " 
 " I will stay till to - night if you be willing , " say Dinah . " I would stay 
 long , only I be go back to Snowfield on Saturday , and I must be with 
 my aunt to - morrow . " 
 " eh , I would ne'er go back to that country . my old man come from that 
 Stonyshire side , but he leave it when he war a young un , an ' I ' the right 
 on't   too ; for he say as there war no wood there , an ' it ' ud ha ' be a 
 bad country for a carpenter . " 
 " ah , " say Adam , " I remember father tell I when I be a little lad 
 that he make up his mind if ever he move it should be south'ard . but 
 I be not so sure about it . Bartle Massey say - and he know the South - as 
 the northern man be a fine breed than the southern , hard - head and 
 stronger - bodied , and a deal taller . and then he say in some o ' those 
 county it be as flat as the back o ' your hand , and you can see nothing 
 of a distance without climb up the high tree . I could not   abide 
 that . I like to go to work by a road that will take I up a bit of a hill , 
 and see the field for mile round I , and a bridge , or a town , or a bit 
 of a steeple here and there . it make you feel the world 's a big place , 
 and there be other man work in it with their head and hand besides 
 yourself . " 
 " I like th ' hill well , " say Seth , " when the cloud be over your head 
 and you see the sun shin ever so far off , over the Loamford way , as 
 I have   often do o ' late , on the stormy day . it seem to I as if that 
 be heaven where there be always joy and sunshine , though this life 's 
 dark and cloudy . " 
 " oh , I love the Stonyshire side , " say Dinah ; " I should not   like to set 
 my face towards the country where they be rich in corn and cattle , and 
 the ground so level and easy to tread ; and to turn my back on the hill 
 where the poor people have to live such a hard life and the man spend 
 their day in the mine away from the sunlight . it be very blessed on a 
 bleak cold day , when the sky be hang dark over the hill , to feel 
 the love of God in one 's soul , and carry it to the lonely , bare , stone 
 house , where there be nothing else to give comfort . " 
 " eh ! " say Lisbeth , " that be very well for ye to talk , as look welly 
 like the snowdrop - flower as ha ' live for day an ' day when i'n 
 gethere them , wi ' nothing but a drop o ' water an ' a peep o ' daylight ; 
 but th ' hungry foulk have well leave th ' hungry country . it make less 
 mouth for the scant cake . but , " she go on , look at Adam , " donna 
 thee talk o ' go south'ard or north'ard , an ' leavin ' thy feyther and 
 mother I ' the churchyard , an ' go to a country as they know nothing 
 on . I will ne'er rest I ' my grave if I donna see thee I ' the churchyard of 
 a Sunday . " 
 " Donna fear , mother , " say Adam . " if I hadna make up my mind not to go , 
 I should ha ' be go before now . " 
 he have finish his breakfast now , and rise as he be speak . 
 " what art go to do ? " ask Lisbeth . " set about thy feyther 's coffin ? " 
 " no , mother , " say Adam ; " we be go to take the wood to the village 
 and have it make there . " 
 " Nay , my lad , nay , " Lisbeth burst out in an eager , wail tone ; " thee 
 wotna let nobody make thy feyther 's coffin but thysen ? who would make it 
 so well ? an ' he as know'd what good work war , an 's get a son as be the 
 head o ' the village an ' all Treddles'on too , for cleverness . " 
 " very well , mother , if that be thy wish , I will make the coffin at home ; 
 but I think thee wouldstna like to hear the work go on . " 
 " An ' why shouldna I like ' t ? it be the right thing to be do . an ' what be 
 liking get to do wi't ? it be choice o ' misliking be all I'n get I ' this 
 world . one morsel 's as good as another when your mouth 's out o ' taste . 
 Thee mun set about it now this mornin ' fust thing . I wonna ha ' nobody to 
 touch the coffin but thee . " 
 Adam 's eye meet Seth 's , which look from Dinah to he rather wistfully . 
 " no , Mother , " he say , " I will not consent but Seth shall have a hand 
 in it too , if it be to be do at home . I will go to the village this 
 forenoon , because Mr. Burge ' ull want to see I , and Seth shall stay at 
 home and begin the coffin . I can come back at noon , and then he can go . " 
 " Nay , nay , " persist Lisbeth , begin to cry , " I'n set my heart on't 
 as thee shalt ma ' thy feyther 's coffin . thee't so stiff an ' masterful , 
 thee't ne'er do as thy mother want thee . Thee wast often anger wi ' 
 thy feyther when he war alive ; thee must be the well to he now he be 
 go . he would ha ' think nothing on't   for Seth to ma 's coffin . " 
 " say no more , Adam , say no more , " say Seth , gently , though his voice 
 tell that he speak with some effort ; " Mother 's in the right . I will go to 
 work , and do thee stay at home . " 
 he pass into the workshop immediately , follow by Adam ; while 
 Lisbeth , automatically obey her old habit , begin to put away the 
 breakfast thing , as if she do not mean Dinah to take her place any 
 long . Dinah say nothing , but presently use the opportunity of 
 quietly join the brother in the workshop . 
 they have already get on their apron and paper cap , and Adam be 
 stand with his left hand on Seth 's shoulder , while he point with 
 the hammer in his right to some board which they be look at . their 
 back be turn towards the door by which Dinah enter , and she come 
 in so gently that they be not aware of her presence till they hear 
 her voice say , " Seth Bede ! " Seth start , and they both turn round . 
 Dinah look as if she do not see Adam , and fix her eye on Seth 's 
 face , say with calm kindness , " I will not   say farewell . I shall see you 
 again when you come from work . so as I be at the farm before dark , it 
 will be quite soon enough . " 
 " thank you , Dinah ; I should like to walk home with you once more . it will 
 perhaps be the last time . " 
 there be a little tremor in Seth 's voice . Dinah put out her hand and 
 say , " you will have sweet peace in your mind to - day , Seth , for your 
 tenderness and long - suffering towards your aged mother . " 
 she turn round and leave the workshop as quickly and quietly as she have 
 enter it . Adam have be observe she closely all the while , but she 
 have not look at he . as soon as she be go , he say , " I do not   wonder 
 at thee for love she , Seth . she be get a face like a lily . " 
 Seth 's soul rush to his eye and lip : he have never yet confess his 
 secret to Adam , but now he feel a delicious sense of disburdenment , 
 as he answer , " Aye , Addy , I do love she - too much , I doubt . but she 
 doesna love I , lad , only as one child o ' God love another . she will 
 never love any man as a husband - that be my belief . " 
 " nay , lad , there be no telling ; thee mustna lose heart . she be make out 
 o ' stuff with a fine grain than most o ' the woman ; I can see that clear 
 enough . but if she be well than they be in other thing , I canna think 
 she will fall short of them in love . " 
 no more be say . Seth set out to the village , and Adam begin his work 
 on the coffin . 
 " God help the lad , and I too , " he think , as he lift the board . 
 " we be like enough to find life a tough job - hard work inside and out . 
 it be a strange thing to think of a man as can lift a chair with his 
 tooth and walk fifty mile on end , tremble and turn hot and cold 
 at only a look from one woman out of all the rest I ' the world . it be a 
 mystery we can give no account of ; but no more we can of the sprouting 
 o ' the seed , for that matter . " 
 Chapter XII 
 in the Wood 
 that same Thursday morning , as Arthur Donnithorne be move about in 
 his dressing - room see his well - look british person reflect in 
 the old - fashioned mirror , and star at , from a dingy olive - green piece 
 of tapestry , by Pharaoh 's daughter and her maiden , who ought to have 
 be mind the infant Moses , he be hold a discussion with himself , 
 which , by the time his valet be tie the black silk sling over his 
 shoulder , have issue in a distinct practical resolution . 
 " I mean to go to Eagledale and fish for a week or so , " he say aloud . 
 " I shall take you with I , Pym , and set off this morning ; so be ready by 
 half - past eleven . " 
 the low whistle , which have assist he in arrive at this resolution , 
 here break out into his loud ringing tenor , and the corridor , as he 
 hurry along it , echo to his favourite song from the Beggar 's Opera , 
 " when the heart of a man be oppress with care . " not an heroic strain ; 
 nevertheless Arthur feel himself very heroic as he stride towards the 
 stable to give his order about the horse . his own approbation be 
 necessary to he , and it be not an approbation to be enjoy quite 
 gratuitously ; it must be win by a fair amount of merit . he have never yet 
 forfeit that approbation , and he have considerable reliance on his own 
 virtue . no young man could confess his fault more candidly ; candour 
 be one of his favourite virtue ; and how can a man 's candour be see 
 in all its lustre unless he have a few failing to talk of ? but he have 
 an agreeable confidence that his fault be all of a generous 
 kind - impetuous , warm - blooded , leonine ; never crawl , crafty , 
 reptilian . it be not possible for Arthur Donnithorne to do anything 
 mean , dastardly , or cruel . " no ! I be a devil of a fellow for get 
 myself into a hobble , but I always take care the load shall fall on 
 my own shoulder . " unhappily , there be no inherent poetical justice in 
 hobble , and they will sometimes obstinately refuse to inflict their 
 bad consequence on the prime offender , in spite of his loudly 
 express wish . it be entirely owe to this deficiency in the scheme 
 of thing that Arthur have ever bring any one into trouble besides 
 himself . he be nothing if not good - natured ; and all his picture of 
 the future , when he should come into the estate , be make up of a 
 prosperous , contented tenantry , adore their landlord , who would be the 
 model of an english gentleman - mansion in first - rate order , all elegance 
 and high taste - jolly housekeeping , fine stud in Loamshire - purse open 
 to all public object - in short , everything as different as possible 
 from what be now associate with the name of Donnithorne . and one of 
 the first good action he would perform in that future should be to 
 increase Irwine 's income for the vicarage of Hayslope , so that he might 
 keep a carriage for his mother and sister . his hearty affection for the 
 rector date from the age of frock and trouser . it be an affection 
 partly filial , partly fraternal - fraternal enough to make he like 
 Irwine 's company well than that of most young man , and filial enough 
 to make he shrink strongly from incur Irwine 's disapprobation . 
 you perceive that Arthur Donnithorne be " a good fellow " - all his 
 college friend think he such . he could not   bear to see any one 
 uncomfortable ; he would have be sorry even in his angriest mood for 
 any harm to happen to his grandfather ; and his Aunt Lydia herself have 
 the benefit of that soft - heartedness which he bear towards the whole 
 sex . whether he would have self - mastery enough to be always as harmless 
 and purely beneficent as his good - nature lead he to desire , be a 
 question that no one have yet decide against he ; he be but twenty - one , 
 you remember , and we do not   inquire too closely into character in the 
 case of a handsome generous young fellow , who will have property enough 
 to support numerous peccadillo - who , if he should unfortunately 
 break a man 's leg in his rash driving , will be able to pension he 
 handsomely ; or if he should happen to spoil a woman 's existence for she , 
 will make it up to she with expensive bon - bon , pack up and direct 
 by his own hand . it would be ridiculous to be pry and analytic 
 in such case , as if one be inquire into the character of a 
 confidential clerk . we use round , general , gentlemanly epithet about 
 a young man of birth and fortune ; and lady , with that fine intuition 
 which be the distinguish attribute of their sex , see at once that 
 he be " nice . " the chance be that he will go through life without 
 scandalize any one ; a seaworthy vessel that no one would refuse to 
 insure . ship , certainly , be liable to casualty , which sometimes make 
 terribly evident some flaw in their construction that would never have 
 be discoverable in smooth water ; and many a " good fellow , " through a 
 disastrous combination of circumstance , have undergo a like betrayal . 
 but we have no fair ground for entertain unfavourable augury 
 concern Arthur Donnithorne , who this morning prove himself capable 
 of a prudent resolution found on conscience . one thing be clear : 
 Nature have take care that he shall never go far astray with perfect 
 comfort and satisfaction to himself ; he will never get beyond that 
 border - land of sin , where he will be perpetually harass by assault 
 from the other side of the boundary . he will never be a courtier of 
 Vice , and wear her order in his button - hole . 
 it be about ten o'clock , and the sun be shin brilliantly ; 
 everything be look lovelier for the yesterday 's rain . it be a 
 pleasant thing on such a morning to walk along the well - roll gravel on 
 one 's way to the stable , meditate an excursion . but the scent of 
 the stable , which , in a natural state of thing , ought to be among 
 the soothe influence of a man 's life , always bring with it some 
 irritation to Arthur . there be no have his own way in the stable ; 
 everything be manage in the stingiest fashion . his grandfather 
 persist in retain as head groom an old dolt whom no sort of 
 lever could move out of his old habit , and who be allow to hire a 
 succession of raw Loamshire lad as his subordinate , one of whom 
 have lately test a new pair of shear by clip an oblong patch on 
 Arthur 's bay mare . this state of thing be naturally embitter ; one 
 can put up with annoyance in the house , but to have the stable make 
 a scene of vexation and disgust be a point beyond what human flesh 
 and blood can be expect to endure long together without danger of 
 misanthropy . 
 Old John 's wooden , deep - wrinkle face be the first object that meet 
 Arthur 's eye as he enter the stable - yard , and it quite poison for 
 he the bark of the two bloodhound that keep watch there . he could 
 never speak quite patiently to the old blockhead . 
 " you must have Meg saddle for I and bring to the door at half - past 
 eleven , and I shall want Rattler saddle for Pym at the same time . do 
 you hear ? " 
 " yes , I hear , I hear , Cap'n , " say old John very deliberately , follow 
 the young master into the stable . John consider a young master as the 
 natural enemy of an old servant , and young people in general as a poor 
 contrivance for carry on the world . 
 Arthur go in for the sake of pat Meg , decline as far as possible 
 to see anything in the stable , lest he should lose his temper before 
 breakfast . the pretty creature be in one of the inner stable , and 
 turn her mild head as her master come beside she . Little Trot , a tiny 
 spaniel , her inseparable companion in the stable , be comfortably curl 
 up on her back . 
 " well , Meg , my pretty girl , " say Arthur , pat her neck , " we will have 
 a glorious canter this morning . " 
 " Nay , your honour , I donna see as that can be , " say John . 
 " not be ? why not ? " 
 " why , she be get lamed . " 
 " Lamed , confound you ! what do you mean ? " 
 " why , th ' lad take she too close to Dalton 's hosse , an ' one on them 
 fling out at she , an ' she be get her shank bruise o ' the near foreleg . " 
 the judicious historian abstain from narrate precisely what ensue . 
 you understand that there be a great deal of strong language , mingle 
 with soothe " who - ho 's " while the leg be examine ; that John stand 
 by with quite as much emotion as if he have be a cunningly carve 
 crab - tree walking - stick , and that Arthur Donnithorne presently repasse 
 the iron gate of the pleasure - ground without sing as he go . 
 he consider himself thoroughly disappointed and annoyed . there be not 
 another mount in the stable for himself and his servant besides Meg and 
 Rattler . it be vexatious ; just when he want to get out of the way 
 for a week or two . it seem culpable in Providence to allow such a 
 combination of circumstance . to be shut up at the Chase with a break 
 arm when every other fellow in his regiment be enjoy himself 
 at Windsor - shut up with his grandfather , who have the same sort of 
 affection for he as for his parchment deed ! and to be disgust at 
 every turn with the management of the house and the estate ! in such 
 circumstance a man necessarily get in an ill humour , and work off the 
 irritation by some excess or other . " Salkeld would have drink a bottle 
 of port every day , " he mutter to himself , " but I be not well season 
 enough for that . well , since I can not   go to Eagledale , I will have a gallop 
 on Rattler to Norburne this morning , and lunch with Gawaine . " 
 behind this explicit resolution there lie an implicit one . if he lunch 
 with Gawaine and linger chatting , he should not reach the Chase again 
 till nearly five , when Hetty would be safe out of his sight in the 
 housekeeper 's room ; and when she set out to go home , it would be his 
 lazy time after dinner , so he should keep out of her way altogether . 
 there really would have be no harm in be kind to the little thing , 
 and it be worth dance with a dozen ballroom bell only to look at 
 Hetty for half an hour . but perhaps he have well not take any more 
 notice of she ; it might put notion into her head , as Irwine have hint ; 
 though Arthur , for his part , think girl be not by any mean so soft 
 and easily bruise ; indeed , he have generally find they twice as cool 
 and cunning as he be himself . as for any real harm in Hetty 's case , it 
 be out of the question : Arthur Donnithorne accept his own bond for 
 himself with perfect confidence . 
 so the twelve o'clock sun see he gallop towards Norburne ; and by 
 good fortune Halsell Common lie in his road and give he some fine 
 leap for Rattler . nothing like " take " a few bush and ditch for 
 exorcise a demon ; and it be really astonishing that the centaur , with 
 their immense advantage in this way , have leave so bad a reputation in 
 history . 
 after this , you will perhaps be surprised to hear that although Gawaine 
 be at home , the hand of the dial in the courtyard have scarcely 
 clear the last stroke of three when Arthur return through the 
 entrance - gate , get down from the pant Rattler , and go into the 
 house to take a hasty luncheon . but I believe there have be man 
 since his day who have ride a long way to avoid a rencontre , and then 
 gallop hastily back lest they should miss it . it be the favourite 
 stratagem of our passion to sham a retreat , and to turn sharp round 
 upon we at the moment we have make up our mind that the day be our own . 
 " the cap'n 's be ridin ' the devil 's own pace , " say Dalton the 
 coachman , whose person stand out in high relief as he smoke his pipe 
 against the stable wall , when John bring up Rattler . 
 " An ' I wish he would get the devil to do 's groom for'n , " growl John . 
 " aye ; he would hev a deal haimabler groom nor what he have now , " observe 
 Dalton - and the joke appear to he so good that , be leave alone upon 
 the scene , he continue at interval to take his pipe from his mouth 
 in order to wink at an imaginary audience and shake luxuriously with 
 a silent , ventral laughter , mentally rehearse the dialogue from the 
 beginning , that he might recite it with effect in the servant ' hall . 
 when Arthur go up to his dressing - room again after luncheon , it be 
 inevitable that the debate he have have with himself there early in the 
 day should flash across his mind ; but it be impossible for he now 
 to dwell on the remembrance - impossible to recall the feeling and 
 reflection which have be decisive with he then , any more than to 
 recall the peculiar scent of the air that have freshen he when he 
 first open his window . the desire to see Hetty have rush back like an 
 ill - stem current ; he be amazed himself at the force with which this 
 trivial fancy seem to grasp he : he be even rather tremulous as he 
 brush his hair - pooh ! it be rid in that break - neck way . it be 
 because he have make a serious affair of an idle matter , by think of 
 it as if it be of any consequence . he would amuse himself by see 
 Hetty to - day , and get rid of the whole thing from his mind . it be all 
 Irwine 's fault . " if Irwine have say nothing , I should not   have think 
 half so much of Hetty as of Meg 's lameness . " however , it be just the 
 sort of day for loll in the Hermitage , and he would go and finish 
 Dr. Moore 's Zeluco there before dinner . the Hermitage stand in Fir - tree 
 Grove - the way Hetty be sure to come in walk from the Hall Farm . 
 so nothing could be simple and more natural : meet Hetty be a mere 
 circumstance of his walk , not its object . 
 Arthur 's shadow flit rather fast among the sturdy oak of the Chase 
 than might have be expect from the shadow of a tired man on a warm 
 afternoon , and it be still scarcely four o'clock when he stand before 
 the tall narrow gate lead into the delicious labyrinthine wood which 
 skirt one side of the Chase , and which be call Fir - tree Grove , not 
 because the fir be many , but because they be few . it be a wood 
 of beech and lime , with here and there a light silver - stem 
 birch - just the sort of wood most haunt by the nymph : you see their 
 white sunlit limb gleam athwart the bough , or peep from behind 
 the smooth - sweeping outline of a tall lime ; you hear their soft liquid 
 laughter - but if you look with a too curious sacrilegious eye , they 
 vanish behind the silvery beeche , they make you believe that their 
 voice be only a running brooklet , perhaps they metamorphose themselves 
 into a tawny squirrel that scamper away and mock you from the topmost 
 bough . it be not a grove with measured grass or roll gravel for you 
 to tread upon , but with narrow , hollow - shape , earthy path , edge with 
 faint dash of delicate moss - path which look as if they be make 
 by the free will of the tree and underwood , move reverently aside to 
 look at the tall queen of the white - footed nymph . 
 it be along the broad of these path that Arthur Donnithorne pass , 
 under an avenue of lime and beech . it be a still afternoon - the 
 golden light be linger languidly among the upper bough , only 
 glance down here and there on the purple pathway and its edge of 
 faintly sprinkle moss : an afternoon in which destiny disguise her cold 
 awful face behind a hazy radiant veil , enclose we in warm downy 
 wing , and poison we with violet - scented breath . Arthur stroll along 
 carelessly , with a book under his arm , but not look on the ground 
 as meditative man be apt to do ; his eye would fix themselves on the 
 distant bend in the road round which a little figure must surely appear 
 before long . ah ! there she come . first a bright patch of colour , like 
 a tropic bird among the bough ; then a tripping figure , with a round 
 hat on , and a small basket under her arm ; then a deep - blushing , almost 
 frightened , but bright - smile girl , make her curtsy with a fluttered 
 yet happy glance , as Arthur come up to she . if Arthur have have time 
 to think at all , he would have think it strange that he should feel 
 flutter too , be conscious of blush too - in fact , look and feel as 
 foolish as if he have be take by surprise instead of meet just what 
 he expect . poor thing ! it be a pity they be not in that golden age 
 of childhood when they would have stand face to face , eye each other 
 with timid liking , then give each other a little butterfly kiss , 
 and toddle off to play together . Arthur would have go home to his 
 silk - curtain cot , and Hetty to her home - spin pillow , and both would 
 have sleep without dream , and to - morrow would have be a life hardly 
 conscious of a yesterday . 
 Arthur turn round and walk by Hetty 's side without give a reason . 
 they be alone together for the first time . what an overpowering 
 presence that first privacy be ! he actually dare not look at this 
 little butter - maker for the first minute or two . as for Hetty , her foot 
 rest on a cloud , and she be bear along by warm zephyr ; she have 
 forget her rose - colour ribbon ; she be no more conscious of her 
 limb than if her childish soul have pass into a water - lily , rest 
 on a liquid bed and warm by the midsummer sun - beam . it may seem a 
 contradiction , but Arthur gather a certain carelessness and confidence 
 from his timidity : it be an entirely different state of mind from what 
 he have expect in such a meeting with Hetty ; and full as he be of 
 vague feeling , there be room , in those moment of silence , for the 
 thought that his previous debate and scruple be needless . 
 " you be quite right to choose this way of come to the Chase , " he 
 say at last , look down at Hetty ; " it be so much pretty as well as 
 short than come by either of the lodge . " 
 " yes , sir , " Hetty answer , with a tremulous , almost whisper voice . 
 she do not   know one bit how to speak to a gentleman like Mr. Arthur , and 
 her very vanity make she more coy of speech . 
 " do you come every week to see Mrs. Pomfret ? " 
 " yes , sir , every Thursday , only when she be get to go out with Miss 
 Donnithorne . " 
 " and she be teach you something , be she ? " 
 " yes , sir , the lace - mending as she learn abroad , and the 
 stocking - mending - it look just like the stocking , you can not   tell it be 
 be mend ; and she teach I cut - out too . " 
 " what ! be you go to be a lady 's maid ? " 
 " I should like to be one very much indeed . " Hetty speak more audibly 
 now , but still rather tremulously ; she think , perhaps she seem as 
 stupid to Captain Donnithorne as Luke Britton do to she . 
 " I suppose Mrs. Pomfret always expect you at this time ? " 
 " she expect I at four o'clock . I be rather late to - day , because my aunt 
 could not   spare I ; but the regular time be four , because that give we 
 time before Miss Donnithorne 's bell ring . " 
 " ah , then , I must not keep you now , else I should like to show you the 
 Hermitage . do you ever see it ? " 
 " no , sir . " 
 " this be the walk where we turn up to it . but we must not go now . I will 
 show it you some other time , if you would like to see it . " 
 " yes , please , sir . " 
 " do you always come back this way in the evening , or be you afraid to 
 come so lonely a road ? " 
 " oh no , sir , it be never late ; I always set out by eight o'clock , and 
 it be so light now in the evening . my aunt would be angry with I if I 
 do not   get home before nine . " 
 " perhaps Craig , the gardener , come to take care of you ? " 
 a deep blush overspread Hetty 's face and neck . " I be sure he do not ; 
 I be sure he never do ; I would not   let he ; I do not   like he , " she say 
 hastily , and the tear of vexation have come so fast that before she have 
 do speak a bright drop roll down her hot cheek . then she feel 
 ashamed to death that she be cry , and for one long instant her 
 happiness be all go . but in the next she feel an arm steal round she , 
 and a gentle voice say , " why , Hetty , what make you cry ? I do not   mean 
 to vex you . I would not   vex you for the world , you little blossom . come , 
 do not   cry ; look at I , else I shall think you will not   forgive I . " 
 Arthur have lay his hand on the soft arm that be near to he , and 
 be stoop towards Hetty with a look of coax entreaty . Hetty lift 
 her long dewy lash , and meet the eye that be bent towards she with a 
 sweet , timid , beseech look . what a space of time those three moment 
 be while their eye meet and his arm touch she ! love be such a 
 simple thing when we have only one - and - twenty summer and a sweet girl 
 of seventeen tremble under our glance , as if she be a bud first 
 open her heart with wonder rapture to the morning . such young 
 unfurrowed soul roll to meet each other like two velvet peach that 
 touch softly and be at rest ; they mingle as easily as two brooklet 
 that ask for nothing but to entwine themselves and ripple with 
 ever - interlace curve in the leafiest hiding - place . while Arthur 
 gaze into Hetty 's dark beseech eye , it make no difference to he 
 what sort of English she speak ; and even if hoop and powder have be 
 in fashion , he would very likely not have be sensible just then that 
 Hetty want those sign of high breeding . 
 but they start asunder with beat heart : something have fall on 
 the ground with a rattle noise ; it be Hetty 's basket ; all her little 
 workwoman 's matter be scatter on the path , some of they show 
 a capability of roll to great length . there be much to be do in 
 pick up , and not a word be speak ; but when Arthur hang the basket 
 over her arm again , the poor child feel a strange difference in his look 
 and manner . he just press her hand , and say , with a look and tone 
 that be almost chilling to she , " I have be hinder you ; I must not 
 keep you any long now . you will be expect at the house . good - bye . " 
 without wait for she to speak , he turn away from she and hurry 
 back towards the road that lead to the Hermitage , leave Hetty to pursue 
 her way in a strange dream that seem to have begin in bewilder 
 delight and be now pass into contrariety and sadness . would he 
 meet she again as she come home ? why have he speak almost as if he be 
 displeased with she ? and then run away so suddenly ? she cry , hardly 
 know why . 
 Arthur too be very uneasy , but his feeling be light up for he by a 
 more distinct consciousness . he hurry to the Hermitage , which stand in 
 the heart of the wood , unlock the door with a hasty wrench , slam 
 it after he , pitch Zeluco into the most distant corner , and thrust 
 his right hand into his pocket , first walk four or five time up and 
 down the scanty length of the little room , and then seat himself on 
 the ottoman in an uncomfortable stiff way , as we often do when we wish 
 not to abandon ourselves to feel . 
 he be get in love with Hetty - that be quite plain . he be ready 
 to pitch everything else - no matter where - for the sake of surrender 
 himself to this delicious feeling which have just disclose itself . it 
 be no use blink the fact now - they would get too fond of each other , 
 if he go on take notice of she - and what would come of it ? he should 
 have to go away in a few week , and the poor little thing would be 
 miserable . he must not see she alone again ; he must keep out of her way . 
 what a fool he be for come back from Gawaine 's ! 
 he get up and throw open the window , to let in the soft breath of the 
 afternoon , and the healthy scent of the fir that make a belt round the 
 Hermitage . the soft air do not help his resolution , as he lean out 
 and look into the leafy distance . but he consider his resolution 
 sufficiently fix : there be no need to debate with himself any long . 
 he have make up his mind not to meet Hetty again ; and now he might 
 give himself up to think how immensely agreeable it would be if 
 circumstance be different - how pleasant it would have be to meet 
 she this evening as she come back , and put his arm round she again and 
 look into her sweet face . he wonder if the dear little thing be 
 think of he too - twenty to one she be . how beautiful her eye be 
 with the tear on their lash ! he would like to satisfy his soul for a 
 day with look at they , and he must see she again - he must see she , 
 simply to remove any false impression from her mind about his manner 
 to she just now . he would behave in a quiet , kind way to she - just to 
 prevent she from go home with her head full of wrong fancy . yes , 
 that would be the good thing to do after all . 
 it be a long while - more than an hour before Arthur have bring his 
 meditation to this point ; but once arrive there , he could stay no 
 long at the Hermitage . the time must be fill up with movement until 
 he should see Hetty again . and it be already late enough to go and 
 dress for dinner , for his grandfather 's dinner - hour be six . 
 chapter XIII 
 evening in the Wood 
 IT happen that Mrs. Pomfret have have a slight quarrel with Mrs. 
 Best , the housekeeper , on this Thursday morning - a fact which have two 
 consequence highly convenient to Hetty . it cause Mrs. Pomfret to have 
 tea send up to her own room , and it inspire that exemplary lady 's maid 
 with so lively a recollection of former passage in Mrs. Best 's conduct , 
 and of dialogue in which Mrs. Best have decidedly the inferiority as an 
 interlocutor with Mrs. Pomfret , that Hetty require no more presence 
 of mind than be demand for use her needle , and throw in an 
 occasional " yes " or " no . " she would have want to put on her hat 
 early than usual ; only she have tell Captain Donnithorne that she 
 usually set out about eight o'clock , and if he should go to the Grove 
 again expect to see she , and she should be go ! would he come ? her 
 little butterfly soul flutter incessantly between memory and dubious 
 expectation . at last the minute - hand of the old - fashioned brazen - face 
 timepiece be on the last quarter to eight , and there be every reason 
 for its being time to get ready for departure . even Mrs. Pomfret 's 
 preoccupied mind do not prevent she from notice what look like a 
 new flush of beauty in the little thing as she tie on her hat before 
 the look - glass . 
 " that child get pretty and pretty every day , I do believe , " be she 
 inward comment . " the more be the pity . she will get neither a place nor 
 a husband any the soon for it . Sober well - to - do man do not   like such 
 pretty wife . when I be a girl , I be more admired than if I have be 
 so very pretty . however , she be reason to be grateful to I for teach 
 her something to get her bread with , well than farm - house work . they 
 always tell I I be good - natured - and that be the truth , and to my hurt 
 too , else there be they in this house that would not   be here now to lord 
 it over I in the housekeeper 's room . " 
 Hetty walk hastily across the short space of pleasure - ground which she 
 have to traverse , dread to meet Mr. Craig , to whom she could hardly 
 have speak civilly . how relieved she be when she have get safely under 
 the oak and among the fern of the Chase ! even then she be as ready to 
 be startle as the deer that leap away at her approach . she think 
 nothing of the evening light that lie gently in the grassy alley 
 between the fern , and make the beauty of their live green more visible 
 than it have be in the overpower flood of noon : she think of 
 nothing that be present . she only see something that be possible : Mr. 
 Arthur Donnithorne come to meet she again along the Fir - tree Grove . 
 that be the foreground of Hetty 's picture ; behind it lie a bright hazy 
 something - day that be not to be as the other day of her life have 
 be . it be as if she have be woo by a river - god , who might any 
 time take she to his wondrous hall below a watery heaven . there be no 
 know what would come , since this strange entrancing delight have come . 
 if a chest full of lace and satin and jewel have be send she from some 
 unknown source , how could she but have think that her whole lot be 
 go to change , and that to - morrow some still more bewildering joy 
 would befall she ? Hetty have never read a novel ; if she have ever see 
 one , I think the word would have be too hard for she ; how then could 
 she find a shape for her expectation ? they be as formless as the 
 sweet languid odour of the garden at the Chase , which have float past 
 she as she walk by the gate . 
 she be at another gate now - that lead into Fir - tree Grove . she enter 
 the wood , where it be already twilight , and at every step she take , the 
 fear at her heart become colder . if he should not come ! oh , how dreary 
 it be - the thought of go out at the other end of the wood , into the 
 unsheltered road , without have see he . she reach the first turning 
 towards the Hermitage , walk slowly - he be not there . she hat the 
 leveret that run across the path ; she hat everything that be not what 
 she long for . she walk on , happy whenever she be come to a bend in 
 the road , for perhaps he be behind it . no . she be begin to cry : her 
 heart have swell so , the tear stand in her eye ; she give one great 
 sob , while the corner of her mouth quiver , and the tear roll down . 
 she do not   know that there be another turning to the Hermitage , that 
 she be close against it , and that Arthur Donnithorne be only a few yard 
 from she , full of one thought , and a thought of which she only be the 
 object . he be go to see Hetty again : that be the longing which have 
 be grow through the last three hour to a feverish thirst . not , 
 of course , to speak in the caressing way into which he have unguardedly 
 fall before dinner , but to set thing right with she by a kindness 
 which would have the air of friendly civility , and prevent she from 
 run away with wrong notion about their mutual relation . 
 if Hetty have know he be there , she would not have cry ; and it would 
 have be well , for then Arthur would perhaps have behave as wisely 
 as he have intend . as it be , she start when he appear at the end 
 of the side - alley , and look up at he with two great drop roll 
 down her cheek . what else could he do but speak to she in a soft , 
 soothe tone , as if she be a bright - eyed spaniel with a thorn in her 
 foot ? 
 " have something frighten you , Hetty ? have you see anything in the 
 wood ? do not   be frightened - I will take care of you now . " 
 Hetty be blush so , she do not   know whether she be happy or 
 miserable . to be cry again - what do gentleman think of girl who 
 cry in that way ? she feel unable even to say " no , " but could only look 
 away from he and wipe the tear from her cheek . not before a great drop 
 have fall on her rose - colour string - she know that quite well . 
 " come , be cheerful again . smile at I , and tell I what be the matter . 
 come , tell I . " 
 Hetty turn her head towards he , whisper , " I think you would not 
 come , " and slowly get courage to lift her eye to he . that look be too 
 much : he must have have eye of egyptian granite not to look too lovingly 
 in return . 
 " you little frighten bird ! little tearful rose ! silly pet ! you will not 
 cry again , now I be with you , will you ? " 
 ah , he do not   know in the least what he be say . this be not what 
 he mean to say . his arm be steal round the waist again ; it be 
 tighten its clasp ; he be bend his face nearer and near to the 
 round cheek ; his lip be meet those pout child - lip , and for a 
 long moment time have vanish . he may be a shepherd in Arcadia for aught 
 he know , he may be the first youth kiss the first maiden , he may be 
 Eros himself , sip the lip of Psyche - it be all one . 
 there be no speaking for minute after . they walk along with beat 
 heart till they come within sight of the gate at the end of the wood . 
 then they look at each other , not quite as they have look before , for 
 in their eye there be the memory of a kiss . 
 but already something bitter have begin to mingle itself with the 
 fountain of sweet : already Arthur be uncomfortable . he take his arm 
 from Hetty 's waist , and say , " here we be , almost at the end of the 
 Grove . I wonder how late it be , " he add , pull out his watch . 
 " twenty minute past eight - but my watch be too fast . however , I would 
 well not go any far now . trot along quickly with your little foot , 
 and get home safely . good - bye . " 
 he take her hand , and look at her half - sadly , half with a constrained 
 smile . Hetty 's eye seem to beseech he not to go away yet ; but he 
 pat her cheek and say " good - bye " again . she be oblige to turn away 
 from he and go on . 
 as for Arthur , he rush back through the wood , as if he want to put 
 a wide space between himself and Hetty . he would not go to the hermitage 
 again ; he remember how he have debate with himself there before 
 dinner , and it have all come to nothing - bad than nothing . he walk 
 right on into the Chase , glad to get out of the Grove , which surely be 
 haunt by his evil genius . those beech and smooth lime - there be 
 something enervate in the very sight of they ; but the strong knot 
 old oak have no bend languor in they - the sight of they would give 
 a man some energy . Arthur lose himself among the narrow opening in 
 the fern , wind about without seek any issue , till the twilight 
 deepen almost to night under the great bough , and the hare look 
 black as it dart across his path . 
 he be feel much more strongly than he have do in the morning : it 
 be as if his horse have wheel round from a leap and dare to dispute 
 his mastery . he be dissatisfied with himself , irritated , mortify . he 
 no soon fix his mind on the probable consequence of give way to 
 the emotion which have steal over he to - day - of continue to notice 
 Hetty , of allow himself any opportunity for such slight caress as 
 he have be betray into already - than he refuse to believe such a 
 future possible for himself . to flirt with Hetty be a very different 
 affair from flirt with a pretty girl of his own station : that be 
 understand to be an amusement on both side , or , if it become serious , 
 there be no obstacle to marriage . but this little thing would be speak 
 ill of directly , if she happen to be see walk with he ; and then 
 those excellent people , the Poysers , to whom a good name be as precious 
 as if they have the good blood in the land in their vein - he should hate 
 himself if he make a scandal of that sort , on the estate that be to be 
 his own some day , and among tenant by whom he like , above all , to be 
 respect . he could no more believe that he should so fall in his own 
 esteem than that he should break both his leg and go on crutch all 
 the rest of his life . he could not   imagine himself in that position ; it 
 be too odious , too unlike he . 
 and even if no one know anything about it , they might get too fond of 
 each other , and then there could be nothing but the misery of parting , 
 after all . no gentleman , out of a ballad , could marry a farmer 's niece . 
 there must be an end to the whole thing at once . it be too foolish . 
 and yet he have be so determined this morning , before he go to 
 Gawaine 's ; and while he be there something have take hold of he and 
 make he gallop back . it seem he could not   quite depend on his own 
 resolution , as he have think he could ; he almost wish his arm would 
 get painful again , and then he should think of nothing but the comfort 
 it would be to get rid of the pain . there be no know what impulse 
 might seize he to - morrow , in this confounded place , where there be 
 nothing to occupy he imperiously through the livelong day . what could 
 he do to secure himself from any more of this folly ? 
 there be but one resource . he would go and tell Irwine - tell he 
 everything . the mere act of tell it would make it seem trivial ; the 
 temptation would vanish , as the charm of fond word vanish when one 
 repeat they to the indifferent . in every way it would help he to tell 
 Irwine . he would ride to Broxton Rectory the first thing after breakfast 
 to - morrow . 
 Arthur have no soon come to this determination than he begin to think 
 which of the path would lead he home , and make as short a walk thither 
 as he could . he feel sure he should sleep now : he have have enough to tire 
 he , and there be no more need for he to think . 
 Chapter XIV 
 the Return Home 
 while that parting in the wood be happen , there be a parting in the 
 cottage too , and Lisbeth have stand with Adam at the door , strain she 
 aged eye to get the last glimpse of Seth and Dinah , as they mount the 
 opposite slope . 
 " eh , I be loath to see the last on she , " she say to Adam , as they turn 
 into the house again . " I would ha ' be willin ' t ' ha ' she about I till 
 I die and go to lie by my old man . she would make it easy dyin ' - she 
 spake so gentle an ' move about so still . I could be fast sure that 
 pictur ' be draw for she I ' thy new Bible - th ' angel a - sittin ' on the 
 big stone by the grave . eh , I wouldna mind ha'in a daughter like that ; 
 but nobody ne'er marry they as be good for aught . " 
 " well , Mother , I hope thee WILT have she for a daughter ; for Seth 's get 
 a liking for she , and I hope she will get a liking for Seth in time . " 
 " where be th ' use o ' talkin ' a - that'n ? she caresna for Seth . she be go 
 away twenty mile aff . how be she to get a likin ' for he , I would like to 
 know ? no more nor the cake ' ull come wi'out the leaven . Thy figurin ' 
 book might ha ' tould thee well nor that , I should think , else thee 
 mightst as well read the commin print , as Seth allay do . " 
 " Nay , Mother , " say Adam , laughing , " the figure tell we a fine deal , 
 and we could not   go far without them , but they do not   tell we about folk 's 
 feeling . it be a nicer job to calculate they . but Seth 's as good - hearte 
 a lad as ever handle a tool , and plenty o ' sense , and good - look too ; 
 and he be get the same way o ' thinking as Dinah . he deserve to win she , 
 though there be no deny she be a rare bit o ' workmanship . you do not   see 
 such woman turn off the wheel every day . " 
 " eh , thee't allay stick up for thy brother . Thee'st be just the 
 same , e'er sin ' ye war little un together . Thee wart allay for halve 
 iverything wi ' he . but what be Seth get to do with marryin ' , as be on'y 
 three - an'-twenty ? he have more need to learn an ' lay by sixpence . an ' as 
 for his desarve she - she be two ' ear old nor Seth : she be pretty 
 near as old as thee . but that be the way ; folk mun allay choose by 
 contrairie , as if they must be sort like the pork - a bit o ' good meat 
 wi ' a bit o ' offal . " 
 to the feminine mind in some of its mood , all thing that might be 
 receive a temporary charm from comparison with what be ; and since Adam 
 do not want to marry Dinah himself , Lisbeth feel rather peevish on that 
 score - as peevish as she would have be if he have want to marry 
 she , and so shut himself out from Mary Burge and the partnership as 
 effectually as by marry Hetty . 
 it be more than half - past eight when Adam and his mother be talk 
 in this way , so that when , about ten minute later , Hetty reach the 
 turning of the lane that lead to the farmyard gate , she see Dinah and 
 Seth approach it from the opposite direction , and wait for they to 
 come up to she . they , too , like Hetty , have linger a little in their 
 walk , for Dinah be try to speak word of comfort and strength to 
 Seth in these parting moment . but when they see Hetty , they pause and 
 shake hand ; Seth turn homeward , and Dinah come on alone . 
 " Seth Bede would have come and speak to you , my dear , " she say , as she 
 reach Hetty , " but he be very full of trouble to - night . " 
 Hetty answer with a dimpled smile , as if she do not quite know what 
 have be say ; and it make a strange contrast to see that sparkle 
 self - engross loveliness look at by Dinah 's calm pitying face , with 
 its open glance which tell that her heart live in no cherished secret 
 of its own , but in feeling which it long to share with all the world . 
 Hetty like Dinah as well as she have ever like any woman ; how be it 
 possible to feel otherwise towards one who always put in a kind word for 
 she when her aunt be find fault , and who be always ready to take 
 Totty off her hand - little tiresome Totty , that be make such a pet of 
 by every one , and that Hetty could see no interest in at all ? Dinah 
 have never say anything disapprove or reproachful to Hetty during her 
 whole visit to the Hall Farm ; she have talk to she a great deal in a 
 serious way , but Hetty do not   mind that much , for she never listen : 
 whatever Dinah might say , she almost always stroke Hetty 's cheek after 
 it , and want to do some mending for she . Dinah be a riddle to she ; 
 Hetty look at her much in the same way as one might imagine a little 
 perch bird that could only flutter from bough to bough , to look at 
 the swoop of the swallow or the mounting of the lark ; but she do not 
 care to solve such riddle , any more than she care to know what be 
 mean by the picture in the Pilgrim 's Progress , or in the old folio 
 Bible that Marty and Tommy always plague she about on a Sunday . 
 Dinah take her hand now and draw it under her own arm . 
 " you look very happy to - night , dear child , " she say . " I shall think of 
 you often when I be at Snowfield , and see your face before I as it be 
 now . it be a strange thing - sometimes when I be quite alone , sit in 
 my room with my eye close , or walk over the hill , the people I have 
 see and know , if it be only be for a few day , be bring before I , 
 and I hear their voice and see they look and move almost plain than 
 I ever do when they be really with I so as I could touch they . and 
 then my heart be draw out towards they , and I feel their lot as if 
 it be my own , and I take comfort in spread it before the Lord and 
 rest in his love , on their behalf as well as my own . and so I feel 
 sure you will come before I . " 
 she pause a moment , but Hetty say nothing . 
 " it have be a very precious time to I , " Dinah go on , " last night 
 and to - day - see two such good son as Adam and Seth Bede . they be so 
 tender and thoughtful for their aged mother . and she have be tell 
 I what Adam have do , for these many year , to help his father and his 
 brother ; it be wonderful what a spirit of wisdom and knowledge he have , 
 and how he be ready to use it all in behalf of they that be feeble . and 
 I be sure he have a love spirit too . I have   notice it often among my 
 own people round Snowfield , that the strong , skilful man be often the 
 gentle to the woman and child ; and it be pretty to see them carry 
 the little baby as if they be no heavy than little bird . and the 
 baby always seem to like the strong arm well . I feel sure it would be 
 so with Adam Bede . do not   you think so , Hetty ? " 
 " yes , " say Hetty abstractedly , for her mind have be all the while 
 in the wood , and she would have find it difficult to say what she be 
 assent to . Dinah see she be not inclined to talk , but there would 
 not have be time to say much more , for they be now at the yard - gate . 
 the still twilight , with its die western red and its few faint 
 struggle star , rest on the farm - yard , where there be not a sound 
 to be hear but the stamping of the cart - horse in the stable . it be 
 about twenty minute after sunset . the fowl be all go to roost , 
 and the bull - dog lay stretch on the straw outside his kennel , with 
 the black - and - tan terrier by his side , when the fall - to of the gate 
 disturb they and set they bark , like good official , before they 
 have any distinct knowledge of the reason . 
 the barking have its effect in the house , for , as Dinah and Hetty 
 approach , the doorway be fill by a portly figure , with a ruddy 
 black - eyed face which bear in it the possibility of look extremely 
 acute , and occasionally contemptuous , on market - day , but have now a 
 predominant after - supper expression of hearty good - nature . it be well 
 know that great scholar who have show the most pitiless acerbity in 
 their criticism of other man 's scholarship have yet be of a relenting 
 and indulgent temper in private life ; and I have hear of a learn man 
 meekly rock the twin in the cradle with his left hand , while with 
 his right he inflict the most lacerate sarcasm on an opponent who 
 have betray a brutal ignorance of Hebrew . weakness and error must 
 be forgive - alas ! they be not alien to we - but the man who take the 
 wrong side on the momentous subject of the hebrew point must be treat 
 as the enemy of his race . there be the same sort of antithetic mixture 
 in Martin Poyser : he be of so excellent a disposition that he have be 
 kind and more respectful than ever to his old father since he have make 
 a deed of gift of all his property , and no man judge his neighbour 
 more charitably on all personal matter ; but for a farmer , like Luke 
 Britton , for example , whose fallow be not well clean , who do not 
 know the rudiment of hedging and ditching , and show but a small share 
 of judgment in the purchase of winter stock , Martin Poyser be as hard 
 and implacable as the north - east wind . Luke Britton could not make a 
 remark , even on the weather , but Martin Poyser detect in it a taint 
 of that unsoundness and general ignorance which be palpable in all his 
 farming operation . he hat to see the fellow lift the pewter pint to 
 his mouth in the bar of the Royal George on market - day , and the mere 
 sight of he on the other side of the road bring a severe and critical 
 expression into his black eye , as different as possible from the 
 fatherly glance he bend on his two niece as they approach the door . 
 Mr. Poyser have smoke his evening pipe , and now hold his hand in his 
 pocket , as the only resource of a man who continue to sit up after the 
 day 's business be do . 
 " why , lass , ye're rather late to - night , " he say , when they reach 
 the little gate lead into the causeway . " the mother 's begin to fidget 
 about you , an ' she be get the little un ill . an ' how do you leave the 
 old woman Bede , Dinah ? be she much down about the old man ? he have be but 
 a poor bargain to she this five year . " 
 " she be be greatly distressed for the loss of he , " say Dinah , " but 
 she be seem more comfort to - day . her son Adam 's be at home all day , 
 work at his father 's coffin , and she love to have he at home . she be 
 be talk about he to I almost all the day . she have a love heart , 
 though she be sorely give to fret and be fearful . I wish she have a surer 
 trust to comfort she in her old age . " 
 " Adam be sure enough , " say Mr. Poyser , misunderstand Dinah 's wish . 
 " there be no fear but he will yield well I ' the threshing . he be not one 
 o ' they as be all straw and no grain . I will be bond for he any day , as 
 he will be a good son to the last . do he say he would be come to see we 
 soon ? but come in , come in , " he add , make way for they ; " I have not 
 need keep y ' out any long . " 
 the tall building round the yard shut out a good deal of the sky , 
 but the large window let in abundant light to show every corner of the 
 house - place . 
 Mrs. Poyser , seat in the rock - chair , which have be bring out of 
 the " right - hand parlour , " be try to soothe Totty to sleep . but Totty 
 be not disposed to sleep ; and when her cousin enter , she raise 
 herself up and show a pair of flushed cheek , which look fat than 
 ever now they be define by the edge of her linen night - cap . 
 in the large wicker - bottom arm - chair in the left - hand chimney - nook sit 
 old Martin Poyser , a hale but shrunken and bleach image of his portly 
 black - haired son - his head hang forward a little , and his elbow 
 push backwards so as to allow the whole of his forearm to rest on the 
 arm of the chair . his blue handkerchief be spread over his knee , as 
 be usual indoor , when it be not hang over his head ; and he sit 
 watch what go forward with the quiet outward glance of healthy old 
 age , which , disengage from any interest in an inward drama , spy out 
 pin upon the floor , follow one 's minute motion with an unexpectant 
 purposeless tenacity , watch the flickering of the flame or the 
 sun - gleam on the wall , count the quarry on the floor , watch even 
 the hand of the clock , and please itself with detect a rhythm in the 
 tick . 
 " what a time o ' night this be to come home , Hetty ! " say Mrs. Poyser . 
 " look at the clock , do ; why , it be go on for half - past nine , and I have 
 send the gell to bed this half - hour , and late enough too ; when they have 
 get to get up at half after four , and the mower ' bottle to fill , and 
 the baking ; and here be this blessed child wi ' the fever for what I know , 
 and as wakeful as if it be dinner - time , and nobody to help I to give 
 she the physic but your uncle , and fine work there be be , and half of 
 it spill on her night - gown - it be well if she be swallow more nor ' ull 
 make her bad i'stead o ' well . but folk as have no mind to be o ' use 
 have allay the luck to be out o ' the road when there be anything to be 
 do . " 
 " I do set out before eight , aunt , " say Hetty , in a pettish tone , with 
 a slight toss of her head . " but this clock 's so much before the clock at 
 the Chase , there be no telling what time it will be when I get here . " 
 " what ! you would be want the clock set by gentlefolk 's time , would you ? 
 an ' sit up burnin ' candle , an ' lie a - bed wi ' the sun a - bakin ' you like a 
 cowcumber I ' the frame ? the clock have not   be put forrard for the first 
 time to - day , I reckon . " 
 the fact be , Hetty have really forget the difference of the clock 
 when she tell Captain Donnithorne that she set out at eight , and this , 
 with her linger pace , have make she nearly half an hour later than 
 usual . but here her aunt 's attention be divert from this tender 
 subject by Totty , who , perceive at length that the arrival of 
 her cousin be not likely to bring anything satisfactory to she in 
 particular , begin to cry , " Munny , munny , " in an explosive manner . 
 " well , then , my pet , Mother 's get she , Mother will not   leave she ; Totty be 
 a good dilling , and go to sleep now , " say Mrs. Poyser , lean back and 
 rock the chair , while she try to make Totty nestle against she . 
 but Totty only cry louder , and say , " do not   yock ! " so the mother , with 
 that wondrous patience which love give to the quick temperament , sit 
 up again , and press her cheek against the linen night - cap and kiss 
 it , and forget to scold Hetty any long . 
 " Come , Hetty , " say Martin Poyser , in a conciliatory tone , " go and get 
 your supper I ' the pantry , as the thing be all put away ; an ' then you 
 can come and take the little un while your aunt undress herself , for 
 she will not   lie down in bed without her mother . an ' I reckon you could eat 
 a bit , Dinah , for they do not   keep much of a house down there . " 
 " no , thank you , Uncle , " say Dinah ; " I eat a good meal before I come 
 away , for Mrs. Bede would make a kettle - cake for I . " 
 " I do not   want any supper , " say Hetty , take off her hat . " I can hold 
 Totty now , if Aunt want I . " 
 " why , what nonsense that be to talk ! " say Mrs. Poyser . " do you think 
 you can live wi'out eatin ' , an ' nourish your inside wi ' stickin ' red 
 ribbon on your head ? go an ' get your supper this minute , child ; there be 
 a nice bit o ' cold pudding I ' the safe - just what you be fond of . " 
 Hetty comply silently by go towards the pantry , and Mrs. Poyser 
 go on speak to Dinah . 
 " sit down , my dear , an ' look as if you know what it be to make 
 yourself a bit comfortable I ' the world . I warrant the old woman be 
 glad to see you , since you stay so long . " 
 " she seem to like have I there at last ; but her son say she 
 do not   like young woman about she commonly ; and I think just at first 
 she be almost angry with I for go . " 
 " eh , it be a poor look - out when th ' ould folk doesna like the young 
 uns , " say old Martin , bend his head down lower , and seem to trace 
 the pattern of the quarry with his eye . 
 " Aye , it be ill livin ' in a hen - roost for they as do not   like flea , " 
 say Mrs. Poyser . " we have   all have our turn at bein ' young , I reckon , be't 
 good luck or ill . " 
 " but she must learn to ' commodate herself to young woman , " say Mr. 
 Poyser , " for it be not   to be count on as Adam and Seth ' ull keep 
 bachelor for the next ten year to please their mother . that ' ud be 
 unreasonable . it be not   right for old nor young nayther to make a bargain 
 all o ' their own side . what be good for one 's good all round I ' the 
 long run . I be no friend to young fellow a - marrying afore they know the 
 difference atween a crab an ' a apple ; but they may wait o'er long . " 
 " to be sure , " say Mrs. Poyser ; " if you go past your dinner - time , 
 there will be little relish o ' your meat . you turn it o'er an ' o'er wi ' 
 your fork , an ' do not   eat it after all . you find faut wi ' your meat , an ' 
 the faut 's all I ' your own stomach . " 
 Hetty now come back from the pantry and say , " I can take Totty now , 
 Aunt , if you like . " 
 " Come , Rachel , " say Mr. Poyser , as his wife seem to hesitate , see 
 that Totty be at last nestling quietly , " thee'dst well let Hetty 
 carry she upstairs , while thee tak'st thy thing off . thee't tired . it be 
 time thee wast in bed . thee't bring on the pain in thy side again . " 
 " well , she may hold she if the child ' ull go to she , " say Mrs. Poyser . 
 Hetty go close to the rock - chair , and stand without her usual 
 smile , and without any attempt to entice Totty , simply wait for her 
 aunt to give the child into her hand . 
 " Wilt go to Cousin Hetty , my dilling , while mother get ready to go to 
 bed ? then Totty shall go into Mother 's bed , and sleep there all night . " 
 before her mother have do speak , Totty have give her answer in 
 an unmistakable manner , by knit her brow , set her tiny tooth 
 against her underlip , and lean forward to slap Hetty on the arm with 
 her utmost force . then , without speak , she nestle to her mother 
 again . 
 " hey , hey , " say Mr. Poyser , while Hetty stand without move , " not go 
 to Cousin Hetty ? that be like a babby . Totty 's a little woman , an ' not a 
 babby . " 
 " it be no use try to persuade she , " say Mrs. Poyser . " she allay 
 take against Hetty when she be not   well . happen she will go to Dinah . " 
 Dinah , have take off her bonnet and shawl , have hitherto keep quietly 
 seat in the background , not like to thrust herself between Hetty and 
 what be consider Hetty 's proper work . but now she come forward , and , 
 put out her arm , say , " Come Totty , come and let Dinah carry she 
 upstairs along with Mother : poor , poor mother ! she be so tired - she want 
 to go to bed . " 
 Totty turn her face towards Dinah , and look at her an instant , then 
 lift herself up , put out her little arm , and let Dinah lift she from 
 her mother 's lap . Hetty turn away without any sign of ill humour , 
 and , take her hat from the table , stand wait with an air of 
 indifference , to see if she should be tell to do anything else . 
 " you may make the door fast now , Poyser ; Alick 's be come in this long 
 while , " say Mrs. Poyser , rise with an appearance of relief from 
 her low chair . " get I the match down , Hetty , for I must have the 
 rushlight burn I ' my room . come , Father . " 
 the heavy wooden bolt begin to roll in the house door , and old Martin 
 prepare to move , by gather up his blue handkerchief , and reach 
 his bright knob walnut - tree stick from the corner . Mrs. Poyser then 
 lead the way out of the kitchen , follow by the gandfather , and Dinah 
 with Totty in her arm - all go to bed by twilight , like the bird . 
 Mrs. Poyser , on her way , peep into the room where her two boy lay ; 
 just to see their ruddy round cheek on the pillow , and to hear for a 
 moment their light regular breathing . 
 " Come , Hetty , get to bed , " say Mr. Poyser , in a soothe tone , as 
 he himself turn to go upstairs . " you didna mean to be late , I will 
 be bind , but your aunt be be worrite to - day . good - night , my wench , 
 good - night . " 
 Chapter XV 
 the Two Bed - Chambers 
 HETTY and Dinah both sleep in the second story , in room adjoin each 
 other , meagrely furnish room , with no blind to shut out the light , 
 which be now begin to gather new strength from the rise of 
 the moon - more than enough strength to enable Hetty to move about and 
 undress with perfect comfort . she could see quite well the peg in the 
 old paint linen - press on which she hang her hat and gown ; she could 
 see the head of every pin on her red cloth pin - cushion ; she could see 
 a reflection of herself in the old - fashioned look - glass , quite as 
 distinct as be needful , consider that she have only to brush her hair 
 and put on her night - cap . a queer old look - glass ! Hetty get into an 
 ill temper with it almost every time she dress . it have be consider 
 a handsome glass in its day , and have probably be buy into the 
 Poyser family a quarter of a century before , at a sale of genteel 
 household furniture . even now an auctioneer could say something for 
 it : it have a great deal of tarnished gilding about it ; it have a firm 
 mahogany base , well supply with drawer , which open with a decided 
 jerk and send the content leap out from the farth corner , 
 without give you the trouble of reach they ; above all , it have a 
 brass candle - socket on each side , which would give it an aristocratic 
 air to the very last . but Hetty object to it because it have numerous 
 dim blotch sprinkle over the mirror , which no rubbing would remove , 
 and because , instead of swing backwards and forwards , it be fix 
 in an upright position , so that she could only get one good view of 
 her head and neck , and that be to be have only by sit down on a 
 low chair before her dressing - table . and the dressing - table be no 
 dressing - table at all , but a small old chest of drawer , the most 
 awkward thing in the world to sit down before , for the big brass 
 handle quite hurt her knee , and she could not   get near the glass at 
 all comfortably . but devout worshipper never allow inconvenience 
 to prevent they from perform their religious rite , and Hetty this 
 evening be more bent on her peculiar form of worship than usual . 
 have take off her gown and white kerchief , she draw a key from the 
 large pocket that hang outside her petticoat , and , unlock one of 
 the low drawer in the chest , reach from it two short bit of wax 
 candle - secretly buy at Treddleston - and stick they in the two 
 brass socket . then she draw forth a bundle of match and light the 
 candle ; and last of all , a small red - frame shilling look - glass , 
 without blotch . it be into this small glass that she choose to look 
 first after seat herself . she look into it , smile and turn she 
 head on one side , for a minute , then lay it down and take out her brush 
 and comb from an upper drawer . she be go to let down her hair , 
 and make herself look like that picture of a lady in Miss Lydia 
 Donnithorne 's dressing - room . it be soon do , and the dark hyacinthine 
 curve fall on her neck . it be not heavy , massive , merely ripple 
 hair , but soft and silken , run at every opportunity into delicate 
 ring . but she push it all backward to look like the picture , and form 
 a dark curtain , throw into relief her round white neck . then she put 
 down her brush and comb and look at herself , fold her arm before 
 she , still like the picture . even the old mottled glass could not   help 
 send back a lovely image , none the less lovely because Hetty 's stay 
 be not of white satin - such as I feel sure heroine must generally 
 wear - but of a dark greenish cotton texture . 
 oh yes ! she be very pretty . Captain Donnithorne think so . pretty 
 than anybody about Hayslope - pretty than any of the lady she have 
 ever see visit at the Chase - indeed it seem fine lady be 
 rather old and ugly - and pretty than Miss Bacon , the miller 's 
 daughter , who be call the beauty of Treddleston . and Hetty look at 
 herself to - night with quite a different sensation from what she have ever 
 feel before ; there be an invisible spectator whose eye rest on she 
 like morning on the flower . his soft voice be say over and over 
 again those pretty thing she have hear in the wood ; his arm be round 
 she , and the delicate rose - scent of his hair be with she still . the 
 vain woman be never thoroughly conscious of her own beauty till she 
 be love by the man who set her own passion vibrate in return . 
 but Hetty seem to have make up her mind that something be want , 
 for she get up and reach an old black lace scarf out of the 
 linen - press , and a pair of large ear - ring out of the sacred drawer from 
 which she have take her candle . it be an old old scarf , full of rent , 
 but it would make a become border round her shoulder , and set off the 
 whiteness of her upper arm . and she would take out the little ear - ring 
 she have in her ear - oh , how her aunt have scold she for have her 
 ear bore ! - and put in those large one . they be but coloured glass 
 and gilding , but if you do not   know what they be make of , they look 
 just as well as what the lady wear . and so she sit down again , with 
 the large ear - ring in her ear , and the black lace scarf adjust round 
 her shoulder . she look down at her arm : no arm could be pretty 
 down to a little way below the elbow - they be white and plump , and 
 dimple to match her cheek ; but towards the wrist , she think with 
 vexation that they be coarsen by butter - making and other work that 
 lady never do . 
 Captain Donnithorne could not   like she to go on do work : he would like 
 to see she in nice clothe , and thin shoe , and white stocking , perhaps 
 with silk clock to they ; for he must love she very much - no one else 
 have ever put his arm round she and kiss she in that way . he would want 
 to marry she and make a lady of she ; she could hardly dare to shape 
 the thought - yet how else could it be ? marry she quite secretly , as Mr. 
 James , the doctor 's assistant , marry the doctor 's niece , and nobody 
 ever find it out for a long while after , and then it be of no use to 
 be angry . the doctor have tell her aunt all about it in Hetty 's hearing . 
 she do not   know how it would be , but it be quite plain the old squire 
 could never be tell anything about it , for Hetty be ready to faint with 
 awe and fright if she come across he at the Chase . he might have be 
 earth - bear , for what she know . it have never enter her mind that he 
 have be young like other man ; he have always be the old squire at whom 
 everybody be frightened . oh , it be impossible to think how it would 
 be ! but Captain Donnithorne would know ; he be a great gentleman , and 
 could have his way in everything , and could buy everything he like . and 
 nothing could be as it have be again : perhaps some day she should be 
 a grand lady , and ride in her coach , and dress for dinner in a brocaded 
 silk , with feather in her hair , and her dress sweep the ground , like 
 Miss Lydia and Lady Dacey , when she see they go into the dining - room 
 one evening as she peep through the little round window in the lobby ; 
 only she should not be old and ugly like Miss Lydia , or all the same 
 thickness like Lady Dacey , but very pretty , with her hair do in a 
 great many different way , and sometimes in a pink dress , and sometimes 
 in a white one - she do not   know which she like well ; and Mary Burge and 
 everybody would perhaps see she go out in her carriage - or rather , 
 they would hear of it : it be impossible to imagine these thing 
 happen at Hayslope in sight of her aunt . at the thought of all this 
 splendour , Hetty get up from her chair , and in do so catch the 
 little red - framed glass with the edge of her scarf , so that it fall with 
 a bang on the floor ; but she be too eagerly occupy with her vision 
 to care about pick it up ; and after a momentary start , begin to pace 
 with a pigeon - like stateliness backwards and forwards along her room , 
 in her coloured stay and coloured skirt , and the old black lace scarf 
 round her shoulder , and the great glass ear - ring in her ear . 
 how pretty the little puss look in that odd dress ! it would be the 
 easy folly in the world to fall in love with she : there be such a 
 sweet babylike roundness about her face and figure ; the delicate dark 
 ring of hair lie so charmingly about her ear and neck ; her great 
 dark eye with their long eye - lash touch one so strangely , as if an 
 imprison frisky sprite look out of they . 
 ah , what a prize the man get who win a sweet bride like Hetty ! how the 
 man envy he who come to the wedding breakfast , and see she hang on 
 his arm in her white lace and orange blossom . the dear , young , round , 
 soft , flexible thing ! her heart must be just as soft , her temper just 
 as free from angle , her character just as pliant . if anything ever go 
 wrong , it must be the husband 's fault there : he can make she what he 
 like - that be plain . and the lover himself think so too : the little 
 darling be so fond of he , her little vanity be so bewitch , he 
 would not   consent to she be a bit wiser ; those kittenlike glance and 
 movement be just what one want to make one 's hearth a paradise . 
 every man under such circumstance be conscious of be a great 
 physiognomist . nature , he know , have a language of her own , which she 
 use with strict veracity , and he consider himself an adept in the 
 language . nature have write out his bride 's character for he in those 
 exquisite line of cheek and lip and chin , in those eyelid delicate as 
 petal , in those long lash curl like the staman of a flower , in the 
 dark liquid depth of those wonderful eye . how she will dote on her 
 child ! she be almost a child herself , and the little pink round 
 thing will hang about she like floret round the central flower ; and 
 the husband will look on , smile benignly , able , whenever he choose , 
 to withdraw into the sanctuary of his wisdom , towards which his sweet 
 wife will look reverently , and never lift the curtain . it be a marriage 
 such as they make in the golden age , when the man be all wise and 
 majestic and the woman all lovely and loving . 
 it be very much in this way that our friend Adam Bede think about 
 Hetty ; only he put his thought into different word . if ever she 
 behave with cold vanity towards he , he say to himself it be only 
 because she do not   love I well enough ; and he be sure that her love , 
 whenever she give it , would be the most precious thing a man could 
 possess on earth . before you despise Adam as deficient in penetration , 
 pray ask yourself if you be ever predispose to believe evil of 
 any pretty woman - if you ever could , without hard head - break 
 demonstration , believe evil of the one supremely pretty woman who have 
 bewitch you . no : people who love downy peach be apt not to think of 
 the stone , and sometimes jar their tooth terribly against it . 
 Arthur Donnithorne , too , have the same sort of notion about Hetty , so 
 far as he have think of her nature of all . he feel sure she be a 
 dear , affectionate , good little thing . the man who awake the wonder 
 tremulous passion of a young girl always think her affectionate ; and 
 if he chance to look forward to future year , probably imagine himself 
 be virtuously tender to she , because the poor thing be so clingingly 
 fond of he . God make these dear woman so - and it be a convenient 
 arrangement in case of sickness . 
 after all , I believe the wise of we must be beguile in this way 
 sometimes , and must think both well and bad of people than they 
 deserve . nature have her language , and she be not unveracious ; but we 
 do not   know all the intricacy of her syntax just yet , and in a hasty 
 reading we may happen to extract the very opposite of her real meaning . 
 long dark eyelash , now - what can be more exquisite ? I find it 
 impossible not to expect some depth of soul behind a deep grey eye with 
 a long dark eyelash , in spite of an experience which have show I that 
 they may go along with deceit , peculation , and stupidity . but if , in 
 the reaction of disgust , I have betake myself to a fishy eye , there have 
 be a surprising similarity of result . one begin to suspect at length 
 that there be no direct correlation between eyelash and moral ; or 
 else , that the eyelash express the disposition of the fair one 's 
 grandmother , which be on the whole less important to we . 
 no eyelash could be more beautiful than Hetty 's ; and now , while she 
 walk with her pigeon - like stateliness along the room and look down on 
 her shoulder border by the old black lace , the dark fringe show to 
 perfection on her pink cheek . they be but dim ill - define picture that 
 her narrow bit of an imagination can make of the future ; but of every 
 picture she be the central figure in fine clothe ; Captain Donnithorne 
 be very close to she , put his arm round she , perhaps kiss she , 
 and everybody else be admire and envy she - especially Mary Burge , 
 whose new print dress look very contemptible by the side of Hetty 's 
 resplendent toilette . do any sweet or sad memory mingle with this 
 dream of the future - any love thought of her second parent - of the 
 child she have help to tend - of any youthful companion , any pet 
 animal , any relic of her own childhood even ? not one . there be some 
 plant that have hardly any root : you may tear they from their native 
 nook of rock or wall , and just lie they over your ornamental flower - pot , 
 and they blossom none the bad . Hetty could have cast all her past life 
 behind she and never care to be remind of it again . I think she have 
 no feeling at all towards the old house , and do not like the Jacob 's 
 Ladder and the long row of hollyhock in the garden well than other 
 flower - perhaps not so well . it be wonderful how little she seem to 
 care about wait on her uncle , who have be a good father to she - she 
 hardly ever remember to reach he his pipe at the right time without 
 be tell , unless a visitor happen to be there , who would have a 
 well opportunity of see she as she walk across the hearth . Hetty 
 do not understand how anybody could be very fond of middle - aged people . 
 and as for those tiresome child , Marty and Tommy and Totty , they have 
 be the very nuisance of her life - as bad as buzz insect that will 
 come tease you on a hot day when you want to be quiet . Marty , the 
 eld , be a baby when she first come to the farm , for the child 
 bear before he have die , and so Hetty have have they all three , one after 
 the other , toddle by her side in the meadow , or play about she on 
 wet day in the half - empty room of the large old house . the boy be 
 out of hand now , but Totty be still a day - long plague , bad than 
 either of the other have be , because there be more fuss make about 
 she . and there be no end to the making and mending of clothe . Hetty 
 would have be glad to hear that she should never see a child again ; 
 they be bad than the nasty little lamb that the shepherd be always 
 bring in to be take special care of in lamb time ; for the lamb 
 be get rid of soon or later . as for the young chicken and turkey , 
 Hetty would have hat the very word " hatch , " if her aunt have not 
 bribe she to attend to the young poultry by promise she the proceed 
 of one out of every brood . the round downy chick peep out from under 
 their mother 's wing never touch Hetty with any pleasure ; that be 
 not the sort of prettiness she care about , but she do care about the 
 prettiness of the new thing she would buy for herself at Treddleston 
 Fair with the money they fetch . and yet she look so dimpled , 
 so charming , as she stoop down to put the soak bread under the 
 hen - coop , that you must have be a very acute personage indeed to 
 suspect she of that hardness . molly , the housemaid , with a turn - up nose 
 and a protuberant jaw , be really a tender - hearted girl , and , as Mrs. 
 Poyser say , a jewel to look after the poultry ; but her stolid 
 face show nothing of this maternal delight , any more than a brown 
 earthenware pitcher will show the light of the lamp within it . 
 it be generally a feminine eye that first detect the moral deficiency 
 hide under the " dear deceit " of beauty , so it be not surprising that 
 Mrs. Poyser , with her keenness and abundant opportunity for observation , 
 should have form a tolerably fair estimate of what might be expect 
 from Hetty in the way of feeling , and in moment of indignation she have 
 sometimes speak with great openness on the subject to her husband . 
 " she be no well than a peacock , as ' ud strut about on the wall and 
 spread its tail when the sun shine if all the folk I ' the parish be 
 die : there be nothing seem to give she a turn I ' th ' inside , not even 
 when we think Totty have tumble into the pit . to think o ' that dear 
 cherub ! and we find her wi ' her little shoe stick I ' the mud an ' 
 cry fit to break her heart by the far horse - pit . but Hetty never 
 mind it , I could see , though she be be at the nussin ' o ' the child 
 ever since it be a babby . it be my belief her heart be as hard as a 
 pebble . " 
 " Nay , nay , " say Mr. Poyser , " thee must not   judge Hetty too hard . they 
 young gell be like the unripe grain ; they will make good meal by and by , 
 but they be squashy as yet . thee't see Hetty will be all right when she be 
 get a good husband and child of her own . " 
 " I do not   want to be hard upo ' the gell . she be get cliver finger of her 
 own , and can be useful enough when she like and I should miss her wi ' 
 the butter , for she be get a cool hand . an ' let be what may , I would strive 
 to do my part by a niece o ' yours - an ' that I have   do , for I have   teach 
 her everything as belong to a house , an ' I have   tell she her duty often 
 enough , though , God know , I have   no breath to spare , an ' that catchin ' 
 pain come on dreadful by time . Wi ' they three gell in the house I would 
 need have twice the strength to keep them up to their work . it be 
 like have roast meat at three fire ; as soon as you have   baste one , 
 another 's burnin ' . " 
 Hetty stand sufficiently in awe of her aunt to be anxious to conceal 
 from she so much of her vanity as could be hide without too great a 
 sacrifice . she could not resist spend her money in bit of finery 
 which Mrs. Poyser disapprove ; but she would have be ready to die with 
 shame , vexation , and fright if her aunt have this moment open the door , 
 and see she with her bit of candle light , and strut about deck 
 in her scarf and ear - ring . to prevent such a surprise , she always 
 bolt her door , and she have not forget to do so to - night . it be 
 well : for there now come a light tap , and Hetty , with a leap heart , 
 rush to blow out the candle and throw they into the drawer . she dare 
 not stay to take out her ear - ring , but she throw off her scarf , and let 
 it fall on the floor , before the light tap come again . we shall know how 
 it be that the light tap come , if we leave Hetty for a short time 
 and return to Dinah , at the moment when she have deliver Totty to her 
 mother 's arm , and be come upstairs to her bedroom , adjoin Hetty 's . 
 Dinah delight in her bedroom window . be on the second story of that 
 tall house , it give she a wide view over the field . the thickness of 
 the wall form a broad step about a yard below the window , where she 
 could place her chair . and now the first thing she do on enter she 
 room be to seat herself in this chair and look out on the peaceful 
 field beyond which the large moon be rise , just above the hedgerow 
 elm . she like the pasture good where the milch cow be lie , 
 and next to that the meadow where the grass be half - mow , and lie in 
 silvered sweeping line . her heart be very full , for there be to be 
 only one more night on which she would look out on those field for a 
 long time to come ; but she think little of leave the mere scene , 
 for , to she , bleak Snowfield have just as many charm . she think of all 
 the dear people whom she have learn to care for among these peaceful 
 field , and who would now have a place in her love remembrance for 
 ever . she think of the struggle and the weariness that might lie 
 before they in the rest of their life 's journey , when she would be away 
 from they , and know nothing of what be befall they ; and the pressure 
 of this thought soon become too strong for she to enjoy the unresponding 
 stillness of the moonlit field . she close her eye , that she might 
 feel more intensely the presence of a Love and Sympathy deep and more 
 tender than be breathe from the earth and sky . that be often Dinah 's 
 mode of pray in solitude . simply to close her eye and to feel 
 herself enclose by the Divine Presence ; then gradually her fear , her 
 yearn anxiety for other , melt away like ice - crystal in a warm 
 ocean . she have sit in this way perfectly still , with her hand cross 
 on her lap and the pale light rest on her calm face , for at least ten 
 minute when she be startle by a loud sound , apparently of something 
 fall in Hetty 's room . but like all sound that fall on our ear in a 
 state of abstraction , it have no distinct character , but be simply loud 
 and startling , so that she feel uncertain whether she have interpret 
 it rightly . she rise and listen , but all be quiet afterwards , and she 
 reflect that Hetty might merely have knock something down in get 
 into bed . she begin slowly to undress ; but now , owe to the suggestion 
 of this sound , her thought become concentrated on Hetty - that sweet 
 young thing , with life and all its trial before she - the solemn daily 
 duty of the wife and mother - and her mind so unprepared for they all , 
 bent merely on little foolish , selfish pleasure , like a child hug 
 its toy in the beginning of a long toilsome journey in which it will 
 have to bear hunger and cold and unsheltered darkness . Dinah feel a 
 double care for Hetty , because she share Seth 's anxious interest in his 
 brother 's lot , and she have not come to the conclusion that Hetty do not 
 love Adam well enough to marry he . she see too clearly the absence of 
 any warm , self - devote love in Hetty 's nature to regard the coldness of 
 her behaviour towards Adam as any indication that he be not the man 
 she would like to have for a husband . and this blank in Hetty 's nature , 
 instead of exciting Dinah 's dislike , only touch she with a deep 
 pity : the lovely face and form affect she as beauty always affect a 
 pure and tender mind , free from selfish jealousy . it be an excellent 
 divine gift , that give a deep pathos to the need , the sin , the sorrow 
 with which it be mingle , as the canker in a lily - white bud be more 
 grievous to behold than in a common pot - herb . 
 by the time Dinah have undressed and put on her night - gown , this feeling 
 about Hetty have gather a painful intensity ; her imagination have 
 create a thorny thicket of sin and sorrow , in which she see the poor 
 thing struggle tear and bleed , look with tear for rescue and 
 find none . it be in this way that Dinah 's imagination and sympathy 
 act and react habitually , each heighten the other . she feel a 
 deep longing to go now and pour into Hetty 's ear all the word of tender 
 warning and appeal that rush into her mind . but perhaps Hetty be 
 already asleep . Dinah put her ear to the partition and hear still some 
 slight noise , which convince she that Hetty be not yet in bed . still 
 she hesitate ; she be not quite certain of a divine direction ; the 
 voice that tell she to go to Hetty seem no strong that the other 
 voice which say that Hetty be weary , and that go to she now in an 
 unseasonable moment would only tend to close her heart more obstinately . 
 Dinah be not satisfied without a more unmistakable guidance than those 
 inward voice . there be light enough for she , if she open her Bible , 
 to discern the text sufficiently to know what it would say to she . she 
 know the physiognomy of every page , and could tell on what book she 
 open , sometimes on what chapter , without see title or number . it 
 be a small thick Bible , wear quite round at the edge . Dinah lay it 
 sideways on the window ledge , where the light be strong , and then 
 open it with her forefinger . the first word she look at be those 
 at the top of the left - hand page : " and they all weep sore , and fall on 
 Paul 's neck and kiss he . " that be enough for Dinah ; she have open 
 on that memorable parting at Ephesus , when Paul have feel bind to open 
 his heart in a last exhortation and warning . she hesitate no long , 
 but , open her own door gently , go and tap on Hetty 's . we know 
 she have to tap twice , because Hetty have to put out her candle and throw 
 off her black lace scarf ; but after the second tap the door be open 
 immediately . Dinah say , " will you let I come in , Hetty ? " and Hetty , 
 without speak , for she be confused and vex , open the door wide 
 and let she in . 
 what a strange contrast the two figure make , visible enough in that 
 mingle twilight and moonlight ! Hetty , her cheek flush and her eye 
 glisten from her imaginary drama , her beautiful neck and arm bare , 
 her hair hang in a curly tangle down her back , and the bauble in her 
 ear . Dinah , cover with her long white dress , her pale face full of 
 subdue emotion , almost like a lovely corpse into which the soul have 
 return charge with sublimer secret and a sublimer love . they be 
 nearly of the same height ; Dinah evidently a little the tall as she 
 put her arm round Hetty 's waist and kiss her forehead . 
 " I know you be not in bed , my dear , " she say , in her sweet clear 
 voice , which be irritate to Hetty , mingle with her own peevish 
 vexation like music with jangle chain , " for I hear you move ; and I 
 long to speak to you again to - night , for it be the last but one that 
 I shall be here , and we do not   know what may happen to - morrow to keep we 
 apart . shall I sit down with you while you do up your hair ? " 
 " oh yes , " say Hetty , hastily turn round and reach the second 
 chair in the room , glad that Dinah look as if she do not notice she 
 ear - ring . 
 Dinah sit down , and Hetty begin to brush together her hair before 
 twist it up , do it with that air of excessive indifference which 
 belong to confused self - consciousness . but the expression of Dinah 's 
 eye gradually relieve she ; they seem unobservant of all detail . 
 " Dear Hetty , " she say , " it have be bear in upon my mind to - night that 
 you may some day be in trouble - trouble be appoint for we all here 
 below , and there come a time when we need more comfort and help than 
 the thing of this life can give . I want to tell you that if ever you 
 be in trouble , and need a friend that will always feel for you and love 
 you , you have get that friend in Dinah Morris at Snowfield , and if you 
 come to she , or send for she , she will never forget this night and the 
 word she be speak to you now . will you remember it , Hetty ? " 
 " yes , " say Hetty , rather frightened . " but why should you think I shall 
 be in trouble ? do you know of anything ? " 
 Hetty have seat herself as she tie on her cap , and now Dinah lean 
 forward and take her hand as she answer , " because , dear , trouble 
 come to we all in this life : we set our heart on thing which it be not 
 God 's will for we to have , and then we go sorrow ; the people we love 
 be take from we , and we can joy in nothing because they be not with 
 we ; sickness come , and we faint under the burden of our feeble body ; 
 we go astray and do wrong , and bring ourselves into trouble with our 
 fellow - man . there be no man or woman bear into this world to whom some 
 of these trial do not fall , and so I feel that some of they must happen 
 to you ; and I desire for you , that while you be young you should seek 
 for strength from your Heavenly Father , that you may have a support 
 which will not fail you in the evil day . " 
 Dinah pause and release Hetty 's hand that she might not hinder she . 
 Hetty sit quite still ; she feel no response within herself to Dinah 's 
 anxious affection ; but Dinah 's word utter with solemn pathetic 
 distinctness , affect she with a chill fear . her flush have die away 
 almost to paleness ; she have the timidity of a luxurious pleasure - seek 
 nature , which shrink from the hint of pain . Dinah see the effect , and 
 her tender anxious pleading become the more earnest , till Hetty , full of 
 a vague fear that something evil be some time to befall she , begin to 
 cry . 
 it be our habit to say that while the low nature can never understand 
 the high , the high nature command a complete view of the low . but 
 I think the high nature have to learn this comprehension , as we learn 
 the art of vision , by a good deal of hard experience , often with bruise 
 and gash incur in take thing up by the wrong end , and fancy 
 our space wide than it be . Dinah have never see Hetty affect in this 
 way before , and , with her usual benignant hopefulness , she trust it 
 be the stirring of a divine impulse . she kiss the sob thing , and 
 begin to cry with she for grateful joy . but Hetty be simply in that 
 excitable state of mind in which there be no calculate what turn the 
 feeling may take from one moment to another , and for the first time she 
 become irritated under Dinah 's caress . she push she away impatiently , 
 and say , with a childish sobbing voice , " do not   talk to I so , Dinah . 
 why do you come to frighten I ? I have   never do anything to you . why 
 can not   you let I be ? " 
 Poor Dinah feel a pang . she be too wise to persist , and only say 
 mildly , " yes , my dear , you be tired ; I will not   hinder you any long . make 
 haste and get into bed . good - night . " 
 she go out of the room almost as quietly and quickly as if she have 
 be a ghost ; but once by the side of her own bed , she throw herself on 
 her knee and pour out in deep silence all the passionate pity that 
 fill her heart . 
 as for Hetty , she be soon in the wood again - her wake dream be 
 merge in a sleep life scarcely more fragmentary and confused . 
 Chapter XVI 
 link 
 ARTHUR DONNITHORNE , you remember , be under an engagement with himself to 
 go and see Mr. Irwine this Friday morning , and he be awake and dress 
 so early that he determine to go before breakfast , instead of after . 
 the rector , he know , breakfast alone at half - past nine , the lady of 
 the family have a different breakfast - hour ; Arthur will have an early 
 ride over the hill and breakfast with he . one can say everything good 
 over a meal . 
 the progress of civilization have make a breakfast or a dinner an 
 easy and cheerful substitute for more troublesome and disagreeable 
 ceremony . we take a less gloomy view of our error now our father 
 confessor listen to we over his egg and coffee . we be more distinctly 
 conscious that rude penance be out of the question for gentleman in 
 an enlightened age , and that mortal sin be not incompatible with an 
 appetite for muffin . an assault on our pocket , which in more barbarous 
 time would have be make in the brusque form of a pistol - shot , be 
 quite a well - breed and smile procedure now it have become a request for 
 a loan throw in as an easy parenthesis between the second and third 
 glass of claret . 
 still , there be this advantage in the old rigid form , that they 
 commit you to the fulfilment of a resolution by some outward deed : 
 when you have put your mouth to one end of a hole in a stone wall and 
 be aware that there be an expectant ear at the other end , you be more 
 likely to say what you come out with the intention of say than if you 
 be seat with your leg in an easy attitude under the mahogany with 
 a companion who will have no reason to be surprised if you have nothing 
 particular to say . 
 however , Arthur Donnithorne , as he wind among the pleasant lane on 
 horseback in the morning sunshine , have a sincere determination to open 
 his heart to the rector , and the swirl sound of the scythe as he 
 pass by the meadow be all the pleasanter to he because of this honest 
 purpose . he be glad to see the promise of settle weather now , for 
 get in the hay , about which the farmer have be fearful ; and there 
 be something so healthful in the sharing of a joy that be general and 
 not merely personal , that this think about the hay - harvest react on 
 his state of mind and make his resolution seem an easy matter . a man 
 about town might perhaps consider that these influence be not to be 
 feel out of a child 's story - book ; but when you be among the field 
 and hedgerow , it be impossible to maintain a consistent superiority to 
 simple natural pleasure . 
 Arthur have pass the village of Hayslope and be approach the 
 Broxton side of the hill , when , at a turning in the road , he see a 
 figure about a hundred yard before he which it be impossible to 
 mistake for any one else than Adam Bede , even if there have be no grey , 
 tailless shepherd - dog at his heel . he be stride along at his usual 
 rapid pace , and Arthur push on his horse to overtake he , for he 
 retain too much of his boyish feeling for Adam to miss an opportunity 
 of chat with he . I will not say that his love for that good fellow 
 do not owe some of its force to the love of patronage : our friend 
 Arthur like to do everything that be handsome , and to have his 
 handsome deed recognize . 
 Adam look round as he hear the quicken clatter of the horse 's 
 heel , and wait for the horseman , lift his paper cap from his head 
 with a bright smile of recognition . next to his own brother Seth , Adam 
 would have do more for Arthur Donnithorne than for any other young man 
 in the world . there be hardly anything he would not rather have lose 
 than the two - foot ruler which he always carry in his pocket ; it be 
 Arthur 's present , buy with his pocket - money when he be a fair - haired 
 lad of eleven , and when he have profit so well by Adam 's lesson in 
 carpentering and turn as to embarrass every female in the house with 
 gift of superfluous thread - reel and round box . Adam have quite a 
 pride in the little squire in those early day , and the feeling have 
 only become slightly modify as the fair - haired lad have grow into 
 the whiskered young man . Adam , I confess , be very susceptible to the 
 influence of rank , and quite ready to give an extra amount of respect to 
 every one who have more advantage than himself , not be a philosopher 
 or a proletaire with democratic idea , but simply a stout - limbed clever 
 carpenter with a large fund of reverence in his nature , which incline 
 he to admit all establish claim unless he see very clear ground for 
 question they . he have no theory about set the world to right , 
 but he see there be a great deal of damage do by build with 
 ill - season timber - by ignorant man in fine clothe make plan for 
 outhouse and workshop and the like without know the bearing of 
 thing - by slovenly joiner ' work , and by hasty contract that could 
 never be fulfil without ruin somebody ; and he resolve , for his 
 part , to set his face against such doing . on these point he would 
 have maintain his opinion against the large landed proprietor in 
 Loamshire or Stonyshire either ; but he feel that beyond these it would 
 be well for he to defer to people who be more knowing than himself . 
 he see as plainly as possible how ill the wood on the estate be 
 manage , and the shameful state of the farm - building ; and if old squire 
 Donnithorne have ask he the effect of this mismanagement , he would 
 have speak his opinion without flinching , but the impulse to a 
 respectful demeanour towards a " gentleman " would have be strong within 
 he all the while . the word " gentleman " have a spell for Adam , and , as he 
 often say , he " could not   abide a fellow who think he make himself fine 
 by be coxy to 's better . " I must remind you again that Adam have the 
 blood of the peasant in his vein , and that since he be in his prime 
 half a century ago , you must expect some of his characteristic to be 
 obsolete . 
 towards the young squire this instinctive reverence of Adam 's be 
 assist by boyish memory and personal regard so you may imagine that 
 he think far more of Arthur 's good quality , and attach far more 
 value to very slight action of his , than if they have be the quality 
 and action of a common workman like himself . he feel sure it would be 
 a fine day for everybody about Hayslope when the young squire come into 
 the estate - such a generous open - hearted disposition as he have , and an 
 " uncommon " notion about improvement and repair , consider he be 
 only just come of age . thus there be both respect and affection in 
 the smile with which he raise his paper cap as Arthur Donnithorne ride 
 up . 
 " well , Adam , how be you ? " say Arthur , hold out his hand . he never 
 shake hand with any of the farmer , and Adam feel the honour keenly . " I 
 could swear to your back a long way off . it be just the same back , only 
 broad , as when you use to carry I on it . do you remember ? " 
 " Aye , sir , I remember . it ' ud be a poor look - out if folk do not 
 remember what they do and say when they be lad . we should think no 
 more about old friend than we do about new un , then . " 
 " you be go to Broxton , I suppose ? " say Arthur , put his horse 
 on at a slow pace while Adam walk by his side . " be you go to the 
 rectory ? " 
 " no , sir , I be go to see about Bradwell 's barn . they be afraid of the 
 roof push the wall out , and I be go to see what can be do with 
 it before we send the stuff and the workman . " 
 " why , Burge trust almost everything to you now , Adam , do not   he ? I 
 should think he will make you his partner soon . he will , if he be wise . " 
 " Nay , sir , I do not   see as he would be much the well off for that . a 
 foreman , if he be get a conscience and delight in his work , will do his 
 business as well as if he be a partner . I would not   give a penny for 
 a man as ' ud drive a nail in slack because he do not   get extra pay for 
 it . " 
 " I know that , Adam ; I know you work for he as well as if you be 
 work for yourself . but you would have more power than you have now , 
 and could turn the business to well account perhaps . the old man must 
 give up his business sometime , and he have no son ; I suppose he will want a 
 son - in - law who can take to it . but he have rather grasp finger of his 
 own , I fancy . I daresay he want a man who can put some money into the 
 business . if I be not as poor as a rat , I would gladly invest some 
 money in that way , for the sake of have you settle on the estate . I be 
 sure I should profit by it in the end . and perhaps I shall be well off 
 in a year or two . I shall have a large allowance now I be of age ; and 
 when I have   pay off a debt or two , I shall be able to look about I . " 
 " you be very good to say so , sir , and I be not unthankful . but " - Adam 
 continue , in a decide tone - " I should not   like to make any offer 
 to Mr. Burge , or t ' have any make for I . I see no clear road to a 
 partnership . if he should ever want to dispose of the business , that ' ud 
 be a different matter . I should be glad of some money at a fair interest 
 then , for I feel sure I could pay it off in time . " 
 " very well , Adam , " say Arthur , remember what Mr. Irwine have say 
 about a probable hitch in the love - making between Adam and Mary Burge , 
 " we will say no more about it at present . when be your father to be 
 bury ? " 
 " on Sunday , sir ; Mr. Irwine be come early on purpose . I shall be glad 
 when it be over , for I think my mother ' ull perhaps get easy then . it 
 cut one sadly to see the grief of old people ; they have   no way o ' work 
 it off , and the new spring bring no new shoot out on the wither 
 tree . " 
 " ah , you have   have a good deal of trouble and vexation in your life , Adam . 
 I do not   think you have   ever be hare - brain and light - hearte , like 
 other youngster . you have   always have some care on your mind . " 
 " why , yes , sir ; but that be nothing to make a fuss about . if we be man 
 and have man 's feeling , I reckon we must have man 's trouble . we can not 
 be like the bird , as fly from their nest as soon as they have   get their 
 wing , and never know their kin when they see them , and get a fresh lot 
 every year . I have   have enough to be thankful for : I have   allay have health 
 and strength and brain to give I a delight in my work ; and I count it 
 a great thing as I have   have Bartle Massey 's night - school to go to . he be 
 help I to knowledge I could never ha ' get by myself . " 
 " what a rare fellow you be , Adam ! " say Arthur , after a pause , in which 
 he have look musingly at the big fellow walk by his side . " I could 
 hit out well than most man at Oxford , and yet I believe you would 
 knock I into next week if I be to have a battle with you . " 
 " God forbid I should ever do that , sir , " say Adam , look round at 
 Arthur and smile . " I use to fight for fun , but I have   never do that 
 since I be the cause o ' poor Gil Tranter be lay up for a fortnight . 
 I will never fight any man again , only when he behave like a scoundrel . 
 if you get hold of a chap that be get no shame nor conscience to stop 
 he , you must try what you can do by bung his eye up . " 
 Arthur do not laugh , for he be preoccupy with some thought that 
 make he say presently , " I should think now , Adam , you never have any 
 struggle within yourself . I fancy you would master a wish that you have 
 make up your mind it be not quite right to indulge , as easily as you 
 would knock down a drunken fellow who be quarrelsome with you . I mean , 
 you be never shilly - shally , first make up your mind that you will not   do 
 a thing , and then do it after all ? " 
 " well , " say Adam , slowly , after a moment 's hesitation , " no . I do not 
 remember ever be see - saw in that way , when I have make my mind up , as 
 you say , that a thing be wrong . it take the taste out o ' my mouth for 
 thing , when I know I should have a heavy conscience after them . I have 
 see pretty clear , ever since I could cast up a sum , as you can never 
 do what be wrong without breed sin and trouble more than you can ever 
 see . it be like a bit o ' bad workmanship - you never see th ' end o ' the 
 mischief it will do . and it be a poor look - out to come into the world to 
 make your fellow - creature bad off instead o ' well . but there be a 
 difference between the thing folk call wrong . I be not for make a 
 sin of every little fool 's trick , or bit o ' nonsense anybody may be let 
 into , like some o ' them dissenter . and a man may have two mind whether 
 it be not   worthwhile to get a bruise or two for the sake of a bit o ' fun . 
 but it be not   my way to be see - see about anything : I think my fault lie 
 th ' other way . when I have   say a thing , if it be only to myself , it be hard 
 for I to go back . " 
 " yes , that be just what I expect of you , " say Arthur . " you have   get an 
 iron will , as well as an iron arm . but however strong a man 's resolution 
 may be , it cost he something to carry it out , now and then . we may 
 determine not to gather any cherry and keep our hand sturdily in our 
 pocket , but we can not   prevent our mouth from watering . " 
 " that be true , sir , but there be nothing like settle with ourselves as 
 there be a deal we must do without I ' this life . it be no use look on 
 life as if it be Treddles'on Fair , where folk only go to see show and 
 get fairing . if we do , we shall find it different . but where be the use 
 o ' I talk to you , sir ? you know well than I do . " 
 " I be not so sure of that , Adam . you have   have four or five year of 
 experience more than I have   have , and I think your life have be a well 
 school to you than college have be to I . " 
 " why , sir , you seem to think o ' college something like what Bartle 
 Massey do . he say college mostly make people like bladder - just 
 good for nothing but t ' hold the stuff as be pour into them . but he be 
 get a tongue like a sharp blade , Bartle have - it never touch anything 
 but it cut . here be the turning , sir . I must bid you good - morning , as 
 you be go to the rectory . " 
 " good - bye , Adam , good - bye . " 
 Arthur give his horse to the groom at the rectory gate , and walk along 
 the gravel towards the door which open on the garden . he know that the 
 rector always breakfast in his study , and the study lie on the left 
 hand of this door , opposite the dining - room . it be a small low room , 
 belong to the old part of the house - dark with the sombre cover of 
 the book that line the wall ; yet it look very cheery this morning 
 as Arthur reach the open window . for the morning sun fall aslant on 
 the great glass globe with gold fish in it , which stand on a scagliola 
 pillar in front of the ready - spread bachelor breakfast - table , and by the 
 side of this breakfast - table be a group which would have make any room 
 enticing . in the crimson damask easy - chair sit Mr. Irwine , with that 
 radiant freshness which he always have when he come from his morning 
 toilet ; his finely form plump white hand be play along Juno 's 
 brown curly back ; and close to Juno 's tail , which be wag with calm 
 matronly pleasure , the two brown pup be roll over each other in an 
 ecstatic duet of worrying noise . on a cushion a little removed sit 
 Pug , with the air of a maiden lady , who look on these familiarity 
 as animal weakness , which she make as little show as possible of 
 observe . on the table , at Mr. Irwine 's elbow , lie the first volume of 
 the Foulis AEschylus , which Arthur know well by sight ; and the silver 
 coffee - pot , which Carroll be bring in , send forth a fragrant steam 
 which complete the delight of a bachelor breakfast . 
 " Hallo , Arthur , that be a good fellow ! you be just in time , " say Mr. 
 Irwine , as Arthur pause and step in over the low window - sill . 
 " Carroll , we shall want more coffee and egg , and have not   you get some 
 cold fowl for we to eat with that ham ? why , this be like old day , 
 Arthur ; you have not   be to breakfast with I these five year . " 
 " it be a tempting morning for a ride before breakfast , " say Arthur ; 
 " and I use to like breakfast with you so when I be read with 
 you . my grandfather be always a few degree colder at breakfast than at 
 any other hour in the day . I think his morning bath do not   agree with 
 he . " 
 Arthur be anxious not to imply that he come with any special purpose . 
 he have no soon find himself in Mr. Irwine 's presence than the 
 confidence which he have think quite easy before , suddenly appear 
 the most difficult thing in the world to he , and at the very moment of 
 shake hand he see his purpose in quite a new light . how could he make 
 Irwine understand his position unless he tell he those little scene 
 in the wood ; and how could he tell they without look like a fool ? 
 and then his weakness in come back from Gawaine 's , and do the very 
 opposite of what he intend ! Irwine would think he a shilly - shally 
 fellow ever after . however , it must come out in an unpremeditated way ; 
 the conversation might lead up to it . 
 " I like breakfast - time well than any other moment in the day , " say 
 Mr. Irwine . " no dust have settle on one 's mind then , and it present a 
 clear mirror to the ray of thing . I always have a favourite book by 
 I at breakfast , and I enjoy the bit I pick up then so much , that 
 regularly every morning it seem to I as if I should certainly become 
 studious again . but presently Dent bring up a poor fellow who have 
 kill a hare , and when I have   get through my ' justicing , ' as Carroll 
 call it , I be inclined for a ride round the glebe , and on my way back 
 I meet with the master of the workhouse , who have get a long story of a 
 mutinous pauper to tell I ; and so the day go on , and I be always the 
 same lazy fellow before evening set in . besides , one want the 
 stimulus of sympathy , and I have never have that since poor D'Oyley leave 
 Treddleston . if you have stick to your book well , you rascal , I should 
 have have a pleasanter prospect before I . but scholarship do not   run in 
 your family blood . " 
 " no indeed . it be well if I can remember a little inapplicable Latin to 
 adorn my maiden speech in Parliament six or seven year hence . ' cra 
 ingen iterabimus aequor , ' and a few shred of that sort , will perhaps 
 stick to I , and I shall arrange my opinion so as to introduce they . 
 but I do not   think a knowledge of the classic be a press want to 
 a country gentleman ; as far as I can see , he would much well have a 
 knowledge of manure . I have   be read your friend Arthur Young 's book 
 lately , and there be nothing I should like well than to carry out some 
 of his idea in put the farmer on a well management of their 
 land ; and , as he say , make what be a wild country , all of the same 
 dark hue , bright and variegate with corn and cattle . my grandfather 
 will never let I have any power while he live , but there be nothing 
 I should like well than to undertake the Stonyshire side of the 
 estate - it be in a dismal condition - and set improvement on foot , and 
 gallop about from one place to another and overlook they . I should like 
 to know all the labourer , and see they touch their hat to I with a 
 look of goodwill . " 
 " Bravo , Arthur ! a man who have no feeling for the classic could not 
 make a well apology for come into the world than by increase 
 the quantity of food to maintain scholar - and rector who appreciate 
 scholar . and whenever you enter on your career of model landlord may 
 I be there to see . you will want a portly rector to complete the picture , 
 and take his tithe of all the respect and honour you get by your hard 
 work . only do not   set your heart too strongly on the goodwill you be to 
 get in consequence . I be not sure that man be the fond of those who 
 try to be useful to they . you know Gawaine have get the curse of the 
 whole neighbourhood upon he about that enclosure . you must make 
 it quite clear to your mind which you be most bent upon , old 
 boy - popularity or usefulness - else you may happen to miss both . " 
 " oh ! Gawaine be harsh in his manner ; he do not   make himself personally 
 agreeable to his tenant . I do not   believe there be anything you can not 
 prevail on people to do with kindness . for my part , I could not   live in 
 a neighbourhood where I be not respect and beloved . and it be very 
 pleasant to go among the tenant here - they seem all so well inclined 
 to I I suppose it seem only the other day to they since I be a little 
 lad , rid on a pony about as big as a sheep . and if fair allowance 
 be make to they , and their building attend to , one could persuade 
 they to farm on a well plan , stupid as they be . " 
 " then mind you fall in love in the right place , and do not   get a wife who 
 will drain your purse and make you niggardly in spite of yourself . my 
 mother and I have a little discussion about you sometimes : she say , ' I 
 ll never risk a single prophecy on Arthur until I see the woman he fall 
 in love with . ' she think your lady - love will rule you as the moon rule 
 the tide . but I feel bound to stand up for you , as my pupil you know , 
 and I maintain that you be not of that watery quality . so mind you do not 
 disgrace my judgment . " 
 Arthur wince under this speech , for keen old Mrs. Irwine 's opinion 
 about he have the disagreeable effect of a sinister oman . this , to be 
 sure , be only another reason for persevere in his intention , and 
 get an additional security against himself . nevertheless , at this 
 point in the conversation , he be conscious of increase disinclination 
 to tell his story about Hetty . he be of an impressible nature , and 
 live a great deal in other people 's opinion and feeling concern 
 himself ; and the mere fact that he be in the presence of an intimate 
 friend , who have not the slight notion that he have have any such 
 serious internal struggle as he come to confide , rather shake his own 
 belief in the seriousness of the struggle . it be not , after all , a 
 thing to make a fuss about ; and what could Irwine do for he that he 
 could not do for himself ? he would go to Eagledale in spite of Meg 's 
 lameness - go on Rattler , and let Pym follow as well as he could on the 
 old hack . that be his thought as he sugar his coffee ; but the 
 next minute , as he be lift the cup to his lip , he remember how 
 thoroughly he have make up his mind last night to tell Irwine . no ! he 
 would not be vacillate again - he would do what he have mean to do , 
 this time . so it would be well not to let the personal tone of the 
 conversation altogether drop . if they go to quite indifferent topic , 
 his difficulty would be heighten . it have require no noticeable pause 
 for this rush and rebound of feeling , before he answer , " but I think 
 it be hardly an argument against a man 's general strength of character 
 that he should be apt to be master by love . a fine constitution 
 do not   insure one against smallpox or any other of those inevitable 
 disease . a man may be very firm in other matter and yet be under a 
 sort of witchery from a woman . " 
 " yes ; but there be this difference between love and smallpox , or 
 bewitchment either - that if you detect the disease at an early stage and 
 try change of air , there be every chance of complete escape without any 
 further development of symptom . and there be certain alternative dos 
 which a man may administer to himself by keep unpleasant consequence 
 before his mind : this give you a sort of smoke glass through which 
 you may look at the resplendent fair one and discern her true outline ; 
 though I be afraid , by the by , the smoked glass be apt to be miss just 
 at the moment it be most want . I daresay , now , even a man fortify 
 with a knowledge of the classic might be lure into an imprudent 
 marriage , in spite of the warning give he by the chorus in the 
 Prometheus . " 
 the smile that flit across Arthur 's face be a faint one , and instead 
 of follow Mr. Irwine 's playful lead , he say , quite seriously - " yes , 
 that be the bad of it . it be a desperately vexatious thing , that after 
 all one 's reflection and quiet determination , we should be rule by 
 mood that one can not   calculate on beforehand . I do not   think a man ought 
 to be blame so much if he be betray into do thing in that way , in 
 spite of his resolution . " 
 " ah , but the mood lie in his nature , my boy , just as much as his 
 reflection do , and more . a man can never do anything at variance with 
 his own nature . he carry within he the germ of his most exceptional 
 action ; and if we wise people make eminent fool of ourselves on any 
 particular occasion , we must endure the legitimate conclusion that we 
 carry a few grain of folly to our ounce of wisdom . " 
 " well , but one may be betray into do thing by a combination of 
 circumstance , which one might never have do otherwise . " 
 " why , yes , a man can not   very well steal a bank - note unless the bank - note 
 lie within convenient reach ; but he will not   make we think he an honest 
 man because he begin to howl at the bank - note for fall in his way . " 
 " but surely you do not   think a man who struggle against a temptation 
 into which he fall at last as bad as the man who never struggle at 
 all ? " 
 " no , certainly ; I pity he in proportion to his struggle , for they 
 foreshadow the inward suffering which be the bad form of Nemesis . 
 consequence be unpitying . our deed carry their terrible consequence , 
 quite apart from any fluctuation that go before - consequence that 
 be hardly ever confine to ourselves . and it be good to fix our mind 
 on that certainty , instead of consider what may be the element of 
 excuse for we . but I never know you so inclined for moral discussion , 
 Arthur ? be it some danger of your own that you be consider in this 
 philosophical , general way ? " 
 in ask this question , Mr. Irwine push his plate away , throw himself 
 back in his chair , and look straight at Arthur . he really suspect 
 that Arthur want to tell he something , and think of smooth 
 the way for he by this direct question . but he be mistaken . bring 
 suddenly and involuntarily to the brink of confession , Arthur shrank 
 back and feel less disposed towards it than ever . the conversation have 
 take a more serious tone than he have intend - it would quite mislead 
 Irwine - he would imagine there be a deep passion for Hetty , while there 
 be no such thing . he be conscious of colour , and be annoy at his 
 boyishness . 
 " oh no , no danger , " he say as indifferently as he could . " I do not   know 
 that I be more liable to irresolution than other people ; only there be 
 little incident now and then that set one speculate on what might 
 happen in the future . " 
 be there a motive at work under this strange reluctance of Arthur 's 
 which have a sort of backstair influence , not admit to himself ? our 
 mental business be carry on much in the same way as the business 
 of the state : a great deal of hard work be do by agent who be not 
 acknowledge . in a piece of machinery , too , I believe there be often a 
 small unnoticeable wheel which have a great deal to do with the motion of 
 the large obvious one . possibly there be some such unrecognized agent 
 secretly busy in Arthur 's mind at this moment - possibly it be the fear 
 lest he might hereafter find the fact of have make a confession to the 
 rector a serious annoyance , in case he should not be able quite to carry 
 out his good resolution ? I dare not assert that it be not so . the 
 human soul be a very complex thing . 
 the idea of Hetty have just cross Mr. Irwine 's mind as he look 
 inquiringly at Arthur , but his disclaim indifferent answer confirm 
 the thought which have quickly follow - that there could be nothing 
 serious in that direction . there be no probability that Arthur ever see 
 she except at church , and at her own home under the eye of Mrs. Poyser ; 
 and the hint he have give Arthur about she the other day have no more 
 serious meaning than to prevent he from notice she so as to rouse the 
 little chit 's vanity , and in this way perturb the rustic drama of her 
 life . Arthur would soon join his regiment , and be far away : no , there 
 could be no danger in that quarter , even if Arthur 's character have not 
 be a strong security against it . his honest , patronize pride in 
 the good - will and respect of everybody about he be a safeguard even 
 against foolish romance , still more against a low kind of folly . 
 if there have be anything special on Arthur 's mind in the previous 
 conversation , it be clear he be not inclined to enter into detail , 
 and Mr. Irwine be too delicate to imply even a friendly curiosity . he 
 perceive a change of subject would be welcome , and say , " by the way , 
 Arthur , at your colonel 's birthday fete there be some transparency 
 that make a great effect in honour of Britannia , and Pitt , and the 
 Loamshire Militia , and , above all , the ' generous youth , ' the hero of 
 the day . do not   you think you should get up something of the same sort to 
 astonish our weak mind ? " 
 the opportunity be go . while Arthur be hesitate , the rope to 
 which he might have clung have drift away - he must trust now to his own 
 swimming . 
 in ten minute from that time , Mr. Irwine be call for on business , 
 and Arthur , bid he good - bye , mount his horse again with a sense 
 of dissatisfaction , which he try to quell by determine to set off 
 for Eagledale without an hour 's delay . 
 Book two 
 chapter XVII 
 in which the Story pause a little 
 " this rector of Broxton be little well than a pagan ! " I hear one of my 
 reader exclaim . " how much more edify it would have be if you have 
 make he give Arthur some truly spiritual advice ! you might have put 
 into his mouth the most beautiful thing - quite as good as read a 
 sermon . " 
 certainly I could , if I hold it the high vocation of the novelist 
 to represent thing as they never have be and never will be . then , 
 of course , I might refashion life and character entirely after my own 
 liking ; I might select the most unexceptionable type of clergyman and 
 put my own admirable opinion into his mouth on all occasion . but it 
 happen , on the contrary , that my strong effort be to avoid any such 
 arbitrary picture , and to give a faithful account of man and thing 
 as they have mirror themselves in my mind . the mirror be doubtless 
 defective , the outline will sometimes be disturb , the reflection 
 faint or confused ; but I feel as much bind to tell you as precisely 
 as I can what that reflection be , as if I be in the witness - box , 
 narrate my experience on oath . 
 sixty year ago - it be a long time , so no wonder thing have 
 change - all clergyman be not zealous ; indeed , there be reason to 
 believe that the number of zealous clergyman be small , and it be 
 probable that if one among the small minority have own the living 
 of Broxton and Hayslope in the year 1799 , you would have like he no 
 well than you like Mr. Irwine . ten to one , you would have think he 
 a tasteless , indiscreet , methodistical man . it be so very rarely that 
 fact hit that nice medium require by our own enlightened opinion and 
 refine taste ! perhaps you will say , " do improve the fact a little , 
 then ; make they more accordant with those correct view which it be our 
 privilege to possess . the world be not just what we like ; do touch it 
 up with a tasteful pencil , and make believe it be not quite such a mixed 
 entangle affair . let all people who hold unexceptionable opinion act 
 unexceptionably . let your most faulty character always be on the wrong 
 side , and your virtuous one on the right . then we shall see at a glance 
 whom we be to condemn and whom we be to approve . then we shall be able 
 to admire , without the slight disturbance of our prepossession : we 
 shall hate and despise with that true ruminant relish which belong to 
 undoubting confidence . " 
 but , my good friend , what will you do then with your fellow - parishioner 
 who oppose your husband in the vestry ? with your newly appoint vicar , 
 whose style of preach you find painfully below that of his regretted 
 predecessor ? with the honest servant who worry your soul with her one 
 fail ? with your neighbour , Mrs. Green , who be really kind to you 
 in your last illness , but have say several ill - natured thing about you 
 since your convalescence ? Nay , with your excellent husband himself , who 
 have other irritate habit besides that of not wipe his shoe ? these 
 fellow - mortal , every one , must be accept as they be : you can neither 
 straighten their nose , nor brighten their wit , nor rectify their 
 disposition ; and it be these people - amongst whom your life be 
 pass - that it be needful you should tolerate , pity , and love : it be 
 these more or less ugly , stupid , inconsistent people whose movement of 
 goodness you should be able to admire - for whom you should cherish all 
 possible hope , all possible patience . and I would not , even if I have 
 the choice , be the clever novelist who could create a world so much 
 well than this , in which we get up in the morning to do our daily 
 work , that you would be likely to turn a hard , cold eye on the 
 dusty street and the common green field - on the real breathing man 
 and woman , who can be chill by your indifference or injure by your 
 prejudice ; who can be cheer and help onward by your fellow - feeling , 
 your forbearance , your outspoken , brave justice . 
 so I be content to tell my simple story , without try to make thing 
 seem well than they be ; dread nothing , indeed , but falsity , 
 which , in spite of one 's good effort , there be reason to dread . 
 falsehood be so easy , truth so difficult . the pencil be conscious of a 
 delightful facility in draw a griffin - the long the claw , and 
 the large the wing , the well ; but that marvellous facility which 
 we mistook for genius be apt to forsake we when we want to draw a real 
 unexaggerated lion . examine your word well , and you will find that even 
 when you have no motive to be false , it be a very hard thing to say the 
 exact truth , even about your own immediate feeling - much hard than to 
 say something fine about they which be not the exact truth . 
 it be for this rare , precious quality of truthfulness that I delight in 
 many dutch painting , which lofty - minded people despise . I find a source 
 of delicious sympathy in these faithful picture of a monotonous 
 homely existence , which have be the fate of so many more among my 
 fellow - mortal than a life of pomp or of absolute indigence , of tragic 
 suffering or of world - stir action . I turn , without shrink , from 
 cloud - bear angel , from prophet , sibyls , and heroic warrior , to an 
 old woman bend over her flower - pot , or eat her solitary dinner , 
 while the noonday light , soften perhaps by a screen of leaf , fall 
 on her mob - cap , and just touch the rim of her spinning - wheel , and 
 her stone jug , and all those cheap common thing which be the precious 
 necessary of life to she - or I turn to that village wedding , keep 
 between four brown wall , where an awkward bridegroom open the dance 
 with a high - shoulder , broad - faced bride , while elderly and middle - aged 
 friend look on , with very irregular nose and lip , and probably 
 with quart - pot in their hand , but with an expression of unmistakable 
 contentment and goodwill . " Foh ! " say my idealistic friend , " what vulgar 
 detail ! what good be there in take all these pain to give an exact 
 likeness of old woman and clown ? what a low phase of life ! what clumsy , 
 ugly people ! " 
 but bless we , thing may be lovable that be not altogether handsome , I 
 hope ? I be not at all sure that the majority of the human race have 
 not be ugly , and even among those " lord of their kind , " the british , 
 squat figure , ill - shapen nostril , and dingy complexion be not 
 startling exception . yet there be a great deal of family love amongst 
 we . I have a friend or two whose class of feature be such that the 
 Apollo curl on the summit of their brow would be decidedly try ; yet 
 to my certain knowledge tender heart have beat for they , and their 
 miniature - flatter , but still not lovely - be kiss in secret by 
 motherly lip . I have see many an excellent matron , who could have 
 never in her good day have be handsome , and yet she have a packet of 
 yellow love - letter in a private drawer , and sweet child shower 
 kiss on her sallow cheek . and I believe there have be plenty of 
 young hero , of middle stature and feeble beard , who have feel quite 
 sure they could never love anything more insignificant than a Diana , and 
 yet have find themselves in middle life happily settle with a wife who 
 waddle . yes ! thank God ; human feeling be like the mighty river that 
 bless the earth : it do not wait for beauty - it flow with resistless 
 force and bring beauty with it . 
 all honour and reverence to the divine beauty of form ! let we cultivate 
 it to the utmost in man , woman , and child - in our garden and in our 
 house . but let we love that other beauty too , which lie in no secret 
 of proportion , but in the secret of deep human sympathy . paint we an 
 angel , if you can , with a float violet robe , and a face pal by the 
 celestial light ; paint we yet oftener a Madonna , turn her mild face 
 upward and open her arm to welcome the divine glory ; but do not 
 impose on we any aesthetic rule which shall banish from the region of 
 art those old woman scrap carrot with their work - wear hand , those 
 heavy clown take holiday in a dingy pot - house , those rounded back 
 and stupid weather - beat face that have bend over the spade and do 
 the rough work of the world - those home with their tin pan , their 
 brown pitcher , their rough cur , and their cluster of onion . in 
 this world there be so many of these common coarse people , who have 
 no picturesque sentimental wretchedness ! it be so needful we should 
 remember their existence , else we may happen to leave they quite out of 
 our religion and philosophy and frame lofty theory which only fit 
 a world of extreme . therefore , let art always remind we of they ; 
 therefore let we always have man ready to give the love pain of a 
 life to the faithful representing of commonplace thing - man who see 
 beauty in these commonplace thing , and delight in show how kindly 
 the light of heaven fall on they . there be few prophet in the world ; 
 few sublimely beautiful woman ; few hero . I can not   afford to give all 
 my love and reverence to such rarity : I want a great deal of those 
 feeling for my every - day fellow - man , especially for the few in the 
 foreground of the great multitude , whose face I know , whose hand I 
 touch for whom I have to make way with kindly courtesy . neither be 
 picturesque lazzaroni or romantic criminal half so frequent as your 
 common labourer , who get his own bread and eat it vulgarly but 
 creditably with his own pocket - knife . it be more needful that I should 
 have a fibre of sympathy connect I with that vulgar citizen who 
 weigh out my sugar in a vilely assorted cravat and waistcoat , than with 
 the handsome rascal in red scarf and green feather - more needful that 
 my heart should swell with love admiration at some trait of gentle 
 goodness in the faulty people who sit at the same hearth with I , or in 
 the clergyman of my own parish , who be perhaps rather too corpulent and 
 in other respect be not an Oberlin or a Tillotson , than at the deed 
 of hero whom I shall never know except by hearsay , or at the sublime 
 abstract of all clerical grace that be ever conceive by an able 
 novelist . 
 and so I come back to Mr. Irwine , with whom I desire you to be in 
 perfect charity , far as he may be from satisfy your demand on the 
 clerical character . perhaps you think he be not - as he ought to have 
 be - a live demonstration of the benefit attach to a national 
 church ? but I be not sure of that ; at least I know that the people 
 in Broxton and Hayslope would have be very sorry to part with their 
 clergyman , and that most face brighten at his approach ; and until it 
 can be prove that hatred be a well thing for the soul than love , 
 I must believe that Mr. Irwine 's influence in his parish be a more 
 wholesome one than that of the zealous Mr. Ryde , who come there twenty 
 year afterwards , when Mr. Irwine have be gather to his father . it 
 be true , Mr. Ryde insist strongly on the doctrine of the Reformation , 
 visit his flock a great deal in their own home , and be severe 
 in rebuke the aberration of the flesh - put a stop , indeed , to the 
 Christmas round of the church singer , as promote drunkenness and 
 too light a handling of sacred thing . but I gather from Adam Bede , to 
 whom I talk of these matter in his old age , that few clergyman could 
 be less successful in win the heart of their parishioner than Mr. 
 Ryde . they learn a great many notion about doctrine from he , so 
 that almost every church - goer under fifty begin to distinguish as well 
 between the genuine gospel and what do not come precisely up to that 
 standard , as if he have be bear and breed a Dissenter ; and for some time 
 after his arrival there seem to be quite a religious movement in that 
 quiet rural district . " but , " say Adam , " I have   see pretty clear , ever 
 since I be a young un , as religion 's something else besides notion . it 
 be not   notion set people do the right thing - it be feeling . it be the 
 same with the notion in religion as it be with math'matics - a man may 
 be able to work problem straight off in 's head as he sit by the fire 
 and smoke his pipe , but if he have to make a machine or a building , he 
 must have a will and a resolution and love something else well than 
 his own ease . somehow , the congregation begin to fall off , and people 
 begin to speak light o ' Mr. Ryde . I believe he mean right at bottom ; 
 but , you see , he be sourish - temper , and be for beat down price 
 with the people as work for he ; and his preaching would not   go down 
 well with that sauce . and he want to be like my lord judge I ' the 
 parish , punish folk for do wrong ; and he scold them from 
 the pulpit as if he have be a Ranter , and yet he could not   abide the 
 dissenter , and be a deal more set against them than Mr. Irwine be . and 
 then he do not   keep within his income , for he seem to think at first 
 go - off that six hundred a - year be to make he as big a man as Mr. 
 Donnithorne . that be a sore mischief I have   often see with the poor 
 curate jump into a bit of a living all of a sudden . Mr. Ryde be a 
 deal think on at a distance , I believe , and he write book , but as for 
 math'matic and the natur o ' thing , he be as ignorant as a woman . he 
 be very know about doctrine , and use to call them the bulwark of 
 the Reformation ; but I have   always mistrust that sort o ' learning as 
 leave folk foolish and unreasonable about business . now Mester Irwine 
 be as different as could be : as quick ! - he understand what you mean in 
 a minute , and he know all about building , and could see when you have make 
 a good job . and he behave as much like a gentleman to the farmer , and 
 th ' old woman , and the labourer , as he do to the gentry . you never see 
 HIM interfere and scolding , and try to play th ' emperor . ah , he be 
 a fine man as ever you set eye on ; and so kind to 's mother and sister . 
 that poor sickly Miss Anne - he seem to think more of she than of 
 anybody else in the world . there be not   a soul in the parish have a word 
 to say against he ; and his servant stay with he till they be so 
 old and potter , he have to hire other folk to do their work . " 
 " well , " I say , " that be an excellent way of preach in the weekday ; 
 but I daresay , if your old friend Mr. Irwine be to come to life again , 
 and get into the pulpit next Sunday , you would be rather ashamed that he 
 do not   preach well after all your praise of he . " 
 " Nay , nay , " say Adam , broaden his chest and throw himself back in 
 his chair , as if he be ready to meet all inference , " nobody have ever 
 hear I say Mr. Irwine be much of a preacher . he do not   go into deep 
 speritial experience ; and I know there s a deal in a man 's inward life 
 as you can not   measure by the square , and say , ' do this and that will 
 follow , ' and , ' do that and this will follow . ' there 's thing go on in the 
 soul , and time when feeling come into you like a rush mighty wind , 
 as the scripture say , and part your life in two a'most , so you look 
 back on yourself as if you be somebody else . those be thing as you 
 can not   bottle up in a ' do this ' and ' do that ' ; and I will go so far with 
 the strong Methodist ever you will find . that show I there be deep 
 speritial thing in religion . you can not   make much out wi ' talk about 
 it , but you feel it . Mr. Irwine do not   go into those thing - he preach 
 short moral sermon , and that be all . but then he act pretty much 
 up to what he say ; he do not   set up for be so different from other 
 folk one day , and then be as like them as two pea the next . and he 
 make folk love he and respect he , and that be well nor stir 
 up their gall wi ' be overbusy . Mrs. Poyser use to say - you know she 
 would have her word about everything - she say , Mr. Irwine be like a 
 good meal o ' victual , you be the well for he without think on 
 it , and Mr. Ryde be like a dose o ' physic , he grip you and worrete 
 you , and after all he leave you much the same . " 
 " but do not   Mr. Ryde preach a great deal more about that spiritual part 
 of religion that you talk of , Adam ? could not   you get more out of his 
 sermon than out of Mr. Irwine 's ? " 
 " eh , I knowna . he preach a deal about doctrine . but I have   see pretty 
 clear , ever since I be a young un , as religion 's something else besides 
 doctrine and notion . I look at it as if the doctrine be like find 
 name for your feeling , so as you can talk of them when you have   never 
 know them , just as a man may talk o ' tool when he know their name , 
 though he be never so much as see them , still less handle them . I have 
 hear a deal o ' doctrine I ' my time , for I use to go after the 
 dissent preacher along wi ' Seth , when I be a lad o ' seventeen , and 
 get puzzle myself a deal about th ' Arminians and the Calvinists . the 
 Wesleyans , you know , be strong Arminians ; and Seth , who could never 
 abide anything harsh and be always for hop the good , hold fast by 
 the Wesleyans from the very first ; but I think I could pick a hole or 
 two in their notion , and I get dispute wi ' one o ' the class leader 
 down at Treddles'on , and harass he so , first o ' this side and then 
 o ' that , till at last he say , ' young man , it be the devil make use o ' 
 your pride and conceit as a weapon to war against the simplicity o ' 
 the truth . ' I could not   help laugh then , but as I be go home , I 
 think the man be not   far wrong . I begin to see as all this weighing 
 and sift what this text mean and that text mean , and whether folk 
 be save all by God 's grace , or whether there go an ounce o ' their 
 own will to't , be no part o ' real religion at all . you may talk o ' 
 these thing for hour on end , and you will only be all the more coxy and 
 conceite for't . so I take to go nowhere but to church , and hear 
 nobody but Mr. Irwine , for he say nothing but what be good and what 
 you would be the wiser for remembering . and I find it well for my soul 
 to be humble before the mystery o ' God 's dealing , and not be make 
 a clatter about what I could never understand . and they be poor foolish 
 question after all ; for what have we get either inside or outside of we 
 but what come from God ? if we have   get a resolution to do right , he give 
 it we , I reckon , first or last ; but I see plain enough we shall never do 
 it without a resolution , and that be enough for I . " 
 Adam , you perceive , be a warm admirer , perhaps a partial judge , of Mr. 
 Irwine , as , happily , some of we still be of the people we have know 
 familiarly . doubtless it will be despise as a weakness by that lofty 
 order of mind who pant after the ideal , and be oppress by a general 
 sense that their emotion be of too exquisite a character to find fit 
 object among their everyday fellowman . I have often be favour with 
 the confidence of these select nature , and find they to concur in 
 the experience that great man be overestimated and small man be 
 insupportable ; that if you would love a woman without ever look back 
 on your love as a folly , she must die while you be court she ; and if 
 you would maintain the slight belief in human heroism , you must never 
 make a pilgrimage to see the hero . I confess I have often meanly shrink 
 from confess to these accomplished and acute gentleman what my own 
 experience have be . I be afraid I have often smile with hypocritical 
 assent , and gratify they with an epigram on the fleeting nature of our 
 illusion , which any one moderately acquainted with french literature 
 can command at a moment 's notice . human converse , I think some wise 
 man have remark , be not rigidly sincere . but I herewith discharge my 
 conscience , and declare that I have have quite enthusiastic movement of 
 admiration towards old gentleman who speak the bad English , who be 
 occasionally fretful in their temper , and who have never move in a 
 high sphere of influence than that of parish overseer ; and that 
 the way in which I have come to the conclusion that human nature be 
 lovable - the way I have learn something of its deep pathos , its sublime 
 mystery - have be by live a great deal among people more or less 
 commonplace and vulgar , of whom you would perhaps hear nothing very 
 surprising if you be to inquire about they in the neighbourhood where 
 they dwelt . ten to one most of the small shopkeeper in their vicinity 
 see nothing at all in they . for I have observe this remarkable 
 coincidence , that the select nature who pant after the ideal , and 
 find nothing in pantaloon or petticoat great enough to command their 
 reverence and love , be curiously in unison with the narrow and 
 pettiest . for example , I have often hear Mr. Gedge , the landlord of 
 the Royal Oak , who use to turn a bloodshot eye on his neighbour in 
 the village of Shepperton , sum up his opinion of the people in his own 
 parish - and they be all the people he know - in these emphatic word : 
 " Aye , sir , I have   say it often , and I will say it again , they be a poor lot 
 I ' this parish - a poor lot , sir , big and little . " I think he have a 
 dim idea that if he could migrate to a distant parish , he might find 
 neighbour worthy of he ; and indeed he do subsequently transfer 
 himself to the saracen 's Head , which be do a thriving business in 
 the back street of a neighbouring market - town . but , oddly enough , he have 
 find the people up that back street of precisely the same stamp as the 
 inhabitant of Shepperton - " a poor lot , sir , big and little , and they 
 as come for a go o ' gin be no well than they as come for a pint o ' 
 twopenny - a poor lot . " 
 Chapter xviii 
 Church 
 " HETTY , Hetty , do not   you know church begin at two , and it be go half 
 after one a'ready ? have you get nothing well to think on this good 
 Sunday as poor old Thias Bede 's to be put into the ground , and he 
 drownde I ' th ' dead o ' the night , as it be enough to make one 's back 
 run cold , but you must be ' dizen yourself as if there be a wedding 
 i'stid of a funeral ? " 
 " well , Aunt , " say Hetty , " I can not   be ready so soon as everybody else , 
 when I have   get Totty 's thing to put on . and I would ever such work to make 
 her stand still . " 
 Hetty be come downstairs , and Mrs. Poyser , in her plain bonnet and 
 shawl , be stand below . if ever a girl look as if she have be make 
 of rose , that girl be Hetty in her Sunday hat and frock . for her hat 
 be trim with pink , and her frock have pink spot , sprinkle on a 
 white ground . there be nothing but pink and white about she , except 
 in her dark hair and eye and her little buckled shoe . Mrs. Poyser 
 be provoke at herself , for she could hardly keep from smile , as any 
 mortal be inclined to do at the sight of pretty round thing . so she 
 turn without speak , and join the group outside the house door , 
 follow by Hetty , whose heart be flutter so at the thought of some 
 one she expect to see at church that she hardly feel the ground she 
 trod on . 
 and now the little procession set off . Mr. Poyser be in his Sunday suit 
 of drab , with a red - and - green waistcoat and a green watch - ribbon have 
 a large cornelian seal attach , pendant like a plumb - line from that 
 promontory where his watch - pocket be situate ; a silk handkerchief of a 
 yellow tone round his neck ; and excellent grey rib stocking , knit 
 by Mrs. Poyser 's own hand , set off the proportion of his leg . Mr. 
 Poyser have no reason to be ashamed of his leg , and suspect that the 
 grow abuse of top - boot and other fashion tend to disguise the 
 nether limb have their origin in a pitiable degeneracy of the human 
 calf . still less have he reason to be ashamed of his round jolly face , 
 which be good humour itself as he say , " come , Hetty - come , little 
 un ! " and give his arm to his wife , lead the way through the causeway 
 gate into the yard . 
 the " little uns " address be Marty and Tommy , boy of nine and seven , 
 in little fustian tail coat and knee - breech , relieve by rosy 
 cheek and black eye , look as much like their father as a very small 
 elephant be like a very large one . Hetty walk between they , and behind 
 come patient Molly , whose task it be to carry Totty through the yard 
 and over all the wet place on the road ; for Totty , have speedily 
 recover from her threaten fever , have insist on go to church 
 to - day , and especially on wear her red - and - black necklace outside her 
 tippet . and there be many wet place for she to be carry over this 
 afternoon , for there have be heavy shower in the morning , though now 
 the cloud have roll off and lie in tower silvery mass on the 
 horizon . 
 you might have know it be Sunday if you have only wake up in the 
 farmyard . the cock and hen seem to know it , and make only croon 
 subdue noise ; the very bull - dog look less savage , as if he would 
 have be satisfied with a small bite than usual . the sunshine seem 
 to call all thing to rest and not to labour . it be asleep itself on 
 the moss - grow cow - shed ; on the group of white duck nestle together 
 with their bill tuck under their wing ; on the old black sow 
 stretch languidly on the straw , while her large young one find an 
 excellent spring - bed on his mother 's fat rib ; on Alick , the shepherd , 
 in his new smock - frock , take an uneasy siesta , half - sit , 
 half - stand on the granary step . Alick be of opinion that church , 
 like other luxury , be not to be indulge in often by a foreman who 
 have the weather and the ewe on his mind . " Church ! Nay - I'n get 
 summat else to think on , " be an answer which he often utter in a tone 
 of bitter significance that silence further question . I feel sure 
 Alick mean no irreverence ; indeed , I know that his mind be not of a 
 speculative , negative cast , and he would on no account have miss go 
 to church on Christmas Day , Easter Sunday , and " whissuntide . " but he have 
 a general impression that public worship and religious ceremony , 
 like other non - productive employment , be intend for people who have 
 leisure . 
 " there be Father a - standing at the yard - gate , " say Martin Poyser . " I 
 reckon he want to watch we down the field . it be wonderful what sight he 
 have , and he turn seventy - five . " 
 " ah , I often think it be wi ' th ' old folk as it be wi ' the babbie , " 
 say Mrs. Poyser ; " they be satisfied wi ' looking , no matter what they be 
 look at . it be God A'mighty 's way o ' quieten them , I reckon , afore 
 they go to sleep . " 
 Old Martin open the gate as he see the family procession approach , 
 and hold it wide open , lean on his stick - pleased to do this bit 
 of work ; for , like all old man whose life have be spend in labour , he 
 like to feel that he be still useful - that there be a well crop of 
 onion in the garden because he be by at the sowing - and that the cow 
 would be milk the well if he stay at home on a Sunday afternoon 
 to look on . he always go to church on Sacrament Sundays , but not very 
 regularly at other time ; on wet Sundays , or whenever he have a touch of 
 rheumatism , he use to read the three first chapter of Genesis instead . 
 " they will ha ' putten Thias Bede I ' the ground afore ye get to the 
 churchyard , " he say , as his son come up . " it ' ud ha ' be well luck 
 if they would ha ' bury he I ' the forenoon when the rain be fallin ' ; 
 there be no likelihood of a drop now ; an ' the moon lie like a boat 
 there , dost see ? that be a sure sign o ' fair weather - there be a many as 
 be false but that be sure . " 
 " aye , aye , " say the son , " I be in hope it will hold up now . " 
 " mind what the parson say , mind what the parson say , my lad , " say 
 Grandfather to the black - eyed youngster in knee - breech , conscious of 
 a marble or two in their pocket which they look forward to handling , 
 a little , secretly , during the sermon . 
 " dood - bye , Dandad , " say Totty . " I do to church . I dot my neklace 
 on . dive I a peppermint . " 
 Grandad , shake with laughter at this " deep little wench , " slowly 
 transfer his stick to his left hand , which hold the gate open , and 
 slowly thrust his finger into the waistcoat pocket on which Totty have 
 fix her eye with a confident look of expectation . 
 and when they be all go , the old man lean on the gate again , 
 watch they across the lane along the Home Close , and through the 
 far gate , till they disappear behind a bend in the hedge . for the 
 hedgerow in those day shut out one 's view , even on the well - manage 
 farm ; and this afternoon , the dog - rose be toss out their pink 
 wreath , the nightshade be in its yellow and purple glory , the pale 
 honeysuckle grow out of reach , peep high up out of a holly bush , and 
 over all an ash or a sycamore every now and then throw its shadow across 
 the path . 
 there be acquaintance at other gate who have to move aside and let 
 they pass : at the gate of the Home Close there be half the dairy of 
 cow stand one behind the other , extremely slow to understand that 
 their large body might be in the way ; at the far gate there be the 
 mare hold her head over the bar , and beside she the liver - colour 
 foal with its head towards its mother 's flank , apparently still much 
 embarrassed by its own straddling existence . the way lie entirely 
 through Mr. Poyser 's own field till they reach the main road lead 
 to the village , and he turn a keen eye on the stock and the crop 
 as they go along , while Mrs. Poyser be ready to supply a run 
 commentary on they all . the woman who manage a dairy have a large share 
 in make the rent , so she may well be allow to have her opinion on 
 stock and their " keep " - an exercise which strengthen her understanding 
 so much that she find herself able to give her husband advice on most 
 other subject . 
 " there be that shorthorne Sally , " she say , as they enter the home 
 Close , and she catch sight of the meek beast that lie chew the cud 
 and look at she with a sleepy eye . " I begin to hate the sight o ' the 
 cow ; and I say now what I say three week ago , the soon we get rid of 
 she the well , for there be that little yallow cow as do not   give half 
 the milk , and yet I have   twice as much butter from she . " 
 " why , thee't not like the woman in general , " say Mr. Poyser ; " they like 
 the shorthorn , as give such a lot o ' milk . there be Chowne 's wife want 
 he to buy no other sort . " 
 " what be it sinnify what Chowne 's wife like ? a poor soft thing , wi ' no 
 more head - piece nor a sparrow . she would take a big cullender to strain 
 her lard wi ' , and then wonder as the scratchin 's run through . I have 
 see enough of she to know as I will niver take a servant from her house 
 again - all hugger - mugger - and you would niver know , when you go in , 
 whether it be Monday or Friday , the wash draggin ' on to th ' end o ' the 
 week ; and as for her cheese , I know well enough it rise like a loaf in 
 a tin last year . and then she talk o ' the weather bein ' i ' fault , as 
 there be folk ' ud stand on their head and then say the fault be I ' 
 their boot . " 
 " well , Chowne 's be want to buy Sally , so we can get rid of she if 
 thee lik'st , " say Mr. Poyser , secretly proud of his wife 's superior 
 power of put two and two together ; indeed , on recent market - day 
 he have more than once boasted of her discernment in this very matter of 
 shorthorn . " Aye , they as choose a soft for a wife may be well buy up 
 the shorthorn , for if you get your head stick in a bog , your leg may 's 
 well go after it . eh ! talk o ' leg , there be leg for you , " Mrs. Poyser 
 continue , as Totty , who have be set down now the road be dry , toddle 
 on in front of her father and mother . " there 's shape ! an ' she be get 
 such a long foot , she will be her father 's own child . " 
 " Aye , she will be welly such a one as Hetty I ' ten year ' time , on'y she be 
 get THY colour eye . I niver remember a blue eye I ' my family ; my 
 mother have eye as black as sloe , just like Hetty 's . " 
 " the child ' ull be none the bad for have summat as be not   like Hetty . 
 an ' I be none for have she so overpretty . though for the matter o ' 
 that , there be people wi ' light hair an ' blue eye as pretty as they wi ' 
 black . if Dinah have get a bit o ' colour in her cheek , an ' do not   stick 
 that Methodist cap on her head , enough to frighten the cow , folk ' ud 
 think she as pretty as Hetty . " 
 " Nay , nay , " say Mr. Poyser , with rather a contemptuous emphasis , " thee 
 dostna know the pint of a woman . the man ' ud niver run after Dinah as 
 they would after Hetty . " 
 " what care I what the man ' ud run after ? it be well see what choice the 
 most of them know how to make , by the poor draggle - tail o ' wife you 
 see , like bit o ' gauze ribbin , good for nothing when the colour 's 
 go . " 
 " well , well , thee canstna say but what I know how to make a choice 
 when I marry thee , " say Mr. Poyser , who usually settle little 
 conjugal dispute by a compliment of this sort ; " and thee wast twice as 
 buxom as Dinah ten year ago . " 
 " I niver say as a woman have need to be ugly to make a good missis of a 
 house . there be Chowne 's wife ugly enough to turn the milk an ' save the 
 rennet , but she will niver save nothing any other way . but as for Dinah , 
 poor child , she be niver likely to be buxom as long as she will make she 
 dinner o ' cake and water , for the sake o ' give to they as want . she 
 provoke I past bearing sometimes ; and , as I tell she , she go clean 
 again ' the Scriptur ' , for that say , ' love your neighbour as yourself ' ; 
 ' but , ' I say , ' if you love your neighbour no well nor you do 
 yourself , Dinah , it be little enough you would do for he . you would be think 
 he might do well enough on a half - empty stomach . ' eh , I wonder where she 
 be this blessed Sunday ! sit by that sick woman , I daresay , as she have 
 set her heart on go to all of a sudden . " 
 " ah , it be a pity she should take such megrim into her head , when 
 she might ha ' stay wi ' we all summer , and eat twice as much as she 
 want , and it ' ud niver ha ' be miss . she make no odd in th ' house 
 at all , for she sit as still at her sewing as a bird on the nest , and 
 be uncommon nimble at run to fetch anything . if Hetty get marry , 
 theed'st like to ha ' Dinah wi ' thee constant . " 
 " it be no use think o ' that , " say Mrs. Poyser . " you might as 
 well beckon to the fly swallow as ask Dinah to come an ' live here 
 comfortable , like other folk . if anything could turn she , I should ha ' 
 turn she , for I have   talk to she for a hour on end , and scold she 
 too ; for she be my own sister 's child , and it behove I to do what I can 
 for she . but eh , poor thing , as soon as she have say we ' good - bye ' an ' 
 get into the cart , an ' look back at I with her pale face , as be welly 
 like her Aunt Judith come back from heaven , I begin to be frightened to 
 think o ' the set - down I would give she ; for it come over you sometimes 
 as if she have a way o ' know the right o ' thing more nor other folk 
 have . but I will niver give in as that be 'cause she be a Methodist , no more 
 nor a white calf 's white 'cause it eat out o ' the same bucket wi ' a 
 black un . " 
 " Nay , " say Mr. Poyser , with as near an approach to a snarl as his 
 good - nature would allow ; " I be no opinion o ' the Methodists . it be on'y 
 tradesfolk as turn Methodists ; you nuver know a farmer bite wi ' they 
 maggot . there be maybe a workman now an ' then , as be not   overclever at 's 
 work , take to preachin ' an ' that , like Seth Bede . but you see Adam , as 
 have get one o ' the good head - piece hereabout , know well ; he be a good 
 Churchman , else I would never encourage he for a sweetheart for Hetty . " 
 " why , goodness I , " say Mrs. Poyser , who have look back while her 
 husband be speak , " look where molly be with they lad ! they be the 
 field 's length behind we . how could you let them do so , Hetty ? anybody 
 might as well set a pictur ' to watch the child as you . run back and 
 tell them to come on . " 
 Mr. and Mrs. Poyser be now at the end of the second field , so they set 
 Totty on the top of one of the large stone form the true Loamshire 
 stile , and await the loiterer Totty observe with complacency , " Dey 
 naughty , naughty boy - I dood . " 
 the fact be that this Sunday walk through the field be fraught with 
 great excitement to Marty and Tommy , who see a perpetual drama go on 
 in the hedgerow , and could no more refrain from stop and peep 
 than if they have be a couple of spaniel or terrier . Marty be quite 
 sure he see a yellow - hammer on the bough of the great ash , and while 
 he be peep , he miss the sight of a white - throate stoat , which have 
 run across the path and be describe with much fervour by the junior 
 Tommy . then there be a little greenfinch , just fledge , flutter 
 along the ground , and it seem quite possible to catch it , till it 
 manage to flutter under the blackberry bush . Hetty could not be get 
 to give any heed to these thing , so Molly be call on for her ready 
 sympathy , and peep with open mouth wherever she be tell , and say 
 " Lawks ! " whenever she be expect to wonder . 
 molly hasten on with some alarm when Hetty have come back and call to 
 they that her aunt be angry ; but Marty run on first , shout , 
 " we have   find the speckle turkey 's nest , Mother ! " with the instinctive 
 confidence that people who bring good news be never in fault . 
 " ah , " say Mrs. Poyser , really forget all discipline in this 
 pleasant surprise , " that be a good lad ; why , where be it ? " 
 " down in ever such a hole , under the hedge . I see it first , look 
 after the greenfinch , and she sit on th ' nest . " 
 " you do not   frighten she , I hope , " say the mother , " else she will forsake 
 it . " 
 " no , I go away as still as still , and whisper to Molly - do not   I , 
 molly ? " 
 " well , well , now come on , " say Mrs. Poyser , " and walk before Father and 
 Mother , and take your little sister by the hand . we must go straight on 
 now . good boy do not   look after the bird of a Sunday . " 
 " but , Mother , " say Marty , " you say you would give half - a - crown to find 
 the speckled turkey 's nest . may not   I have the half - crown put into my 
 money - box ? " 
 " we will see about that , my lad , if you walk along now , like a good boy . " 
 the father and mother exchange a significant glance of amusement at 
 their eldest - bear 's acuteness ; but on Tommy 's round face there be a 
 cloud . 
 " Mother , " he say , half - cry , " Marty 's get ever so much more money in 
 his box nor I have   get in mine . " 
 " Munny , I want half - a - toun in my bot , " say Totty . 
 " hush , hush , hush , " say Mrs. Poyser , " do ever anybody hear such 
 naughty child ? nobody shall ever see their money - box any more , if 
 they do not   make haste and go on to church . " 
 this dreadful threat have the desire effect , and through the two 
 remain field the three pair of small leg trot on without any 
 serious interruption , notwithstanding a small pond full of tadpole , 
 alias " bullhead , " which the lad look at wistfully . 
 the damp hay that must be scatter and turn afresh to - morrow be 
 not a cheer sight to Mr. Poyser , who during hay and corn harvest have 
 often some mental struggle as to the benefit of a day of rest ; but no 
 temptation would have induce he to carry on any field - work , however 
 early in the morning , on a Sunday ; for have not Michael Holdsworth have a 
 pair of oxen ' swelter " while he be plough on Good Friday ? that be 
 a demonstration that work on sacred day be a wicked thing ; and with 
 wickedness of any sort Martin Poyser be quite clear that he would have 
 nothing to do , since money get by such mean would never prosper . 
 " it a'most make your finger itch to be at the hay now the sun shin 
 so , " he observe , as they pass through the " Big Meadow . " " but it be 
 poor foolishness to think o ' saving by go against your conscience . 
 there be that Jim Wakefield , as they use to call ' Gentleman Wakefield , ' 
 use to do the same of a Sunday as o ' weekday , and take no heed to 
 right or wrong , as if there be nayth God nor devil . an ' what be he 
 come to ? why , I see he myself last market - day a - carry a basket wi ' 
 orange in't . " 
 " ah , to be sure , " say Mrs. Poyser , emphatically , " you make but a poor 
 trap to catch luck if you go and bait it wi ' wickedness . the money as be 
 get so be like to burn hole I ' your pocket . I would niver wish we to leave 
 our lad a sixpence but what be get I ' the rightful way . and as for 
 the weather , there be one above make it , and we must put up wi't : it be 
 nothing of a plague to what the wench be . " 
 notwithstanding the interruption in their walk , the excellent habit 
 which Mrs. Poyser 's clock have of take time by the forelock have secure 
 their arrival at the village while it be still a quarter to two , 
 though almost every one who mean to go to church be already within the 
 churchyard gate . those who stay at home be chiefly mother , like 
 Timothy 's Bess , who stand at her own door nurse her baby and feeling 
 as woman feel in that position - that nothing else can be expect of 
 they . 
 it be not entirely to see Thias Bede 's funeral that the people be 
 stand about the churchyard so long before service begin ; that be 
 their common practice . the woman , indeed , usually enter the church at 
 once , and the farmer ' wife talk in an undertone to each other , over 
 the tall pew , about their illness and the total failure of doctor 's 
 stuff , recommend dandelion - tea , and other home - make specific , as 
 far preferable - about the servant , and their grow exorbitance as to 
 wage , whereas the quality of their service decline from year to year , 
 and there be no girl nowadays to be trust any far than you could 
 see she - about the bad price Mr. Dingall , the Treddleston grocer , be 
 give for butter , and the reasonable doubt that might be hold as to 
 his solvency , notwithstanding that Mrs. Dingall be a sensible woman , 
 and they be all sorry for she , for she have very good kin . meantime the 
 man linger outside , and hardly any of they except the singer , who have 
 a humming and fragmentary rehearsal to go through , enter the church 
 until Mr. Irwine be in the desk . they see no reason for that premature 
 entrance - what could they do in church if they be there before service 
 begin ? - and they do not conceive that any power in the universe 
 could take it ill of they if they stay out and talk a little about 
 " bus'ness . " 
 Chad Cranage look like quite a new acquaintance to - day , for he have get 
 his clean Sunday face , which always make his little granddaughter cry 
 at he as a stranger . but an experienced eye would have fix on he at 
 once as the village blacksmith , after see the humble deference with 
 which the big saucy fellow take off his hat and stroke his hair to the 
 farmer ; for Chad be accustom to say that a work - man must hold 
 a candle to a personage understand to be as black as he be himself 
 on weekday ; by which evil - sound rule of conduct he mean what be , 
 after all , rather virtuous than otherwise , namely , that man who have 
 horse to be shod must be treat with respect . Chad and the rougher 
 sort of workman keep aloof from the grave under the white thorn , 
 where the burial be go forward ; but Sandy Jim , and several of the 
 farm - labourer , make a group round it , and stand with their hat off , as 
 fellow - mourner with the mother and son . other hold a midway position , 
 sometimes watch the group at the grave , sometimes listen to the 
 conversation of the farmer , who stand in a knot near the church door , 
 and be now join by Martin Poyser , while his family pass into the 
 church . on the outside of this knot stand Mr. Casson , the landlord of 
 the Donnithorne Arms , in his most striking attitude - that be to say , 
 with the forefinger of his right hand thrust between the button of his 
 waistcoat , his left hand in his breech pocket , and his head very 
 much on one side ; look , on the whole , like an actor who have only a 
 mono - syllabic part entrust to he , but feel sure that the audience 
 discern his fitness for the lead business ; curiously in contrast with 
 old Jonathan Burge , who hold his hand behind he and lean forward , 
 cough asthmatically , with an inward scorn of all knowingness that 
 could not be turn into cash . the talk be in rather a low tone than 
 usual to - day , hush a little by the sound of Mr. Irwine 's voice read 
 the final prayer of the burial - service . they have all have their word 
 of pity for poor Thias , but now they have get upon the nearer subject of 
 their own grievance against Satchell , the squire 's bailiff , who 
 play the part of steward so far as it be not perform by old Mr. 
 Donnithorne himself , for that gentleman have the meanness to receive 
 his own rent and make bargain about his own timber . this subject of 
 conversation be an additional reason for not be loud , since Satchell 
 himself might presently be walk up the paved road to the church door . 
 and soon they become suddenly silent ; for Mr. Irwine 's voice have cease , 
 and the group round the white thorn be disperse itself towards the 
 church . 
 they all move aside , and stand with their hat off , while Mr. Irwine 
 pass . Adam and Seth be come next , with their mother between they ; 
 for Joshua Rann officiate as head sexton as well as clerk , and be not 
 yet ready to follow the rector into the vestry . but there be a pause 
 before the three mourner come on : Lisbeth have turn round to look 
 again towards the grave ! ah ! there be nothing now but the brown earth 
 under the white thorn . yet she cry less to - day than she have do any 
 day since her husband 's death . along with all her grief there be mixed 
 an unusual sense of her own importance in have a " burial , " and in Mr. 
 Irwine 's read a special service for her husband ; and besides , she 
 know the funeral psalm be go to be sing for he . she feel this 
 counter - excitement to her sorrow still more strongly as she walk with 
 her son towards the church door , and see the friendly sympathetic nod 
 of their fellow - parishioner . 
 the mother and son pass into the church , and one by one the 
 loiterer follow , though some still linger without ; the sight of Mr. 
 Donnithorne 's carriage , which be wind slowly up the hill , perhaps 
 help to make they feel that there be no need for haste . 
 but presently the sound of the bassoon and the key - bugle burst forth ; 
 the evening hymn , which always open the service , have begin , and every 
 one must now enter and take his place . 
 I can not say that the interior of Hayslope Church be remarkable for 
 anything except for the grey age of its oaken pew - great square pew 
 mostly , range on each side of a narrow aisle . it be free , indeed , 
 from the modern blemish of gallery . the choir have two narrow pew to 
 themselves in the middle of the right - hand row , so that it be a short 
 process for Joshua Rann to take his place among they as principal bass , 
 and return to his desk after the singing be over . the pulpit and desk , 
 grey and old as the pew , stand on one side of the arch lead into 
 the chancel , which also have its grey square pew for Mr. Donnithorne 's 
 family and servant . yet I assure you these grey pew , with the 
 buff - wash wall , give a very pleasing tone to this shabby interior , 
 and agree extremely well with the ruddy face and bright waistcoat . 
 and there be liberal touch of crimson toward the chancel , for 
 the pulpit and Mr. Donnithorne 's own pew have handsome crimson cloth 
 cushion ; and , to close the vista , there be a crimson altar - cloth , 
 embroider with golden ray by Miss Lydia 's own hand . 
 but even without the crimson cloth , the effect must have be warm and 
 cheer when Mr. Irwine be in the desk , look benignly round on 
 that simple congregation - on the hardy old man , with bent knee and 
 shoulder , perhaps , but with vigour leave for much hedge - clip and 
 thatch ; on the tall stalwart frame and roughly cut bronzed face of 
 the stone - cutter and carpenter ; on the half - dozen well - to - do farmer , 
 with their apple - cheek family ; and on the clean old woman , mostly 
 farm - labourer ' wife , with their bit of snow - white cap - border under 
 their black bonnet , and with their wither arm , bare from the elbow , 
 fold passively over their chest . for none of the old people hold 
 book - why should they ? not one of they could read . but they know a 
 few " good word " by heart , and their withered lip now and then move 
 silently , follow the service without any very clear comprehension 
 indeed , but with a simple faith in its efficacy to ward off harm and 
 bring blessing . and now all face be visible , for all be stand 
 up - the little child on the seat peep over the edge of the grey 
 pew , while good Bishop Ken 's evening hymn be be sing to one of 
 those lively psalm - tune which die out with the last generation of 
 rector and choral parish clerk . melody die out , like the pipe of 
 Pan , with the ear that love they and listen for they . Adam be not in 
 his usual place among the singer to - day , for he sit with his mother 
 and Seth , and he notice with surprise that Bartle Massey be absent 
 too - all the more agreeable for Mr. Joshua Rann , who give out his bass 
 note with unusual complacency and throw an extra ray of severity into 
 the glance he send over his spectacle at the recusant will Maskery . 
 I beseech you to imagine Mr. Irwine look round on this scene , in his 
 ample white surplice that become he so well , with his powdered hair 
 throw back , his rich brown complexion , and his finely cut nostril and 
 upper lip ; for there be a certain virtue in that benignant yet keen 
 countenance as there be in all human face from which a generous soul 
 beam out . and over all stream the delicious June sunshine through the 
 old window , with their desultory patch of yellow , red , and blue , that 
 throw pleasant touch of colour on the opposite wall . 
 I think , as Mr. Irwine look round to - day , his eye rest an instant 
 long than usual on the square pew occupy by Martin Poyser and his 
 family . and there be another pair of dark eye that find it impossible 
 not to wander thither , and rest on that round pink - and - white figure . but 
 Hetty be at that moment quite careless of any glance - she be absorb 
 in the thought that Arthur Donnithorne would soon be come into church , 
 for the carriage must surely be at the church - gate by this time . she 
 have never see he since she part with he in the wood on Thursday 
 evening , and oh , how long the time have seem ! thing have go on just 
 the same as ever since that evening ; the wonder that have happen then 
 have bring no change after they ; they be already like a dream . when 
 she hear the church door swing , her heart beat so , she dare not 
 look up . she feel that her aunt be curtsy ; she curtsy herself . 
 that must be old Mr. Donnithorne - he always come first , the wrinkle 
 small old man , peer round with short - sighted glance at the bowing 
 and curtsying congregation ; then she know Miss Lydia be pass , 
 and though Hetty like so much to look at her fashionable little 
 coal - scuttle bonnet , with the wreath of small rose round it , she do not 
 mind it to - day . but there be no more curtsy - no , he be not come ; 
 she feel sure there be nothing else pass the pew door but the 
 house - keeper 's black bonnet and the lady 's maid 's beautiful straw hat 
 that have once be Miss Lydia 's , and then the powdered head of the 
 butler and footman . no , he be not there ; yet she would look now - she 
 might be mistake - for , after all , she have not look . so she lift 
 up her eyelid and glance timidly at the cushion pew in the 
 chancel - there be no one but old Mr. Donnithorne rub his spectacle 
 with his white handkerchief , and Miss Lydia open the large gilt - edge 
 prayer - book . the chill disappointment be too hard to bear . she feel 
 herself turn pale , her lip tremble ; she be ready to cry . oh , what 
 should she do ? everybody would know the reason ; they would know she be 
 cry because Arthur be not there . and Mr. Craig , with the wonderful 
 hothouse plant in his button - hole , be star at she , she know . it be 
 dreadfully long before the General Confession begin , so that she could 
 kneel down . two great drop would fall then , but no one see they except 
 good - natured Molly , for her aunt and uncle kneel with their back 
 towards she . molly , unable to imagine any cause for tear in church 
 except faintness , of which she have a vague traditional knowledge , draw 
 out of her pocket a queer little flat blue smell - bottle , and after 
 much labour in pull the cork out , thrust the narrow neck against 
 Hetty 's nostril . " it donna smell , " she whisper , think this be a 
 great advantage which old salt have over fresh one : they do you good 
 without bite your nose . Hetty push it away peevishly ; but this 
 little flash of temper do what the salt could not have do - it rouse 
 she to wipe away the trace of her tear , and try with all her might 
 not to shed any more . Hetty have a certain strength in her vain little 
 nature : she would have bear anything rather than be laugh at , or 
 point at with any other feeling than admiration ; she would have 
 press her own nail into her tender flesh rather than people should 
 know a secret she do not want they to know . 
 what fluctuation there be in her busy thought and feeling , while 
 Mr. Irwine be pronounce the solemn " Absolution " in her deaf ear , and 
 through all the tone of petition that follow ! anger lie very close to 
 disappointment , and soon win the victory over the conjecture her 
 small ingenuity could devise to account for Arthur 's absence on the 
 supposition that he really want to come , really want to see she 
 again . and by the time she rise from her knee mechanically , because all 
 the rest be rise , the colour have return to her cheek even with 
 a heighten glow , for she be frame little indignant speech to 
 herself , say she hat Arthur for give she this pain - she would 
 like he to suffer too . yet while this selfish tumult be go on in 
 her soul , her eye be bent down on her prayer - book , and the eyelid 
 with their dark fringe look as lovely as ever . Adam Bede think so , 
 as he glance at she for a moment on rise from his knee . 
 but Adam 's thought of Hetty do not deafen he to the service ; they 
 rather blend with all the other deep feeling for which the church 
 service be a channel to he this afternoon , as a certain consciousness 
 of our entire past and our imagined future blend itself with all our 
 moment of keen sensibility . and to Adam the church service be the 
 good channel he could have find for his mingled regret , yearning , and 
 resignation ; its interchange of beseech cry for help with outburst 
 of faith and praise , its recurrent response and the familiar rhythm of 
 its collect , seem to speak for he as no other form of worship could 
 have do ; as , to those early Christians who have worship from their 
 childhood upwards in catacomb , the torch - light and shadow must have 
 seem near the divine presence than the heathenish daylight of the 
 street . the secret of our emotion never lie in the bare object , but 
 in its subtle relation to our own past : no wonder the secret escape 
 the unsympathize observer , who might as well put on his spectacle to 
 discern odour . 
 but there be one reason why even a chance comer would have find the 
 service in Hayslope Church more impressive than in most other village 
 nook in the kingdom - a reason of which I be sure you have not the 
 slight suspicion . it be the reading of our friend Joshua Rann . where 
 that good shoemaker get his notion of reading from remain a mystery 
 even to his most intimate acquaintance . I believe , after all , he get it 
 chiefly from Nature , who have pour some of her music into this honest 
 conceited soul , as she have be know to do into other narrow soul 
 before his . she have give he , at least , a fine bass voice and a musical 
 ear ; but I can not positively say whether these alone have suffice to 
 inspire he with the rich chant in which he deliver the response . 
 the way he roll from a rich deep forte into a melancholy cadence , 
 subsiding , at the end of the last word , into a sort of faint resonance , 
 like the linger vibration of a fine violoncello , I can compare to 
 nothing for its strong calm melancholy but the rush and cadence of the 
 wind among the autumn bough . this may seem a strange mode of speak 
 about the reading of a parish clerk - a man in rusty spectacle , with 
 stubbly hair , a large occiput , and a prominent crown . but that be 
 Nature 's way : she will allow a gentleman of splendid physiognomy and 
 poetic aspiration to sing woefully out of tune , and not give he the 
 slight hint of it ; and take care that some narrow - browed fellow , 
 troll a ballad in the corner of a pot - house , shall be as true to his 
 interval as a bird . 
 Joshua himself be less proud of his reading than of his singing , and it 
 be always with a sense of heighten importance that he pass from the 
 desk to the choir . still more to - day : it be a special occasion , for an 
 old man , familiar to all the parish , have die a sad death - not in his 
 bed , a circumstance the most painful to the mind of the peasant - and 
 now the funeral psalm be to be sing in memory of his sudden departure . 
 moreover , Bartle Massey be not at church , and Joshua 's importance in 
 the choir suffer no eclipse . it be a solemn minor strain they sing . 
 the old psalm - tune have many a wail among they , and the word - 
 Thou sweep'st we off as with a flood ; 
 we vanish hence like dream - 
 seem to have a close application than usual in the death of poor 
 Thias . the mother and son listen , each with peculiar feeling . 
 Lisbeth have a vague belief that the psalm be do her husband good ; it 
 be part of that decent burial which she would have think it a great 
 wrong to withhold from he than to have cause he many unhappy day 
 while he be live . the more there be say about her husband , the 
 more there be do for he , surely the safe he would be . it be poor 
 Lisbeth 's blind way of feel that human love and pity be a ground of 
 faith in some other love . Seth , who be easily touch , shed tear , and 
 try to recall , as he have do continually since his father 's death , 
 all that he have hear of the possibility that a single moment of 
 consciousness at the last might be a moment of pardon and reconcilement ; 
 for be it not write in the very psalm they be sing that the 
 divine dealing be not measure and circumscribe by time ? Adam have 
 never be unable to join in a psalm before . he have know plenty of 
 trouble and vexation since he have be a lad , but this be the first 
 sorrow that have hem in his voice , and strangely enough it be sorrow 
 because the chief source of his past trouble and vexation be for ever 
 go out of his reach . he have not be able to press his father 's 
 hand before their parting , and say , " Father , you know it be all right 
 between we ; I never forget what I owe you when I be a lad ; you forgive 
 I if I have be too hot and hasty now and then ! " Adam think but 
 little to - day of the hard work and the earning he have spend on his 
 father : his thought run constantly on what the old man 's feeling have 
 be in moment of humiliation , when he have hold down his head before 
 the rebuke of his son . when our indignation be bear in submissive 
 silence , we be apt to feel twinge of doubt afterwards as to our own 
 generosity , if not justice ; how much more when the object of our anger 
 have go into everlasting silence , and we have see his face for the 
 last time in the meekness of death ! 
 " ah ! I be always too hard , " Adam say to himself . " it be a sore fault in 
 I as I be so hot and out o ' patience with people when they do wrong , and 
 my heart get shut up against them , so as I can not   bring myself to forgive 
 them . I see clear enough there be more pride nor love in my soul , for I 
 could soon make a thousand stroke with th ' hammer for my father than 
 bring myself to say a kind word to he . and there go plenty o ' pride 
 and temper to the stroke , as the devil will be have his finger in 
 what we call our duty as well as our sin . mayhap the good thing I 
 ever do in my life be only do what be easy for myself . it be 
 allay be easy for I to work nor to sit still , but the real tough 
 job for I ' ud be to master my own will and temper and go right against 
 my own pride . it seem to I now , if I be to find Father at home 
 to - night , I should behave different ; but there be no knowing - perhaps 
 nothing ' ud be a lesson to we if it do not   come too late . it be well we 
 should feel as life be a reckoning we can not   make twice over ; there be 
 no real making amend in this world , any more nor you can mend a wrong 
 subtraction by do your addition right . " 
 this be the key - note to which Adam 's thought have perpetually return 
 since his father 's death , and the solemn wail of the funeral psalm 
 be only an influence that bring back the old thought with strong 
 emphasis . so be the sermon , which Mr. Irwine have choose with reference 
 to Thias 's funeral . it speak briefly and simply of the word , " in the 
 midst of life we be in death " - how the present moment be all we can 
 call our own for work of mercy , of righteous dealing , and of family 
 tenderness . all very old truth - but what we think the old truth 
 become the most startling to we in the week when we have look on the 
 dead face of one who have make a part of our own life . for when man want 
 to impress we with the effect of a new and wonderfully vivid light , do 
 they not let it fall on the most familiar object , that we may measure 
 its intensity by remember the former dimness ? 
 then come the moment of the final blessing , when the forever sublime 
 word , " the peace of God , which passeth all understanding , " seem to 
 blend with the calm afternoon sunshine that fall on the bow head of 
 the congregation ; and then the quiet rising , the mother tie on the 
 bonnet of the little maiden who have sleep through the sermon , the 
 father collect the prayer - book , until all stream out through the 
 old archway into the green churchyard and begin their neighbourly talk , 
 their simple civility , and their invitation to tea ; for on a Sunday 
 every one be ready to receive a guest - it be the day when all must be 
 in their good clothe and their good humour . 
 Mr. and Mrs. Poyser pause a minute at the church gate : they be 
 wait for Adam to come up , not be content to go away without 
 say a kind word to the widow and her son . 
 " well , Mrs. Bede , " say Mrs. Poyser , as they walk on together , " you 
 must keep up your heart ; husband and wife must be content when they have 
 live to rear their child and see one another 's hair grey . " 
 " aye , aye , " say Mr. Poyser ; " they wonna have long to wait for one 
 another then , anyhow . and ye've   get two o ' the strapping'st son I ' 
 th ' country ; and well you may , for I remember poor Thias as fine a 
 broad - shoulder fellow as need to be ; and as for you , Mrs. Bede , why 
 you be straighter I ' the back nor half the young woman now . " 
 " eh , " say Lisbeth , " it be poor luck for the platter to wear well when 
 it be broke I ' two . the soon I be lay under the thorn the well . I be 
 no good to nobody now . " 
 Adam never take notice of his mother 's little unjust plaint ; but Seth 
 say , " Nay , Mother , thee mustna say so . thy son ' ull never get another 
 mother . " 
 " that be true , lad , that be true , " say Mr. Poyser ; " and it be wrong on we 
 to give way to grief , Mrs. Bede ; for it be like the child cryin ' when 
 the father and mother take thing from them . there be one above know 
 well nor we . " 
 " ah , " say Mrs. Poyser , " an ' it be poor work allay settin ' the dead 
 above the livin ' . we shall all on we be dead some time , I reckon - it ' ud 
 be well if folk ' ud make much on we beforehand , i'stid o ' beginnin ' 
 when we be go . it be but little good you will do a - water the last 
 year 's crop . " 
 " well , Adam , " say Mr. Poyser , feel that his wife 's word be , 
 as usual , rather incisive than soothe , and that it would be well to 
 change the subject , " you will come and see we again now , I hope . I hanna 
 have a talk with you this long while , and the missis here want you to 
 see what can be do with her good spinning - wheel , for it be get break , 
 and it will be a nice job to mend it - there will want a bit o ' turning . 
 you will come as soon as you can now , will you ? " 
 Mr. Poyser pause and look round while he be speak , as if to see 
 where Hetty be ; for the child be run on before . Hetty be not 
 without a companion , and she have , besides , more pink and white about 
 she than ever , for she hold in her hand the wonderful pink - and - white 
 hot - house plant , with a very long name - a Scotch name , she suppose , 
 since people say Mr. Craig the gardener be Scotch . Adam take the 
 opportunity of look round too ; and I be sure you will not require of 
 he that he should feel any vexation in observe a pouting expression 
 on Hetty 's face as she listen to the gardener 's small talk . yet in her 
 secret heart she be glad to have he by her side , for she would perhaps 
 learn from he how it be Arthur have not come to church . not that she 
 care to ask he the question , but she hop the information would be 
 give spontaneously ; for Mr. Craig , like a superior man , be very fond 
 of give information . 
 Mr. Craig be never aware that his conversation and advance be 
 receive coldly , for to shift one 's point of view beyond certain limit 
 be impossible to the most liberal and expansive mind ; we be none of 
 we aware of the impression we produce on brazilian monkey of feeble 
 understanding - it be possible they see hardly anything in we . moreover , 
 Mr. Craig be a man of sober passion , and be already in his tenth 
 year of hesitation as to the relative advantage of matrimony and 
 bachelorhood . it be true that , now and then , when he have be a little 
 heated by an extra glass of grog , he have be hear to say of Hetty 
 that the " lass be well enough , " and that " a man might do bad " ; but on 
 convivial occasion man be apt to express themselves strongly . 
 Martin Poyser hold Mr. Craig in honour , as a man who " know his business " 
 and who have great light concern soil and compost ; but he be 
 less of a favourite with Mrs. Poyser , who have more than once say in 
 confidence to her husband , " you be mighty fond o ' Craig , but for my 
 part , I think he be welly like a cock as think the sun 's rose o ' purpose 
 to hear he crow . " for the rest , Mr. Craig be an estimable gardener , 
 and be not without reason for have a high opinion of himself . he 
 have also high shoulder and high cheek - bone and hang his head forward 
 a little , as he walk along with his hand in his breech pocket . I 
 think it be his pedigree only that have the advantage of be Scotch , 
 and not his " bring up " ; for except that he have a strong burr in 
 his accent , his speech differ little from that of the Loamshire people 
 about he . but a gardener be Scotch , as a french teacher be parisian . 
 " well , Mr. Poyser , " he say , before the good slow farmer have time to 
 speak , " ye'll not be carry your hay to - morrow , I be think . the 
 glass stick at ' change , ' and ye may rely upo ' my word as we will ha ' more 
 downfall afore twenty - four hour be past . ye see that darkish - blue cloud 
 there upo ' the ' rizon - ye know what I mean by the ' rizon , where the land 
 and sky seem to meet ? " 
 " aye , aye , I see the cloud , " say Mr. Poyser , " ' rizon or no ' rizon . it be 
 right o'er Mike Holdsworth 's fallow , and a foul fallow it be . " 
 " well , you mark my word , as that cloud ' ull spread o'er the sky pretty 
 nigh as quick as you would spread a tarpaulin over one o ' your hay - rick . 
 it be a great thing to ha ' study the look o ' the cloud . Lord bless 
 you ! th ' met'orological almaneck can learn I nothing , but there be a 
 pretty sight o ' thing I could let they up to , if they would just come 
 to I . and how be you , Mrs. Poyser ? - think o ' getherin ' the red 
 currant soon , I reckon . you have a deal well gether them afore they be 
 o'erripe , wi ' such weather as we have   get to look forward to . how do ye 
 do , Mistress Bede ? " Mr. Craig continue , without a pause , nod by the 
 way to Adam and Seth . " I hope y ' enjoy they spinach and gooseberry 
 as I send Chester with th ' other day . if ye want vegetable while ye're 
 in trouble , ye know where to come to . it be well known I be not give 
 other folk ' thing away , for when I have   supply the house , the garden 
 s my own spekilation , and it isna every man th ' old squire could get 
 as ' ud be equil to the undertaking , let alone ask whether he would be 
 willing I have   get to run my calkilation fine , I can tell you , to make 
 sure o ' get back the money as I pay the squire . I should like to see 
 some o ' they fellow as make the almaneck look as far before their 
 nose as I have   get to do every year as come . " 
 " they look pretty fur , though , " say Mr. Poyser , turn his head on one 
 side and speak in rather a subdue reverential tone . " why , what could 
 come truer nor that pictur o ' the cock wi ' the big spur , as have get its 
 head knock down wi ' th ' anchor , an ' th ' firin ' , an ' the ship behind ? 
 why , that pictur be make afore Christmas , and yit it be come as true 
 as th ' Bible . why , th ' cock 's France , an ' th ' anchor 's Nelson - an ' they 
 tell we that beforehand . " 
 " Pee - ee - eh ! " say Mr. Craig . " a man doesna want to see fur to know as 
 th ' English ' ull beat the French . why , I know upo ' good authority as 
 it be a big Frenchman as reach five foot high , an ' they live upo ' 
 spoon - meat mostly . I know a man as his father have a particular knowledge 
 o ' the French . I should like to know what they grasshopper be to 
 do against such fine fellow as our young Captain Arthur . why , it 
 ' ud astonish a frenchman only to look at he ; his arm 's thick nor a 
 Frenchman 's body , I will be bind , for they pinch theirsell in wi ' stay ; 
 and it be easy enough , for they have   get nothing I ' their inside . " 
 " where be the captain , as he wasna at church to - day ? " say Adam . " I be 
 talk to he o ' Friday , and he say nothing about his go away . " 
 " oh , he be only go to Eagledale for a bit o ' fishing ; I reckon he will be 
 back again afore many day be o'er , for he be to be at all th ' arrange 
 and prepare o ' thing for the comin ' o ' age o ' the 30th o ' July . 
 but he be fond o ' get away for a bit , now and then . he and th ' old 
 squire fit one another like frost and flower . " 
 Mr. Craig smile and wink slowly as he make this last observation , 
 but the subject be not develop far , for now they have reach the 
 turning in the road where Adam and his companion must say " good - bye . " 
 the gardener , too , would have have to turn off in the same direction if 
 he have not accept Mr. Poyser 's invitation to tea . Mrs. Poyser duly 
 second the invitation , for she would have hold it a deep disgrace not 
 to make her neighbour welcome to her house : personal like and dislike 
 must not interfere with that sacred custom . moreover , Mr. Craig have 
 always be full of civility to the family at the Hall Farm , and Mrs. 
 Poyser be scrupulous in declare that she have " nothing to say again ' 
 he , on'y it be a pity he couldna be hatch o'er again , an ' hatched 
 different . " 
 so Adam and Seth , with their mother between they , wound their way down 
 to the valley and up again to the old house , where a sadden memory have 
 take the place of a long , long anxiety - where Adam would never have to 
 ask again as he enter , " where be Father ? " 
 and the other family party , with Mr. Craig for company , go back to 
 the pleasant bright house - place at the Hall Farm - all with quiet mind , 
 except Hetty , who know now where Arthur be go , but be only the 
 more puzzled and uneasy . for it appear that his absence be quite 
 voluntary ; he need not have go - he would not have go if he have 
 want to see she . she have a sickening sense that no lot could ever 
 be pleasant to she again if her Thursday night 's vision be not to be 
 fulfil ; and in this moment of chill , bare , wintry disappointment and 
 doubt , she look towards the possibility of be with Arthur again , 
 of meet his love glance , and hear his soft word with that eager 
 yearning which one may call the " grow pain " of passion . 
 Chapter XIX 
 Adam on a Working Day 
 notwithstanding Mr. Craig 's prophecy , the dark - blue cloud disperse 
 itself without have produce the threaten consequence . " the 
 weather " - as he observe the next morning - " the weather , you see , be 
 a ticklish thing , an ' a fool ' ull hit on't   sometimes when a wise man 
 miss ; that be why the almaneck get so much credit . it be one o ' they 
 chancy thing as fool thrive on . " 
 this unreasonable behaviour of the weather , however , could displease no 
 one else in Hayslope besides Mr. Craig . all hand be to be out in 
 the meadow this morning as soon as the dew have rise ; the wife and 
 daughter do double work in every farmhouse , that the maid might give 
 their help in toss the hay ; and when Adam be march along the 
 lane , with his basket of tool over his shoulder , he catch the sound 
 of jocose talk and ringing laughter from behind the hedge . the jocose 
 talk of hay - maker be good at a distance ; like those clumsy bell round 
 the cow ' neck , it have rather a coarse sound when it come close , 
 and may even grate on your ear painfully ; but hear from far off , it 
 mingle very prettily with the other joyous sound of nature . man 's 
 muscle move well when their soul be make merry music , though 
 their merriment be of a poor blundering sort , not at all like the 
 merriment of bird . 
 and perhaps there be no time in a summer 's day more cheering than when 
 the warmth of the sun be just begin to triumph over the freshness 
 of the morning - when there be just a lingering hint of early coolness 
 to keep off languor under the delicious influence of warmth . the reason 
 Adam be walk along the lane at this time be because his work for 
 the rest of the day lie at a country - house about three mile off , which 
 be be put in repair for the son of a neighbouring squire ; and he 
 have be busy since early morning with the packing of panel , door , 
 and chimney - piece , in a waggon which be now go on before he , while 
 Jonathan Burge himself have ride to the spot on horseback , to await its 
 arrival and direct the workman . 
 this little walk be a rest to Adam , and he be unconsciously under 
 the charm of the moment . it be summer morning in his heart , and he see 
 Hetty in the sunshine - a sunshine without glare , with slant ray 
 that tremble between the delicate shadow of the leaf . he think , 
 yesterday when he put out his hand to she as they come out of church , 
 that there be a touch of melancholy kindness in her face , such as he 
 have not see before , and he take it as a sign that she have some sympathy 
 with his family trouble . poor fellow ! that touch of melancholy come from 
 quite another source , but how be he to know ? we look at the one little 
 woman 's face we love as we look at the face of our mother earth , and see 
 all sort of answer to our own yearning . it be impossible for Adam 
 not to feel that what have happen in the last week have bring the 
 prospect of marriage near to he . Hitherto he have feel keenly the 
 danger that some other man might step in and get possession of Hetty 's 
 heart and hand , while he himself be still in a position that make he 
 shrink from ask she to accept he . even if he have have a strong hope 
 that she be fond of he - and his hope be far from be strong - he 
 have be too heavily burden with other claim to provide a home for 
 himself and Hetty - a home such as he could expect she to be content with 
 after the comfort and plenty of the Farm . like all strong nature , Adam 
 have confidence in his ability to achieve something in the future ; he 
 feel sure he should some day , if he live , be able to maintain a family 
 and make a good broad path for himself ; but he have too cool a head not 
 to estimate to the full the obstacle that be to be overcome . and the 
 time would be so long ! and there be Hetty , like a bright - cheek apple 
 hang over the orchard wall , within sight of everybody , and everybody 
 must long for she ! to be sure , if she love he very much , she would be 
 content to wait for he : but do she love he ? his hope have never rise 
 so high that he have dare to ask she . he be clear - sight enough to be 
 aware that her uncle and aunt would have look kindly on his suit , and 
 indeed , without this encouragement he would never have persevere in 
 go to the Farm ; but it be impossible to come to any but fluctuate 
 conclusion about Hetty 's feeling . she be like a kitten , and have the 
 same distractingly pretty look , that mean nothing , for everybody that 
 come near she . 
 but now he could not help say to himself that the heavy part of 
 his burden be remove , and that even before the end of another year 
 his circumstance might be bring into a shape that would allow he to 
 think of marry . it would always be a hard struggle with his mother , 
 he know : she would be jealous of any wife he might choose , and she have 
 set her mind especially against Hetty - perhaps for no other reason than 
 that she suspect Hetty to be the woman he have choose . it would never 
 do , he fear , for his mother to live in the same house with he when 
 he be marry ; and yet how hard she would think it if he ask she to 
 leave he ! yes , there be a great deal of pain to be go through with 
 his mother , but it be a case in which he must make she feel that his 
 will be strong - it would be well for she in the end . for himself , 
 he would have like that they should all live together till Seth be 
 married , and they might have build a bit themselves to the old house , 
 and make more room . he do not like " to part wi ' th ' lad " : they have 
 hardly every be separate for more than a day since they be bear . 
 but Adam have no soon catch his imagination leap forward in this 
 way - make arrangement for an uncertain future - than he check 
 himself . " a pretty building I be make , without either brick or 
 timber . I be up I ' the garret a'ready , and have not   so much as dig the 
 foundation . " whenever Adam be strongly convinced of any proposition , it 
 take the form of a principle in his mind : it be knowledge to be act 
 on , as much as the knowledge that damp will cause rust . perhaps here lay 
 the secret of the hardness he have accuse himself of : he have too 
 little fellow - feeling with the weakness that err in spite of foreseen 
 consequence . without this fellow - feeling , how be we to get enough 
 patience and charity towards our stumbling , fall companion in the 
 long and changeful journey ? and there be but one way in which a strong 
 determined soul can learn it - by get his heart - string bind 
 round the weak and err , so that he must share not only the outward 
 consequence of their error , but their inward suffering . that be a long 
 and hard lesson , and Adam have at present only learn the alphabet of it 
 in his father 's sudden death , which , by annihilate in an instant all 
 that have stimulate his indignation , have send a sudden rush of thought 
 and memory over what have claim his pity and tenderness . 
 but it be Adam 's strength , not its correlative hardness , that 
 influence his meditation this morning . he have long make up his mind 
 that it would be wrong as well as foolish for he to marry a blooming 
 young girl , so long as he have no other prospect than that of grow 
 poverty with a grow family . and his saving have be so constantly 
 draw upon   besides the terrible sweep of pay for Seth 's substitute 
 in the militia   that he have not enough money beforehand to furnish even 
 a small cottage , and keep something in reserve against a rainy day . he 
 have good hope that he should be " firm on his leg " by and by ; but he 
 could not be satisfied with a vague confidence in his arm and brain ; he 
 must have definite plan , and set about they at once . the partnership 
 with Jonathan Burge be not to be think of at present - there be 
 thing implicitly tack to it that he could not accept ; but Adam 
 think that he and Seth might carry on a little business for themselves 
 in addition to their journeyman 's work , by buy a small stock of 
 superior wood and make article of household furniture , for which Adam 
 have no end of contrivance . Seth might gain more by work at separate 
 job under Adam 's direction than by his journeyman 's work , and Adam , 
 in his overhour , could do all the " nice " work that require peculiar 
 skill . the money gain in this way , with the good wage he receive 
 as foreman , would soon enable they to get beforehand with the world , 
 so sparingly as they would all live now . no soon have this little 
 plan shape itself in his mind than he begin to be busy with exact 
 calculation about the wood to be buy and the particular article of 
 furniture that should be undertake first - a kitchen cupboard of his 
 own contrivance , with such an ingenious arrangement of slide - door and 
 bolt , such convenient nook for stow household provender , and such 
 a symmetrical result to the eye , that every good housewife would be 
 in rapture with it , and fall through all the gradation of melancholy 
 longing till her husband promise to buy it for she . Adam picture to 
 himself Mrs. Poyser examine it with her keen eye and try in vain to 
 find out a deficiency ; and , of course , close to Mrs. Poyser stand Hetty , 
 and Adam be again beguile from calculation and contrivance into 
 dream and hope . yes , he would go and see she this evening - it be so 
 long since he have be at the Hall Farm . he would have like to go 
 to the night - school , to see why Bartle Massey have not be at church 
 yesterday , for he fear his old friend be ill ; but , unless he could 
 manage both visit , this last must be put off till to - morrow - the desire 
 to be near Hetty and to speak to she again be too strong . 
 as he make up his mind to this , he be come very near to the end of 
 his walk , within the sound of the hammer at work on the refitting of 
 the old house . the sound of tool to a clever workman who love his work 
 be like the tentative sound of the orchestra to the violinist who 
 have to bear his part in the overture : the strong fibre begin their 
 accustomed thrill , and what be a moment before joy , vexation , or 
 ambition , begin its change into energy . all passion become strength 
 when it have an outlet from the narrow limit of our personal lot in the 
 labour of our right arm , the cunning of our right hand , or the still , 
 creative activity of our thought . look at Adam through the rest of the 
 day , as he stand on the scaffolding with the two - foot ruler in 
 his hand , whistle low while he consider how a difficulty about a 
 floor - joist or a window - frame be to be overcome ; or as he push one of 
 the young workman aside and take his place in upheave a weight of 
 timber , say , " let alone , lad ! Thee'st get too much gristle I ' thy 
 bone yet " ; or as he fix his keen black eye on the motion of a 
 workman on the other side of the room and warn he that his distance 
 be not right . look at this broad - shoulder man with the bare muscular 
 arm , and the thick , firm , black hair toss about like trodden 
 meadow - grass whenever he take off his paper cap , and with the strong 
 barytone voice burst every now and then into loud and solemn 
 psalm - tune , as if seek an outlet for superfluous strength , yet 
 presently check himself , apparently cross by some thought which 
 jar with the singing . perhaps , if you have not be already in 
 the secret , you might not have guess what sad memory what warm 
 affection , what tender flutter hope , have their home in this athletic 
 body with the broken finger - nail - in this rough man , who know no well 
 lyric than he could find in the Old and New Version and an occasional 
 hymn ; who know the small possible amount of profane history ; and for 
 whom the motion and shape of the earth , the course of the sun , and the 
 change of the season lie in the region of mystery just make visible by 
 fragmentary knowledge . it have cost Adam a great deal of trouble and 
 work in overhour to know what he know over and above the secret of his 
 handicraft , and that acquaintance with mechanic and figure , and the 
 nature of the material he work with , which be make easy to he by 
 inborn inherit faculty - to get the mastery of his pen , and write a 
 plain hand , to spell without any other mistake than must in fairness be 
 attribute to the unreasonable character of orthography rather than to 
 any deficiency in the speller , and , moreover , to learn his musical note 
 and part - singing . besides all this , he have read his Bible , include 
 the apocryphal book ; Poor Richard 's Almanac , Taylor 's Holy Living and 
 Dying , the Pilgrim 's Progress , with Bunyan 's Life and Holy War , a great 
 deal of Bailey 's Dictionary , Valentine and Orson , and part of a history 
 of Babylon , which Bartle Massey have lend he . he might have have many 
 more book from Bartle Massey , but he have no time for read " the 
 commin print , " as Lisbeth call it , so busy as he be with figure in 
 all the leisure moment which he do not fill up with extra carpentry . 
 Adam , you perceive , be by no mean a marvellous man , nor , properly 
 speaking , a genius , yet I will not pretend that his be an ordinary 
 character among workman ; and it would not be at all a safe conclusion 
 that the next good man you may happen to see with a basket of tool over 
 his shoulder and a paper cap on his head have the strong conscience and 
 the strong sense , the blend susceptibility and self - command , of our 
 friend Adam . he be not an average man . yet such man as he be rear 
 here and there in every generation of our peasant artisan - with an 
 inheritance of affection nurture by a simple family life of common 
 need and common industry , and an inheritance of faculty train 
 in skilful courageous labour : they make their way upwards , rarely as 
 genius , most commonly as painstaking honest man , with the skill and 
 conscience to do well the task that lie before they . their life have 
 no discernible echo beyond the neighbourhood where they dwelt , but you 
 be almost sure to find there some good piece of road , some building , 
 some application of mineral produce , some improvement in farming 
 practice , some reform of parish abuse , with which their name be 
 associate by one or two generation after they . their employer be 
 the rich for they , the work of their hand have wear well , and the work 
 of their brain have guide well the hand of other man . they go about 
 in their youth in flannel or paper cap , in coat black with coal - dust 
 or streak with lime and red paint ; in old age their white hair be 
 see in a place of honour at church and at market , and they tell their 
 well - dress son and daughter , seat round the bright hearth on 
 winter evening , how pleased they be when they first earn their 
 twopence a - day . other there be who die poor and never put off the 
 workman 's coal on weekday . they have not have the art of get rich , 
 but they be man of trust , and when they die before the work be all out 
 of they , it be as if some main screw have get loose in a machine ; the 
 master who employ they say , " where shall I find their like ? " 
 chapter XX 
 Adam visit the Hall Farm 
 ADAM come back from his work in the empty waggon - that be why he have 
 change his clothe - and be ready to set out to the Hall Farm when it 
 still want a quarter to seven . 
 " what be thee get thy Sunday cloose on for ? " say Lisbeth complainingly , 
 as he come downstairs . " Thee artna go to th ' school I ' thy good 
 coat ? " 
 " no , Mother , " say Adam , quietly . " I be go to the Hall Farm , but 
 mayhap I may go to the school after , so thee mustna wonder if I be a 
 bit late . Seth ' ull be at home in half an hour - he be only go to the 
 village ; so thee wutna mind . " 
 " eh , an ' what be thee get thy good cloose on for to go to th ' Hall Farm ? 
 the Poyser folk see'd thee in them yesterday , I warrand . what dost mean 
 by turnin ' worki'day into Sunday a - that'n ? it be poor keepin ' company wi ' 
 folk as donna like to see thee I ' thy workin ' jacket . " 
 " good - bye , mother , I can not   stay , " say Adam , put on his hat and 
 go out . 
 but he have no soon go a few pace beyond the door than Lisbeth 
 become uneasy at the thought that she have vex he . of course , the 
 secret of her objection to the good clothe be her suspicion that they 
 be put on for Hetty 's sake ; but deeply than all her peevishness lie 
 the need that her son should love she . she hurry after he , and lay 
 hold of his arm before he have get half - way down to the brook , and say , 
 " Nay , my lad , thee wutna go away angered wi ' thy mother , an ' she get 
 nought to do but to sit by hersen an ' think on thee ? " 
 " Nay , nay , Mother , " say Adam , gravely , and stand still while he put 
 his arm on her shoulder , " I be not anger . but I wish , for thy own sake , 
 thee'dst be more contented to let I do what I have   make up my mind to do . 
 I will never be no other than a good son to thee as long as we live . but a 
 man have other feeling besides what he owe to 's father and mother , and 
 thee oughtna to want to rule over I body and soul . and thee must make 
 up thy mind as I will not give way to thee where I have   a right to do what I 
 like . so let we have no more word about it . " 
 " eh , " say Lisbeth , not willing to show that she feel the real bearing 
 of Adam 's word , " and ' who like to see thee I ' thy good cloose well 
 nor thy mother ? an ' when thee'st get thy face wash as clean as 
 the smooth white pibble , an ' thy hair comb so nice , and thy eye 
 a - sparklin ' - what else be there as thy old mother should like to look at 
 half so well ? an ' thee sha't put on thy Sunday cloose when thee lik'st 
 for I - I will ne'er plague thee no moor about'n . " 
 " well , well ; good - bye , mother , " say Adam , kiss she and hurry 
 away . he see there be no other mean of put an end to the dialogue . 
 Lisbeth stand still on the spot , shade her eye and look after he 
 till he be quite out of sight . she feel to the full all the meaning 
 that have lie in Adam 's word , and , as she lose sight of he and turn 
 back slowly into the house , she say aloud to herself - for it be her 
 way to speak her thought aloud in the long day when her husband and 
 son be at their work - " eh , he will be tellin ' I as he be go to bring 
 her home one o ' these day ; an ' she will be missis o'er I , and I mun 
 look on , belike , while she use the blue - edge platter , and break 
 them , mayhap , though there be ne'er be one break sin ' my old man an ' I 
 buy them at the fair twenty ' ear come next whissuntide . eh ! " she go 
 on , still louder , as she catch up her knitting from the table , " but 
 she will ne'er knit the lad 's stockin 's , nor foot them nayther , while I 
 live ; an ' when I be go , he will bethink he as nobody ' ull ne'er fit 's 
 leg an ' foot as his old mother do . she will know nothing o ' narrowin ' an ' 
 heelin ' , I warrand , an ' she will make a long toe as he canna get 's boot 
 on . that be what come o ' marr'in ' young wench . I war go thirty , an ' 
 th ' feyther too , afore we war marry ; an ' young enough too . she will be 
 a poor dratchell by then she be thirty , a - marr'in ' a - that'n , afore her 
 tooth 's all come . " 
 Adam walk so fast that he be at the yard - gate before seven . Martin 
 Poyser and the grandfather be not yet come in from the meadow : every 
 one be in the meadow , even to the black - and - tan terrier - no one 
 keep watch in the yard but the bull - dog ; and when Adam reach the 
 house - door , which stand wide open , he see there be no one in the bright 
 clean house - place . but he guess where Mrs. Poyser and some one else 
 would be , quite within hearing ; so he knock on the door and say in 
 his strong voice , " Mrs. Poyser within ? " 
 " come in , Mr. Bede , come in , " Mrs. Poyser call out from the dairy . she 
 always give Adam this title when she receive he in her own house . 
 " you may come into the dairy if you will , for I canna justly leave the 
 cheese . " 
 Adam walk into the dairy , where Mrs. Poyser and Nancy be crush 
 the first evening cheese . 
 " why , you might think you war come to a dead - house , " say Mrs. Poyser , 
 as he stand in the open doorway ; " they be all I ' the meadow ; but 
 Martin be sure to be in afore long , for they be leave the hay cock 
 to - night , ready for carry first thing to - morrow . I have   be force 
 t ' have Nancy in , upo ' ' count as Hetty must gether the red currant 
 to - night ; the fruit allay ripen so contrairy , just when every hand 's 
 want . an ' there be no trustin ' the child to gether it , for they put 
 more into their own mouth nor into the basket ; you might as well set 
 the wasp to gether the fruit . " 
 Adam long to say he would go into the garden till Mr. Poyser come in , 
 but he be not quite courageous enough , so he say , " I could be look 
 at your spinning - wheel , then , and see what want do to it . perhaps it 
 stand in the house , where I can find it ? " 
 " no , I have   put it away in the right - hand parlour ; but let it be till 
 I can fetch it and show it you . I would be glad now if you would go into the 
 garden and tell Hetty to send Totty in . the child ' ull run in if she be 
 tell , an ' I know Hetty 's lettin ' she eat too many currant . I will be much 
 oblige to you , Mr. Bede , if you will go and send she in ; an ' there be the 
 York and Lankester rose beautiful in the garden now - you will like to see 
 them . but you would like a drink o ' whey first , p'r'aps ; I know you be fond 
 o ' whey , as most folk be when they hanna get to crush it out . " 
 " thank you , Mrs. Poyser , " say Adam ; " a drink o ' whey be allay a treat 
 to I . I would rather have it than beer any day . " 
 " aye , aye , " say Mrs. Poyser , reach a small white basin that stand on 
 the shelf , and dip it into the whey - tub , " the smell o ' bread 's 
 sweet t ' everybody but the baker . the Miss Irwines allay say , ' oh , Mrs. 
 Poyser , I envy you your dairy ; and I envy you your chicken ; and what 
 a beautiful thing a farm - house be , to be sure ! ' an ' I say , ' yes ; a 
 farm - house be a fine thing for they as look on , an ' do not   know the 
 liftin ' , an ' the stannin ' , an ' the worritin ' o ' th ' inside as belong 
 to't . ' " 
 " why , Mrs. Poyser , you would not   like to live anywhere else but in a 
 farm - house , so well as you manage it , " say Adam , take the basin ; 
 " and there can be nothing to look at pleasanter nor a fine milch cow , 
 stand up to'ts knee in pasture , and the new milk froth in the 
 pail , and the fresh butter ready for market , and the calf , and the 
 poultry . here be to your health , and may you allay have strength to look 
 after your own dairy , and set a pattern t ' all the farmer ' wife in the 
 country . " 
 Mrs. Poyser be not to be catch in the weakness of smile at a 
 compliment , but a quiet complacency over - spread her face like a stealing 
 sunbeam , and give a milder glance than usual to her blue - grey eye , 
 as she look at Adam drink the whey . ah ! I think I taste that whey 
 now - with a flavour so delicate that one can hardly distinguish it from 
 an odour , and with that soft gliding warmth that fill one 's imagination 
 with a still , happy dreaminess . and the light music of the dropping whey 
 be in my ear , mingle with the twittering of a bird outside the wire 
 network window - the window overlook the garden , and shade by tall 
 Guelder rose . 
 " have a little more , Mr. Bede ? " say Mrs. Poyser , as Adam set down the 
 basin . 
 " no , thank you ; I will go into the garden now , and send in the little 
 lass . " 
 " Aye , do ; and tell she to come to her mother in the dairy . " 
 Adam walk round by the rick - yard , at present empty of rick , to 
 the little wooden gate lead into the garden - once the well - tend 
 kitchen - garden of a manor - house ; now , but for the handsome brick wall 
 with stone cop that run along one side of it , a true farmhouse 
 garden , with hardy perennial flower , unprune fruit - tree , and kitchen 
 vegetable grow together in careless , half - neglect abundance . in 
 that leafy , flowery , bushy time , to look for any one in this garden 
 be like play at " hide - and - seek . " there be the tall hollyhock 
 begin to flower and dazzle the eye with their pink , white , and 
 yellow ; there be the syringas and Guelder rose , all large and 
 disorderly for want of trimming ; there be leafy wall of scarlet bean 
 and late pea ; there be a row of bushy filbert in one direction , 
 and in another a huge apple - tree make a barren circle under its 
 low - spread bough . but what signify a barren patch or two ? the 
 garden be so large . there be always a superfluity of broad bean - it 
 take nine or ten of Adam 's stride to get to the end of the uncut grass 
 walk that run by the side of they ; and as for other vegetable , there 
 be so much more room than be necessary for they that in the rotation 
 of crop a large flourish bed of groundsel be of yearly occurrence 
 on one spot or other . the very rose - tree at which Adam stop to pluck 
 one look as if they grow wild ; they be all huddle together in bushy 
 mass , now flaunt with wide - open petal , almost all of they of the 
 streaked pink - and - white kind , which doubtless date from the union 
 of the house of York and Lancaster . Adam be wise enough to choose a 
 compact Provence rise that peep out half - smother by its flaunting 
 scentless neighbour , and hold it in his hand - he think he should be 
 more at ease hold something in his hand - as he walk on to the far 
 end of the garden , where he remember there be the large row of 
 currant - tree , not far off from the great yew - tree arbour . 
 but he have not go many step beyond the rose , when he hear the 
 shaking of a bough , and a boy 's voice say , " now , then , Totty , hold 
 out your pinny - there be a duck . " 
 the voice come from the bough of a tall cherry - tree , where Adam have 
 no difficulty in discern a small blue - pinafore figure perch in a 
 commodious position where the fruit be thick . Doubtless Totty be 
 below , behind the screen of pea . yes - with her bonnet hang down her 
 back , and her fat face , dreadfully smear with red juice , turn up 
 towards the cherry - tree , while she hold her little round hole of a mouth 
 and her red - stain pinafore to receive the promise downfall . I be 
 sorry to say , more than half the cherry that fall be hard and yellow 
 instead of juicy and red ; but Totty spend no time in useless regret , 
 and she be already suck the third juiciest when Adam say , " there 
 now , Totty , you have   get your cherry . run into the house with them to 
 Mother - she want you - she be in the dairy . run in this minute - there be a 
 good little girl . " 
 he lift she up in his strong arm and kiss she as he speak , 
 a ceremony which Totty regard as a tiresome interruption to 
 cherry - eating ; and when he set she down she trot off quite silently 
 towards the house , suck her cherry as she go along . 
 " Tommy , my lad , take care you be not shoot for a little thieving bird , " 
 say Adam , as he walk on towards the currant - tree . 
 he could see there be a large basket at the end of the row : Hetty would 
 not be far off , and Adam already feel as if she be look at he . yet 
 when he turn the corner she be stand with she back towards he , 
 and stoop to gather the low - hang fruit . strange that she have 
 not hear he come ! perhaps it be because she be make the 
 leave rustle . she start when she become conscious that some one be 
 near - start so violently that she drop the basin with the currant 
 in it , and then , when she see it be Adam , she turn from pale to deep 
 red . that blush make his heart beat with a new happiness . Hetty have 
 never blush at see he before . 
 " I frighten you , " he say , with a delicious sense that it do not 
 signify what he say , since Hetty seem to feel as much as he do ; " let 
 I pick the currant up . " 
 that be soon do , for they have only fall in a tangled mass on the 
 grass - plot , and Adam , as he rise and give she the basin again , look 
 straight into her eye with the subdue tenderness that belong to the 
 first moment of hopeful love . 
 Hetty do not turn away her eye ; her blush have subside , and she meet 
 his glance with a quiet sadness , which content Adam because it be so 
 unlike anything he have see in she before . 
 " there be not many more currant to get , " she say ; " I shall soon ha ' 
 do now . " 
 " I will help you , " say Adam ; and he fetch the large basket , which be 
 nearly full of currant , and set it close to they . 
 not a word more be speak as they gather the currant . Adam 's heart 
 be too full to speak , and he think Hetty know all that be in it . she 
 be not indifferent to his presence after all ; she have blush when she 
 see he , and then there be that touch of sadness about she which must 
 surely mean love , since it be the opposite of her usual manner , which 
 have often impress he as indifference . and he could glance at she 
 continually as she bend over the fruit , while the level evening sunbeam 
 steal through the thick apple - tree bough , and rest on her round cheek 
 and neck as if they too be in love with she . it be to Adam the time 
 that a man can least forget in after - life , the time when he believe 
 that the first woman he have ever love betray by a slight something - a 
 word , a tone , a glance , the quivering of a lip or an eyelid - that she be 
 at least begin to love he in return . the sign be so slight , it 
 be scarcely perceptible to the ear or eye - he could describe it to no 
 one - it be a mere feather - touch , yet it seem to have change his 
 whole being , to have merge an uneasy yearning into a delicious 
 unconsciousness of everything but the present moment . so much of our 
 early gladness vanishe utterly from our memory : we can never recall the 
 joy with which we lay our head on our mother 's bosom or ride on our 
 father 's back in childhood . doubtless that joy be work up into our 
 nature , as the sunlight of long - past morning be work up in the soft 
 mellowness of the apricot , but it be go for ever from our imagination , 
 and we can only believe in the joy of childhood . but the first glad 
 moment in our first love be a vision which return to we to the last , 
 and bring with it a thrill of feel intense and special as the 
 recurrent sensation of a sweet odour breathe in a far - off hour 
 of happiness . it be a memory that give a more exquisite touch to 
 tenderness , that feed the madness of jealousy and add the last 
 keenness to the agony of despair . 
 Hetty bend over the red bunch , the level ray pierce the screen 
 of apple - tree bough , the length of bushy garden beyond , his own emotion 
 as he look at she and believe that she be think of he , and that 
 there be no need for they to talk - Adam remember it all to the last 
 moment of his life . 
 and Hetty ? you know quite well that Adam be mistake about she . like 
 many other man , he think the sign of love for another be sign of 
 love towards himself . when Adam be approach unseen by she , she be 
 absorb as usual in think and wonder about Arthur 's possible 
 return . the sound of any man 's footstep would have affect she just in 
 the same way - she would have FELT it might be Arthur before she have time 
 to see , and the blood that forsook her cheek in the agitation of that 
 momentary feeling would have rush back again at the sight of any one 
 else just as much as at the sight of Adam . he be not wrong in think 
 that a change have come over Hetty : the anxiety and fear of a first 
 passion , with which she be tremble , have become strong than vanity , 
 have give she for the first time that sense of helpless dependence on 
 another 's feeling which awaken the clinging deprecate womanhood even 
 in the shallow girl that can ever experience it , and create in her a 
 sensibility to kindness which find she quite hard before . for the first 
 time Hetty feel that there be something soothing to she in Adam 's timid 
 yet manly tenderness . she want to be treat lovingly - oh , it be 
 very hard to bear this blank of absence , silence , apparent indifference , 
 after those moment of glow love ! she be not afraid that Adam 
 would tease she with love - making and flattering speech like her other 
 admirer ; he have always be so reserved to she ; she could enjoy without 
 any fear the sense that this strong brave man love she and be near 
 she . it never enter into her mind that Adam be pitiable too - that 
 Adam too must suffer one day . 
 Hetty , we know , be not the first woman that have behave more gently 
 to the man who love she in vain because she have herself begin to love 
 another . it be a very old story , but Adam know nothing about it , so he 
 drink in the sweet delusion . 
 " that will do , " say Hetty , after a little while . " Aunt want I to leave 
 some on the tree . I will take them in now . " 
 " it be very well I come to carry the basket , " say Adam " for it ' ud ha ' 
 be too heavy for your little arm . " 
 " no ; I could ha ' carry it with both hand . " 
 " oh , I daresay , " say Adam , smile , " and be as long get into the 
 house as a little ant carry a caterpillar . have you ever see those 
 tiny fellow carry thing four time as big as themselves ? " 
 " no , " say Hetty , indifferently , not care to know the difficulty of 
 ant life . 
 " oh , I use to watch them often when I be a lad . but now , you see , I can 
 carry the basket with one arm , as if it be an empty nutshell , and give 
 you th ' other arm to lean on . will not   you ? such big arm as mine be make 
 for little arm like your to lean on . " 
 Hetty smile faintly and put her arm within his . Adam look down at 
 she , but her eye be turn dreamily towards another corner of the 
 garden . 
 " have you ever be to Eagledale ? " she say , as they walk slowly 
 along . 
 " yes , " say Adam , please to have she ask a question about himself . " ten 
 year ago , when I be a lad , I go with father to see about some work 
 there . it be a wonderful sight - rock and cave such as you never see in 
 your life . I never have a right notion o ' rock till I go there . " 
 " how long do it take to get there ? " 
 " why , it take we the good part o ' two day ' walking . but it be nothing of 
 a day 's journey for anybody as have get a first - rate nag . the captain ' ud 
 get there in nine or ten hour , I will be bind , he be such a rider . and I 
 should not   wonder if he be back again to - morrow ; he be too active to rest 
 long in that lonely place , all by himself , for there be nothing but a 
 bit of a inn I ' that part where he be go to fish . I wish he would got th ' 
 estate in his hand ; that ' ud be the right thing for he , for it ' ud 
 give he plenty to do , and he have do't well too , for all he be so young ; 
 he be get well notion o ' thing than many a man twice his age . he 
 speak very handsome to I th ' other day about lend I money to set up 
 I ' business ; and if thing come round that way , I would rather be behold 
 to he nor to any man I ' the world . " 
 Poor Adam be lead on to speak about Arthur because he think Hetty 
 would be pleased to know that the young squire be so ready to befriend 
 he ; the fact enter into his future prospect , which he would like to 
 seem promise in her eye . and it be true that Hetty listen with an 
 interest which bring a new light into her eye and a half - smile upon 
 her lip . 
 " how pretty the rose be now ! " Adam continue , pause to look at they . 
 " see ! I steal the prettiest , but I didna mean to keep it myself . I think 
 these as be all pink , and have get a fine sort o ' green leaf , be 
 pretty than the striped uns , do not   you ? " 
 he set down the basket and take the rose from his button - hole . 
 " it smell very sweet , " he say ; " those strip uns have no smell . Stick 
 it in your frock , and then you can put it in water after . it ' ud be a 
 pity to let it fade . " 
 Hetty take the rose , smile as she do so at the pleasant thought that 
 Arthur could so soon get back if he like . there be a flash of hope and 
 happiness in her mind , and with a sudden impulse of gaiety she do what 
 she have very often do before - stick the rose in her hair a little 
 above the left ear . the tender admiration in Adam 's face be slightly 
 shadow by reluctant disapproval . Hetty 's love of finery be just the 
 thing that would most provoke his mother , and he himself dislike it 
 as much as it be possible for he to dislike anything that belong to 
 she . 
 " ah , " he say , " that be like the lady in the picture at the Chase ; 
 they have   mostly get flower or feather or gold thing I ' their hair , 
 but somehow I do not   like to see them they allay put I I ' mind o ' the 
 paint woman outside the show at Treddles'on Fair . what can a woman 
 have to set she off well than her own hair , when it curl so , like 
 your ? if a woman 's young and pretty , I think you can see her good look 
 all the well for she be plain dressed . why , Dinah Morris look very 
 nice , for all she wear such a plain cap and gown . it seem to I as a 
 woman 's face doesna want flower ; it be almost like a flower itself . I be 
 sure yours be . " 
 " oh , very well , " say Hetty , with a little playful pout , take the rose 
 out of her hair . " I will put one o ' Dinah 's cap on when we go in , and 
 you will see if I look well in it . she leave one behind , so I can take 
 the pattern . " 
 " Nay , nay , I do not   want you to wear a Methodist cap like Dinah 's . I 
 daresay it be a very ugly cap , and I use to think when I see she here as 
 it be nonsense for she to dress different t ' other people ; but I never 
 rightly notice she till she come to see mother last week , and then I 
 think the cap seem to fit her face somehow as th ' acorn - cup fit th ' 
 acorn , and I should not   like to see she so well without it . but you have 
 get another sort o ' face ; I would have you just as you be now , without 
 anything t ' interfere with your own look . it be like when a man 's 
 sing a good tune - you do not   want t ' hear bell tinkle and 
 interfere wi ' the sound . " 
 he take her arm and put it within his again , look down on she fondly . 
 he be afraid she should think he have lecture she , imagine , as we 
 be apt to do , that she have perceive all the thought he have only 
 half - express . and the thing he dread most be lest any cloud should 
 come over this evening 's happiness . for the world he would not have 
 speak of his love to Hetty yet , till this commencing kindness towards 
 he should have grow into unmistakable love . in his imagination he 
 see long year of his future life stretch before he , blest with the 
 right to call Hetty his own : he could be content with very little at 
 present . so he take up the basket of currant once more , and they go 
 on towards the house . 
 the scene have quite change in the half - hour that Adam have be in the 
 garden . the yard be full of life now : Marty be let the scream 
 geese through the gate , and wickedly provoke the gander by hiss at 
 he ; the granary - door be groan on its hinge as Alick shut it , after 
 deal out the corn ; the horse be be lead out to watering , 
 amidst much barking of all the three dog and many " whup " from Tim the 
 ploughman , as if the heavy animal who hold down their meek , intelligent 
 head , and lift their shaggy foot so deliberately , be likely to rush 
 wildly in every direction but the right . everybody be come back from 
 the meadow ; and when Hetty and Adam enter the house - place , Mr. Poyser 
 be seat in the three - cornered chair , and the grandfather in the 
 large arm - chair opposite , look on with pleasant expectation while the 
 supper be be lay on the oak table . Mrs. Poyser have lay the cloth 
 herself - a cloth make of homespun linen , with a shin checker 
 pattern on it , and of an agreeable whitey - brown hue , such as all 
 sensible housewife like to see - none of your bleached ' shop - rag " that 
 would wear into hole in no time , but good homespun that would last 
 for two generation . the cold veal , the fresh lettuce , and the stuff 
 chine might well look tempting to hungry man who have din at half - past 
 twelve o'clock . on the large deal table against the wall there be 
 bright pewter plate and spoon and can , ready for Alick and his 
 companion ; for the master and servant eat their supper not far off 
 each other ; which be all the pleasanter , because if a remark about 
 to - morrow morning 's work occur to Mr. Poyser , Alick be at hand to 
 hear it . 
 " well , Adam , I be glad to see ye , " say Mr. Poyser . " what ! ye've   be 
 help Hetty to gether the curran 's , eh ? come , sit ye down , sit ye 
 down . why , it be pretty near a three - week since y ' have your supper with 
 we ; and the missis have get one of her rare stuff chine . I be glad 
 ye're come . " 
 " Hetty , " say Mrs. Poyser , as she look into the basket of currant 
 to see if the fruit be fine , " run upstairs and send molly down . she be 
 put Totty to bed , and I want she to draw th ' ale , for Nancy 's busy 
 yet I ' the dairy . you can see to the child . but whativer do you let she 
 run away from you along wi ' Tommy for , and stuff herself wi ' fruit as 
 she can not   eat a bit o ' good victual ? " 
 this be say in a low tone than usual , while her husband be talk 
 to Adam ; for Mrs. Poyser be strict in adherence to her own rule of 
 propriety , and she consider that a young girl be not to be treat 
 sharply in the presence of a respectable man who be court she . that 
 would not be fair - play : every woman be young in her turn , and have she 
 chance of matrimony , which it be a point of honour for other woman not 
 to spoil - just as one market - woman who have sell her own egg must not 
 try to balk another of a customer . 
 Hetty make haste to run away upstairs , not easily find an answer to 
 her aunt 's question , and Mrs. Poyser go out to see after Marty and 
 Tommy and bring they in to supper . 
 soon they be all seat - the two rosy lad , one on each side , by the 
 pale mother , a place be leave for Hetty between Adam and her uncle . 
 Alick too be come in , and be seat in his far corner , eat cold 
 broad bean out of a large dish with his pocket - knife , and find 
 a flavour in they which he would not have exchange for the fine 
 pineapple . 
 " what a time that gell be draw th ' ale , to be sure ! " say Mrs. 
 Poyser , when she be dispense her slice of stuff chine . " I think 
 she set the jug under and forget to turn the tap , as there be nothing 
 you can not   believe o ' they wench : they will set the empty kettle o ' the 
 fire , and then come an hour after to see if the water boil . " 
 " she be drawin ' for the man too , " say Mr. Poyser . " thee shouldst ha ' 
 tell she to bring our jug up first . " 
 " tell she ? " say Mrs. Poyser . " yes , I might spend all the wind I ' my 
 body , an ' take the bellow too , if I be to tell they gell everything 
 as their own sharpness wonna tell them . Mr. Bede , will you take some 
 vinegar with your lettuce ? aye you be I ' the right not . it spoil the 
 flavour o ' the chine , to my thinking . it be poor eat where the flavour 
 o ' the meat lie I ' the cruet . there be folk as make bad butter and 
 trusten to the salt t ' hide it . " 
 Mrs. Poyser 's attention be here divert by the appearance of Molly , 
 carry a large jug , two small mug , and four drinking - can , all full 
 of ale or small beer - an interesting example of the prehensile power 
 possess by the human hand . Poor Molly 's mouth be rather wider open 
 than usual , as she walk along with her eye fix on the double 
 cluster of vessel in her hand , quite innocent of the expression in her 
 mistress 's eye . 
 " molly , I niver know your equil - to think o ' your poor mother as be 
 a widow , an ' I take you wi ' as good as no character , an ' the time an ' 
 time I have   tell you .... " 
 molly have not see the lightning , and the thunder shake her nerve the 
 more for the want of that preparation . with a vague alarmed sense that 
 she must somehow comport herself differently , she hasten her step 
 a little towards the far deal table , where she might set down her 
 can - catch her foot in her apron , which have become untied , and fall 
 with a crash and a splash into a pool of beer ; whereupon a tittering 
 explosion from Marty and Tommy , and a serious " Ello ! " from Mr. Poyser , 
 who see his draught of ale unpleasantly defer . 
 " there you go ! " resume Mrs. Poyser , in a cut tone , as she rise and 
 go towards the cupboard while molly begin dolefully to pick up the 
 fragment of pottery . " it be what I tell you ' ud come , over and over 
 again ; and there be your month 's wage go , and more , to pay for that jug 
 as I have   have I ' the house this ten year , and nothing ever happen to't 
 before ; but the crockery you have   break sin ' here in th ' house you have   be 
 ' ud make a parson swear - God forgi ' I for say so - an ' if it have be 
 boiling wort out o ' the copper , it ' ud ha ' be the same , and you would ha ' 
 be scald and very like lamed for life , as there be no knowing but 
 what you will be some day if you go on ; for anybody ' ud think you would get 
 the St. Vitus 's Dance , to see the thing you have   throw down . it be 
 a pity but what the bit be stack up for you to see , though it be 
 neither see nor hear as ' ull make much odd to you - anybody ' ud 
 think you war case - harden . " 
 Poor Molly 's tear be drop fast by this time , and in her 
 desperation at the lively movement of the beer - stream towards Alick 's 
 leg , she be convert her apron into a mop , while Mrs. Poyser , 
 open the cupboard , turn a blighting eye upon she . 
 " ah , " she go on , " you will do no good wi ' cry an ' make more wet to 
 wipe up . it be all your own wilfulness , as I tell you , for there be nobody 
 no call to break anything if they will only go the right way to work . but 
 wooden folk have need ha ' wooden thing t ' handle . and here must I take 
 the brown - and - white jug , as it be niver be use three time this year , 
 and go down I ' the cellar myself , and belike catch my death , and be lay 
 up wi ' inflammation .... " 
 Mrs. Poyser have turn round from the cupboard with the brown - and - white 
 jug in her hand , when she catch sight of something at the other end 
 of the kitchen ; perhaps it be because she be already tremble and 
 nervous that the apparition have so strong an effect on she ; perhaps 
 jug - breaking , like other crime , have a contagious influence . however 
 it be , she star and start like a ghost - seer , and the precious 
 brown - and - white jug fall to the ground , part for ever with its spout 
 and handle . 
 " do ever anybody see the like ? " she say , with a suddenly lower 
 tone , after a moment 's bewildered glance round the room . " the jug be 
 bewitch , I think . it be they nasty glaze handle - they slip o'er the 
 finger like a snail . " 
 " why , thee'st let thy own whip fly I ' thy face , " say her husband , who 
 have now join in the laugh of the young one . 
 " it be all very fine to look on and grin , " rejoin Mrs. Poyser ; " but 
 there be time when the crockery seem alive an ' fly out o ' your hand 
 like a bird . it be like the glass , sometimes , ' ull crack as it stand . 
 what be to be broke will be break , for I never drop a thing I ' my 
 life for want o ' hold it , else I should never ha ' keep the crockery 
 all these ' ear as I buy at my own wedding . and Hetty , be you mad ? 
 Whativer do you mean by come down I ' that way , and make one think as 
 there be a ghost a - walk I ' th ' house ? " 
 a new outbreak of laughter , while Mrs. Poyser be speak , be cause , 
 less by her sudden conversion to a fatalistic view of jug - break than 
 by that strange appearance of Hetty , which have startle her aunt . the 
 little minx have find a black gown of her aunt 's , and pin it close 
 round her neck to look like Dinah 's , have make her hair as flat as she 
 could , and have tie on one of Dinah 's high - crown borderless net cap . 
 the thought of Dinah 's pale grave face and mild grey eye , which the 
 sight of the gown and cap bring with it , make it a laughable surprise 
 enough to see they replace by Hetty 's round rosy cheek and coquettish 
 dark eye . the boy get off their chair and jump round she , clap 
 their hand , and even Alick give a low ventral laugh as he look up 
 from his bean . under cover of the noise , Mrs. Poyser go into the back 
 kitchen to send Nancy into the cellar with the great pewter measure , 
 which have some chance of be free from bewitchment . 
 " why , Hetty , lass , be ye turn Methodist ? " say Mr. Poyser , with 
 that comfortable slow enjoyment of a laugh which one only see in stout 
 people . " you must pull your face a deal long before you will do for one ; 
 mustna she , Adam ? how come you put they thing on , eh ? " 
 " Adam say he like Dinah 's cap and gown well nor my clothe , " say 
 Hetty , sit down demurely . " he say folk look well in ugly 
 clothe . " 
 " Nay , nay , " say Adam , look at she admiringly ; " I only say they 
 seem to suit Dinah . but if I have say you would look pretty in them , I should 
 ha ' say nothing but what be true . " 
 " why , thee thought'st Hetty war a ghost , didstna ? " say Mr. Poyser to 
 his wife , who now come back and take her seat again . " Thee look'dst as 
 scar as scared . " 
 " it little sinnifie how I look , " say Mrs. Poyser ; " look ' ull mend 
 no jug , nor laugh neither , as I see . Mr. Bede , I be sorry you have   to 
 wait so long for your ale , but it be come in a minute . make yourself at 
 home wi ' th ' cold potato : I know you like them . Tommy , I will send you to 
 bed this minute , if you do not   give over laughing . what be there to laugh 
 at , I should like to know ? I would soon cry nor laugh at the sight o ' that 
 poor thing 's cap ; and there be they as ' ud be well if they could make 
 theirselve like she I ' more way nor put on her cap . it little 
 become anybody I ' this house to make fun o ' my sister 's child , an ' she 
 just go away from we , as it go to my heart to part wi ' she . an ' I 
 know one thing , as if trouble be to come , an ' I be to be lay up I ' 
 my bed , an ' the child be to die - as there be no knowing but what they 
 will - an ' the murrain be to come among the cattle again , an ' everything 
 go to rack an ' ruin , I say we might be glad to get sight o ' Dinah 's 
 cap again , wi ' her own face under it , border or no border . for she be one 
 o ' they thing as look the bright on a rainy day , and love you the 
 good when you be most I ' need on't . " 
 Mrs. Poyser , you perceive , be aware that nothing would be so likely 
 to expel the comic as the terrible . Tommy , who be of a susceptible 
 disposition , and very fond of his mother , and who have , besides , eat so 
 many cherry as to have his feeling less under command than usual , be 
 so affected by the dreadful picture she have make of the possible future 
 that he begin to cry ; and the good - natured father , indulgent to all 
 weakness but those of negligent farmer , say to Hetty , " you would well 
 take the thing off again , my lass ; it hurt your aunt to see them . " 
 Hetty go upstairs again , and the arrival of the ale make an agreeable 
 diversion ; for Adam have to give his opinion of the new tap , which could 
 not be otherwise than complimentary to Mrs. Poyser ; and then follow 
 a discussion on the secret of good brewing , the folly of stinginess in 
 " hopping , " and the doubtful economy of a farmer 's make his own malt . 
 Mrs. Poyser have so many opportunity of express herself with 
 weight on these subject that by the time supper be end , the ale - jug 
 refill , and Mr. Poyser 's pipe alight she be once more in high good 
 humour , and ready , at Adam 's request , to fetch the break spinning - wheel 
 for his inspection . 
 " ah , " say Adam , look at it carefully , " here be a nice bit o ' turning 
 want . it be a pretty wheel . I must have it up at the turning - shop in 
 the village and do it there , for I have   no convenence for turn at home . 
 if you will send it to Mr. Burge 's shop I ' the morning , I will get it 
 do for you by Wednesday . I have   be turn it over in my mind , " he 
 continue , look at Mr. Poyser , " to make a bit more convenence at home 
 for nice job o ' cabinet - making . I have   always do a deal at such 
 little thing in odd hour , and they be profitable , for there 's more 
 workmanship nor material in them . I look for I and Seth to get a little 
 business for ourselves I ' that way , for I know a man at Rosseter as ' ull 
 take as many thing as we should make , besides what we could get order 
 for round about . " 
 Mr. Poyser enter with interest into a project which seem a step 
 towards Adam 's become a " master - man , " and Mrs. Poyser give she 
 approbation to the scheme of the movable kitchen cupboard , which be to 
 be capable of contain grocery , pickle , crockery , and house - linen in 
 the utmost compactness without confusion . Hetty , once more in her own 
 dress , with her neckerchief push a little backwards on this warm 
 evening , be seat pick currant near the window , where Adam could 
 see she quite well . and so the time pass pleasantly till Adam get up 
 to go . he be press to come again soon , but not to stay long , for at 
 this busy time sensible people would not run the risk of be sleepy at 
 five o'clock in the morning . 
 " I shall take a step far , " say Adam , " and go on to see Mester 
 Massey , for he be not   at church yesterday , and I have   not see he for a 
 week past . I have   never hardly know he to miss church before . " 
 " aye , " say Mr. Poyser , " we have   hear nothing about he , for it be the 
 boy ' holloday now , so we can give you no account . " 
 " but you will niver think o ' go there at this hour o ' the night ? " say 
 Mrs. Poyser , fold up her knitting . 
 " oh , Mester Massey sit up late , " say Adam . " An ' the night - school 's not 
 over yet . some o ' the man do not   come till late - they have   get so far to 
 walk . and Bartle himself be never in bed till it be go eleven . " 
 " I wouldna have he to live wi ' I , then , " say Mrs. Poyser , " a - drop 
 candle - grease about , as you be like to tumble down o ' the floor the 
 first thing I ' the morning . " 
 " Aye , eleven o'clock 's late - it be late , " say old Martin . " I ne'er sot 
 up so I ' my life , not to say as it warna a marr'in ' , or a christenin ' , 
 or a wake , or th ' harvest supper . eleven o'clock 's late . " 
 " why , I sit up till after twelve often , " say Adam , laughing , " but 
 it be not   t ' eat and drink extry , it be to work extry . good - night , Mrs. 
 Poyser ; good - night , Hetty . " 
 Hetty could only smile and not shake hand , for her be dye and damp 
 with currant - juice ; but all the rest give a hearty shake to the large 
 palm that be hold out to they , and say , " come again , come again ! " 
 " Aye , think o ' that now , " say Mr. Poyser , when Adam be out of on the 
 causeway . " sit up till past twelve to do extry work ! Ye'll not find 
 many man o ' six - an ' twenty as ' ull do to put I ' the shafts wi ' he . 
 if you can catch Adam for a husband , Hetty , you will ride I ' your own 
 spring - cart some day , I will be your warrant . " 
 Hetty be move across the kitchen with the currant , so her uncle do 
 not see the little toss of the head with which she answer he . to ride 
 in a spring - cart seem a very miserable lot indeed to she now . 
 chapter XXI 
 the Night - School and the Schoolmaster 
 Bartle Massey 's be one of a few scatter house on the edge of a 
 common , which be divide by the road to Treddleston . Adam reach it 
 in a quarter of an hour after leave the Hall Farm ; and when he have his 
 hand on the door - latch , he could see , through the curtainless window , 
 that there be eight or nine head bend over the desk , light by 
 thin dip . 
 when he enter , a reading lesson be go forward and Bartle Massey 
 merely nod , leave he to take his place where he please . he have 
 not come for the sake of a lesson to - night , and his mind be too full 
 of personal matter , too full of the last two hour he have pass in 
 Hetty 's presence , for he to amuse himself with a book till school be 
 over ; so he sit down in a corner and look on with an absent mind . it 
 be a sort of scene which Adam have behold almost weekly for year ; he 
 know by heart every arabesque flourish in the framed speciman of Bartle 
 Massey 's handwriting which hang over the schoolmaster 's head , by way of 
 keep a lofty ideal before the mind of his pupil ; he know the back 
 of all the book on the shelf run along the whitewashed wall above 
 the peg for the slate ; he know exactly how many grain be go out 
 of the ear of indian corn that hang from one of the rafter ; he have long 
 ago exhaust the resource of his imagination in try to think 
 how the bunch of leathery seaweed have look and grow in its native 
 element ; and from the place where he sit , he could make nothing of the 
 old map of England that hang against the opposite wall , for age have 
 turn it of a fine yellow brown , something like that of a well - season 
 meerschaum . the drama that be go on be almost as familiar as the 
 scene , nevertheless habit have not make he indifferent to it , and even 
 in his present self - absorb mood , Adam feel a momentary stirring of the 
 old fellow - feeling , as he look at the rough man painfully hold pen 
 or pencil with their cramp hand , or humbly labour through their 
 reading lesson . 
 the reading class now seat on the form in front of the schoolmaster 's 
 desk consist of the three most backward pupil . Adam would have know 
 it only by see Bartle Massey 's face as he look over his spectacle , 
 which he have shift to the ridge of his nose , not require they for 
 present purpose . the face wear its mild expression : the grizzle 
 bushy eyebrow have take their more acute angle of compassionate 
 kindness , and the mouth , habitually compress with a pout of the low 
 lip , be relax so as to be ready to speak a helpful word or syllable 
 in a moment . this gentle expression be the more interesting because the 
 schoolmaster 's nose , an irregular aquiline twist a little on one side , 
 have rather a formidable character ; and his brow , moreover , have that 
 peculiar tension which always impress one as a sign of a keen 
 impatient temperament : the blue vein stand out like cord under the 
 transparent yellow skin , and this intimidating brow be soften by no 
 tendency to baldness , for the grey bristly hair , cut down to about an 
 inch in length , stand round it in as close rank as ever . 
 " Nay , Bill , nay , " Bartle be say in a kind tone , as he nod to 
 Adam , " begin that again , and then perhaps , it will come to you what d - r - y 
 spell . it be the same lesson you read last week , you know . " 
 " Bill " be a sturdy fellow , aged four - and - twenty , an excellent 
 stone - sawyer , who could get as good wage as any man in the trade of his 
 year ; but he find a reading lesson in word of one syllable a hard 
 matter to deal with than the hard stone he have ever have to saw . the 
 letter , he complain , be so " uncommon alike , there be no tellin ' 
 them one from another , " the sawyer 's business not be concern with 
 minute difference such as exist between a letter with its tail 
 turn up and a letter with its tail turn down . but Bill have a firm 
 determination that he would learn to read , found chiefly on two 
 reason : first , that Tom Hazelow , his cousin , could read anything " right 
 off , " whether it be print or writing , and Tom have send he a letter 
 from twenty mile off , say how he be prosper in the world and have 
 get an overlooker 's place ; secondly , that Sam Phillips , who saw with 
 he , have learn to read when he be turn twenty , and what could be 
 do by a little fellow like Sam Phillips , Bill consider , could 
 be do by himself , see that he could pound Sam into wet clay if 
 circumstance require it . so here he be , point his big finger 
 towards three word at once , and turn his head on one side that he 
 might keep well hold with his eye of the one word which be to be 
 discriminate out of the group . the amount of knowledge Bartle Massey 
 must possess be something so dim and vast that Bill 's imagination 
 recoil before it : he would hardly have venture to deny that the 
 schoolmaster might have something to do in bring about the regular 
 return of daylight and the change in the weather . 
 the man seat next to Bill be of a very different type : he be a 
 Methodist brickmaker who , after spend thirty year of his life in 
 perfect satisfaction with his ignorance , have lately " get religion , " and 
 along with it the desire to read the Bible . but with he , too , learn 
 be a heavy business , and on his way out to - night he have offer as 
 usual a special prayer for help , see that he have undertake this hard 
 task with a single eye to the nourishment of his soul - that he might 
 have a great abundance of text and hymn wherewith to banish evil 
 memory and the temptation of old habit - or , in brief language , 
 the devil . for the brickmaker have be a notorious poacher , and be 
 suspect , though there be no good evidence against he , of be the 
 man who have shoot a neighbouring gamekeeper in the leg . however that 
 might be , it be certain that shortly after the accident refer to , 
 which be coincident with the arrival of an awakening Methodist preacher 
 at Treddleston , a great change have be observe in the brickmaker ; and 
 though he be still know in the neighbourhood by his old sobriquet of 
 " brimstone , " there be nothing he hold in so much horror as any further 
 transaction with that evil - smell element . he be a broad - cheste 
 fellow with a fervid temperament , which help he well in imbibe 
 religious idea than in the dry process of acquire the mere human 
 knowledge of the alphabet . indeed , he have be already a little shaken 
 in his resolution by a brother Methodist , who assure he that the 
 letter be a mere obstruction to the Spirit , and express a fear that 
 Brimstone be too eager for the knowledge that puffeth up . 
 the third beginner be a much more promising pupil . he be a tall but 
 thin and wiry man , nearly as old as Brimstone , with a very pale face and 
 hand stain a deep blue . he be a dyer , who in the course of dipping 
 homespun wool and old woman 's petticoat have get fire with the ambition 
 to learn a great deal more about the strange secret of colour . he have 
 already a high reputation in the district for his dye , and he be 
 bent on discover some method by which he could reduce the expense 
 of crimson and scarlet . the druggist at Treddleston have give he a 
 notion that he might save himself a great deal of labour and expense if 
 he could learn to read , and so he have begin to give his spare hour to 
 the night - school , resolve that his " little chap " should lose no time 
 in come to Mr. Massey 's day - school as soon as he be old enough . 
 it be touch to see these three big man , with the mark of their hard 
 labour about they , anxiously bend over the worn book and painfully 
 make out , " the grass be green , " " the stick be dry , " " the corn be 
 ripe " - a very hard lesson to pass to after column of single word 
 all alike except in the first letter . it be almost as if three rough 
 animal be make humble effort to learn how they might become human . 
 and it touch the tender fibre in Bartle Massey 's nature , for such 
 full - grow child as these be the only pupil for whom he have 
 no severe epithet and no impatient tone . he be not gifted with an 
 imperturbable temper , and on music - night it be apparent that patience 
 could never be an easy virtue to he ; but this evening , as he glance 
 over his spectacle at Bill Downes , the sawyer , who be turn his 
 head on one side with a desperate sense of blankness before the letter 
 d - r - y , his eye shed their mild and most encouraging light . 
 after the reading class , two youth between sixteen and nineteen come up 
 with the imaginary bill of parcel , which they have be write out on 
 their slate and be now require to calculate " off - hand " - a test which 
 they stand with such imperfect success that Bartle Massey , whose eye 
 have be glare at they ominously through his spectacle for some 
 minute , at length burst out in a bitter , high - pitch tone , pausing 
 between every sentence to rap the floor with a knobbed stick which 
 rest between his leg . 
 " now , you see , you do not   do this thing a bit well than you do a 
 fortnight ago , and I will tell you what be the reason . you want to learn 
 account - that be well and good . but you think all you need do to learn 
 account be to come to I and do sum for an hour or so , two or three 
 time a - week ; and no soon do you get your cap on and turn out of 
 door again than you sweep the whole thing clean out of your mind . you 
 go whistle about , and take no more care what you be think of 
 than if your head be gutter for any rubbish to swill through that 
 happen to be in the way ; and if you get a good notion in them , 
 it be pretty soon wash out again . you think knowledge be to be get 
 cheap - you will come and pay Bartle Massey sixpence a - week , and he will make 
 you clever at figure without your take any trouble . but knowledge 
 be not   to be get with pay sixpence , let I tell you . if you be to know 
 figure , you must turn them over in your head and keep your thought 
 fix on them . there be nothing you can not   turn into a sum , for there be 
 nothing but what be get number in it - even a fool . you may say to 
 yourself , ' I be one fool , and Jack be another ; if my fool 's head weigh 
 four pound , and Jack 's three pound three ounce and three quarter , how 
 many pennyweight heavy would my head be than Jack 's ? ' a man that have 
 get his heart in learn figure would make sum for himself and work 
 them in his head . when he sit at his shoemaking , he would count his stitch 
 by five , and then put a price on his stitch , say half a farthing , and 
 then see how much money he could get in an hour ; and then ask himself 
 how much money he would get in a day at that rate ; and then how much ten 
 workman would get work three , or twenty , or a hundred year at that 
 rate - and all the while his needle would be go just as fast as if 
 he leave his head empty for the devil to dance in . but the long and the 
 short of it be - I will have nobody in my night - school that do not   strive 
 to learn what he come to learn , as hard as if he be strive to get 
 out of a dark hole into broad daylight . I will send no man away because 
 he be stupid : if Billy Taft , the idiot , want to learn anything , I would not 
 refuse to teach he . but I will not throw away good knowledge on people 
 who think they can get it by the sixpenn'orth , and carry it away with 
 them as they would an ounce of snuff . so never come to I again , if you 
 can not   show that you have   be work with your own head , instead of 
 think that you can pay for mine to work for you . that be the last word 
 I have   get to say to you . " 
 with this final sentence , Bartle Massey give a sharp rap than ever 
 with his knobbed stick , and the discomfited lad get up to go with a 
 sulky look . the other pupil have happily only their writing - book to 
 show , in various stage of progress from pot - hook to round text ; and 
 mere pen - stroke , however perverse , be less exasperating to Bartle 
 than false arithmetic . he be a little more severe than usual on Jacob 
 Storey 's Z 's , of which poor Jacob have write a pageful , all with their 
 top turn the wrong way , with a puzzled sense that they be not right 
 ' somehow . " but he observe in apology , that it be a letter you never 
 want hardly , and he think it have only be there " to finish off th ' 
 alphabet , like , though ampusand      would ha ' do as well , for what he 
 could see . " 
 at last the pupil have all take their hat and say their 
 " good - night , " and Adam , know his old master 's habit , rise and say , 
 " shall I put the candle out , Mr. Massey ? " 
 " yes , my boy , yes , all but this , which I will carry into the house ; and 
 just lock the outer door , now you be near it , " say Bartle , get his 
 stick in the fitting angle to help he in descend from his stool . 
 he be no soon on the ground than it become obvious why the stick 
 be necessary - the left leg be much short than the right . but the 
 school - master be so active with his lameness that it be hardly think 
 of as a misfortune ; and if you have see he make his way along the 
 schoolroom floor , and up the step into his kitchen , you would perhaps 
 have understand why the naughty boy sometimes feel that his pace might 
 be indefinitely quicken and that he and his stick might overtake they 
 even in their swift run . 
 the moment he appear at the kitchen door with the candle in his 
 hand , a faint whimpering begin in the chimney - corner , and a 
 brown - and - tan - coloured bitch , of that wise - look breed with short leg 
 and long body , know to an unmechanical generation as turnspit , come 
 creep along the floor , wag her tail , and hesitate at every 
 other step , as if her affection be painfully divide between the 
 hamper in the chimney - corner and the master , whom she could not leave 
 without a greeting . 
 " well , Vixen , well then , how be the babbie ? " say the schoolmaster , 
 make haste towards the chimney - corner and hold the candle over 
 the low hamper , where two extremely blind puppy lift up their head 
 towards the light from a nest of flannel and wool . Vixen could not even 
 see her master look at they without painful excitement : she get into the 
 hamper and get out again the next moment , and behave with true feminine 
 folly , though look all the while as wise as a dwarf with a large 
 old - fashioned head and body on the most abbreviate leg . 
 " why , you have   get a family , I see , Mr. Massey ? " say Adam , smile , as 
 he come into the kitchen . " how be that ? I think it be against the law 
 here . " 
 " Law ? what be the use o ' law when a man 's once such a fool as to let a 
 woman into his house ? " say Bartle , turn away from the hamper with 
 some bitterness . he always call Vixen a woman , and seem to have lose 
 all consciousness that he be use a figure of speech . " if I have know 
 Vixen be a woman , I would never have hold the boy from drown she ; but 
 when I would get she into my hand , I be force to take to she . and now you 
 see what she be bring I to - the sly , hypocritical wench " - Bartle speak 
 these last word in a rasp tone of reproach , and look at Vixen , who 
 poke down her head and turn up her eye towards he with a keen 
 sense of opprobrium - " and contrive to be bring to bed on a Sunday at 
 church - time . I have   wish again and again I would be a bloody minded man , 
 that I could have strangle the mother and the brat with one cord . " 
 " I be glad it be no bad a cause keep you from church , " say Adam . " I 
 be afraid you must be ill for the first time I ' your life . and I be 
 particularly sorry not to have you at church yesterday . " 
 " ah , my boy , I know why , I know why , " say Bartle kindly , go up to 
 Adam and raise his hand up to the shoulder that be almost on a level 
 with his own head . " you have   have a rough bit o ' road to get over since I 
 see you - a rough bit o ' road . but I be in hope there be well time 
 come for you . I have   get some news to tell you . but I must get my supper 
 first , for I be hungry , I be hungry . sit down , sit down . " 
 Bartel go into his little pantry , and bring out an excellent 
 home - bake loaf ; for it be his one extravagance in these dear time 
 to eat bread once a - day instead of oat - cake ; and he justify it by 
 observe , that what a schoolmaster want be brain , and oat - cake run 
 too much to bone instead of brain . then come a piece of cheese and a 
 quart jug with a crown of foam upon it . he place they all on the 
 round deal table which stand against his large arm - chair in the 
 chimney - corner , with Vixen 's hamper on one side of it and a window - shelf 
 with a few book pile up in it on the other . the table be as clean as 
 if Vixen have be an excellent housewife in a checkered apron ; so be 
 the quarry floor ; and the old carve oaken press , table , and chair , 
 which in these day would be buy at a high price in aristocratic 
 house , though , in that period of spider - leg and inlaid cupid , Bartle 
 have get they for an old song , where as free from dust as thing could be 
 at the end of a summer 's day . 
 " now , then , my boy , draw up , draw up . we will not talk about business till 
 we have   have our supper . no man can be wise on an empty stomach . but , " say 
 Bartle , rise from his chair again , " I must give Vixen her supper 
 too , confound she ! though she will do nothing with it but nourish those 
 unnecessary babbie . that be the way with these woman - they have   get no 
 head - piece to nourish , and so their food all run either to fat or to 
 brat . " 
 he bring out of the pantry a dish of scrap , which Vixen at once fix 
 her eye on , and jump out of her hamper to lick up with the utmost 
 dispatch . 
 " I have   have my supper , Mr. Massey , " say Adam , ' so I will look on while you 
 eat your . I have   be at the Hall Farm , and they always have their supper 
 betime , you know : they do not   keep your late hour . " 
 " I know little about their hour , " say Bartle dryly , cut his bread 
 and not shrink from the crust . " it be a house I seldom go into , though 
 I be fond of the boy , and Martin Poyser 's a good fellow . there be too 
 many woman in the house for I : I hate the sound of woman 's voice ; 
 they be always either a - buzz or a - squeak - always either a - buzz or 
 a - squeak . Mrs. Poyser keep at the top o ' the talk like a fife ; and 
 as for the young lass , I would as soon look at water - grub . I know what 
 they will turn to - sting gnat , sting gnat . here , take some ale , my 
 boy : it be be draw for you - it be be draw for you . " 
 " Nay , Mr. Massey , " say Adam , who take his old friend 's whim more 
 seriously than usual to - night , " do not   be so hard on the creatur God have 
 make to be companion for we . a work - man ' ud be badly off without 
 a wife to see to th ' house and the victual , and make thing clean and 
 comfortable . " 
 " Nonsense ! it be the silly lie a sensible man like you ever believe , 
 to say a woman make a house comfortable . it be a story get up because 
 the woman be there and something must be find for them to do . I tell 
 you there be not   a thing under the sun that need to be do at all , but 
 what a man can do well than a woman , unless it be bear child , and 
 they do that in a poor make - shift way ; it have well ha ' be leave to 
 the man - it have well ha ' be leave to the man . I tell you , a woman 
 ' ull bake you a pie every week of her life and never come to see that 
 the hot th ' oven the short the time . I tell you , a woman ' ull make 
 your porridge every day for twenty year and never think of measure 
 the proportion between the meal and the milk - a little more or less , 
 she will think , do not   signify . the porridge will be awk'ard now and 
 then : if it be wrong , it be summat in the meal , or it be summat in the 
 milk , or it be summat in the water . look at I ! I make my own bread , and 
 there be no difference between one batch and another from year 's end to 
 year 's end ; but if I would get any other woman besides Vixen in the house , 
 I must pray to the Lord every bake to give I patience if the bread 
 turn out heavy . and as for cleanliness , my house be clean than any 
 other house on the Common , though the half of them swarm with woman . will 
 Baker 's lad come to help I in a morning , and we get as much cleaning 
 do in one hour , without any fuss , as a woman ' ud get do in three , 
 and all the while be send bucket o ' water after your ankle , and let 
 the fender and the fire - iron stand in the middle o ' the floor half the 
 day for you to break your shin against them . do not   tell I about God 
 have make such creature to be companion for we ! I do not   say but 
 he might make Eve to be a companion to Adam in Paradise - there be no 
 cooking to be spoil there , and no other woman to cackle with and make 
 mischief , though you see what mischief she do as soon as she have an 
 opportunity . but it be an impious , unscriptural opinion to say a woman 's 
 a blessing to a man now ; you might as well say adder and wasp , and 
 fox and wild beast be a blessing , when they be only the evil that 
 belong to this state o ' probation , which it be lawful for a man to keep 
 as clear of as he can in this life , hop to get quit of them for ever 
 in another - hop to get quit of them for ever in another . " 
 Bartle have become so excited and angry in the course of his invective 
 that he have forget his supper , and only use the knife for the 
 purpose of rap the table with the haft . but towards the close , the 
 rap become so sharp and frequent , and his voice so quarrelsome , that 
 Vixen feel it incumbent on she to jump out of the hamper and bark 
 vaguely . 
 " quiet , Vixen ! " snarl Bartle , turn round upon she . " you be like the 
 rest o ' the woman - always put in your word before you know why . " 
 Vixen return to her hamper again in humiliation , and her master 
 continue his supper in a silence which Adam do not choose to 
 interrupt ; he know the old man would be in a well humour when he have 
 have his supper and light his pipe . Adam be use to hear he talk in 
 this way , but have never learn so much of Bartle 's past life as to know 
 whether his view of married comfort be found on experience . on that 
 point Bartle be mute , and it be even a secret where he have live 
 previous to the twenty year in which happily for the peasant and 
 artisan of this neighbourhood he have be settle among they as their 
 only schoolmaster . if anything like a question be venture on this 
 subject , Bartle always reply , " oh , I have   see many place - I have   be a 
 deal in the south , " and the Loamshire man would as soon have think of 
 ask for a particular town or village in Africa as in " the south . " 
 " now then , my boy , " say Bartle , at last , when he have pour out his 
 second mug of ale and light his pipe , " now then , we will have a little 
 talk . but tell I first , have you hear any particular news to - day ? " 
 " no , " say Adam , " not as I remember . " 
 " ah , they will keep it close , they will keep it close , I daresay . but I 
 find it out by chance ; and it be news that may concern you , Adam , else 
 I be a man that do not   know a superficial square foot from a solid . " 
 here Bartle give a series of fierce and rapid puff , look earnestly 
 the while at Adam . your impatient loquacious man have never any notion of 
 keep his pipe alight by gentle measure puff ; he be always let 
 it go nearly out , and then punish it for that negligence . at last he 
 say , " Satchell 's get a paralytic stroke . I find it out from the lad 
 they send to Treddleston for the doctor , before seven o'clock this 
 morning . he be a good way beyond sixty , you know ; it be much if he get 
 over it . " 
 " well , " say Adam , " I daresay there would be more rejoicing than sorrow 
 in the parish at his be lay up . he be be a selfish , tale - bear , 
 mischievous fellow ; but , after all , there be nobody he be do so much 
 harm to as to th ' old squire . though it be the squire himself as be to 
 blame - make a stupid fellow like that a sort o ' man - of - all - work , just 
 to save th ' expense of have a proper steward to look after th ' estate . 
 and he be lose more by ill management o ' the wood , I will be bind , than 
 ' ud pay for two steward . if he be lay on the shelf , it be to be hop 
 he will make way for a well man , but I do not   see how it be like to make 
 any difference to I . " 
 " but I see it , but I see it , " say Bartle , " and other besides I . the 
 captain 's coming of age now - you know that as well as I do - and it be to 
 be expect he will have a little more voice in thing . and I know , and 
 you know too , what ' ud be the captain 's wish about the wood , if there 
 be a fair opportunity for make a change . he be say in plenty of 
 people 's hearing that he would make you manager of the wood to - morrow , if 
 he have the power . why , Carroll , Mr. Irwine 's butler , hear he say so to 
 the parson not many day ago . Carroll look in when we be smoke 
 our pipe o ' Saturday night at Casson 's , and he tell we about it ; and 
 whenever anybody say a good word for you , the parson be ready to back 
 it , that I will answer for . it be pretty well talk over , I can tell 
 you , at Casson 's , and one and another have their fling at you ; for if 
 donkey set to work to sing , you be pretty sure what the tune'll be . " 
 " why , do they talk it over before Mr. Burge ? " say Adam ; " or be not   he 
 there o ' Saturday ? " 
 " oh , he go away before Carroll come ; and Casson - he be always for 
 set other folk right , you know - would have it Burge be the man to 
 have the management of the wood . ' a substantial man , ' say he , ' with 
 pretty near sixty year ' experience o ' timber : it ' ud be all very well 
 for Adam Bede to act under he , but it be not   to be suppose the squire 
 ' ud appoint a young fellow like Adam , when there be his elder and 
 better at hand ! ' but I say , ' that be a pretty notion o ' your , Casson . 
 why , Burge be the man to buy timber ; would you put the wood into his 
 hand and let he make his own bargain ? I think you do not   leave your 
 customer to score their own drink , do you ? and as for age , what that be 
 worth depend on the quality o ' the liquor . it be pretty well know who be 
 the backbone of Jonathan Burge 's business . ' " 
 " I thank you for your good word , Mr. Massey , " say Adam . " but , for 
 all that , Casson be partly I ' the right for once . there be not much 
 likelihood that th ' old squire ' ud ever consent t ' employ I . I offend 
 he about two year ago , and he be never forgive I . " 
 " why , how be that ? you never tell I about it , " say Bartle . 
 " oh , it be a bit o ' nonsense . I would make a frame for a screen for 
 Miss Lyddy - she be allay make something with her worst - work , you 
 know - and she would give I particular order about this screen , and there 
 be as much talk and measure as if we have be plan a house . 
 however , it be a nice bit o ' work , and I like do it for she . but , 
 you know , those little friggle thing take a deal o ' time . I only 
 work at it in overhour - often late at night - and I have to go to 
 Treddleston over an ' over again about little bit o ' brass nail and 
 such gear ; and I turn the little knob and the leg , and carve th ' 
 open work , after a pattern , as nice as could be . and I be uncommon 
 pleased with it when it be do . and when I take it home , Miss Lyddy 
 send for I to bring it into her drawing - room , so as she might give I 
 direction about fasten on the work - very fine needlework , Jacob and 
 Rachel a - kiss one another among the sheep , like a picture - and th ' 
 old squire be sit there , for he mostly sit with she . well , she be 
 mighty pleased with the screen , and then she want to know what pay she 
 be to give I . I do not   speak at random - you know it be not my way ; I would 
 calculate pretty close , though I have not   make out a bill , and I say , 
 ' one pound thirty . ' that be pay for the mater'al and pay I , but 
 none too much , for my work . th ' old squire look up at this , and peer 
 in his way at the screen , and say , ' one pound thirteen for a gimcrack 
 like that ! Lydia , my dear , if you must spend money on these thing , 
 why do not   you get they at Rosseter , instead of pay double price for 
 clumsy work here ? such thing be not work for a carpenter like Adam . 
 give he a guinea , and no more . ' well , Miss Lyddy , I reckon , believe 
 what he tell she , and she be not overfond o ' parting with the money 
 herself - she be not a bad woman at bottom , but she be be bring up 
 under his thumb ; so she begin fidget with her purse , and turn as 
 red as her ribbon . but I make a bow , and say , ' no , thank you , madam ; 
 I will make you a present o ' the screen , if you please . I have   charge 
 the regular price for my work , and I know it be do well ; and I know , 
 beg his Honour 's pardon , that you could not   get such a screen at 
 Rosseter under two guineas . I be willing to give you my work - it be be 
 do in my own time , and nobody be get anything to do with it but I ; but 
 if I be pay , I can not   take a small price than I ask , because that 
 ' ud be like say I have ask more than be just . with your leave , madam , 
 I will bid you good - morning . ' I make my bow and go out before she have 
 time to say any more , for she stand with the purse in her hand , look 
 almost foolish . I do not   mean to be disrespectful , and I speak as polite 
 as I could ; but I can give in to no man , if he want to make it out as 
 I be try to overreach he . and in the evening the footman bring I 
 the one pound thirteen wrap in paper . but since then I have   see pretty 
 clear as th ' old squire can not   abide I . " 
 " that be likely enough , that be likely enough , " say Bartle meditatively . 
 " the only way to bring he round would be to show he what be for his 
 own interest , and that the captain may do - that the captain may do . " 
 " Nay , I do not   know , " say Adam ; " the squire 's ' cute enough but it take 
 something else besides ' cuteness to make folk see what will be their 
 interest in the long run . it take some conscience and belief in right 
 and wrong , I see that pretty clear . you would hardly ever bring round th ' 
 old squire to believe he would gain as much in a straightfor'ard way as by 
 trick and turn . and , besides , I have   not much mind to work under he : 
 I do not   want to quarrel with any gentleman , more particular an old 
 gentleman turn eighty , and I know we could not   agree long . if the 
 captain be master o ' th ' estate , it ' ud be different : he be get a 
 conscience and a will to do right , and I would soon work for he nor for 
 any man live . " 
 " well , well , my boy , if good luck knock at your door , do not   you put 
 your head out at window and tell it to be go about its business , 
 that be all . you must learn to deal with odd and even in life , as well 
 as in figure . I tell you now , as I tell you ten year ago , when you 
 pommel young Mike Holdsworth for want to pass a bad shilling 
 before you know whether he be in jest or earnest - you be overhasty and 
 proud , and apt to set your tooth against folk that do not   square to your 
 notion . it be no harm for I to be a bit fiery and stiff - back - I be an 
 old schoolmaster , and shall never want to get on to a high perch . but 
 where be the use of all the time I have   spend in teach you write and 
 mapping and mensuration , if you be not to get for'ard in the world and 
 show folk there be some advantage in have a head on your shoulder , 
 instead of a turnip ? do you mean to go on turn up your nose at every 
 opportunity because it be get a bit of a smell about it that nobody find 
 out but yourself ? it be as foolish as that notion o ' your that a wife 
 be to make a working - man comfortable . stuff and nonsense ! stuff and 
 nonsense ! leave that to fool that never get beyond a sum in simple 
 addition . simple addition enough ! add one fool to another fool , and in 
 six year ' time six fool more - they be all of the same denomination , 
 big and little 's nothing to do with the sum ! " 
 during this rather heated exhortation to coolness and discretion the 
 pipe have go out , and Bartle give the climax to his speech by strike 
 a light furiously , after which he puff with fierce resolution , fix 
 his eye still on Adam , who be try not to laugh . 
 " there be a good deal o ' sense in what you say , Mr. Massey , " Adam begin , 
 as soon as he feel quite serious , " as there always be . but you will give 
 in that it be no business o ' mine to be build on chance that may 
 never happen . what I have   get to do be to work as well as I can with the 
 tool and mater'al I have   get in my hand . if a good chance come to I , 
 I will think o ' what you have   be say ; but till then , I have   get nothing 
 to do but to trust to my own hand and my own head - piece . I be turn 
 over a little plan for Seth and I to go into the cabinet - make a bit 
 by ourselves , and win a extra pound or two in that way . but it be get 
 late now - it will be pretty near eleven before I be at home , and Mother may 
 happen to lie awake ; she be more fidgety nor usual now . so I will bid you 
 good - night . " 
 " well , well , we will go to the gate with you - it be a fine night , " say 
 Bartle , take up his stick . Vixen be at once on her leg , and without 
 further word the three walk out into the starlight , by the side of 
 Bartle 's potato - bed , to the little gate . 
 " come to the music o ' Friday night , if you can , my boy , " say the old 
 man , as he close the gate after Adam and lean against it . 
 " aye , aye , " say Adam , stride along towards the streak of pale road . 
 he be the only object move on the wide common . the two grey donkey , 
 just visible in front of the gorse bush , stand as still as limestone 
 image - as still as the grey - thatched roof of the mud cottage a little 
 far on . Bartle keep his eye on the move figure till it pass into 
 the darkness , while Vixen , in a state of divided affection , have twice 
 run back to the house to bestow a parenthetic lick on her puppy . 
 " aye , aye , " mutter the schoolmaster , as Adam disappear , " there you 
 go , stalk along - stalk along ; but you would not   have be what you 
 be if you have not   have a bit of old lame Bartle inside you . the strong 
 calf must have something to suck at . there be plenty of these big , 
 lumber fellow ' ud never have know their A b c if it have not   be for 
 Bartle Massey . well , well , Vixen , you foolish wench , what be it , what be 
 it ? I must go in , must I ? aye , aye , I be never to have a will o ' my own 
 any more . and those pup - what do you think I be to do with them , when 
 they be twice as big as you ? for I be pretty sure the father be that 
 hulk bull - terrier of Will Baker 's - be not   he now , eh , you sly hussy ? " 
  here Vixen tuck her tail between her leg and run forward into the 
 house . subject be sometimes broach which a well - breed female will 
 ignore . 
 " but where be the use of talk to a woman with babbie ? " continue 
 Bartle . " she be get no conscience - no conscience ; it be all run to milk . " 
 Book Three 
 Chapter XXII 
 go to the Birthday Feast 
 the thirtieth of July be come , and it be one of those half - dozen warm 
 day which sometimes occur in the middle of a rainy English summer . no 
 rain have fall for the last three or four day , and the weather be 
 perfect for that time of the year : there be less dust than usual on 
 the dark - green hedge - row and on the wild camomile that star the 
 roadside , yet the grass be dry enough for the little child to roll 
 on it , and there be no cloud but a long dash of light , downy ripple , 
 high , high up in the far - off blue sky . perfect weather for an outdoor 
 July merry - making , yet surely not the good time of year to be bear in . 
 Nature seem to make a hot pause just then : all the lovely flower 
 be go ; the sweet time of early growth and vague hope be past ; and 
 yet the time of harvest and ingathere be not come , and we tremble at 
 the possible storm that may ruin the precious fruit in the moment 
 of its ripeness . the wood be all one dark monotonous green ; the 
 waggon - load of hay no long creep along the lane , scatter their 
 sweet - smell fragment on the blackberry branch ; the pasture be 
 often a little tan , yet the corn have not get its last splendour 
 of red and gold ; the lamb and calf have lose all trace of their 
 innocent frisky prettiness , and have become stupid young sheep and cow . 
 but it be a time of leisure on the farm - that pause between hay - and 
 corn - harvest , and so the farmer and labourer in Hayslope and Broxton 
 think the captain do well to come of age just then , when they could 
 give their undivided mind to the flavour of the great cask of ale which 
 have be brew the autumn after " the heir " be bear , and be to be 
 tap on his twenty - first birthday . the air have be merry with the 
 ringing of church - bell very early this morning , and every one have make 
 haste to get through the needful work before twelve , when it would be 
 time to think of get ready to go to the Chase . 
 the midday sun be stream into Hetty 's bedchamber , and there be no 
 blind to temper the heat with which it fall on her head as she look at 
 herself in the old speck glass . still , that be the only glass she have 
 in which she could see her neck and arm , for the small hanging 
 glass she have fetch out of the next room - the room that have be 
 Dinah 's - would show she nothing below her little chin ; and that 
 beautiful bit of neck where the roundness of her cheek melt into 
 another roundness shadow by dark delicate curl . and to - day she 
 think more than usual about her neck and arm ; for at the dance this 
 evening she be not to wear any neckerchief , and she have be busy 
 yesterday with she spot pink - and - white frock , that she might make the 
 sleeve either long or short at will . she be dress now just as she 
 be to be in the evening , with a tucker make of " real " lace , which she 
 aunt have lend she for this unparalleled occasion , but with no ornament 
 besides ; she have even take out her small round ear - ring which she wear 
 every day . but there be something more to be do , apparently , before 
 she put on her neckerchief and long sleeve , which she be to wear in 
 the day - time , for now she unlock the drawer that hold her private 
 treasure . it be more than a month since we see her unlock that drawer 
 before , and now it hold new treasure , so much more precious than the 
 old one that these be thrust into the corner . Hetty would not care to 
 put the large coloured glass ear - ring into her ear now ; for see ! she 
 have get a beautiful pair of gold and pearl and garnet , lie snugly in 
 a pretty little box line with white satin . oh , the delight of take 
 out that little box and look at the ear - ring ! do not reason about 
 it , my philosphical reader , and say that Hetty , be very pretty , must 
 have know that it do not signify whether she have on any ornament 
 or not ; and that , moreover , to look at ear - ring which she could not 
 possibly wear out of her bedroom could hardly be a satisfaction , the 
 essence of vanity be a reference to the impression produce 
 on other ; you will never understand woman 's nature if you be so 
 excessively rational . try rather to divest yourself of all your rational 
 prejudice , as much as if you be study the psychology of a canary 
 bird , and only watch the movement of this pretty round creature as she 
 turn her head on one side with an unconscious smile at the ear - ring 
 nestle in the little box . ah , you think , it be for the sake of the 
 person who have give they to she , and her thought be go back now to 
 the moment when they be put into her hand . no ; else why should she 
 have care to have ear - ring rather than anything else ? and I know that 
 she have long for ear - ring from among all the ornament she could 
 imagine . 
 " little , little ear ! " Arthur have say , pretend to pinch they one 
 evening , as Hetty sit beside he on the grass without her hat . " I wish I 
 have some pretty ear - ring ! " she say in a moment , almost before she know 
 what she be say - the wish lie so close to her lip , it would flutter 
 past they at the slight breath . and the next day - it be only last 
 week - Arthur have ride over to Rosseter on purpose to buy they . that 
 little wish so naively utter seem to he the prettiest bit of 
 childishness ; he have never hear anything like it before ; and he have 
 wrap the box up in a great many cover , that he might see Hetty 
 unwrap it with grow curiosity , till at last her eye flash back 
 their new delight into his . 
 no , she be not think most of the giver when she smile at the 
 ear - ring , for now she be take they out of the box , not to press they 
 to her lip , but to fasten they in her ear - only for one moment , to 
 see how pretty they look , as she peep at they in the glass against 
 the wall , with first one position of the head and then another , like a 
 listening bird . it be impossible to be wise on the subject of ear - ring 
 as one look at she ; what should those delicate pearl and crystal be 
 make for , if not for such ear ? one can not even find fault with the 
 tiny round hole which they leave when they be take out ; perhaps 
 water - nixie , and such lovely thing without soul , have these little 
 round hole in their ear by nature , ready to hang jewel in . and Hetty 
 must be one of they : it be too painful to think that she be a woman , 
 with a woman 's destiny before her - a woman spin in young ignorance a 
 light web of folly and vain hope which may one day close round her and 
 press upon she , a rancorous poison garment , change all at once 
 her fluttering , trivial butterfly sensation into a life of deep human 
 anguish . 
 but she can not keep in the ear - ring long , else she may make her uncle 
 and aunt wait . she put they quickly into the box again and shut they 
 up . some day she will be able to wear any ear - ring she like , 
 and already she live in an invisible world of brilliant costume , 
 shimmer gauze , soft satin , and velvet , such as the lady 's maid at the 
 Chase have show she in Miss Lydia 's wardrobe . she feel the bracelet on 
 her arm , and tread on a soft carpet in front of a tall mirror . but 
 she have one thing in the drawer which she can venture to wear to - day , 
 because she can hang it on the chain of dark - brown berry which she have 
 be use to wear on grand day , with a tiny flat scent - bottle at 
 the end of it tuck inside her frock ; and she must put on her brown 
 berry - her neck would look so unfinished without it . Hetty be 
 not quite as fond of the locket as of the ear - ring , though it be 
 a handsome large locket , with enamel flower at the back and a 
 beautiful gold border round the glass , which show a light - brown 
 slightly wave lock , form a background for two little dark ring . 
 she must keep it under her clothe , and no one would see it . but Hetty 
 have another passion , only a little less strong than her love of finery , 
 and that other passion make she like to wear the locket even hide in 
 her bosom . she would always have wear it , if she have dare to encounter 
 her aunt 's question about a ribbon round her neck . so now she slip 
 it on along her chain of dark - brown berry , and snap the chain round 
 her neck . it be not a very long chain , only allow the locket to hang 
 a little way below the edge of her frock . and now she have nothing to do 
 but to put on her long sleeve , her new white gauze neckerchief , and 
 her straw hat trim with white to - day instead of the pink , which 
 have become rather fade under the July sun . that hat make the drop of 
 bitterness in Hetty 's cup to - day , for it be not quite new - everybody 
 would see that it be a little tan against the white ribbon - and Mary 
 Burge , she feel sure , would have a new hat or bonnet on . she look for 
 consolation at her fine white cotton stocking : they really be very 
 nice indeed , and she have give almost all her spare money for they . 
 Hetty 's dream of the future could not make she insensible to triumph in 
 the present . to be sure , Captain Donnithorne love she so that he would 
 never care about look at other people , but then those other people 
 do not   know how he love she , and she be not satisfied to appear shabby 
 and insignificant in their eye even for a short space . 
 the whole party be assemble in the house - place when Hetty go down , 
 all of course in their Sunday clothe ; and the bell have be ring so 
 this morning in honour of the captain 's twenty - first birthday , and the 
 work have all be get do so early , that Marty and Tommy be not quite 
 easy in their mind until their mother have assure they that go 
 to church be not part of the day 's festivity . Mr. Poyser have once 
 suggest that the house should be shut up and leave to take care 
 of itself ; " for , " say he , " there be no danger of anybody 's break 
 in - everybody'll be at the Chase , thieve an ' all . if we lock th ' house 
 up , all the man can go : it be a day they wonna see twice I ' their life . " 
 but Mrs. Poyser answer with great decision : " I never leave the house to 
 take care of itself since I be a missis , and I never will . there be be 
 ill - look tramp enoo ' about the place this last week , to carry off 
 every ham an ' every spoon we'n get ; and they all collogue together , 
 they tramp , as it be a mercy they hanna come and poison the dog and 
 murder we all in our bed afore we know , some Friday night when 
 we'n get the money in th ' house to pay the man . and it be like enough the 
 tramp know where we be go as well as we do oursen ; for if Old Harry 
 want any work do , you may be sure he will find the mean . " 
 " nonsense about murder we in our bed , " say Mr. Poyser ; " I have   get a 
 gun I ' our room , hanna I ? and thee'st get ear as ' ud find it out if a 
 mouse be gnaw the bacon . Howiver , if thee wouldstna be easy , Alick 
 can stay at home I ' the forepart o ' the day , and Tim can come back 
 tow'rd five o'clock , and let Alick have his turn . they may let Growler 
 loose if anybody offer to do mischief , and there be Alick 's dog too , 
 ready enough to set his tooth in a tramp if Alick give he a wink . " 
 Mrs. Poyser accept this compromise , but think it advisable to bar 
 and bolt to the utmost ; and now , at the last moment before start , 
 Nancy , the dairy - maid , be close the shutter of the house - place , 
 although the window , lie under the immediate observation of Alick and 
 the dog , might have be suppose the least likely to be select for a 
 burglarious attempt . 
 the covered cart , without spring , be stand ready to carry the whole 
 family except the man - servant . Mr. Poyser and the grandfather sit 
 on the seat in front , and within there be room for all the woman and 
 child ; the fuller the cart the well , because then the jolting 
 would not hurt so much , and Nancy 's broad person and thick arm be an 
 excellent cushion to be pitch on . but Mr. Poyser drive at no more 
 than a walk pace , that there might be as little risk of jolt as 
 possible on this warm day , and there be time to exchange greeting and 
 remark with the foot - passenger who be go the same way , speck 
 the path between the green meadow and the golden cornfield with bit 
 of movable bright colour - a scarlet waistcoat to match the poppy that 
 nod a little too thickly among the corn , or a dark - blue neckerchief 
 with end flaunt across a brand - new white smock - frock . all Broxton 
 and all Hayslope be to be at the Chase , and make merry there in honour 
 of " th ' heir " ; and the old man and woman , who have never be so far down 
 this side of the hill for the last twenty year , be be bring from 
 Broxton and Hayslope in one of the farmer 's waggon , at Mr. Irwine 's 
 suggestion . the church - bell have strike up again now - a last tune , 
 before the ringer come down the hill to have their share in the 
 festival ; and before the bell have finish , other music be hear 
 approach , so that even Old Brown , the sober horse that be draw 
 Mr. Poyser 's cart , begin to prick up his ear . it be the band of the 
 Benefit Club , which have muster in all its glory - that be to say , in 
 bright - blue scarf and blue favour , and carry its banner with 
 the motto , " let brotherly love continue , " encircle a picture of a 
 stone - pit . 
 the cart , of course , be not to enter the Chase . every one must get 
 down at the lodge , and the vehicle must be send back . 
 " why , the Chase be like a fair a'ready , " say Mrs. Poyser , as she get 
 down from the cart , and see the group scatter under the great oak , 
 and the boy run about in the hot sunshine to survey the tall pole 
 surmount by the flutter garment that be to be the prize of the 
 successful climber . " I should ha ' think there wasna so many people 
 I ' the two parish . mercy on we ! how hot it be out o ' the shade ! come 
 here , Totty , else your little face ' ull be burn to a scratchin ' ! they 
 might ha ' cook the dinner I ' that open space an ' save the fire . I 
 shall go to Mrs. Best 's room an ' sit down . " 
 " stop a bit , stop a bit , " say Mr. Poyser . " there be th ' waggin come 
 wi ' th ' old folk in't ; it will be such a sight as wonna come o'er again , 
 to see them get down an ' walk along all together . you remember some on 
 them I ' their prime , eh , Father ? " 
 " aye , aye , " say old Martin , walk slowly under the shade of the lodge 
 porch , from which he could see the aged party descend . " I remember Jacob 
 Taft walk fifty mile after the Scotch raybel , when they turn back 
 from Stoniton . " 
 he feel himself quite a youngster , with a long life before he , as he 
 see the Hayslope patriarch , old Feyther Taft , descend from the waggon 
 and walk towards he , in his brown nightcap , and lean on his two 
 stick . 
 " well , Mester Taft , " shout old Martin , at the utmost stretch of his 
 voice - for though he know the old man be stone deaf , he could not omit 
 the propriety of a greeting - " you be hearty yet . you can enjoy yoursen 
 to - day , for - all you be ninety an ' well . " 
 " your sarvant , mester , your sarvant , " say Feyther Taft in a treble 
 tone , perceive that he be in company . 
 the aged group , under care of son or daughter , themselves wear and 
 grey , pass on along the least - wind carriage - road towards the house , 
 where a special table be prepare for they ; while the Poyser party 
 wisely strike across the grass under the shade of the great tree , 
 but not out of view of the house - front , with its slop lawn and 
 flower - bed , or of the pretty striped marquee at the edge of the lawn , 
 stand at right angle with two large marquee on each side of the 
 open green space where the game be to be play . the house would have 
 be nothing but a plain square mansion of Queen Anne 's time , but for 
 the remnant of an old abbey to which it be unite at one end , in much 
 the same way as one may sometimes see a new farmhouse rise high and 
 prim at the end of old and low farm - office . the fine old remnant 
 stand a little backward and under the shadow of tall beech , but the 
 sun be now on the tall and more advanced front , the blind be all 
 down , and the house seem asleep in the hot midday . it make Hetty quite 
 sad to look at it : Arthur must be somewhere in the back room , with the 
 grand company , where he could not possibly know that she be come , and 
 she should not see he for a long , long while - not till after dinner , 
 when they say he be to come up and make a speech . 
 but Hetty be wrong in part of her conjecture . no grand company be 
 come except the Irwines , for whom the carriage have be send early , 
 and Arthur be at that moment not in a back room , but walk with the 
 rector into the broad stone cloister of the old abbey , where the long 
 table be lay for all the cottage tenant and the farm - servant . 
 a very handsome young Briton he look to - day , in high spirit and a 
 bright - blue frock - coat , the high mode - his arm no long in a sling . 
 so open - look and candid , too ; but candid people have their secret , 
 and secret leave no line in young face . 
 " upon my word , " he say , as they enter the cool cloister , " I think 
 the cottager have the good of it : these cloister make a delightful 
 dining - room on a hot day . that be capital advice of your , Irwine , 
 about the dinner - to let they be as orderly and comfortable as 
 possible , and only for the tenant : especially as I have only a limited 
 sum after all ; for though my grandfather talk of a carte blanche , he 
 could not   make up his mind to trust I , when it come to the point . " 
 " never mind , you will give more pleasure in this quiet way , " say Mr. 
 Irwine . " in this sort of thing people be constantly confound 
 liberality with riot and disorder . it sound very grand to say that so 
 many sheep and oxen be roasted whole , and everybody eat who like 
 to come ; but in the end it generally happen that no one have have an 
 enjoyable meal . if the people get a good dinner and a moderate quantity 
 of ale in the middle of the day , they will be able to enjoy the game 
 as the day cool . you can not   hinder some of they from get too much 
 towards evening , but drunkenness and darkness go well together than 
 drunkenness and daylight . " 
 " well , I hope there will not   be much of it . I have   keep the Treddleston 
 people away by have a feast for they in the town ; and I have   get Casson 
 and Adam Bede and some other good fellow to look to the giving out of 
 ale in the booth , and to take care thing do not   go too far . come , let 
 we go up above now and see the dinner - table for the large tenant . " 
 they go up the stone staircase lead simply to the long gallery 
 above the cloister , a gallery where all the dusty worthless old 
 picture have be banish for the last three generation - mouldy 
 portrait of Queen Elizabeth and her lady , General Monk with his eye 
 knock out , Daniel very much in the dark among the lion , and Julius 
 Caesar on horseback , with a high nose and laurel crown , hold his 
 Commentaries in his hand . 
 " what a capital thing it be that they save this piece of the old 
 abbey ! " say Arthur . " if I be ever master here , I shall do up the gallery 
 in first - rate style . we have   get no room in the house a third as large 
 as this . that second table be for the farmer ' wife and child : Mrs. 
 Best say it would be more comfortable for the mother and child 
 to be by themselves . I be determined to have the child , and make a 
 regular family thing of it . I shall be ' the old squire ' to those little 
 lad and lass some day , and they will tell their child what a much 
 fine young fellow I be than my own son . there be a table for the woman 
 and child below as well . but you will see they all - you will come up 
 with I after dinner , I hope ? " 
 " yes , to be sure , " say Mr. Irwine . " I would not   miss your maiden speech 
 to the tenantry . " 
 " and there will be something else you will like to hear , " say Arthur . 
 " let we go into the library and I will tell you all about it while my 
 grandfather be in the drawing - room with the lady . something that will 
 surprise you , " he continue , as they sit down . " my grandfather have come 
 round after all . " 
 " what , about Adam ? " 
 " yes ; I should have ride over to tell you about it , only I be so 
 busy . you know I tell you I have quite give up argue the matter with 
 he - I think it be hopeless - but yesterday morning he ask I to 
 come in here to he before I go out , and astonish I by say that 
 he have decide on all the new arrangement he should make in consequence 
 of old Satchell be oblige to lay by work , and that he intend to 
 employ Adam in superintend the wood at a salary of a guinea a - week , 
 and the use of a pony to be keep here . I believe the secret of it be , 
 he see from the first it would be a profitable plan , but he have some 
 particular dislike of Adam to get over - and besides , the fact that I 
 propose a thing be generally a reason with he for reject it . there be 
 the most curious contradiction in my grandfather : I know he mean to 
 leave I all the money he have save , and he be likely enough to have cut 
 off poor Aunt Lydia , who have be a slave to he all her life , with only 
 five hundred a - year , for the sake of give I all the more ; and yet I 
 sometimes think he positively hat I because I be his heir . I believe 
 if I be to break my neck , he would feel it the great misfortune 
 that could befall he , and yet it seem a pleasure to he to make my 
 life a series of petty annoyance . " 
 " ah , my boy , it be not only woman 's love that be   two greek word 
 omit   as old AEschylus call it . there be plenty of ' unlove love ' in 
 the world of a masculine kind . but tell I about Adam . have he accept 
 the post ? I do not   see that it can be much more profitable than his 
 present work , though , to be sure , it will leave he a good deal of time 
 on his own hand . 
 " well , I feel some doubt about it when I speak to he and he seem to 
 hesitate at first . his objection be that he think he should not be 
 able to satisfy my grandfather . but I beg he as a personal favour 
 to I not to let any reason prevent he from accept the place , if he 
 really like the employment and would not be give up anything that 
 be more profitable to he . and he assure I he should like it of all 
 thing - it would be a great step forward for he in business , and it 
 would enable he to do what he have long wish to do , to give up working 
 for Burge . he say he shall have plenty of time to superintend a little 
 business of his own , which he and Seth will carry on , and will perhaps 
 be able to enlarge by degree . so he have agree at last , and I have 
 arrange that he shall dine with the large tenant to - day ; and I mean to 
 announce the appointment to they , and ask they to drink Adam 's health . 
 it be a little drama I have   get up in honour of my friend Adam . he be a fine 
 fellow , and I like the opportunity of let people know that I think 
 so . " 
 " a drama in which friend Arthur pique himself on have a pretty part 
 to play , " say Mr. Irwine , smile . but when he see Arthur colour , he 
 go on relentingly , " my part , you know , be always that of the old fogy 
 who see nothing to admire in the young folk . I do not   like to admit 
 that I be proud of my pupil when he do graceful thing . but I must play 
 the amiable old gentleman for once , and second your toast in honour of 
 Adam . have your grandfather yield on the other point too , and agree to 
 have a respectable man as steward ? " 
 " oh no , " say Arthur , rise from his chair with an air of impatience 
 and walk along the room with his hand in his pocket . " he be get 
 some project or other about let the Chase Farm and bargaining for 
 a supply of milk and butter for the house . but I ask no question about 
 it - it make I too angry . I believe he mean to do all the business 
 himself , and have nothing in the shape of a steward . it be amazing what 
 energy he have , though . " 
 " well , we will go to the lady now , " say Mr. Irwine , rise too . " I want 
 to tell my mother what a splendid throne you have   prepare for she under 
 the marquee . " 
 " yes , and we must be go to luncheon too , " say Arthur . " it must be 
 two o'clock , for there be the gong begin to sound for the tenant ' 
 dinner . " 
 Chapter XXIII 
 Dinner - Time 
 when Adam hear that he be to dine upstairs with the large tenant , he 
 feel rather uncomfortable at the idea of be exalt in this way above 
 his mother and Seth , who be to dine in the cloister below . but 
 Mr. Mills , the butler , assure he that Captain Donnithorne have give 
 particular order about it , and would be very angry if Adam be not 
 there . 
 Adam nod and go up to Seth , who be stand a few yard off . 
 " Seth , lad , " he say , " the captain have send to say I be to dine 
 upstairs - he wish it particular , Mr. Mills say , so I suppose it ' ud 
 be behave ill for I not to go . but I do not   like sit up above thee 
 and mother , as if I be well than my own flesh and blood . thee't not 
 take it unkind , I hope ? " 
 " Nay , nay , lad , " say Seth , " thy honour be our honour ; and if thee get'st 
 respect , thee'st win it by thy own desert . the far I see thee 
 above I , the well , so long as thee feel'st like a brother to I . 
 it be because o ' thy be appoint over the wood , and it be nothing but 
 what be right . that be a place o ' trust , and thee't above a common workman 
 now . " 
 " aye , " say Adam , " but nobody know a word about it yet . I have not   give 
 notice to Mr. Burge about leave he , and I do not   like to tell anybody 
 else about it before he know , for he will be a good bit hurt , I doubt . 
 People ' ull be wonder to see I there , and they will like enough be 
 guess the reason and ask question , for there be be so much talk 
 up and down about my have the place , this last three week . " 
 " well , thee canst say thee wast order to come without be tell the 
 reason . that be the truth . and mother ' ull be fine and joyful about it . 
 let us go and tell she . " 
 Adam be not the only guest invite to come upstairs on other ground 
 than the amount he contribute to the rent - roll . there be other people 
 in the two parish who derive dignity from their function rather than 
 from their pocket , and of these Bartle Massey be one . his lame walk be 
 rather slow than usual on this warm day , so Adam linger behind when 
 the bell ring for dinner , that he might walk up with his old friend ; 
 for he be a little too shy to join the Poyser party on this public 
 occasion . opportunity of get to Hetty 's side would be sure to turn 
 up in the course of the day , and Adam content himself with that for 
 he dislike any risk of be " joke " about Hetty - the big , outspoken , 
 fearless man be very shy and diffident as to his love - making . 
 " well , Mester Massey , " say Adam , as Bartle come up " I be go to dine 
 upstairs with you to - day : the captain 's send I order . " 
 " ah ! " say Bartle , pausing , with one hand on his back . " then there be 
 something in the wind - there be something in the wind . have you hear 
 anything about what the old squire mean to do ? " 
 " why , yes , " say Adam ; " I will tell you what I know , because I believe you 
 can keep a still tongue in your head if you like , and I hope you will 
 not let drop a word till it be common talk , for I have   particular reason 
 against its be know . " 
 " trust to I , my boy , trust to I . I have   get no wife to worm it out of 
 I and then run out and cackle it in everybody 's hearing . if you trust a 
 man , let he be a bachelor - let he be a bachelor . " 
 " well , then , it be so far settle yesterday that I be to take the 
 management o ' the wood . the captain send for I t ' offer it I , when 
 I be see to the pole and thing here and I have   agree to't . but if 
 anybody ask any question upstairs , just you take no notice , and turn 
 the talk to something else , and I will be oblige to you . now , let we go 
 on , for we be pretty nigh the last , I think . " 
 " I know what to do , never fear , " say Bartle , move on . " the news will 
 be good sauce to my dinner . aye , aye , my boy , you will get on . I will back 
 you for an eye at measure and a head - piece for figure , against 
 any man in this county and you have   have good teaching - you have   have good 
 teaching . " 
 when they get upstairs , the question which Arthur have leave unsettled , as 
 to who be to be president , and who vice , be still under discussion , so 
 that Adam 's entrance pass without remark . 
 " it stand to sense , " Mr. Casson be say , " as old Mr. Poyser , as be 
 th ' old man I ' the room , should sit at top o ' the table . I be not 
 butler fifteen year without learn the right and the wrong about 
 dinner . " 
 " Nay , nay , " say old Martin , " I'n gi'en up to my son ; I be no tenant now : 
 let my son take my place . Th ' ould foulks ha ' have their turn : they mun 
 make way for the young un . " 
 " I should ha ' think the big tenant have the good right , more nor 
 th ' old , " say Luke Britton , who be not fond of the critical Mr. 
 Poyser ; " there be Mester Holdsworth have more land nor anybody else on th ' 
 estate . " 
 " well , " say Mr. Poyser , ' suppose we say the man wi ' the foul land 
 shall sit at top ; then whoever get th ' honour , there will be no envying 
 on he . " 
 " eh , here be Mester Massey , " say Mr. Craig , who , be a neutral in the 
 dispute , have no interest but in conciliation ; " the schoolmaster ought to 
 be able to tell you what be right . who be to sit at top o ' the table , Mr. 
 Massey ? " 
 " why , the broad man , " say Bartle ; " and then he will not   take up other 
 folk ' room ; and the next broad must sit at bottom . " 
 this happy mode of settle the dispute produce much laughter - a 
 small joke would have suffice for that Mr. Casson , however , do not 
 feel it compatible with his dignity and superior knowledge to join 
 in the laugh , until it turn out that he be fix on as the second 
 broad man . Martin Poyser the young , as the broad , be to be 
 president , and Mr. Casson , as next broad , be to be vice . 
 owe to this arrangement , Adam , be , of course , at the bottom of the 
 table , fall under the immediate observation of Mr. Casson , who , too much 
 occupy with the question of precedence , have not hitherto notice his 
 entrance . Mr. Casson , we have see , consider Adam " rather lift up 
 and peppery - like " : he think the gentry make more fuss about this 
 young carpenter than be necessary ; they make no fuss about Mr. Casson , 
 although he have be an excellent butler for fifteen year . 
 " well , Mr. Bede , you be one o ' they as mount hup'ard apace , " he say , 
 when Adam sit down . " you have   niver din here before , as I remember . " 
 " no , Mr. Casson , " say Adam , in his strong voice , that could be hear 
 along the table ; " I have   never din here before , but I come by Captain 
 Donnithorne 's wish , and I hope it be not disagreeable to anybody here . " 
 " Nay , nay , " say several voice at once , " we be glad ye're come . who be 
 get anything to say again ' it ? " 
 " and ye'll sing we ' over the hill and far away , ' after dinner , wonna 
 ye ? " say Mr. Chowne . " that be a song I be uncommon fond on . " 
 " Peeh ! " say Mr. Craig ; " it be not to be name by side o ' the Scotch 
 tune . I have   never care about sing myself ; I have   have something well 
 to do . a man that be get the name and the natur o ' plant in 's head isna 
 likely to keep a hollow place t ' hold tune in . but a second cousin o ' 
 mine , a drovier , be a rare hand at remember the Scotch tune . he would 
 get nothing else to think on . " 
 " the Scotch tune ! " say Bartle Massey , contemptuously ; " I have   hear 
 enough o ' the Scotch tune to last I while I live . they be fit for 
 nothing but to frighten the bird with - that be to say , the English 
 bird , for the Scotch bird may sing Scotch for what I know . give the 
 lad a bagpipe instead of a rattle , and I will answer for it the corn will 
 be safe . " 
 " yes , there be folk as find a pleasure in undervallye what they know 
 but little about , " say Mr. Craig . 
 " why , the Scotch tune be just like a scolding , nagging woman , " Bartle 
 go on , without deign to notice Mr. Craig 's remark . " they go on with 
 the same thing over and over again , and never come to a reasonable end . 
 anybody ' ud think the Scotch tune have always be ask a question of 
 somebody as deaf as old Taft , and have never get an answer yet . " 
 Adam mind the less about sit by Mr. Casson , because this position 
 enable he to see Hetty , who be not far off he at the next table . 
 Hetty , however , have not even notice his presence yet , for she be 
 give angry attention to Totty , who insist on draw up her foot on 
 to the bench in antique fashion , and thereby threaten to make dusty 
 mark on Hetty 's pink - and - white frock . no soon be the little fat 
 leg push down than up they come again , for Totty 's eye be too busy 
 in star at the large dish to see where the plum pudding be for 
 she to retain any consciousness of her leg . Hetty get quite out of 
 patience , and at last , with a frown and pout , and gather tear , she 
 say , " oh dear , Aunt , I wish you would speak to Totty ; she keep put she 
 leg up so , and mess my frock . " 
 " what be the matter wi ' the child ? she can niver please you , " say the 
 mother . " let she come by the side o ' I , then . I can put up wi ' she . " 
 Adam be look at Hetty , and see the frown , and pout , and the dark 
 eye seem to grow large with pettish half - gather tear . Quiet Mary 
 Burge , who sit near enough to see that Hetty be cross and that Adam 's 
 eye be fix on she , think that so sensible a man as Adam must be 
 reflect on the small value of beauty in a woman whose temper be bad . 
 Mary be a good girl , not give to indulge in evil feeling , but she 
 say to herself , that , since Hetty have a bad temper , it be well Adam 
 should know it . and it be quite true that if Hetty have be plain , she 
 would have look very ugly and unamiable at that moment , and no one 's 
 moral judgment upon she would have be in the least beguile . but 
 really there be something quite charming in her pettishness : it look 
 so much more like innocent distress than ill humour ; and the severe Adam 
 feel no movement of disapprobation ; he only feel a sort of amused pity , 
 as if he have see a kitten set up its back , or a little bird with 
 its feather ruffle . he could not gather what be vex she , but it 
 be impossible to he to feel otherwise than that she be the prettiest 
 thing in the world , and that if he could have his way , nothing should 
 ever vex she any more . and presently , when Totty be go , she catch 
 his eye , and her face break into one of its bright smile , as she 
 nod to he . it be a bit of flirtation - she know Mary Burge be 
 look at they . but the smile be like wine to Adam . 
 Chapter XXIV 
 the Health - Drinking 
 when the dinner be over , and the first draught from the great cask of 
 birthday ale be bring up , room be make for the broad Mr. Poyser at 
 the side of the table , and two chair be place at the head . it have 
 be settle very definitely what Mr. Poyser be to do when the young 
 squire should appear , and for the last five minute he have be in a 
 state of abstraction , with his eye fix on the dark picture opposite , 
 and his hand busy with the loose cash and other article in his 
 breech pocket . 
 when the young squire enter , with Mr. Irwine by his side , every one 
 stand up , and this moment of homage be very agreeable to Arthur . he 
 like to feel his own importance , and besides that , he care a great 
 deal for the good - will of these people : he be fond of think that 
 they have a hearty , special regard for he . the pleasure he feel be in 
 his face as he say , " my grandfather and I hope all our friend here 
 have enjoy their dinner , and find my birthday ale good . Mr. Irwine 
 and I be come to taste it with you , and I be sure we shall all like 
 anything the well that the rector share with we . " 
 all eye be now turn on Mr. Poyser , who , with his hand still busy 
 in his pocket , begin with the deliberateness of a slow - strike clock . 
 " Captain , my neighbour have put it upo ' I to speak for them to - day , for 
 where folk think pretty much alike , one spokesman be as good as a score . 
 and though we have   mayhappen get contrairy way o ' thinking about a many 
 thing - one man lay down his land one way an ' another another - an ' I will 
 not take it upon I to speak to no man 's farming , but my own - this I will 
 say , as we be all o ' one mind about our young squire . we have   pretty nigh 
 all on we know you when you war a little un , an ' we have   niver know 
 anything on you but what be good an ' honorable . you speak fair an ' 
 y ' act fair , an ' we be joyful when we look forrard to your be our 
 landlord , for we b'lieve you mean to do right by everybody , an ' ' ull 
 make no man 's bread bitter to he if you can help it . that be what I 
 mean , an ' that be what we all mean ; and when a man 's say what he mean , 
 he would well stop , for th ' ale ' ull be none the well for stannin ' . an ' 
 I will not say how we like th ' ale yet , for we couldna well taste it till 
 we would drunk your health in it ; but the dinner be good , an ' if there be 
 anybody hasna enjoy it , it must be the fault of his own inside . an ' as 
 for the rector 's company , it be well know as that be welcome t ' all the 
 parish wherever he may be ; an ' I hope , an ' we all hope , as he will live 
 to see we old folk , an ' our child grow to man an ' woman an ' your 
 Honour a family man . I have   no more to say as concern the present time , 
 an ' so we will drink our young squire 's health - three time three . " 
 Hereupon a glorious shouting , a rapping , a jingling , a clattering , and a 
 shouting , with plentiful da capo , pleasanter than a strain of sublimest 
 music in the ear that receive such a tribute for the first time . Arthur 
 have feel a twinge of conscience during Mr. Poyser 's speech , but it be 
 too feeble to nullify the pleasure he feel in be praise . do he not 
 deserve what be say of he on the whole ? if there be something in 
 his conduct that Poyser would not   have like if he have know it , why , 
 no man 's conduct will bear too close an inspection ; and Poyser be not 
 likely to know it ; and , after all , what have he do ? go a little too 
 far , perhaps , in flirtation , but another man in his place would have 
 act much bad ; and no harm would come - no harm should come , for the 
 next time he be alone with Hetty , he would explain to she that she must 
 not think seriously of he or of what have pass . it be necessary 
 to Arthur , you perceive , to be satisfied with himself . uncomfortable 
 thought must be get rid of by good intention for the future , which can 
 be form so rapidly that he have time to be uncomfortable and to become 
 easy again before Mr. Poyser 's slow speech be finish , and when it be 
 time for he to speak he be quite light - hearted . 
 " I thank you all , my good friend and neighbour , " Arthur say , " for the 
 good opinion of I , and the kind feeling towards I which Mr. Poyser 
 have be express on your behalf and on his own , and it will always be 
 my heartiest wish to deserve they . in the course of thing we may expect 
 that , if I live , I shall one day or other be your landlord ; indeed , it 
 be on the ground of that expectation that my grandfather have wish I 
 to celebrate this day and to come among you now ; and I look forward to 
 this position , not merely as one of power and pleasure for myself , but 
 as a means of benefit my neighbour . it hardly become so young a man 
 as I be to talk much about farming to you , who be most of you so much 
 old , and be man of experience ; still , I have interest myself a good 
 deal in such matter , and learn as much about they as my opportunity 
 have allow ; and when the course of event shall place the estate in 
 my hand , it will be my first desire to afford my tenant all the 
 encouragement a landlord can give they , in improve their land and 
 try to bring about a well practice of husbandry . it will be my wish 
 to be look on by all my deserve tenant as their good friend , and 
 nothing would make I so happy as to be able to respect every man on 
 the estate , and to be respect by he in return . it be not my place 
 at present to enter into particular ; I only meet your good hope 
 concern I by tell you that my own hope correspond to they - that 
 what you expect from I I desire to fulfil ; and I be quite of Mr. 
 Poyser 's opinion , that when a man have say what he mean , he have well 
 stop . but the pleasure I feel in have my own health drunk by you would 
 not be perfect if we do not drink the health of my grandfather , who have 
 fill the place of both parent to I . I will say no more , until you 
 have join I in drink his health on a day when he have wish I to 
 appear among you as the future representative of his name and family . " 
 perhaps there be no one present except Mr. Irwine who thoroughly 
 understand and approve Arthur 's graceful mode of propose his 
 grandfather 's health . the farmer think the young squire know well 
 enough that they hat the old squire , and Mrs. Poyser say , " he would 
 well not ha ' stir a kettle o ' sour broth . " the bucolic mind do 
 not readily apprehend the refinement of good taste . but the toast could 
 not be reject and when it have be drunk , Arthur say , " I thank you , 
 both for my grandfather and myself ; and now there be one more thing I 
 wish to tell you , that you may share my pleasure about it , as I hope 
 and believe you will . I think there can be no man here who have not a 
 respect , and some of you , I be sure , have a very high regard , for my 
 friend Adam Bede . it be well known to every one in this neighbourhood 
 that there be no man whose word can be more depended on than his ; that 
 whatever he undertake to do , he do well , and be as careful for the 
 interest of those who employ he as for his own . I be proud to say that 
 I be very fond of Adam when I be a little boy , and I have never lose 
 my old feeling for he - I think that show that I know a good fellow 
 when I find he . it have long be my wish that he should have the 
 management of the wood on the estate , which happen to be very valuable , 
 not only because I think so highly of his character , but because he have 
 the knowledge and the skill which fit he for the place . and I be happy 
 to tell you that it be my grandfather 's wish too , and it be now settle 
 that Adam shall manage the wood - a change which I be sure will be very 
 much for the advantage of the estate ; and I hope you will by and by join 
 I in drink his health , and in wish he all the prosperity in life 
 that he deserve . but there be a still old friend of mine than Adam 
 Bede present , and I need not tell you that it be Mr. Irwine . I be sure 
 you will agree with I that we must drink no other person 's health until 
 we have drink his . I know you have all reason to love he , but no one of 
 his parishioner have so much reason as I. Come , charge your glass , and 
 let we drink to our excellent rector - three time three ! " 
 this toast be drunk with all the enthusiasm that be want to the 
 last , and it certainly be the most picturesque moment in the scene when 
 Mr. Irwine get up to speak , and all the face in the room be turn 
 towards he . the superior refinement of his face be much more striking 
 than that of Arthur 's when see in comparison with the people round 
 they . Arthur 's be a much common british face , and the splendour of 
 his new - fashioned clothe be more akin to the young farmer 's taste 
 in costume than Mr. Irwine 's powder and the well - brush but well - wear 
 black , which seem to be his choose suit for great occasion ; for he 
 have the mysterious secret of never wear a new - look coat . 
 " this be not the first time , by a great many , " he say , " that I have 
 have to thank my parishioner for give I token of their goodwill , but 
 neighbourly kindness be among those thing that be the more precious 
 the old they get . indeed , our pleasant meeting to - day be a proof that 
 when what be good come of age and be likely to live , there be reason 
 for rejoice , and the relation between we as clergyman and parishioner 
 come of age two year ago , for it be three - and - twenty year since I 
 first come among you , and I see some tall fine - look young man here , 
 as well as some bloom young woman , that be far from look as 
 pleasantly at I when I christen they as I be happy to see they 
 look now . but I be sure you will not wonder when I say that among all 
 those young man , the one in whom I have the strong interest be my 
 friend Mr. Arthur Donnithorne , for whom you have just express your 
 regard . I have the pleasure of be his tutor for several year , and 
 have naturally have opportunity of know he intimately which can not 
 have occur to any one else who be present ; and I have some pride as 
 well as pleasure in assure you that I share your high hope concern 
 he , and your confidence in his possession of those quality which will 
 make he an excellent landlord when the time shall come for he to take 
 that important position among you . we feel alike on most matter on 
 which a man who be get towards fifty can feel in common with a young 
 man of one - and - twenty , and he have just be express a feeling which 
 I share very heartily , and I would not willingly omit the opportunity of 
 say so . that feeling be his value and respect for Adam Bede . People 
 in a high station be of course more thought of and talk about and 
 have their virtue more praise , than those whose life be pass in 
 humble everyday work ; but every sensible man know how necessary that 
 humble everyday work be , and how important it be to we that it should be 
 do well . and I agree with my friend Mr. Arthur Donnithorne in feel 
 that when a man whose duty lie in that sort of work show a character 
 which would make he an example in any station , his merit should be 
 acknowledge . he be one of those to whom honour be due , and his friend 
 should delight to honour he . I know Adam Bede well - I know what he be 
 as a workman , and what he have be as a son and brother - and I be say 
 the simple truth when I say that I respect he as much as I respect 
 any man live . but I be not speak to you about a stranger ; some of 
 you be his intimate friend , and I believe there be not one here who 
 do not know enough of he to join heartily in drink his health . " 
 as Mr. Irwine pause , Arthur jump up and , fill his glass , say , " A 
 bumper to Adam Bede , and may he live to have son as faithful and clever 
 as himself ! " 
 no hearer , not even Bartle Massey , be so delighted with this toast as 
 Mr. Poyser . " tough work " as his first speech have be , he would have 
 start up to make another if he have not know the extreme irregularity 
 of such a course . as it be , he find an outlet for his feeling in 
 drink his ale unusually fast , and set down his glass with a swing 
 of his arm and a determined rap . if Jonathan Burge and a few other 
 feel less comfortable on the occasion , they try their good to look 
 content , and so the toast be drunk with a goodwill apparently 
 unanimous . 
 Adam be rather pale than usual when he get up to thank his friend . he 
 be a good deal move by this public tribute - very naturally , for he be 
 in the presence of all his little world , and it be unite to do he 
 honour . but he feel no shyness about speak , not be trouble 
 with small vanity or lack of word ; he look neither awkward nor 
 embarrassed , but stand in his usual firm upright attitude , with his head 
 throw a little backward and his hand perfectly still , in that rough 
 dignity which be peculiar to intelligent , honest , well - build workman , 
 who be never wonder what be their business in the world . 
 " I be quite take by surprise , " he say . " I do not   expect anything o ' 
 this sort , for it be a good deal more than my wage . but I have   the more 
 reason to be grateful to you , Captain , and to you , Mr. Irwine , and to 
 all my friend here , who have   drunk my health and wish I well . it ' ud 
 be nonsense for I to be say , I do not   at all deserve th ' opinion you 
 have of I ; that ' ud be poor thank to you , to say that you have   know I 
 all these year and yet have not   sense enough to find out a great deal o ' 
 the truth about I . you think , if I undertake to do a bit o ' work , I will 
 do it well , be my pay big or little - and that be true . I would be ashamed 
 to stand before you here if it wasna true . but it seem to I that be 
 a man 's plain duty , and nothing to be conceited about , and it be pretty 
 clear to I as I have   never do more than my duty ; for let we do what we 
 will , it be only make use o ' the sperrit and the power that ha ' be 
 give to we . and so this kindness o ' your , I be sure , be no debt you owe 
 I , but a free gift , and as such I accept it and be thankful . and as to 
 this new employment I have   take in hand , I will only say that I take it 
 at Captain Donnithorne 's desire , and that I will try to fulfil his 
 expectation . I would wish for no well lot than to work under he , and 
 to know that while I be get my own bread I be take care of his 
 int'rest . for I believe he be one o those gentleman as wish to do the 
 right thing , and to leave the world a bit well than he find it , which 
 it be my belief every man may do , whether he be gentle or simple , whether 
 he set a good bit o ' work go and find the money , or whether he do 
 the work with his own hand . there be no occasion for I to say any more 
 about what I feel towards he : I hope to show it through the rest o ' my 
 life in my action . " 
 there be various opinion about Adam 's speech : some of the woman 
 whisper that he do not   show himself thankful enough , and seem to 
 speak as proud as could be ; but most of the man be of opinion that 
 nobody could speak more straightfor'ard , and that Adam be as fine a 
 chap as need to be . while such observation be be buzz about , 
 mingle with wondering as to what the old squire mean to do for a 
 bailiff , and whether he be go to have a steward , the two gentleman 
 have rise , and be walk round to the table where the wife and 
 child sit . there be none of the strong ale here , of course , but 
 wine and dessert - sparkle gooseberry for the young one , and some good 
 sherry for the mother . Mrs. Poyser be at the head of this table , and 
 Totty be now seat in her lap , bend her small nose deep down into a 
 wine - glass in search of the nut float there . 
 " how do you do , Mrs. Poyser ? " say Arthur . " be not   you pleased to hear 
 your husband make such a good speech to - day ? " 
 " oh , sir , the man be mostly so tongue - tie - you be force partly to 
 guess what they mean , as you do wi ' the dumb creatur . " 
 " what ! you think you could have make it well for he ? " say Mr. 
 Irwine , laugh . 
 " well , sir , when I want to say anything , I can mostly find word to say 
 it in , thank God . not as I be a - find faut wi ' my husband , for if he be 
 a man o ' few word , what he say he will stand to . " 
 " I be sure I never see a pretty party than this , " Arthur say , look 
 round at the apple - cheek child . " my aunt and the Miss Irwines will 
 come up and see you presently . they be afraid of the noise of the 
 toast , but it would be a shame for they not to see you at table . " 
 he walk on , speak to the mother and pat the child , while 
 Mr. Irwine satisfy himself with standing still and nod at a 
 distance , that no one 's attention might be disturb from the young 
 squire , the hero of the day . Arthur do not venture to stop near Hetty , 
 but merely bow to she as he pass along the opposite side . the 
 foolish child feel her heart swell with discontent ; for what woman 
 be ever satisfied with apparent neglect , even when she know it to be 
 the mask of love ? Hetty think this be go to be the most miserable 
 day she have have for a long while , a moment of chill daylight and reality 
 come across her dream : Arthur , who have seem so near to she only a few 
 hour before , be separate from she , as the hero of a great procession 
 be separate from a small outsider in the crowd . 
 Chapter XXV 
 the Games 
 the great dance be not to begin until eight o'clock , but for any lad 
 and lass who like to dance on the shady grass before then , there be 
 music always at hand - for be not the band of the Benefit Club capable 
 of play excellent jig , reel , and hornpipe ? and , besides this , 
 there be a grand band hire from Rosseter , who , with their wonderful 
 wind - instrument and puff - out cheek , be themselves a delightful 
 show to the small boy and girl . to say nothing of Joshua Rann 's 
 fiddle , which , by an act of generous forethought , he have provide 
 himself with , in case any one should be of sufficiently pure taste to 
 prefer dance to a solo on that instrument . 
 meantime , when the sun have move off the great open space in front of 
 the house , the game begin . there be , of course , well - soap pole 
 to be climb by the boy and youth , race to be run by the old woman , 
 race to be run in sack , heavy weight to be lift by the strong man , 
 and a long list of challenge to such ambitious attempt as that 
 of walk as many yard possible on one leg - feat in which it be 
 generally remark that Wiry Ben , be " the lissom'st , springest fellow 
 I ' the country , " be sure to be pre - eminent . to crown all , there be to 
 be a donkey - race - that sublimest of all race , conduct on the grand 
 socialistic idea of everybody encourage everybody else 's donkey , and 
 the sorriest donkey win . 
 and soon after four o'clock , splendid old Mrs. Irwine , in her damask 
 satin and jewel and black lace , be lead out by Arthur , follow by the 
 whole family party , to her raise seat under the striped marquee , where 
 she be to give out the prize to the victor . Staid , formal Miss Lydia 
 have request to resign that queenly office to the royal old lady , and 
 Arthur be pleased with this opportunity of gratify his godmother 's 
 taste for stateliness . old Mr. Donnithorne , the delicately clean , 
 finely scented , wither old man , lead out Miss Irwine , with his air of 
 punctilious , acid politeness ; Mr. Gawaine bring Miss Lydia , look 
 neutral and stiff in an elegant peach - blossom silk ; and Mr. Irwine come 
 last with his pale sister Anne . no other friend of the family , besides 
 Mr. Gawaine , be invite to - day ; there be to be a grand dinner for 
 the neighbouring gentry on the morrow , but to - day all the force be 
 require for the entertainment of the tenant . 
 there be a sunk fence in front of the marquee , divide the lawn from 
 the park , but a temporary bridge have be make for the passage of the 
 victor , and the group of people stand , or seat here and there 
 on bench , stretch on each side of the open space from the white 
 marquee up to the sunk fence . 
 " upon my word it be a pretty sight , " say the old lady , in her deep 
 voice , when she be seat , and look round on the bright scene with 
 its dark - green background ; " and it be the last fete - day I be likely to 
 see , unless you make haste and get marry , Arthur . but take care you 
 get a charming bride , else I would rather die without see she . " 
 " you be so terribly fastidious , Godmother , " say Arthur , " I be afraid I 
 should never satisfy you with my choice . " 
 " well , I will not   forgive you if she be not handsome . I can not   be put off 
 with amiability , which be always the excuse people be make for the 
 existence of plain people . and she must not be silly ; that will never 
 do , because you will want manage , and a silly woman can not   manage you . 
 who be that tall young man , Dauphin , with the mild face ? there , stand 
 without his hat , and take such care of that tall old woman by the side 
 of he - his mother , of course . I like to see that . " 
 " what , do not   you know he , Mother ? " say Mr. Irwine . " that be Seth 
 Bede , Adam 's brother - a Methodist , but a very good fellow . poor Seth 
 have look rather down - hearted of late ; I think it be because of his 
 father 's die in that sad way , but Joshua Rann tell I he want to 
 marry that sweet little Methodist preacher who be here about a month 
 ago , and I suppose she refuse he . " 
 " ah , I remember hear about she . but there be no end of people here 
 that I do not   know , for they be grow up and alter so since I use to 
 go about . " 
 " what excellent sight you have ! " say old Mr. Donnithorne , who be 
 hold a double glass up to his eye , " to see the expression of that 
 young man 's face so far off . his face be nothing but a pale blur 
 spot to I . but I fancy I have the advantage of you when we come to look 
 close . I can read small print without spectacle . " 
 " ah , my dear sir , you begin with be very near - sighted , and those 
 near - sighted eye always wear the good . I want very strong spectacle to 
 read with , but then I think my eye get well and well for thing at 
 a distance . I suppose if I could live another fifty year , I should be 
 blind to everything that be not   out of other people 's sight , like a man 
 who stand in a well and see nothing but the star . " 
 " see , " say Arthur , " the old woman be ready to set out on their race 
 now . which do you bet on , Gawaine ? " 
 " the long - legged one , unless they be go to have several heat , and 
 then the little wiry one may win . " 
 " there be the Poysers , Mother , not far off on the right hand , " say 
 Miss Irwine . " Mrs. Poyser be look at you . do take notice of she . " 
 " to be sure I will , " say the old lady , give a gracious bow to Mrs. 
 Poyser . " a woman who send I such excellent cream - cheese be not to 
 be neglect . bless I ! what a fat child that be she be hold on her 
 knee ! but who be that pretty girl with dark eye ? " 
 " that be Hetty Sorrel , " say Miss Lydia Donnithorne , " Martin Poyser 's 
 niece - a very likely young person , and well - look too . my maid have 
 teach her fine needlework , and she have mend some lace of mine very 
 respectably indeed - very respectably . " 
 " why , she have live with the Poysers six or seven year , Mother ; you 
 must have see she , " say Miss Irwine . 
 " no , I have   never see she , child - at least not as she be now , " say Mrs. 
 Irwine , continue to look at Hetty . " well - looking , indeed ! she be a 
 perfect beauty ! I have   never see anything so pretty since my young day . 
 what a pity such beauty as that should be throw away among the farmer , 
 when it be want so terribly among the good family without fortune ! 
 I daresay , now , she will marry a man who would have think she just as 
 pretty if she have have round eye and red hair . " 
 Arthur dare not turn his eye towards Hetty while Mrs. Irwine be 
 speak of she . he feign not to hear , and to be occupy with 
 something on the opposite side . but he see she plainly enough without 
 look ; see she in heighten beauty , because he hear her beauty 
 praise - for other man 's opinion , you know , be like a native climate 
 to Arthur 's feeling : it be the air on which they thrive the good , and 
 grow strong . yes ! she be enough to turn any man 's head : any man in his 
 place would have do and feel the same . and to give she up after all , 
 as he be determined to do , would be an act that he should always look 
 back upon with pride . 
 " no , Mother , " and Mr. Irwine , reply to her last word ; " I can not 
 agree with you there . the common people be not quite so stupid as you 
 imagine . the commonest man , who have his ounce of sense and feeling , 
 be conscious of the difference between a lovely , delicate woman and a 
 coarse one . even a dog feel a difference in their presence . the man may 
 be no well able than the dog to explain the influence the more refined 
 beauty have on he , but he feel it . " 
 " bless I , Dauphin , what do an old bachelor like you know about it ? " 
 " oh , that be one of the matter in which old bachelor be wise than 
 married man , because they have time for more general contemplation . 
 your fine critic of woman must never shackle his judgment by call 
 one woman his own . but , as an example of what I be say , that pretty 
 Methodist preacher I mention just now tell I that she have preach 
 to the roughest miner and have never be treat with anything but the 
 utmost respect and kindness by they . the reason be - though she do not 
 know it - that there be so much tenderness , refinement , and purity about 
 she . such a woman as that bring with her ' air from heaven ' that the 
 coarse fellow be not insensible to . " 
 " here be a delicate bit of womanhood , or girlhood , come to receive a 
 prize , I suppose , " say Mr. Gawaine . " she must be one of the racer in 
 the sack , who have set off before we come . " 
 the " bit of womanhood " be our old acquaintance Bessy Cranage , otherwise 
 Chad 's Bess , whose large red cheek and blowsy person have undergo 
 an exaggeration of colour , which , if she have happen to be a heavenly 
 body , would have make her sublime . Bessy , I be sorry to say , have take 
 to her ear - ring again since Dinah 's departure , and be otherwise deck 
 out in such small finery as she could muster . any one who could have 
 look into poor Bessy 's heart would have see a striking resemblance 
 between her little hope and anxiety and Hetty 's . the advantage , 
 perhaps , would have be on Bessy 's side in the matter of feeling . but 
 then , you see , they be so very different outside ! you would have be 
 inclined to box Bessy 's ear , and you would have long to kiss Hetty . 
 Bessy have be tempt to run the arduous race , partly from mere 
 hedonish gaiety , partly because of the prize . some one have say there 
 be to be cloak and other nice clothe for prize , and she approach 
 the marquee , fan herself with her handkerchief , but with exultation 
 sparkle in her round eye . 
 " here be the prize for the first sack - race , " say Miss Lydia , take a 
 large parcel from the table where the prize be lay and give it to 
 Mrs. Irwine before Bessy come up , " an excellent grogram gown and a piece 
 of flannel . " 
 " you do not   think the winner be to be so young , I suppose , Aunt ? " say 
 Arthur . " could not   you find something else for this girl , and save that 
 grim - look gown for one of the old woman ? " 
 " I have buy nothing but what be useful and substantial , " say Miss 
 Lydia , adjust her own lace ; " I should not think of encourage a love 
 of finery in young woman of that class . I have a scarlet cloak , but that 
 be for the old woman who win . " 
 this speech of Miss Lydia 's produce rather a mocking expression in Mrs. 
 Irwine 's face as she look at Arthur , while Bessy come up and drop a 
 series of curtsy . 
 " this be Bessy Cranage , mother , " say Mr. Irwine , kindly , " Chad 
 Cranage 's daughter . you remember Chad Cranage , the blacksmith ? " 
 " yes , to be sure , " say Mrs. Irwine . " well , Bessy , here be your 
 prize - excellent warm thing for winter . I be sure you have have hard work 
 to win they this warm day . " 
 Bessy 's lip fall as she see the ugly , heavy gown - which feel so hot and 
 disagreeable too , on this July day , and be such a great ugly thing to 
 carry . she drop her curtsy again , without look up , and with a 
 grow tremulousness about the corner of her mouth , and then turn 
 away . 
 " poor girl , " say Arthur ; " I think she be disappointed . I wish it have 
 be something more to her taste . " 
 " she be a bold - look young person , " observe Miss Lydia . " not at all 
 one I should like to encourage . " 
 Arthur silently resolve that he would make Bessy a present of money 
 before the day be over , that she might buy something more to her mind ; 
 but she , not aware of the consolation in store for she , turn out of 
 the open space , where she be visible from the marquee , and throw 
 down the odious bundle under a tree , begin to cry - very much tittered at 
 the while by the small boy . in this situation she be descry by her 
 discreet matronly cousin , who lose no time in come up , have just 
 give the baby into her husband 's charge . 
 " what be the matter wi ' ye ? " say Bess the matron , take up the bundle 
 and examine it . " Ye'n swelter yoursen , I reckon , run that fool 's 
 race . an ' here , they'n gi'en you lot o ' good grogram and flannel , as 
 should ha ' be gi'en by good right to they as have the sense to keep 
 away from such foolery . Ye might spare I a bit o ' this grogram to make 
 clothe for the lad - ye war ne'er ill - nature , Bess ; I ne'er say that 
 on ye . " 
 " Ye may take it all , for what I care , " say Bess the maiden , with a 
 pettish movement , begin to wipe away her tear and recover herself . 
 " well , I could do wi't , if so be ye want to get rid on't , " say the 
 disintereste cousin , walk quickly away with the bundle , lest Chad 's 
 Bess should change her mind . 
 but that bonny - cheek lass be bless with an elasticity of spirit 
 that secure she from any rankling grief ; and by the time the grand 
 climax of the donkey - race come on , her disappointment be entirely lose 
 in the delightful excitement of attempt to stimulate the last donkey 
 by hiss , while the boy apply the argument of stick . but the 
 strength of the donkey mind lie in adopt a course inversely as the 
 argument urge , which , well consider , require as great a mental 
 force as the direct sequence ; and the present donkey prove the 
 first - rate order of his intelligence by come to a dead standstill 
 just when the blow be thick . Great be the shouting of the crowd , 
 radiant the grinning of Bill Downes the stone - sawyer and the fortunate 
 rider of this superior beast , which stand calm and stiff - legged in the 
 midst of its triumph . 
 Arthur himself have provide the prize for the man , and Bill be make 
 happy with a splendid pocket - knife , supply with blade and gimlet 
 enough to make a man at home on a desert island . he have hardly return 
 from the marquee with the prize in his hand , when it begin to be 
 understand that Wiry Ben propose to amuse the company , before 
 the gentry go to dinner , with an impromptu and gratuitous 
 performance - namely , a hornpipe , the main idea of which be doubtless 
 borrow ; but this be to be develop by the dancer in so peculiar and 
 complex a manner that no one could deny he the praise of originality . 
 Wiry Ben 's pride in his dancing - an accomplishment productive of great 
 effect at the yearly Wake - have need only slightly elevate by an 
 extra quantity of good ale to convince he that the gentry would be 
 very much strike with his performance of his hornpipe ; and he have be 
 decidedly encourage in this idea by Joshua Rann , who observe that it 
 be nothing but right to do something to please the young squire , in 
 return for what he have do for they . you will be the less surprised 
 at this opinion in so grave a personage when you learn that Ben have 
 request Mr. Rann to accompany he on the fiddle , and Joshua feel quite 
 sure that though there might not be much in the dancing , the music would 
 make up for it . Adam Bede , who be present in one of the large marquee , 
 where the plan be be discuss , tell Ben he have well not make a 
 fool of himself - a remark which at once fix Ben 's determination : he 
 be not go to let anything alone because Adam Bede turn up his nose 
 at it . 
 " what be this , what be this ? " say old Mr. Donnithorne . " be it something 
 you have   arrange , Arthur ? here be the clerk come with his fiddle , and a 
 smart fellow with a nosegay in his button - hole . " 
 " no , " say Arthur ; " I know nothing about it . by Jove , he be go to 
 dance ! it be one of the carpenter - I forget his name at this moment . " 
 " it be Ben Cranage - Wiry Ben , they call he , " say Mr. Irwine ; " rather 
 a loose fish , I think . Anne , my dear , I see that fiddle - scraping be too 
 much for you : you be get tired . let I take you in now , that you may 
 rest till dinner . " 
 Miss Anne rise assentingly , and the good brother take she away , while 
 Joshua 's preliminary scraping burst into the " White Cockade , " from 
 which he intend to pass to a variety of tune , by a series of 
 transition which his good ear really teach he to execute with some 
 skill . it would have be an exasperating fact to he , if he have know 
 it , that the general attention be too thoroughly absorb by Ben 's 
 dancing for any one to give much heed to the music . 
 have you ever see a real english rustic perform a solo dance ? perhaps 
 you have only see a ballet rustic , smile like a merry countryman in 
 crockery , with graceful turn of the haunch and insinuate movement 
 of the head . that be as much like the real thing as the " Bird Waltz " be 
 like the song of bird . Wiry Ben never smile : he look as serious as a 
 dancing monkey - as serious as if he have be an experimental philosopher 
 ascertaining in his own person the amount of shake and the variety 
 of angularity that could be give to the human limb . 
 to make amend for the abundant laughter in the striped marquee , Arthur 
 clap his hand continually and cry " Bravo ! " but Ben have one admirer 
 whose eye follow his movement with a fervid gravity that equal 
 his own . it be Martin Poyser , who be seat on a bench , with Tommy 
 between his leg . 
 " what dost think o ' that ? " he say to his wife . " he go as pat to the 
 music as if he be make o ' clockwork . I use to be a pretty good un at 
 dance myself when I be light , but I could niver ha ' hit it just to 
 th ' hair like that . " 
 " it be little matter what his limb be , to my thinking , " re - turn 
 Mrs. Poyser . " he be empty enough I ' the upper story , or he would niver come 
 jig an ' stamp I ' that way , like a mad grasshopper , for the gentry 
 to look at he . they be fit to die wi ' laughing , I can see . " 
 " well , well , so much the well , it amuse them , " say Mr. Poyser , who 
 do not easily take an irritable view of thing . " but they be go away 
 now , t ' have their dinner , I reckon . well move about a bit , shall we , 
 and see what Adam Bede 's doing . he be get to look after the drinking and 
 thing : I doubt he hasna have much fun . " 
 Chapter XXVI 
 the Dance 
 arthur have choose the entrance - hall for the ballroom : very wisely , for 
 no other room could have be so airy , or would have have the advantage 
 of the wide door open into the garden , as well as a ready entrance 
 into the other room . to be sure , a stone floor be not the pleasantest 
 to dance on , but then , most of the dancer have know what it be 
 to enjoy a Christmas dance on kitchen quarry . it be one of those 
 entrance - hall which make the surround room look like closet - with 
 stucco angel , trumpet , and flower - wreath on the lofty ceiling , and 
 great medallion of miscellaneous hero on the wall , alternate with 
 statue in niche . just the sort of place to be ornament well with 
 green bough , and Mr. Craig have be proud to show his taste and his 
 hothouse plant on the occasion . the broad step of the stone staircase 
 be cover with cushion to serve as seat for the child , who be 
 to stay till half - past nine with the servant - maid to see the dancing , 
 and as this dance be confine to the chief tenant , there be 
 abundant room for every one . the light be charmingly dispose in 
 colour - paper lamp , high up among green bough , and the farmer ' 
 wife and daughter , as they peep in , believe no scene could be more 
 splendid ; they know now quite well in what sort of room the king and 
 queen live , and their thought glance with some pity towards cousin 
 and acquaintance who have not this fine opportunity of know how 
 thing go on in the great world . the lamp be already light , though 
 the sun have not long set , and there be that calm light out of door in 
 which we seem to see all object more distinctly than in the broad day . 
 it be a pretty scene outside the house : the farmer and their family 
 be move about the lawn , among the flower and shrub , or along the 
 broad straight road lead from the east front , where a carpet of 
 mossy grass spread on each side , stud here and there with a dark 
 flat - boughed cedar , or a grand pyramidal fir sweep the ground with 
 its branch , all tip with a fringe of paler green . the group of 
 cottager in the park be gradually diminish , the young one be 
 attract towards the light that be begin to gleam from the 
 window of the gallery in the abbey , which be to be their dancing - room , 
 and some of the sober elder one think it time to go home quietly . 
 one of these be Lisbeth Bede , and Seth go with she - not from filial 
 attention only , for his conscience would not let he join in dancing . 
 it have be rather a melancholy day to Seth : Dinah have never be more 
 constantly present with he than in this scene , where everything be 
 so unlike she . he see she all the more vividly after look at the 
 thoughtless face and gay - colour dress of the young woman - just as 
 one feel the beauty and the greatness of a picture Madonna the more 
 when it have be for a moment screen from we by a vulgar head in a 
 bonnet . but this presence of Dinah in his mind only help he to bear 
 the well with his mother 's mood , which have be become more and more 
 querulous for the last hour . Poor Lisbeth be suffer from a strange 
 conflict of feeling . her joy and pride in the honour pay to she 
 darling son Adam be begin to be worst in the conflict with the 
 jealousy and fretfulness which have revive when Adam come to tell she 
 that Captain Donnithorne desire he to join the dancer in the hall . 
 Adam be get more and more out of her reach ; she wish all the old 
 trouble back again , for then it matter more to Adam what his mother 
 say and do . 
 " eh , it be fine talkin ' o ' dancin ' , " she say , " an ' thy father not a five 
 week in 's grave . an ' I wish I war there too , i'stid o ' bein ' leave to 
 take up merrier folk 's room above ground . " 
 " Nay , do not   look at it I ' that way , Mother , " say Adam , who be 
 determined to be gentle to she to - day . " I do not   mean to dance - I shall 
 only look on . and since the captain wish I to be there , it ' ud look 
 as if I think I know well than he to say as I would rather not stay . 
 and thee know'st how he be behave to I to - day . " 
 " eh , thee't do as thee lik'st , for thy old mother 's get no right t ' 
 hinder thee . she be nought but th ' old husk , and thee'st slip away 
 from she , like the ripe nut . " 
 " well , Mother , " say Adam , " I will go and tell the captain as it hurt thy 
 feeling for I to stay , and I would rather go home upo ' that account : he 
 will not   take it ill then , I daresay , and I be willing . " he say this with 
 some effort , for he really long to be near Hetty this evening . 
 " Nay , nay , I wonna ha ' thee do that - the young squire ' ull be anger . 
 go an ' do what thee't order to do , an ' I and Seth ' ull go whome . I 
 know it be a grit honour for thee to be so look on - an ' who be to be 
 prouder on it nor thy mother ? hadna she the cumber o ' rearin ' thee an ' 
 do for thee all these ' ear ? " 
 " well , good - bye , then , mother - good - bye , lad - remember Gyp when you get 
 home , " say Adam , turn away towards the gate of the pleasure - ground , 
 where he hop he might be able to join the Poysers , for he have be so 
 occupy throughout the afternoon that he have have no time to speak to 
 Hetty . his eye soon detect a distant group , which he know to be the 
 right one , return to the house along the broad gravel road , and he 
 hasten on to meet they . 
 " why , Adam , I be glad to get sight on y ' again , " say Mr. Poyser , who be 
 carry Totty on his arm . " you be go t ' have a bit o ' fun , I hope , 
 now your work be all do . and here be Hetty have promise no end o ' 
 partner , an ' I have   just be askin ' she if she have agree to dance wi ' 
 you , an ' she say no . " 
 " well , I do not   think o ' dancing to - night , " say Adam , already tempt 
 to change his mind , as he look at Hetty . 
 " nonsense ! " say Mr. Poyser . " why , everybody be go to dance to - night , 
 all but th ' old squire and Mrs. Irwine . Mrs. Best 's be tellin ' we as 
 Miss Lyddy and Miss Irwine ' ull dance , an ' the young squire ' ull pick 
 my wife for his first partner , t ' open the ball : so she will be force to 
 dance , though she be lay by ever sin ' the Christmas afore the little un 
 be bear . you canna for shame stand still , Adam , an ' you a fine young 
 fellow and can dance as well as anybody . " 
 " Nay , nay , " say Mrs. Poyser , " it ' ud be unbecomin ' . I know the dancin 's 
 nonsense , but if you stick at everything because it be nonsense , you 
 wonna go far I ' this life . when your broth 's ready - make for you , you mun 
 swallow the thickenin ' , or else let the broth alone . " 
 " then if Hetty ' ull dance with I , " say Adam , yield either to Mrs. 
 Poyser 's argument or to something else , " I will dance whichever dance 
 she be free . " 
 " I have   get no partner for the fourth dance , " say Hetty ; " I will dance that 
 with you , if you like . " 
 " ah , " say Mr. Poyser , " but you mun dance the first dance , Adam , else 
 it will look partic'ler . there be plenty o ' nice partner to pick an ' 
 choose from , an ' it be hard for the gell when the man stan ' by and do not 
 ask them . " 
 Adam feel the justice of Mr. Poyser 's observation : it would not do for 
 he to dance with no one besides Hetty ; and remember that Jonathan 
 Burge have some reason to feel hurt to - day , he resolve to ask Miss Mary 
 to dance with he the first dance , if she have no other partner . 
 " there be the big clock strikin ' eight , " say Mr. Poyser ; " we must make 
 haste in now , else the squire and the lady ' ull be in afore we , an ' 
 that wouldna look well . " 
 when they have enter the hall , and the three child under Molly 's 
 charge have be seat on the stair , the folding - door of the 
 drawing - room be throw open , and Arthur enter in his regimental , 
 lead Mrs. Irwine to a carpet - cover dai ornament with hot - house 
 plant , where she and Miss Anne be to be seat with old Mr. 
 Donnithorne , that they might look on at the dancing , like the king 
 and queen in the play . Arthur have put on his uniform to please the 
 tenant , he say , who think as much of his militia dignity as if it 
 have be an elevation to the premiership . he have not the least objection 
 to gratify they in that way : his uniform be very advantageous to his 
 figure . 
 the old squire , before sit down , walk round the hall to greet the 
 tenant and make polite speech to the wife : he be always polite ; but 
 the farmer have find out , after long puzzle , that this polish be 
 one of the sign of hardness . it be observe that he give his most 
 elaborate civility to Mrs. Poyser to - night , inquire particularly about 
 her health , recommend she to strengthen herself with cold water as 
 he do , and avoid all drug . Mrs. Poyser curtsy and thank he with 
 great self - command , but when he have pass on , she whisper to her 
 husband , " I will lay my life he be brewin ' some nasty turn against we . Old 
 Harry doesna wag his tail so for nothing . " Mr. Poyser have no time to 
 answer , for now Arthur come up and say , " Mrs. Poyser , I be come to 
 request the favour of your hand for the first dance ; and , Mr. Poyser , 
 you must let I take you to my aunt , for she claim you as her partner . " 
 the wife 's pale cheek flush with a nervous sense of unwonted honour as 
 Arthur lead she to the top of the room ; but Mr. Poyser , to whom an extra 
 glass have restore his youthful confidence in his good look and good 
 dancing , walk along with they quite proudly , secretly flattering 
 himself that Miss Lydia have never have a partner in her life who could 
 lift she off the ground as he would . in order to balance the honour 
 give to the two parish , Miss Irwine dance with Luke Britton , the 
 large Broxton farmer , and Mr. Gawaine lead out Mrs. Britton . Mr. 
 Irwine , after seat his sister Anne , have go to the abbey gallery , 
 as he have agree with Arthur beforehand , to see how the merriment of the 
 cottager be prosper . meanwhile , all the less distinguished couple 
 have take their place : Hetty be lead out by the inevitable Mr. Craig , 
 and Mary Burge by Adam ; and now the music strike up , and the glorious 
 country - dance , good of all dance , begin . 
 Pity it be not a board floor ! then the rhythmic stamping of the thick 
 shoe would have be well than any drum . that merry stamp , that 
 gracious nodding of the head , that wave bestowal of the hand - where 
 can we see they now ? that simple dancing of well - cover matron , lay 
 aside for an hour the care of house and dairy , remember but not 
 affect youth , not jealous but proud of the young maiden by their 
 side - that holiday sprightliness of portly husband pay little 
 compliment to their wife , as if their courting day be come 
 again - those lad and lass a little confused and awkward with their 
 partner , have nothing to say - it would be a pleasant variety to 
 see all that sometimes , instead of low dress and large skirt , and 
 scan glance explore costume , and languid man in lacquer boot 
 smile with double meaning . 
 there be but one thing to mar Martin Poyser 's pleasure in this dance : 
 it be that he be always in close contact with Luke Britton , that 
 slovenly farmer . he think of throw a little glaze coldness into 
 his eye in the crossing of hand ; but then , as Miss Irwine be opposite 
 to he instead of the offensive Luke , he might freeze the wrong person . 
 so he give his face up to hilarity , unchille by moral judgment . 
 how Hetty 's heart beat as Arthur approach she ! he have hardly look at 
 her to - day : now he must take her hand . would he press it ? would he look 
 at she ? she think she would cry if he give she no sign of feeling . 
 now he be there - he have take her hand - yes , he be press it . Hetty 
 turn pale as she look up at he for an instant and meet his eye , 
 before the dance carry he away . that pale look come upon Arthur like 
 the beginning of a dull pain , which clung to he , though he must dance 
 and smile and joke all the same . Hetty would look so , when he tell she 
 what he have to tell she ; and he should never be able to bear it - he 
 should be a fool and give way again . Hetty 's look do not really mean 
 so much as he think : it be only the sign of a struggle between the 
 desire for he to notice she and the dread lest she should betray the 
 desire to other . but Hetty 's face have a language that transcend she 
 feeling . there be face which nature charge with a meaning and pathos 
 not belong to the single human soul that flutter beneath they , but 
 speak the joy and sorrow of foregone generation - eye that tell of 
 deep love which doubtless have be and be somewhere , but not pair with 
 these eye - perhaps pair with pale eye that can say nothing ; just as 
 a national language may be instinct with poetry unfelt by the lip that 
 use it . that look of Hetty 's oppress Arthur with a dread which yet have 
 something of a terrible unconfessed delight in it , that she love he 
 too well . there be a hard task before he , for at that moment he feel 
 he would have give up three year of his youth for the happiness of 
 abandon himself without remorse to his passion for Hetty . 
 these be the incongruous thought in his mind as he lead Mrs. Poyser , 
 who be pant with fatigue , and secretly resolve that neither judge 
 nor jury should force she to dance another dance , to take a quiet rest 
 in the dining - room , where supper be lay out for the guest to come and 
 take it as they choose . 
 " I have   desire Hetty to remember as she be get to dance wi ' you , sir , " 
 say the good innocent woman ; " for she be so thoughtless , she would be like 
 enough to go an ' engage herself for ivery dance . so I tell she not to 
 promise too many . " 
 " thank you , Mrs. Poyser , " say Arthur , not without a twinge . " now , sit 
 down in this comfortable chair , and here be Mills ready to give you what 
 you would like good . " 
 he hurry away to seek another matronly partner , for due honour must be 
 pay to the married woman before he ask any of the young one ; and 
 the country - dance , and the stamping , and the gracious nodding , and the 
 waving of the hand , go on joyously . 
 at last the time have come for the fourth dance - long for by the 
 strong , grave Adam , as if he have be a delicate - handed youth of 
 eighteen ; for we be all very much alike when we be in our first love ; 
 and Adam have hardly ever touch Hetty 's hand for more than a transient 
 greeting - have never dance with she but once before . his eye have 
 follow she eagerly to - night in spite of himself , and have take in 
 deep draught of love . he think she behave so prettily , so quietly ; 
 she do not seem to be flirt at all she smile less than usual ; there 
 be almost a sweet sadness about she . " God bless she ! " he say inwardly ; 
 " I would make her life a happy ' un , if a strong arm to work for she , and a 
 heart to love she , could do it . " 
 and then there steal over he delicious thought of come home from 
 work , and draw Hetty to his side , and feel her cheek softly 
 press against his , till he forget where he be , and the music and the 
 tread of foot might have be the fall of rain and the roaring of the 
 wind , for what he know . 
 but now the third dance be end , and he might go up to she and 
 claim her hand . she be at the far end of the hall near the staircase , 
 whispering with Molly , who have just give the sleep Totty into her 
 arm before run to fetch shawl and bonnet from the landing . Mrs. 
 Poyser have take the two boy away into the dining - room to give they 
 some cake before they go home in the cart with Grandfather and Molly 
 be to follow as fast as possible . 
 " let I hold she , " say Adam , as Molly turn upstairs ; " the child 
 be so heavy when they be asleep . " 
 Hetty be glad of the relief , for to hold Totty in her arm , standing , 
 be not at all a pleasant variety to she . but this second transfer have 
 the unfortunate effect of rouse Totty , who be not behind any child 
 of her age in peevishness at an unseasonable awaking . while Hetty be 
 in the act of place she in Adam 's arm , and have not yet withdraw her 
 own , Totty open her eye , and forthwith fight out with her left fist 
 at Adam 's arm , and with her right catch at the string of brown bead 
 round Hetty 's neck . the locket leap out from her frock , and the next 
 moment the string be break , and Hetty , helpless , see bead and locket 
 scatter wide on the floor . 
 " my locket , my locket ! " she say , in a loud frightened whisper to Adam ; 
 " never mind the bead . " 
 Adam have already see where the locket fall , for it have attract his 
 glance as it leap out of her frock . it have fall on the raise wooden 
 dais where the band sit , not on the stone floor ; and as Adam pick it 
 up , he see the glass with the dark and light lock of hair under it . it 
 have fall that side upwards , so the glass be not break . he turn it 
 over on his hand , and see the enamel gold back . 
 " it be not   hurt , " he say , as he hold it towards Hetty , who be unable to 
 take it because both her hand be occupy with Totty . 
 " oh , it do not   matter , I do not   mind about it , " say Hetty , who have be 
 pale and be now red . 
 " not matter ? " say Adam , gravely . " you seem very frightened about it . 
 I will hold it till you be ready to take it , " he add , quietly close 
 his hand over it , that she might not think he want to look at it 
 again . 
 by this time molly have come with bonnet and shawl , and as soon as she 
 have take Totty , Adam place the locket in Hetty 's hand . she take it 
 with an air of indifference and put it in her pocket , in her heart vex 
 and angry with Adam because he have see it , but determine now that she 
 would show no more sign of agitation . 
 " see , " she say , " they be take their place to dance ; let we go . " 
 Adam assent silently . a puzzled alarm have take possession of he . have 
 Hetty a lover he do not   know of ? for none of her relation , he be sure , 
 would give she a locket like that ; and none of her admirer , with whom 
 he be acquaint , be in the position of an accepted lover , as the 
 giver of that locket must be . Adam be lose in the utter impossibility 
 of find any person for his fear to alight on . he could only feel 
 with a terrible pang that there be something in Hetty 's life unknown to 
 he ; that while he have be rock himself in the hope that she would 
 come to love he , she be already love another . the pleasure of the 
 dance with Hetty be go ; his eye , when they rest on she , have an 
 uneasy questioning expression in they ; he could think of nothing to say 
 to she ; and she too be out of temper and disincline to speak . they 
 be both glad when the dance be end . 
 Adam be determined to stay no long ; no one want he , and no one 
 would notice if he slip away . as soon as he get out of door , he 
 begin to walk at his habitual rapid pace , hurry along without know 
 why , busy with the painful thought that the memory of this day , so full 
 of honour and promise to he , be poison for ever . suddenly , when 
 he be far on through the Chase , he stop , startle by a flash of 
 revive hope . after all , he might be a fool , make a great misery out 
 of a trifle . Hetty , fond of finery as she be , might have buy the 
 thing herself . it look too expensive for that - it look like the 
 thing on white satin in the great jeweller 's shop at Rosseter . but Adam 
 have very imperfect notion of the value of such thing , and he think 
 it could certainly not cost more than a guinea . perhaps Hetty have have as 
 much as that in Christmas box , and there be no knowing but she might 
 have be childish enough to spend it in that way ; she be such a young 
 thing , and she could not   help love finery ! but then , why have she be 
 so frightened about it at first , and change colour so , and afterwards 
 pretend not to care ? oh , that be because she be ashamed of his 
 seeing that she have such a smart thing - she be conscious that it 
 be wrong for she to spend her money on it , and she know that Adam 
 disapprove of finery . it be a proof she care about what he like and 
 dislike . she must have think from his silence and gravity afterwards 
 that he be very much displeased with she , that he be inclined to be 
 harsh and severe towards her foible . and as he walk on more quietly , 
 chew the cud of this new hope , his only uneasiness be that he have 
 behave in a way which might chill Hetty 's feeling towards he . for this 
 last view of the matter must be the true one . how could Hetty have 
 an accepted lover , quite unknown to he ? she be never away from her 
 uncle 's house for more than a day ; she could have no acquaintance that 
 do not come there , and no intimacy unknown to her uncle and aunt . it 
 would be folly to believe that the locket be give to she by a lover . 
 the little ring of dark hair he feel sure be her own ; he could form 
 no guess about the light hair under it , for he have not see it very 
 distinctly . it might be a bit of her father 's or mother 's , who have die 
 when she be a child , and she would naturally put a bit of her own along 
 with it . 
 and so Adam go to bed comfort , have weave for himself an ingenious 
 web of probability - the sure screen a wise man can place between 
 himself and the truth . his last wake thought melt into a dream that 
 he be with Hetty again at the Hall Farm , and that he be ask she to 
 forgive he for be so cold and silent . 
 and while he be dream this , Arthur be lead Hetty to the dance 
 and say to she in low hurried tone , " I shall be in the wood the day 
 after to - morrow at seven ; come as early as you can . " and Hetty 's foolish 
 joy and hope , which have fly away for a little space , scar by a 
 mere nothing , now all come flutter back , unconscious of the real 
 peril . she be happy for the first time this long day , and wish 
 that dance would last for hour . Arthur wish it too ; it be the 
 last weakness he mean to indulge in ; and a man never lie with more 
 delicious languor under the influence of a passion than when he have 
 persuade himself that he shall subdue it to - morrow . 
 but Mrs. Poyser 's wish be quite the reverse of this , for her mind 
 be fill with dreary foreboding as to the retardation of to - morrow 
 morning 's cheese in consequence of these late hour . now that Hetty have 
 do her duty and dance one dance with the young squire , Mr. Poyser 
 must go out and see if the cart be come back to fetch they , for it be 
 half - past ten o'clock , and notwithstanding a mild suggestion on his part 
 that it would be bad manner for they to be the first to go , Mrs. Poyser 
 be resolute on the point , " manner or no manner . " 
 " what ! go already , Mrs. Poyser ? " say old Mr. Donnithorne , as she 
 come to curtsy and take leave ; " I think we should not part with any of 
 our guest till eleven . Mrs. Irwine and I , who be elderly people , think 
 of sit out the dance till then . " 
 " oh , your Honour , it be all right and proper for gentlefolk to stay up 
 by candlelight - they have   get no cheese on their mind . we be late enough 
 as it be , an ' there be no lettin ' the cow know as they must not   want to 
 be milk so early to - morrow mornin ' . so , if you will please t ' excuse we , 
 we will take our leave . " 
 " eh ! " she say to her husband , as they set off in the cart , " I would soon 
 ha ' brewin ' day and washin ' day together than one o ' these pleasurin ' 
 day . there be no work so tirin ' as danglin ' about an ' starin ' an ' not 
 rightly knowin ' what you be go to do next ; and keepin ' your face I ' 
 smilin ' order like a grocer o ' market - day for fear people shouldna think 
 you civil enough . an ' you have   nothing to show for't when it be do , if it 
 be not   a yallow face wi ' eatin ' thing as disagree . " 
 " Nay , nay , " say Mr. Poyser , who be in his merry mood , and feel that 
 he have have a great day , " a bit o ' pleasuring 's good for thee sometimes . 
 an ' thee danc'st as well as any of them , for I will back thee against all 
 the wife I ' the parish for a light foot an ' ankle . an ' it be a great 
 honour for the young squire to ask thee first - I reckon it be because 
 I sit at th ' head o ' the table an ' make the speech . an ' Hetty too - she 
 never have such a partner before - a fine young gentleman in reg'mental . 
 it will serve you to talk on , Hetty , when you be an old woman - how you 
 dance wi ' th ' young squire the day he come o ' age . " 
 Book Four 
 Chapter XXVII 
 a crisis 
 it be beyond the middle of August - nearly three week after the 
 birthday feast . the reaping of the wheat have begin in our north midland 
 county of Loamshire , but the harvest be likely still to be retard 
 by the heavy rain , which be cause inundation and much damage 
 throughout the country . from this last trouble the Broxton and Hayslope 
 farmer , on their pleasant upland and in their brook - water 
 valley , have not suffer , and as I can not pretend that they be such 
 exceptional farmer as to love the general good well than their own , 
 you will infer that they be not in very low spirit about the rapid 
 rise in the price of bread , so long as there be hope of gather in 
 their own corn undamaged ; and occasional day of sunshine and dry 
 wind flatter this hope . 
 the eighteenth of August be one of these day when the sunshine look 
 brighter in all eye for the gloom that go before . grand mass of 
 cloud be hurry across the blue , and the great round hill behind the 
 Chase seem alive with their fly shadow ; the sun be hide for a 
 moment , and then shine out warm again like a recover joy ; the leaf , 
 still green , be toss off the hedgerow tree by the wind ; around the 
 farmhouse there be a sound of clapping door ; the apple fall in the 
 orchard ; and the stray horse on the green side of the lane and on 
 the common have their mane blow about their face . and yet the wind 
 seem only part of the general gladness because the sun be shin . a 
 merry day for the child , who run and shout to see if they could 
 top the wind with their voice ; and the grow - up people too be in 
 good spirit , incline to believe in yet fine day , when the wind have 
 fall . if only the corn be not ripe enough to be blow out of the 
 husk and scatter as untimely seed ! 
 and yet a day on which a blighting sorrow may fall upon a man . for if it 
 be true that nature at certain moment seem charge with a presentiment 
 of one individual lot must it not also be true that she seem unmindful 
 unconscious of another ? for there be no hour that have not its birth 
 of gladness and despair , no morning brightness that do not bring new 
 sickness to desolation as well as new force to genius and love . there 
 be so many of we , and our lot be so different , what wonder that 
 nature 's mood be often in harsh contrast with the great crisis of 
 our life ? we be child of a large family , and must learn , as such 
 child do , not to expect that our hurt will be make much of - to be 
 content with little nurture and caressing , and help each other the more . 
 it be a busy day with Adam , who of late have do almost double work , 
 for he be continue to act as foreman for Jonathan Burge , until some 
 satisfactory person could be find to supply his place , and Jonathan be 
 slow to find that person . but he have do the extra work cheerfully , for 
 his hope be buoyant again about Hetty . every time she have see he 
 since the birthday , she have seem to make an effort to behave all the 
 more kindly to he , that she might make he understand she have forgive 
 his silence and coldness during the dance . he have never mention the 
 locket to she again ; too happy that she smile at he - still happy 
 because he observe in she a more subdue air , something that he 
 interpret as the growth of womanly tenderness and seriousness . " ah ! " 
 he think , again and again , ' she be only seventeen ; she will be thoughtful 
 enough after a while . and her aunt allay say how clever she be at the 
 work . she will make a wife as Mother'll have no occasion to grumble at , 
 after all . " to be sure , he have only see she at home twice since the 
 birthday ; for one Sunday , when he be intend to go from church to the 
 Hall Farm , Hetty have join the party of upper servant from the Chase 
 and have go home with they - almost as if she be inclined to encourage 
 Mr. Craig . " she be takin ' too much likin ' to they folk I ' the house 
 keeper 's room , " Mrs. Poyser remark . " for my part , I be never overfond 
 o ' gentlefolk 's servant - they be mostly like the fine lady ' fat 
 dog , nayther good for bark nor butcher 's meat , but on'y for show . " 
 and another evening she be go to Treddleston to buy some thing ; 
 though , to his great surprise , as he be return home , he see she at 
 a distance get over a stile quite out of the Treddleston road . but , 
 when he hasten to she , she be very kind , and ask he to go in again 
 when he have take she to the yard gate . she have go a little far 
 into the field after come from Treddleston because she do not   want to 
 go in , she say : it be so nice to be out of door , and her aunt always 
 make such a fuss about it if she want to go out . " oh , do come in with 
 I ! " she say , as he be go to shake hand with she at the gate , and 
 he could not resist that . so he go in , and Mrs. Poyser be content 
 with only a slight remark on Hetty 's being later than be expect ; 
 while Hetty , who have look out of spirit when he meet she , smile and 
 talk and wait on they all with unusual promptitude . 
 that be the last time he have see she ; but he mean to make leisure for 
 go to the Farm to - morrow . to - day , he know , be her day for go to 
 the Chase to sew with the lady 's maid , so he would get as much work do 
 as possible this evening , that the next might be clear . 
 one piece of work that Adam be superintend be some slight repair 
 at the Chase Farm , which have be hitherto occupy by Satchell , as 
 bailiff , but which it be now rumour that the old squire be go to 
 let to a smart man in top - boot , who have be see to ride over it 
 one day . nothing but the desire to get a tenant could account for the 
 squire 's undertaking repair , though the Saturday - evening party at Mr. 
 Casson 's agree over their pipe that no man in his sens would take 
 the Chase Farm unless there be a bit more ploughland lay to it . 
 however that might be , the repair be order to be execute with all 
 dispatch , and Adam , act for Mr. Burge , be carry out the order 
 with his usual energy . but to - day , have be occupy elsewhere , 
 he have not be able to arrive at the Chase Farm till late in the 
 afternoon , and he then discover that some old roofing , which he have 
 calculate on preserve , have give way . there be clearly no good to 
 be do with this part of the building without pull it all down , and 
 Adam immediately see in his mind a plan for build it up again , so as 
 to make the most convenient of cow - shed and calf - pen , with a hovel for 
 implement ; and all without any great expense for material . so , when 
 the workman be go , he sit down , take out his pocket - book , and 
 busy himself with sketch a plan , and make a specification of the 
 expense that he might show it to Burge the next morning , and set he 
 on persuade the squire to consent . to " make a good job " of anything , 
 however small , be always a pleasure to Adam , and he sit on a block , 
 with his book rest on a planing - table , whistle low every now and 
 then and turn his head on one side with a just perceptible smile of 
 gratification - of pride , too , for if Adam love a bit of good work , he 
 love also to think , " I do it ! " and I believe the only people who be 
 free from that weakness be those who have no work to call their own . it 
 be nearly seven before he have finish and put on his jacket again ; and 
 on give a last look round , he observe that Seth , who have be work 
 here to - day , have leave his basket of tool behind he . " why , th ' lad 's 
 forget his tool , " think Adam , " and he be get to work up at the shop 
 to - morrow . there never be such a chap for wool - gathering ; he would leave 
 his head behind he , if it be loose . however , it be lucky I have   see them ; 
 I will carry them home . " 
 the building of the Chase Farm lie at one extremity of the Chase , 
 at about ten minute ' walking distance from the Abbey . Adam have come 
 thither on his pony , intend to ride to the stable and put up his nag 
 on his way home . at the stable he encounter Mr. Craig , who have come 
 to look at the captain 's new horse , on which he be to ride away the day 
 after to - morrow ; and Mr. Craig detain he to tell how all the servant 
 be to collect at the gate of the courtyard to wish the young squire 
 luck as he ride out ; so that by the time Adam have get into the Chase , 
 and be stride along with the basket of tool over his shoulder , the 
 sun be on the point of setting , and be send level crimson ray 
 among the great trunk of the old oak , and touch every bare patch of 
 ground with a transient glory that make it look like a jewel dropt upon 
 the grass . the wind have fall now , and there be only enough breeze to 
 stir the delicate - stem leaf . any one who have be sit in the 
 house all day would have be glad to walk now ; but Adam have be quite 
 enough in the open air to wish to shorten his way home , and he bethink 
 himself that he might do so by strike across the Chase and go 
 through the Grove , where he have never be for year . he hurry on 
 across the Chase , stalk along the narrow path between the fern , with 
 Gyp at his heel , not linger to watch the magnificent change of the 
 light - hardly once think of it - yet feel its presence in a certain 
 calm happy awe which mingle itself with his busy work - day thought . 
 how could he help feel it ? the very deer feel it , and be more 
 timid . 
 presently Adam 's thought recur to what Mr. Craig have say about 
 Arthur Donnithorne , and picture his go away , and the change 
 that might take place before he come back ; then they travel back 
 affectionately over the old scene of boyish companionship , and dwelt 
 on Arthur 's good quality , which Adam have a pride in , as we all have in 
 the virtue of the superior who honour we . a nature like Adam 's , with 
 a great need of love and reverence in it , depend for so much of its 
 happiness on what it can believe and feel about other ! and he have no 
 ideal world of dead hero ; he know little of the life of man in 
 the past ; he must find the being to whom he could cling with love 
 admiration among those who come within speech of he . these pleasant 
 thought about Arthur bring a milder expression than usual into his 
 keen rough face : perhaps they be the reason why , when he open the 
 old green gate lead into the Grove , he pause to pat Gyp and say a 
 kind word to he . 
 after that pause , he stride on again along the broad winding path 
 through the Grove . what grand beech ! Adam delight in a fine tree of 
 all thing ; as the fisherman 's sight be keen on the sea , so Adam 's 
 perception be more at home with tree than with other object . he 
 keep they in his memory , as a painter do , with all the fleck and 
 knot in their bark , all the curve and angle of their bough , and have 
 often calculate the height and content of a trunk to a nicety , as he 
 stand look at it . no wonder that , not - withstand his desire to get 
 on , he could not help pause to look at a curious large beech which 
 he have see stand before he at a turning in the road , and convince 
 himself that it be not two tree wed together , but only one . for the 
 rest of his life he remember that moment when he be calmly examine 
 the beech , as a man remember his last glimpse of the home where his 
 youth be pass , before the road turn , and he see it no more . the 
 beech stand at the last turning before the Grove end in an archway of 
 bough that let in the eastern light ; and as Adam step away from the 
 tree to continue his walk , his eye fall on two figure about twenty 
 yard before he . 
 he remain as motionless as a statue , and turn almost as pale . the 
 two figure be stand opposite to each other , with clasped hand 
 about to part ; and while they be bend to kiss , Gyp , who have be 
 run among the brushwood , come out , catch sight of they , and give 
 a sharp bark . they separate with a start - one hurry through the gate 
 out of the Grove , and the other , turn round , walk slowly , with 
 a sort of saunter , towards Adam who still stand transfix and pale , 
 clutch tight the stick with which he hold the basket of tool over 
 his shoulder , and look at the approach figure with eye in which 
 amazement be fast turn to fierceness . 
 Arthur Donnithorne look flushed and excited ; he have try to make 
 unpleasant feeling more bearable by drink a little more wine than 
 usual at dinner to - day , and be still enough under its flattering 
 influence to think more lightly of this unwished - for rencontre with Adam 
 than he would otherwise have do . after all , Adam be the good person 
 who could have happen to see he and Hetty together - he be a sensible 
 fellow , and would not babble about it to other people . Arthur feel 
 confident that he could laugh the thing off and explain it away . and so 
 he saunter forward with elaborate carelessness - his flushed face , his 
 evening dress of fine cloth and fine linen , his hand half - thrust into 
 his waistcoat pocket , all shine upon by the strange evening light which 
 the light cloud have catch up even to the zenith , and be now shed 
 down between the topmost branch above he . 
 Adam be still motionless , look at he as he come up . he understand 
 it all now - the locket and everything else that have be doubtful to 
 he : a terrible scorch light show he the hide letter that 
 change the meaning of the past . if he have move a muscle , he must 
 inevitably have spring upon Arthur like a tiger ; and in the conflicting 
 emotion that fill those long moment , he have tell himself that he 
 would not give loose to passion , he would only speak the right thing . 
 he stand as if petrify by an unseen force , but the force be his own 
 strong will . 
 " well , Adam , " say Arthur , " you have   be look at the fine old beech , 
 eh ? they be not to be come near by the hatchet , though ; this be a sacred 
 grove . I overtake pretty little Hetty Sorrel as I be come to my 
 den - the Hermitage , there . she ought not to come home this way so late . 
 so I take care of she to the gate , and ask for a kiss for my pain . 
 but I must get back now , for this road be confoundedly damp . good - night , 
 Adam . I shall see you to - morrow - to say good - bye , you know . " 
 Arthur be too much preoccupied with the part he be play himself to 
 be thoroughly aware of the expression in Adam 's face . he do not look 
 directly at Adam , but glance carelessly round at the tree and then 
 lift up one foot to look at the sole of his boot . he care to say no 
 more - he have throw quite dust enough into honest Adam 's eye - and as he 
 speak the last word , he walk on . 
 " stop a bit , sir , " say Adam , in a hard peremptory voice , without 
 turn round . " I have   get a word to say to you . " 
 Arthur pause in surprise . susceptible person be more affected by 
 a change of tone than by unexpected word , and Arthur have the 
 susceptibility of a nature at once affectionate and vain . he be still 
 more surprised when he see that Adam have not move , but stand with his 
 back to he , as if summon he to return . what do he mean ? he be 
 go to make a serious business of this affair . Arthur feel his temper 
 rise . a patronising disposition always have its mean side , and in the 
 confusion of his irritation and alarm there enter the feeling that a 
 man to whom he have show so much favour as to Adam be not in a position 
 to criticize his conduct . and yet he be dominate , as one who feel 
 himself in the wrong always be , by the man whose good opinion he care 
 for . in spite of pride and temper , there be as much deprecation as 
 anger in his voice when he say , " what do you mean , Adam ? " 
 " I mean , sir " - answer Adam , in the same harsh voice , still without 
 turn round - " I mean , sir , that you do not   deceive I by your light 
 word . this be not the first time you have   meet Hetty Sorrel in this grove , 
 and this be not the first time you have   kiss she . " 
 Arthur feel a startled uncertainty how far Adam be speak from 
 knowledge , and how far from mere inference . and this uncertainty , 
 which prevent he from contrive a prudent answer , heighten his 
 irritation . he say , in a high sharp tone , " well , sir , what then ? " 
 " why , then , instead of act like th ' upright , honourable man we have 
 all believe you to be , you have   be act the part of a selfish 
 light - minded scoundrel . you know as well as I do what it be to lead to 
 when a gentleman like you kiss and make love to a young woman like 
 Hetty , and give her present as she be frightened for other folk 
 to see . and I say it again , you be act the part of a selfish 
 light - minded scoundrel though it cut I to th ' heart to say so , and I would 
 rather ha ' lose my right hand . " 
 " let I tell you , Adam , " say Arthur , bridle his grow anger and 
 try to recur to his careless tone , " you be not only devilishly 
 impertinent , but you be talk nonsense . every pretty girl be not such 
 a fool as you , to suppose that when a gentleman admire her beauty and 
 pay she a little attention , he must mean something particular . every 
 man like to flirt with a pretty girl , and every pretty girl like to be 
 flirt with . the wide the distance between they , the less harm there 
 be , for then she be not likely to deceive herself . " 
 " I do not   know what you mean by flirt , " say Adam , " but if you mean 
 behave to a woman as if you love she , and yet not love she all 
 the while , I say that be not th ' action of an honest man , and what be not 
 honest do come t ' harm . I be not a fool , and you be not a fool , and you 
 know well than what you be say . you know it could not   be make 
 public as you have   behave to Hetty as y ' have do without she lose her 
 character and bring shame and trouble on she and her relation . what 
 if you mean nothing by your kissing and your present ? other folk 
 will not   believe as you have   mean nothing ; and do not   tell I about she not 
 deceive herself . I tell you as you have   fill her mind so with the 
 thought of you as it will mayhap poison her life , and she will never love 
 another man as ' ud make she a good husband . " 
 Arthur have feel a sudden relief while Adam be speak ; he perceive 
 that Adam have no positive knowledge of the past , and that there be no 
 irrevocable damage do by this evening 's unfortunate rencontre . Adam 
 could still be deceive . the candid Arthur have bring himself into a 
 position in which successful lying be his only hope . the hope allay 
 his anger a little . 
 " well , Adam , " he say , in a tone of friendly concession , " you be perhaps 
 right . perhaps I have   go a little too far in take notice of the pretty 
 little thing and steal a kiss now and then . you be such a grave , 
 steady fellow , you do not   understand the temptation to such trifling . 
 I be sure I would not   bring any trouble or annoyance on she and the good 
 poyser on any account if I could help it . but I think you look a little 
 too seriously at it . you know I be go away immediately , so I shall not 
 make any more mistake of the kind . but let we say good - night " - Arthur 
 here turn round to walk on - " and talk no more about the matter . the 
 whole thing will soon be forget . " 
 " no , by God ! " Adam burst out with rage that could be control no 
 long , throw down the basket of tool and stride forward till he 
 be right in front of Arthur . all his jealousy and sense of personal 
 injury , which he have be hitherto try to keep under , have leap up 
 and master he . what man of we , in the first moment of a sharp 
 agony , could ever feel that the fellow - man who have be the medium of 
 inflict it do not mean to hurt we ? in our instinctive rebellion 
 against pain , we be child again , and demand an active will to wreak 
 our vengeance on . Adam at this moment could only feel that he have 
 be rob of Hetty - rob treacherously by the man in whom he have 
 trust - and he stand close in front of Arthur , with fierce eye glare 
 at he , with pale lip and clench hand , the hard tone in which he 
 have hitherto be constrain himself to express no more than a just 
 indignation give way to a deep agitated voice that seem to shake he 
 as he speak . 
 " no , it will not be soon forget , as you have   come in between she and I , 
 when she might ha ' love I - it will not soon be forget as you have   rob 
 I o ' my happiness , while I think you be my good friend , and a 
 noble - minded man , as I be proud to work for . and you have   be kiss 
 she , and mean nothing , have you ? and I never kiss she I ' my 
 life - but I would ha ' work hard for year for the right to kiss she . and 
 you make light of it . you think little o ' do what may damage other 
 folk , so as you get your bit o ' trifling , as mean nothing . I throw 
 back your favour , for you be not the man I take you for . I will never 
 count you my friend any more . I would rather you would act as my enemy , and 
 fight I where I stand - it be all th ' amend you can make I . " 
 Poor Adam , possess by rage that could find no other vent , begin to 
 throw off his coat and his cap , too blind with passion to notice the 
 change that have take place in Arthur while he be speak . Arthur 's 
 lip be now as pale as Adam 's ; his heart be beat violently . the 
 discovery that Adam love Hetty be a shock which make he for the 
 moment see himself in the light of Adam 's indignation , and regard Adam 's 
 suffering as not merely a consequence , but an element of his error . 
 the word of hatred and contempt - the first he have ever hear in his 
 life - seem like scorch missile that be make ineffaceable scar 
 on he . all screen self - excuse , which rarely fall quite away while 
 other respect we , forsook he for an instant , and he stand face to face 
 with the first great irrevocable evil he have ever commit . he be 
 only twenty - one , and three month ago - nay , much later - he have think 
 proudly that no man should ever be able to reproach he justly . his 
 first impulse , if there have be time for it , would perhaps have be to 
 utter word of propitiation ; but Adam have no soon throw off his 
 coat and cap than he become aware that Arthur be stand pale and 
 motionless , with his hand still thrust in his waistcoat pocket . 
 " what ! " he say , " will not   you fight I like a man ? you know I will not   strike 
 you while you stand so . " 
 " go away , Adam , " say Arthur , " I do not   want to fight you . " 
 " no , " say Adam , bitterly ; " you do not   want to fight I - you think I be a 
 common man , as you can injure without answer for it . " 
 " I never mean to injure you , " say Arthur , with return anger . " I 
 do not   know you love she . " 
 " but you have   make her love you , " say Adam . " you be a double - faced 
 man - I will never believe a word you say again . " 
 " go away , I tell you , " say Arthur , angrily , " or we shall both repent . " 
 " no , " say Adam , with a convulsed voice , " I swear I will not   go away 
 without fight you . do you want provoke any more ? I tell you you be 
 a coward and a scoundrel , and I despise you . " 
 the colour have all rush back to Arthur 's face ; in a moment his right 
 hand be clench , and deal a blow like lightning , which send Adam 
 stagger backward . his blood be as thoroughly up as Adam 's now , and 
 the two man , forget the emotion that have go before , fight 
 with the instinctive fierceness of panther in the deepening twilight 
 darken by the tree . the delicate - handed gentleman be a match for the 
 workman in everything but strength , and Arthur 's skill enable he to 
 protract the struggle for some long moment . but between unarmed man the 
 battle be to the strong , where the strong be no blunderer , and Arthur 
 must sink under a well - plant blow of Adam 's as a steel rod be break 
 by an iron bar . the blow soon come , and Arthur fall , his head lie 
 conceal in a tuft of fern , so that Adam could only discern his darkly 
 clothe body . 
 he stand still in the dim light wait for Arthur to rise . 
 the blow have be give now , towards which he have be strain all the 
 force of nerve and muscle - and what be the good of it ? what have he 
 do by fight ? only satisfy his own passion , only wreak his own 
 vengeance . he have not rescue Hetty , nor change the past - there it be , 
 just as it have be , and he sicken at the vanity of his own rage . 
 but why do not Arthur rise ? he be perfectly motionless , and the time 
 seem long to Adam . good God ! have the blow be too much for he ? Adam 
 shudder at the thought of his own strength , as with the oncoming of 
 this dread he kneel down by Arthur 's side and lift his head from among 
 the fern . there be no sign of life : the eye and tooth be set . the 
 horror that rush over Adam completely master he , and force upon 
 he its own belief . he could feel nothing but that death be in Arthur 's 
 face , and that he be helpless before it . he make not a single movement , 
 but kneel like an image of despair gaze at an image of death . 
 Chapter XXVIII 
 A Dilemma 
 it be only a few minute measure by the clock - though Adam always 
 think it have be a long while - before he perceive a gleam of 
 consciousness in Arthur 's face and a slight shiver through his frame . 
 the intense joy that flood his soul bring back some of the old 
 affection with it . 
 " do you feel any pain , sir ? " he say , tenderly , loosen Arthur 's 
 cravat . 
 Arthur turn his eye on Adam with a vague stare which give way to a 
 slightly startled motion as if from the shock of return memory . but 
 he only shiver again and say nothing . 
 " do you feel any hurt , sir ? " Adam say again , with a trembling in his 
 voice . 
 Arthur put his hand up to his waistcoat button , and when Adam have 
 unbutton it , he take a long breath . " Lay my head down , " he say , 
 faintly , " and get I some water if you can . " 
 Adam lay the head down gently on the fern again , and empty the tool 
 out of the flag - basket , hurry through the tree to the edge of the 
 Grove border on the Chase , where a brook run below the bank . 
 when he return with his basket leaking , but still half - full , Arthur 
 look at he with a more thoroughly reawaken consciousness . 
 " can you drink a drop out o ' your hand , sir ? " say Adam , kneel down 
 again to lift up Arthur 's head . 
 " no , " say Arthur , " dip my cravat in and souse it on my head . " 
 the water seem to do he some good , for he presently raise himself a 
 little high , rest on Adam 's arm . 
 " do you feel any hurt inside sir ? " Adam ask again 
 " no - no hurt , " say Arthur , still faintly , " but rather do up . " 
 after a while he say , " I suppose I faint away when you knock I 
 down . " 
 " yes , sir , thank God , " say Adam . " I think it be bad . " 
 " what ! you think you would do for I , eh ? come help I on my leg . " 
 " I feel terribly shaky and dizzy , " Arthur say , as he stand lean 
 on Adam 's arm ; " that blow of yours must have come against I like a 
 battering - ram . I do not   believe I can walk alone . " 
 " lean on I , sir ; I will get you along , " say Adam . " or , will you sit down 
 a bit long , on my coat here , and I will prop y ' up . you will perhaps be 
 well in a minute or two . " 
 " no , " say Arthur . " I will go to the Hermitage - I think I have   get some 
 brandy there . there be a short road to it a little far on , near the 
 gate . if you will just help I on . " 
 they walk slowly , with frequent pause , but without speak again . 
 in both of they , the concentration in the present which have attend 
 the first moment of Arthur 's revival have now give way to a vivid 
 recollection of the previous scene . it be nearly dark in the narrow 
 path among the tree , but within the circle of fir - tree round the 
 Hermitage there be room for the grow moonlight to enter in at the 
 window . their step be noiseless on the thick carpet of fir - needle , 
 and the outward stillness seem to heighten their inward consciousness , 
 as Arthur take the key out of his pocket and place it in Adam 's hand , 
 for he to open the door . Adam have not know before that Arthur have 
 furnish the old Hermitage and make it a retreat for himself , and it 
 be a surprise to he when he open the door to see a snug room with 
 all the sign of frequent habitation . 
 Arthur loose Adam 's arm and throw himself on the ottoman . " you will see 
 my hunting - bottle somewhere , " he say . " a leather case with a bottle and 
 glass in . " 
 Adam be not long in find the case . " there be very little brandy in 
 it , sir , " he say , turn it downwards over the glass , as he hold it 
 before the window ; " hardly this little glassful . " 
 " well , give I that , " say Arthur , with the peevishness of physical 
 depression . when he have take some sip , Adam say , " had not   I well 
 run to th ' house , sir , and get some more brandy ? I can be there and 
 back pretty soon . it will be a stiff walk home for you , if you do not   have 
 something to revive you . " 
 " yes - go . but do not   say I be ill . ask for my man Pym , and tell he to get 
 it from Mills , and not to say I be at the Hermitage . get some water too . " 
 Adam be relieve to have an active task - both of they be relieve to 
 be apart from each other for a short time . but Adam 's swift pace could 
 not still the eager pain of thinking - of live again with concentrated 
 suffering through the last wretched hour , and look out from it over 
 all the new sad future . 
 Arthur lie still for some minute after Adam be go , but presently 
 he rise feebly from the ottoman and peer about slowly in the break 
 moonlight , seek something . it be a short bit of wax candle that 
 stand amongst a confusion of writing and draw material . there be 
 more search for the mean of light the candle , and when that be 
 do , he go cautiously round the room , as if wish to assure himself 
 of the presence or absence of something . at last he have find a slight 
 thing , which he put first in his pocket , and then , on a second thought , 
 take out again and thrust deep down into a waste - paper basket . it be a 
 woman 's little , pink , silk neckerchief . he set the candle on the table , 
 and throw himself down on the ottoman again , exhaust with the effort . 
 when Adam come back with his supply , his entrance awake Arthur from a 
 doze . 
 " that be right , " Arthur say ; " I be tremendously in want of some 
 brandy - vigour . " 
 " I be glad to see you have   get a light , sir , " say Adam . " I have   be 
 think I would well have ask for a lanthorn . " 
 " no , no ; the candle will last long enough - I shall soon be up to walk 
 home now . " 
 " I can not   go before I have   see you safe home , sir , " say Adam , 
 hesitatingly . 
 " no : it will be well for you to stay - sit down . " 
 Adam sit down , and they remain opposite to each other in uneasy 
 silence , while Arthur slowly drink brandy - and - water , with visibly 
 renovate effect . he begin to lie in a more voluntary position , and 
 look as if he be less overpowered by bodily sensation . Adam be 
 keenly alive to these indication , and as his anxiety about Arthur 's 
 condition begin to be allay , he feel more of that impatience which 
 every one know who have have his just indignation suspend by the 
 physical state of the culprit . yet there be one thing on his mind to be 
 do before he could recur to remonstrance : it be to confess what have 
 be unjust in his own word . perhaps he long all the more to make 
 this confession , that his indignation might be free again ; and as he see 
 the sign of return ease in Arthur , the word again and again come to 
 his lip and go back , check by the thought that it would be well 
 to leave everything till to - morrow . as long as they be silent they do 
 not look at each other , and a foreboding come across Adam that if they 
 begin to speak as though they remember the past - if they look at 
 each other with full recognition - they must take fire again . so they sit 
 in silence till the bit of wax candle flicker low in the socket , the 
 silence all the while become more irksome to Adam . Arthur have just 
 pour out some more brandy - and - water , and he throw one arm behind his 
 head and draw up one leg in an attitude of recovered ease , which be an 
 irresistible temptation to Adam to speak what be on his mind . 
 " you begin to feel more yourself again , sir , " he say , as the candle 
 go out and they be half - hide from each other in the faint 
 moonlight . 
 " yes : I do not   feel good for much - very lazy , and not inclined to move ; 
 but I will go home when I have   take this dose . " 
 there be a slight pause before Adam say , " my temper get the well of 
 I , and I say thing as be not   true . I have no right to speak as if you have 
 know you be do I an injury : you have no ground for know it ; I have 
 always keep what I feel for she as secret as I could . " 
 he pause again before he go on . 
 " and perhaps I judge you too harsh - I be apt to be harsh - and you may 
 have act out o ' thoughtlessness more than I should ha ' believe be 
 possible for a man with a heart and a conscience . we be not all put 
 together alike , and we may misjudge one another . God know , it be all the 
 joy I could have now , to think the good of you . " 
 Arthur want to go home without say any more - he be too painfully 
 embarrassed in mind , as well as too weak in body , to wish for any 
 further explanation to - night . and yet it be a relief to he that Adam 
 reopen the subject in a way the least difficult for he to answer . 
 Arthur be in the wretched position of an open , generous man who have 
 commit an error which make deception seem a necessity . the native 
 impulse to give truth in return for truth , to meet trust with frank 
 confession , must be suppress , and duty be become a question of 
 tactic . his deed be react upon he - be already govern he 
 tyrannously and force he into a course that jar with his habitual 
 feeling . the only aim that seem admissible to he now be to deceive 
 Adam to the utmost : to make Adam think well of he than he deserve . 
 and when he hear the word of honest retractation - when he hear the 
 sad appeal with which Adam end - he be oblige to rejoice in 
 the remain of ignorant confidence it imply . he do not answer 
 immediately , for he have to be judicious and not truthful . 
 " say no more about our anger , Adam , " he say , at last , very languidly , 
 for the labour of speech be unwelcome to he ; " I forgive your momentary 
 injustice - it be quite natural , with the exaggerated notion you have in 
 your mind . we shall be none the bad friend in future , I hope , because 
 we have   fight . you have the good of it , and that be as it should be , for 
 I believe I have   be most in the wrong of the two . come , let we shake 
 hand . " 
 Arthur hold out his hand , but Adam sit still . 
 " I do not   like to say ' no ' to that , sir , " he say , " but I can not   shake 
 hand till it be clear what we mean by't . I be wrong when I speak as 
 if you have do I an injury knowingly , but I be not   wrong in what I say 
 before , about your behaviour t ' Hetty , and I can not   shake hand with you 
 as if I hold you my friend the same as ever till you have   clear that up 
 well . " 
 Arthur swallow his pride and resentment as he draw back his hand . 
 he be silent for some moment , and then say , as indifferently as he 
 could , " I do not   know what you mean by clear up , Adam . I have   tell you 
 already that you think too seriously of a little flirtation . but if 
 you be right in suppose there be any danger in it - I be go away on 
 Saturday , and there will be an end of it . as for the pain it have give 
 you , I be heartily sorry for it . I can say no more . " 
 Adam say nothing , but rise from his chair and stand with his face 
 towards one of the window , as if look at the blackness of the 
 moonlit fir - tree ; but he be in reality conscious of nothing but the 
 conflict within he . it be of no use now - his resolution not to speak 
 till to - morrow . he must speak there and then . but it be several minute 
 before he turn round and step nearer to Arthur , standing and 
 look down on he as he lay . 
 " it will be well for I to speak plain , " he say , with evident effort , 
 " though it be hard work . you see , sir , this be not   a trifle to I , 
 whatever it may be to you . I be none o ' they man as can go make love 
 first to one woman and then t ' another , and do not   think it much odd 
 which of them I take . what I feel for Hetty 's a different sort o ' love , 
 such as I believe nobody can know much about but they as feel it and God 
 as have give it to them . she be more nor everything else to I , all but 
 my conscience and my good name . and if it be true what you have   be say 
 all along - and if it be only be trifle and flirt as you call it , 
 as will be put an end to by your go away - why , then , I would wait , and 
 hope her heart ' ud turn to I after all . I be loath to think you would speak 
 false to I , and I will believe your word , however thing may look . " 
 " you would be wrong Hetty more than I not to believe it , " say 
 Arthur , almost violently , start up from the ottoman and move away . 
 but he throw himself into a chair again directly , say , more feebly , 
 " you seem to forget that , in suspect I , you be cast imputation 
 upon she . " 
 " Nay , sir , " Adam say , in a calm voice , as if he be 
 half - relieve - for he be too straightforward to make a distinction 
 between a direct falsehood and an indirect one - " Nay , sir , thing do not 
 lie level between Hetty and you . you be act with your eye open , 
 whatever you may do ; but how do you know what be be in her mind ? she be 
 all but a child - as any man with a conscience in he ought to feel bound 
 to take care on . and whatever you may think , I know you have   disturb 
 her mind . I know she be be fix her heart on you , for there be a many 
 thing clear to I now as I do not   understand before . but you seem to 
 make light o ' what she may feel - you do not   think o ' that . " 
 " good God , Adam , let I alone ! " Arthur burst out impetuously ; " I feel it 
 enough without your worry I . " 
 he be aware of his indiscretion as soon as the word have escape he . 
 " well , then , if you feel it , " Adam rejoin , eagerly ; " if you feel as 
 you may ha ' put false notion into her mind , and make she believe as 
 you love she , when all the while you mean nothing , I have   this demand 
 to make of you - I be not speak for myself , but for she . I ask you t ' 
 undeceive she before you go away . Y'aren't   go away for ever , and if 
 you leave she behind with a notion in her head o ' your feeling about she 
 the same as she feel about you , she will be hanker after you , and the 
 mischief may get bad . it may be a smart to she now , but it will save she 
 pain I ' th ' end . I ask you to write a letter - you may trust to my seeing 
 as she get it . tell she the truth , and take blame to yourself for 
 behave as you have no right to do to a young woman as be not   your equal . 
 I speak plain , sir , but I can not   speak any other way . there be nobody can 
 take care o ' Hetty in this thing but I . " 
 " I can do what I think needful in the matter , " say Arthur , more and 
 more irritated by mingle distress and perplexity , " without give 
 promise to you . I shall take what measure I think proper . " 
 " no , " say Adam , in an abrupt decide tone , " that will not   do . I must know 
 what ground I be treading on . I must be safe as you have   put an end to what 
 ought never to ha ' be begin . I do not   forget what be owe to you as a 
 gentleman , but in this thing we be man and man , and I can not   give up . " 
 there be no answer for some moment . then Arthur say , " I will see you 
 to - morrow . I can bear no more now ; I be ill . " he rise as he speak , and 
 reach his cap , as if intend to go . 
 " you will not   see she again ! " Adam exclaim , with a flash of recur 
 anger and suspicion , move towards the door and place his back 
 against it . " either tell I she can never be my wife - tell I you have 
 be lie - or else promise I what I have   say . " 
 Adam , utter this alternative , stand like a terrible fate before 
 Arthur , who have move forward a step or two , and now stop , faint , 
 shaken , sick in mind and body . it seem long to both of they - that 
 inward struggle of Arthur 's - before he say , feebly , " I promise ; let I 
 go . " 
 Adam move away from the door and open it , but when Arthur reach the 
 step , he stop again and lean against the door - post . 
 " you be not well enough to walk alone , sir , " say Adam . " take my arm 
 again . " 
 Arthur make no answer , and presently walk on , Adam follow . but , 
 after a few step , he stand still again , and say , coldly , " I believe I 
 must trouble you . it be get late now , and there may be an alarm set 
 up about I at home . " 
 Adam give his arm , and they walk on without utter a word , till they 
 come where the basket and the tool lay . 
 " I must pick up the tool , sir , " Adam say . " they be my brother 's . I 
 doubt they will be rust . if you will please to wait a minute . " 
 Arthur stand still without speak , and no other word pass between 
 they till they be at the side entrance , where he hop to get in 
 without be see by any one . he say then , " thank you ; I need not 
 trouble you any far . " 
 " what time will it be conven'ent for I to see you to - morrow , sir ? " say 
 Adam . 
 " you may send I word that you be here at five o'clock , " say Arthur ; 
 " not before . " 
 " good - night , sir , " say Adam . but he hear no reply ; Arthur have turn 
 into the house . 
 chapter XXIX 
 the Next morning 
 arthur do not pass a sleepless night ; he sleep long and well . for sleep 
 come to the perplexed - if the perplex be only weary enough . but at 
 seven he ring his bell and astonish Pym by declare he be go to 
 get up , and must have breakfast bring to he at eight . 
 " and see that my mare be saddle at half - past eight , and tell my 
 grandfather when he be down that I be well this morning and be go for 
 a ride . " 
 he have be awake an hour , and could rest in bed no long . in bed our 
 yesterday be too oppressive : if a man can only get up , though it 
 be but to whistle or to smoke , he have a present which offer some 
 resistance to the past - sensation which assert themselves against 
 tyrannous memory . and if there be such a thing as take average 
 of feel , it would certainly be find that in the hunting and shoot 
 season regret , self - reproach , and mortified pride weigh light on 
 country gentleman than in late spring and summer . Arthur feel that he 
 should be more of a man on horseback . even the presence of Pym , wait 
 on he with the usual deference , be a reassurance to he after the 
 scene of yesterday . for , with Arthur 's sensitiveness to opinion , 
 the loss of Adam 's respect be a shock to his self - contentment which 
 suffuse his imagination with the sense that he have sink in all eye - as 
 a sudden shock of fear from some real peril make a nervous woman afraid 
 even to step , because all her perception be suffuse with a sense of 
 danger . 
 Arthur 's , as you know , be a love nature . deed of kindness be as 
 easy to he as a bad habit : they be the common issue of his weakness 
 and good quality , of his egoism and his sympathy . he do not   like to 
 witness pain , and he like to have grateful eye beam on he as the 
 giver of pleasure . when he be a lad of seven , he one day kick down an 
 old gardener 's pitcher of broth , from no motive but a kicking impulse , 
 not reflect that it be the old man 's dinner ; but on learn that 
 sad fact , he take his favourite pencil - case and a silver - hafte knife 
 out of his pocket and offer they as compensation . he have be the same 
 Arthur ever since , try to make all offence forget in benefit . 
 if there be any bitterness in his nature , it could only show itself 
 against the man who refuse to be conciliate by he . and perhaps the 
 time be come for some of that bitterness to rise . at the first moment , 
 Arthur have feel pure distress and self - reproach at discover that 
 Adam 's happiness be involve in his relation to Hetty . if there have 
 be a possibility of make Adam tenfold amend - if deed of gift , or 
 any other deed , could have restore Adam 's contentment and regard for 
 he as a benefactor , Arthur would not only have execute they without 
 hesitation , but would have feel bind all the more closely to Adam , 
 and would never have be weary of make retribution . but Adam could 
 receive no amend ; his suffering could not be cancel ; his respect and 
 affection could not be recover by any prompt deed of atonement . he 
 stand like an immovable obstacle against which no pressure could 
 avail ; an embodiment of what Arthur most shrank from believe in - the 
 irrevocableness of his own wrongdoing . the word of scorn , the refusal 
 to shake hand , the mastery assert over he in their last conversation 
 in the Hermitage - above all , the sense of have be knock down , to 
 which a man do not very well reconcile himself , even under the most 
 heroic circumstance - press on he with a gall pain which be 
 strong than compunction . Arthur would so gladly have persuade himself 
 that he have do no harm ! and if no one have tell he the contrary , he 
 could have persuade himself so much well . nemesis can seldom forge a 
 sword for herself out of our conscience - out of the suffering we feel 
 in the suffering we may have cause : there be rarely metal enough there 
 to make an effective weapon . our moral sense learn the manner of good 
 society and smile when other smile , but when some rude person give 
 rough name to our action , she be apt to take part against we . and 
 so it be with Arthur : Adam 's judgment of he , Adam 's grating word , 
 disturb his self - soothe argument . 
 not that Arthur have be at ease before Adam 's discovery . struggle and 
 resolve have transform themselves into compunction and anxiety . he be 
 distressed for Hetty 's sake , and distress for his own , that he 
 must leave she behind . he have always , both in make and break 
 resolution , look beyond his passion and see that it must speedily 
 end in separation ; but his nature be too ardent and tender for he not 
 to suffer at this parting ; and on Hetty 's account he be fill with 
 uneasiness . he have find out the dream in which she be live - that she 
 be to be a lady in silk and satin - and when he have first talk to 
 she about his go away , she have ask he tremblingly to let she go 
 with he and be marry . it be his painful knowledge of this which have 
 give the most exasperating sting to Adam 's reproach . he have say no 
 word with the purpose of deceive she - her vision be all spin by her 
 own childish fancy - but he be oblige to confess to himself that it be 
 spin half out of his own action . and to increase the mischief , on this 
 last evening he have not dare to hint the truth to Hetty ; he have be 
 oblige to soothe she with tender , hopeful word , lest he should throw 
 she into violent distress . he feel the situation acutely , feel the 
 sorrow of the dear thing in the present , and think with a darker 
 anxiety of the tenacity which her feeling might have in the future . 
 that be the one sharp point which press against he ; every other he 
 could evade by hopeful self - persuasion . the whole thing have be secret ; 
 the Poysers have not the shadow of a suspicion . no one , except Adam , know 
 anything of what have pass - no one else be likely to know ; for Arthur 
 have impress on Hetty that it would be fatal to betray , by word or 
 look , that there have be the least intimacy between they ; and Adam , who 
 know half their secret , would rather help they to keep it than betray 
 it . it be an unfortunate business altogether , but there be no use in 
 make it bad than it be by imaginary exaggeration and foreboding 
 of evil that might never come . the temporary sadness for Hetty be 
 the bad consequence ; he resolutely turn away his eye from any bad 
 consequence that be not demonstrably inevitable . but - but Hetty might 
 have have the trouble in some other way if not in this . and perhaps 
 hereafter he might be able to do a great deal for she and make up to she 
 for all the tear she would shed about he . she would owe the advantage 
 of his care for she in future year to the sorrow she have incur now . 
 so good come out of evil . such be the beautiful arrangement of thing ! 
 be you inclined to ask whether this can be the same Arthur who , two 
 month ago , have that freshness of feeling , that delicate honour which 
 shrink from wound even a sentiment , and do not contemplate any 
 more positive offence as possible for it ? - who think that his own 
 self - respect be a high tribunal than any external opinion ? the same , 
 I assure you , only under different condition . our deed determine we , 
 as much as we determine our deed , and until we know what have be or 
 will be the peculiar combination of outward with inward fact , which 
 constitute a man 's critical action , it will be well not to think 
 ourselves wise about his character . there be a terrible coercion in 
 our deed , which may first turn the honest man into a deceiver and then 
 reconcile he to the change , for this reason - that the second wrong 
 present itself to he in the guise of the only practicable right . the 
 action which before commission have be see with that blend common 
 sense and fresh untarnished feeling which be the healthy eye of the 
 soul , be look at afterwards with the lens of apologetic ingenuity , 
 through which all thing that man call beautiful and ugly be see to 
 be make up of texture very much alike . Europe adjust itself to a 
  fait accompli , and so do an individual character - until the placid 
 adjustment be disturb by a convulsive retribution . 
 no man can escape this vitiate effect of an offence against his own 
 sentiment of right , and the effect be the strong in Arthur because of 
 that very need of self - respect which , while his conscience be still at 
 ease , be one of his good safeguard . self - accusation be too painful to 
 he - he could not face it . he must persuade himself that he have not be 
 very much to blame ; he begin even to pity himself for the necessity he 
 be under of deceive Adam - it be a course so opposed to the honesty 
 of his own nature . but then , it be the only right thing to do . 
 well , whatever have be amiss in he , he be miserable enough in 
 consequence : miserable about Hetty ; miserable about this letter that 
 he have promise to write , and that seem at one moment to be a gross 
 barbarity , at another perhaps the great kindness he could do to she . 
 and across all this reflection would dart every now and then a sudden 
 impulse of passionate defiance towards all consequence . he would carry 
 Hetty away , and all other consideration might go to .... 
 in this state of mind the four wall of his room make an intolerable 
 prison to he ; they seem to hem in and press down upon he all the 
 crowd of contradictory thought and conflict feeling , some of which 
 would fly away in the open air . he have only an hour or two to make up 
 his mind in , and he must get clear and calm . once on Meg 's back , in 
 the fresh air of that fine morning , he should be more master of the 
 situation . 
 the pretty creature arch her bay neck in the sunshine , and paw the 
 gravel , and tremble with pleasure when her master stroke her nose , and 
 pat she , and talk to she even in a more caressing tone than usual . 
 he love she the well because she know nothing of his secret . but 
 Meg be quite as well acquainted with her master 's mental state as many 
 other of her sex with the mental condition of the nice young gentleman 
 towards whom their heart be in a state of flutter expectation . 
 Arthur canter for five mile beyond the Chase , till he be at the foot 
 of a hill where there be no hedge or tree to hem in the road . then 
 he throw the bridle on Meg 's neck and prepare to make up his mind . 
 Hetty know that their meeting yesterday must be the last before Arthur 
 go away - there be no possibility of their contrive another without 
 exciting suspicion - and she be like a frightened child , unable to think 
 of anything , only able to cry at the mention of parting , and then put 
 her face up to have the tear kiss away . he could do nothing but 
 comfort she , and lull she into dream on . a letter would be a 
 dreadfully abrupt way of awaken she ! yet there be truth in what Adam 
 say - that it would save she from a lengthened delusion , which might be 
 bad than a sharp immediate pain . and it be the only way of satisfy 
 Adam , who must be satisfy , for more reason than one . if he could have 
 see she again ! but that be impossible ; there be such a thorny hedge 
 of hindrance between they , and an imprudence would be fatal . and yet , 
 if he could see she again , what good would it do ? only cause he to 
 suffer more from the sight of her distress and the remembrance of it . 
 away from he she be surround by all the motif to self - control . 
 a sudden dread here fall like a shadow across his imagination - the dread 
 lest she should do something violent in her grief ; and close upon that 
 dread come another , which deepen the shadow . but he shake they off 
 with the force of youth and hope . what be the ground for paint the 
 future in that dark way ? it be just as likely to be the reverse . Arthur 
 tell himself he do not deserve that thing should turn out badly . he 
 have never mean beforehand to do anything his conscience disapprove ; 
 he have be lead on by circumstance . there be a sort of implicit 
 confidence in he that he be really such a good fellow at bottom , 
 Providence would not treat he harshly . 
 at all event , he could not   help what would come now : all he could do 
 be to take what seem the good course at the present moment . and he 
 persuade himself that that course be to make the way open between 
 Adam and Hetty . her heart might really turn to Adam , as he say , after a 
 while ; and in that case there would have be no great harm do , since 
 it be still Adam 's ardent wish to make she his wife . to be sure , Adam 
 be deceive - deceive in a way that Arthur would have resent as a 
 deep wrong if it have be practise on himself . that be a reflection 
 that mar the console prospect . Arthur 's cheek even burn in 
 mingle shame and irritation at the thought . but what could a man do in 
 such a dilemma ? he be bind in honour to say no word that could injure 
 Hetty : his first duty be to guard she . he would never have tell or 
 act a lie on his own account . good God ! what a miserable fool he be 
 to have bring himself into such a dilemma ; and yet , if ever a man have 
 excuse , he have .   Pity that consequence be determine not by excuse 
 but by action ! 
 well , the letter must be write ; it be the only mean that promise 
 a solution of the difficulty . the tear come into Arthur 's eye as he 
 think of Hetty read it ; but it would be almost as hard for he 
 to write it ; he be not do anything easy to himself ; and this 
 last thought help he to arrive at a conclusion . he could never 
 deliberately have take a step which inflict pain on another and leave 
 himself at ease . even a movement of jealousy at the thought of give up 
 Hetty to Adam go to convince he that he be make a sacrifice . 
 when once he have come to this conclusion , he turn Meg round and set 
 off home again in a canter . the letter should be write the first 
 thing , and the rest of the day would be fill up with other business : 
 he should have no time to look behind he . happily , Irwine and Gawaine 
 be come to dinner , and by twelve o'clock the next day he should 
 have leave the Chase mile behind he . there be some security in this 
 constant occupation against an uncontrollable impulse seize he to 
 rush to Hetty and thrust into her hand some mad proposition that would 
 undo everything . fast and fast go the sensitive Meg , at every 
 slight sign from her rider , till the canter have pass into a swift 
 gallop . 
 " I think they say th ' young mester war take ill last night , " say 
 sour old John , the groom , at dinner - time in the servant ' hall . " he be 
 be ridin ' fit to split the mare I ' two this forenoon . " 
 " that be happen one o ' the symptim , John , " say the facetious coachman . 
 " then I wish he war let blood for ' t , that be all , " say John , grimly . 
 Adam have be early at the Chase to know how Arthur be , and have be 
 relieve from all anxiety about the effect of his blow by learn 
 that he be go out for a ride . at five o'clock he be punctually there 
 again , and send up word of his arrival . in a few minute Pym come down 
 with a letter in his hand and give it to Adam , say that the captain 
 be too busy to see he , and have write everything he have to say . 
 the letter be direct to Adam , but he go out of door again before 
 open it . it contain a seal enclosure direct to Hetty . on the 
 inside of the cover Adam read : 
 " in the enclose letter I have write everything you wish . I leave it 
 to you to decide whether you will be do well to deliver it to Hetty 
 or to return it to I . ask yourself once more whether you be not take 
 a measure which may pain she more than mere silence . 
 " there be no need for our see each other again now . we shall meet 
 with well feeling some month hence . 
 " A.D. " 
 " perhaps he be I ' th ' right on ' t not to see I , " think Adam . " it be 
 no use meeting to say more hard word , and it be no use meeting to shake 
 hand and say we be friend again . we be not friend , an ' it be well 
 not to pretend it . I know forgiveness be a man 's duty , but , to my 
 thinking , that can only mean as you be to give up all thought o ' taking 
 revenge : it can never mean as you be t ' have your old feeling back 
 again , for that be not possible . he be not the same man to I , and I can not 
 feel the same towards he . God help I ! I do not   know whether I feel the 
 same towards anybody : I seem as if I have be measure my work from a 
 false line , and have get it all to measure over again . " 
 but the question about deliver the letter to Hetty soon absorb 
 Adam 's thought . Arthur have procure some relief to himself by throw 
 the decision on Adam with a warning ; and Adam , who be not give to 
 hesitation , hesitate here . he determine to feel his way - to ascertain 
 as well as he could what be Hetty 's state of mind before he decide on 
 deliver the letter . 
 Chapter XXX 
 the Delivery of the Letter 
 the next Sunday Adam join the Poysers on their way out of church , 
 hop for an invitation to go home with they . he have the letter in 
 his pocket , and be anxious to have an opportunity of talk to Hetty 
 alone . he could not see her face at church , for she have change her 
 seat , and when he come up to she to shake hand , her manner be doubtful 
 and constrain . he expect this , for it be the first time she have 
 meet he since she have be aware that he have see she with Arthur in the 
 Grove . 
 " come , you will go on with we , Adam , " Mr. Poyser say when they reach 
 the turning ; and as soon as they be in the field Adam venture to 
 offer his arm to Hetty . the child soon give they an opportunity of 
 linger behind a little , and then Adam say : 
 " will you contrive for I to walk out in the garden a bit with you this 
 evening , if it keep fine , Hetty ? I have   something partic'lar to talk to 
 you about . " 
 Hetty say , " very well . " she be really as anxious as Adam be that she 
 should have some private talk with he . she wonder what he think of 
 she and Arthur . he must have see they kiss , she know , but she have 
 no conception of the scene that have take place between Arthur and Adam . 
 her first feeling have be that Adam would be very angry with she , and 
 perhaps would tell her aunt and uncle , but it never enter her mind 
 that he would dare to say anything to Captain Donnithorne . it be a 
 relief to she that he behave so kindly to she to - day , and want to 
 speak to she alone , for she have tremble when she find he be go 
 home with they lest he should mean " to tell . " but , now he want to talk 
 to she by herself , she should learn what he think and what he mean to 
 do . she feel a certain confidence that she could persuade he not to 
 do anything she do not want he to do ; she could perhaps even make he 
 believe that she do not   care for Arthur ; and as long as Adam think 
 there be any hope of she have he , he would do just what she like , 
 she know . besides , she must go on seem to encourage Adam , lest her 
 uncle and aunt should be angry and suspect she of have some secret 
 lover . 
 Hetty 's little brain be busy with this combination as she hang on 
 Adam 's arm and say " yes " or " no " to some slight observation of his 
 about the many hawthorn - berry there would be for the bird this 
 next winter , and the low - hang cloud that would hardly hold up till 
 morning . and when they rejoin her aunt and uncle , she could pursue her 
 thought without interruption , for Mr. Poyser hold that though a young 
 man might like to have the woman he be court on his arm , he would 
 nevertheless be glad of a little reasonable talk about business the 
 while ; and , for his own part , he be curious to heal the most recent 
 news about the Chase Farm . so , through the rest of the walk , he claim 
 Adam 's conversation for himself , and Hetty lay her small plot and 
 imagine her little scene of cunning blandishment , as she walk along 
 by the hedgerow on honest Adam 's arm , quite as well as if she have be 
 an elegantly clothe coquette alone in her boudoir . for if a country beauty 
 in clumsy shoe be only shallow - hearted enough , it be astonish how 
 closely her mental process may resemble those of a lady in society 
 and crinoline , who apply her refined intellect to the problem of 
 commit indiscretion without compromise herself . perhaps the 
 resemblance be not much the less because Hetty feel very unhappy all 
 the while . the parting with Arthur be a double pain to she - mingle 
 with the tumult of passion and vanity there be a dim undefined fear 
 that the future might shape itself in some way quite unlike her dream . 
 she cling to the comfort hopeful word Arthur have utter in their 
 last meeting - " I shall come again at Christmas , and then we will see 
 what can be do . " she cling to the belief that he be so fond of 
 she , he would never be happy without she ; and she still hug her 
 secret - that a great gentleman love she - with gratified pride , as a 
 superiority over all the girl she know . but the uncertainty of the 
 future , the possibility to which she could give no shape , begin to 
 press upon she like the invisible weight of air ; she be alone on her 
 little island of dream , and all around she be the dark unknown water 
 where Arthur be go . she could gather no elation of spirit now by 
 look forward , but only by look backward to build confidence on 
 past word and caress . but occasionally , since Thursday evening , her 
 dim anxiety have be almost lose behind the more definite fear that 
 Adam might betray what he know to her uncle and aunt , and his sudden 
 proposition to talk with she alone have set her thought to work in a 
 new way . she be eager not to lose this evening 's opportunity ; and after 
 tea , when the boy be go into the garden and Totty beg to go 
 with they , Hetty say , with an alacrity that surprise Mrs. Poyser , 
 " I will go with she , Aunt . " 
 it do not seem at all surprising that Adam say he would go too , 
 and soon he and Hetty be leave alone together on the walk by the 
 filbert - tree , while the boy be busy elsewhere gather the large 
 unripe nut to play at " cob - nut " with , and Totty be watch they with 
 a puppylike air of contemplation . it be but a short time - hardly two 
 month - since Adam have have his mind fill with delicious hope as he 
 stand by Hetty 's side un this garden . the remembrance of that scene have 
 often be with he since Thursday evening : the sunlight through 
 the apple - tree bough , the red bunch , Hetty 's sweet blush . it come 
 importunately now , on this sad evening , with the low - hang cloud , but 
 he try to suppress it , lest some emotion should impel he to say more 
 than be needful for Hetty 's sake . 
 " after what I see on Thursday night , Hetty , " he begin , " you will not   think 
 I make too free in what I be go to say . if you be be court by 
 any man as ' ud make you his wife , and I would know you be fond of he and 
 mean to have he , I should have no right to speak a word to you about 
 it ; but when I see you be be make love to by a gentleman as can never 
 marry you , and doesna think o ' marry you , I feel bound t ' interfere 
 for you . I can not   speak about it to they as be I ' the place o ' your 
 parent , for that might bring bad trouble than 's needful . " 
 Adam 's word relieve one of Hetty 's fear , but they also carry a 
 meaning which sicken she with a strengthen foreboding . she be pale 
 and tremble , and yet she would have angrily contradict Adam , if she 
 have dare to betray her feeling . but she be silent . 
 " you be so young , you know , Hetty , " he go on , almost tenderly , " and y ' 
 have not   see much o ' what go on in the world . it be right for I to 
 do what I can to save you from get into trouble for want o ' your 
 know where you be be lead to . if anybody besides I know what I 
 know about your meet a gentleman and have fine present from he , 
 they would speak light on you , and you would lose your character . and besides 
 that , you will have to suffer in your feeling , wi ' give your love to 
 a man as can never marry you , so as he might take care of you all your 
 life . " 
 Adam pause and look at Hetty , who be pluck the leaf from the 
 filbert - tree and tear they up in her hand . her little plan and 
 preconcerte speech have all forsake she , like an ill - learn lesson , 
 under the terrible agitation produce by Adam 's word . there be a cruel 
 force in their calm certainty which threaten to grapple and crush her 
 flimsy hope and fancy . she want to resist they - she want to throw 
 they off with angry contradiction - but the determination to conceal what 
 she feel still govern she . it be nothing more than a blind prompting 
 now , for she be unable to calculate the effect of her word . 
 " you have   no right to say as I love he , " she say , faintly , but 
 impetuously , pluck another rough leaf and tear it up . she be very 
 beautiful in her paleness and agitation , with her dark childish eye 
 dilate and her breath short than usual . Adam 's heart yearn over she 
 as he look at she . ah , if he could but comfort she , and soothe she , 
 and save she from this pain ; if he have but some sort of strength that 
 would enable he to rescue her poor troubled mind , as he would have 
 rescue her body in the face of all danger ! 
 " I doubt it must be so , Hetty , " he say , tenderly ; " for I canna believe 
 you would let any man kiss you by yourself , and give you a gold box with 
 his hair , and go a - walk I ' the Grove to meet he , if you didna love 
 he . I be not blame you , for I know it ' ud begin by little and little , 
 till at last you would not be able to throw it off . it be he I blame for 
 steal your love I ' that way , when he know he could never make you 
 the right amend . he be be trifle with you , and make a plaything of 
 you , and care nothing about you as a man ought to care . " 
 " yes , he do care for I ; I know well nor you , " Hetty burst out . 
 everything be forget but the pain and anger she feel at Adam 's 
 word . 
 " Nay , Hetty , " say Adam , " if he have care for you rightly , he would never 
 ha ' behave so . he tell I himself he mean nothing by his kissing and 
 present , and he want to make I believe as you think light of them 
 too . but I know well nor that . I can not   help think as you have   be 
 trust to his love you well enough to marry you , for all he be a 
 gentleman . and that be why I must speak to you about it , Hetty , for 
 fear you should be deceive yourself . it be never enter his head the 
 think o ' marry you . " 
 " how do you know ? how durst you say so ? " say Hetty , pause in her walk 
 and tremble . the terrible decision of Adam 's tone shake she with fear . 
 she have no presence of mind leave for the reflection that Arthur would 
 have his reason for not tell the truth to Adam . her word and look 
 be enough to determine Adam : he must give she the letter . 
 " perhaps you can not   believe I , Hetty , because you think too well of 
 he - because you think he love you well than he do . but I have   get 
 a letter I ' my pocket , as he write himself for I to give you . I have   not 
 read the letter , but he say he be tell you the truth in it . but before 
 I give you the letter , consider , Hetty , and do not   let it take too much 
 hold on you . it wouldna ha ' be good for you if he have want to do such 
 a mad thing as marry you : it ' ud ha ' lead to no happiness I ' th ' end . " 
 Hetty say nothing ; she feel a revival of hope at the mention of a 
 letter which Adam have not read . there would be something quite different 
 in it from what he think . 
 Adam take out the letter , but he hold it in his hand still , while he 
 say , in a tone of tender entreaty , " do not   you bear I ill will , Hetty , 
 because I be the mean o ' bring you this pain . God know I would ha ' bear 
 a good deal bad for the sake o ' spar it you . and think - there be 
 nobody but I know about this , and I will take care of you as if I be 
 your brother . you be the same as ever to I , for I do not   believe you have 
 do any wrong knowingly . " 
 Hetty have lay her hand on the letter , but Adam do not loose it till 
 he have do speak . she take no notice of what he say - she have not 
 listen ; but when he loose the letter , she put it into her pocket , 
 without open it , and then begin to walk more quickly , as if she 
 want to go in . 
 " you be in the right not to read it just yet , " say Adam . " read it when 
 you be by yourself . but stay out a little bit long , and let we call 
 the child : you look so white and ill , your aunt may take notice of 
 it . " 
 Hetty hear the warning . it recall to she the necessity of rally 
 her native power of concealment , which have half give way under the 
 shock of Adam 's word . and she have the letter in her pocket : she be 
 sure there be comfort in that letter in spite of Adam . she run to find 
 Totty , and soon reappear with recover colour , lead Totty , who be 
 make a sour face because she have be oblige to throw away an unripe 
 apple that she have set her small tooth in . 
 " Hegh , Totty , " say Adam , " come and ride on my shoulder - ever so 
 high - you will touch the top o ' the tree . " 
 what little child ever refuse to be comfort by that glorious sense of 
 be seize strongly and swing upward ? I do not   believe Ganymede cry 
 when the eagle carry he away , and perhaps deposit he on Jove 's 
 shoulder at the end . Totty smile down complacently from her secure 
 height , and pleasant be the sight to the mother 's eye , as she stand at 
 the house door and see Adam come with his small burden . 
 " bless your sweet face , my pet , " she say , the mother 's strong love 
 fill her keen eye with mildness , as Totty lean forward and put 
 out her arm . she have no eye for Hetty at that moment , and only say , 
 without look at she , " you go and draw some ale , Hetty ; the gell be 
 both at the cheese . " 
 after the ale have be draw and her uncle 's pipe light , there be 
 Totty to be take to bed , and bring down again in her night - gown 
 because she would cry instead of go to sleep . then there be supper 
 to be get ready , and Hetty must be continually in the way to give help . 
 Adam stay till he know Mrs. Poyser expect he to go , engage she 
 and her husband in talk as constantly as he could , for the sake of 
 leave Hetty more at ease . he linger , because he want to see she 
 safely through that evening , and he be delighted to find how much 
 self - command she show . he know she have not have time to read the 
 letter , but he do not know she be buoy up by a secret hope that the 
 letter would contradict everything he have say . it be hard work for he 
 to leave she - hard to think that he should not know for day how she be 
 bear her trouble . but he must go at last , and all he could do be 
 to press her hand gently as he say " good - bye , " and hope she would take 
 that as a sign that if his love could ever be a refuge for she , it be 
 there the same as ever . how busy his thought be , as he walk home , 
 in devise pity excuse for her folly , in refer all her weakness 
 to the sweet lovingness of her nature , in blame Arthur , with less and 
 less inclination to admit that his conduct might be extenuate too ! his 
 exasperation at Hetty 's suffering - and also at the sense that she be 
 possibly thrust for ever out of his own reach - deafen he to any 
 plea for the miscalled friend who have work this misery . Adam be a 
 clear - sight , fair - minded man - a fine fellow , indeed , morally as well 
 as physically . but if Aristides the just be ever in love and jealous , 
 he be at that moment not perfectly magnanimous . and I can not pretend 
 that Adam , in these painful day , feel nothing but righteous indignation 
 and love pity . he be bitterly jealous , and in proportion as his love 
 make he indulgent in his judgment of Hetty , the bitterness find a vent 
 in his feeling towards Arthur . 
 " her head be allay likely to be turn , " he think , " when a 
 gentleman , with his fine manner , and fine clothe , and his white hand , 
 and that way o ' talking gentlefolk have , come about she , make up to 
 she in a bold way , as a man could not   do that be only her equal ; and 
 it be much if she will ever like a common man now . " he could not help 
 draw his own hand out of his pocket and look at they - at the hard 
 palm and the broken finger - nail . " I be a roughish fellow , altogether ; I 
 do not   know , now I come to think on't , what there be much for a woman to 
 like about I ; and yet I might ha ' get another wife easy enough , if 
 I have not   set my heart on she . but it be little matter what other woman 
 think about I , if she can not   love I . she might ha ' love I , perhaps , 
 as likely as any other man - there be nobody hereabout as I be afraid of , 
 if he have not   come between we ; but now I shall belike be hateful to she 
 because I be so different to he . and yet there be no telling - she may 
 turn round the other way , when she find he be make light of she all the 
 while . she may come to feel the vally of a man as ' ud be thankful to be 
 bind to she all his life . but I must put up with it whichever way it 
 be - I have   only to be thankful it be be no bad . I be not th ' only man 
 that be get to do without much happiness I ' this life . there be many a 
 good bit o ' work do with a bad heart . it be God 's will , and that be 
 enough for we : we should not   know well how thing ought to be than he 
 do , I reckon , if we be to spend our life I ' puzzle . but it ' ud ha ' 
 go near to spoil my work for I , if I have see she bring to sorrow and 
 shame , and through the man as I have   always be proud to think on . since 
 I have   be spar that , I have   no right to grumble . when a man 's get his 
 limb whole , he can bear a smart cut or two . " 
 as Adam be get over a stile at this point in his reflection , he 
 perceive a man walk along the field before he . he know it be Seth , 
 return from an evening preaching , and make haste to overtake he . 
 " I think thee'dst be at home before I , " he say , as Seth turn round 
 to wait for he , " for I be later than usual to - night . " 
 " well , I be later too , for I get into talk , after meeting , with John 
 Barnes , who have lately profess himself in a state of perfection , 
 and I have a question to ask he about his experience . it be one o ' they 
 subject that lead you far than y ' expect - they do not   lie along the 
 straight road . " 
 they walk along together in silence two or three minute . Adam be not 
 incline to enter into the subtlety of religious experience , but he 
 be inclined to interchange a word or two of brotherly affection and 
 confidence with Seth . that be a rare impulse in he , much as the 
 brother love each other . they hardly ever speak of personal matter , 
 or utter more than an allusion to their family trouble . Adam be 
 by nature reserve in all matter of feeling , and Seth feel a certain 
 timidity towards his more practical brother . 
 " Seth , lad , " Adam say , put his arm on his brother 's shoulder , " hast 
 hear anything from Dinah Morris since she go away ? " 
 " yes , " say Seth . " she tell I I might write her word after a while , how 
 we go on , and how mother bear up under her trouble . so I write to she 
 a fortnight ago , and tell she about thee have a new employment , and 
 how Mother be more contented ; and last Wednesday , when I call at the 
 post at Treddles'on , I find a letter from she . I think thee'dst perhaps 
 like to read it , but I didna say anything about it because thee'st 
 seem so full of other thing . it be quite easy t ' read - she write 
 wonderful for a woman . " 
 Seth have draw the letter from his pocket and hold it out to Adam , who 
 say , as he take it , " aye , lad , I have   get a tough load to carry just 
 now - thee mustna take it ill if I be a bit silenter and crusty nor 
 usual . trouble doesna make I care the less for thee . I know we shall 
 stick together to the last . " 
 " I take nought ill o ' thee , Adam . I know well enough what it mean if 
 thee't a bit short wi ' I now and then . " 
 " there be Mother open the door to look out for we , " say Adam , as they 
 mount the slope . " she be be sit I ' the dark as usual . well , Gyp , 
 well , art glad to see I ? " 
 Lisbeth go in again quickly and light a candle , for she have hear 
 the welcome rustling of footstep on the grass , before Gyp 's joyful 
 bark . 
 " eh , my lad ! th ' hour war ne'er so long sin ' I war bear as they'n be 
 this blessed Sunday night . what can ye both ha ' be do till this 
 time ? " 
 " thee shouldstna sit I ' the dark , Mother , " say Adam ; " that make the 
 time seem long . " 
 " eh , what be I to do wi ' burnin ' candle of a Sunday , when there be on'y 
 I an ' it be sin to do a bit o ' knittin ' ? the daylight 's long enough 
 for I to stare I ' the booke as I canna read . it ' ud be a fine way o ' 
 shortenin ' the time , to make it waste the good candle . but which on 
 you be for ha'in ' supper ? ye mun ayther be clem or full , I should 
 think , seein ' what time o ' night it be . " 
 " I be hungry , Mother , " say Seth , seat himself at the little table , 
 which have be spread ever since it be light . 
 " I have   have my supper , " say Adam . " here , Gyp , " he add , take some cold 
 potato from the table and rub the rough grey head that look up 
 towards he . 
 " thee needstna be gi'in ' th ' dog , " say Lisbeth ; " I'n feed he well 
 a'ready . I be not like to forget he , I reckon , when he be all o ' thee I 
 can get sight on . " 
 " come , then , Gyp , " say Adam , " we will go to bed . good - night , Mother ; I be 
 very tired . " 
 " what ail he , dost know ? " Lisbeth say to Seth , when Adam be go 
 upstairs . " he be like as if he be strike for death this day or two - he be 
 so cast down . I find he I ' the shop this forenoon , arter thee wast 
 go , a - sittin ' an ' do nothing - not so much as a booke afore he . " 
 " he be a deal o ' work upon he just now , Mother , " say Seth , " and I think 
 he be a bit troubled in his mind . do not   you take notice of it , because it 
 hurt he when you do . be as kind to he as you can , Mother , and do not 
 say anything to vex he . " 
 " eh , what dost talk o ' my vexin ' he ? an ' what be I like to be but kind ? 
 I will ma ' he a kettle - cake for breakfast I ' the mornin ' . " 
 Adam , meanwhile , be read Dinah 's letter by the light of his dip 
 candle . 
 dear brother SETH - your letter lie three day beyond my knowing of it 
 at the post , for I have not money enough by I to pay the carriage , this 
 be a time of great need and sickness here , with the rain that have 
 fall , as if the window of heaven be open again ; and to lay 
 by money , from day to day , in such a time , when there be so many in 
 present need of all thing , would be a want of trust like the lay 
 up of the manna . I speak of this , because I would not have you think I 
 slow to answer , or that I have small joy in your rejoicing at the worldly 
 good that have befall your brother Adam . the honour and love you bear 
 he be nothing but meet , for God have give he great gift , and he use 
 they as the patriarch Joseph do , who , when he be exalt to a place of 
 power and trust , yet yearn with tenderness towards his parent and his 
 young brother . 
 " my heart be knit to your aged mother since it be grant I to be near 
 she in the day of trouble . speak to she of I , and tell she I often bear 
 she in my thought at evening time , when I be sit in the dim light 
 as I do with she , and we hold one another 's hand , and I speak the 
 word of comfort that be give to I . ah , that be a blessed time , 
 be not   it , Seth , when the outward light be fade , and the body be a 
 little weary with its work and its labour . then the inward light 
 shin the brighter , and we have a deep sense of rest on the Divine 
 strength . I sit on my chair in the dark room and close my eye , and it 
 be as if I be out of the body and could feel no want for evermore . for 
 then , the very hardship , and the sorrow , and the blindness , and the sin 
 I have beheld and be ready to weep over - yea , all the anguish of the 
 child of man , which sometimes wrap I round like sudden darkness - I 
 can bear with a willing pain , as if I be share the Redeemer 's cross . 
 for I feel it , I feel it - infinite love be suffer too - yea , in the 
 fulness of knowledge it suffer , it yearn , it mourn ; and that be a 
 blind self - seeking which want to be free from the sorrow wherewith 
 the whole creation groaneth and travaileth . surely it be not true 
 blessedness to be free from sorrow , while there be sorrow and sin in the 
 world : sorrow be then a part of love , and love do not seek to throw it 
 off . it be not the spirit only that tell I this - I see it in the whole 
 work and word of the Gospel . be there not plead in heaven ? be not the 
 Man of Sorrows there in that crucify body wherewith he ascend ? and 
 be he not one with the Infinite Love itself - as our love be one with our 
 sorrow ? 
 " these thought have be much bear in on I of late , and I have see 
 with new clearness the meaning of those word , ' if any man love I , let 
 he take up my cross . ' I have hear this enlarge on as if it mean the 
 trouble and persecution we bring on ourselves by confess Jesus . but 
 surely that be a narrow thought . the true cross of the Redeemer be the 
 sin and sorrow of this world - that be what lie heavy on his heart - and 
 that be the cross we shall share with he , that be the cup we must drink 
 of with he , if we would have any part in that Divine Love which be one 
 with his sorrow . 
 " in my outward lot , which you ask about , I have all thing and abound . I 
 have have constant work in the mill , though some of the other hand have 
 be turn off for a time , and my body be greatly strengthen , so that 
 I feel little weariness after long walk and speak . what you say 
 about stay in your own country with your mother and brother show I 
 that you have a true guidance ; your lot be appoint there by a clear 
 showing , and to seek a great blessing elsewhere would be like lay a 
 false offering on the altar and expect the fire from heaven to kindle 
 it . my work and my joy be here among the hill , and I sometimes think 
 I cle too much to my life among the people here , and should be 
 rebellious if I be call away . 
 " I be thankful for your tiding about the dear friend at the Hall 
 Farm , for though I send they a letter , by my aunt 's desire , after I come 
 back from my sojourn among they , I have have no word from they . my 
 aunt have not the pen of a ready writer , and the work of the house be 
 sufficient for the day , for she be weak in body . my heart cleave to she 
 and her child as the near of all to I in the flesh - yea , and to 
 all in that house . I be carry away to they continually in my sleep , 
 and often in the midst of work , and even of speech , the thought of they 
 be bear in on I as if they be in need and trouble , which yet be dark 
 to I . there may be some lead here ; but I wait to be teach . you say 
 they be all well . 
 " we shall see each other again in the body , I trust , though , it may be , 
 not for a long while ; for the brother and sister at Leeds be desirous 
 to have I for a short space among they , when I have a door open I 
 again to leave Snowfield . 
 " farewell , dear brother - and yet not farewell . for those child of 
 God whom it have be grant to see each other face to face , and to 
 hold communion together , and to feel the same spirit work in both can 
 never more be sunder though the hill may lie between . for their soul 
 be enlarge for evermore by that union , and they bear one another about 
 in their thought continually as it be a new strength . - your faithful 
 Sister and fellow - worker in Christ , 
 " DINAH MORRIS . " 
 " I have not skill to write the word so small as you do and my pen move 
 slow . and so I be straiten , and say but little of what be in my mind . 
 greet your mother for I with a kiss . she ask I to kiss she twice 
 when we part . " 
 Adam have refolde the letter , and be sit meditatively with his head 
 rest on his arm at the head of the bed , when Seth come upstairs . 
 " Hast read the letter ? " say Seth . 
 " yes , " say Adam . " I do not   know what I should ha ' thought of she and her 
 letter if I have never see she : I daresay I should ha ' think a preach 
 woman hateful . but she be one as make everything seem right she say 
 and do , and I seem to see she and hear she speak when I read the 
 letter . it be wonderful how I remember her look and her voice . she would 
 make thee rare and happy , Seth ; she be just the woman for thee . " 
 " it be no use think o ' that , " say Seth , despondingly . " she speak so 
 firm , and she be not the woman to say one thing and mean another . " 
 " Nay , but her feeling may grow different . a woman may get to love by 
 degree - the good fire dosna flare up the soon . I would have thee go and 
 see she by and by : I would make it convenient for thee to be away three 
 or four day , and it ' ud be no walk for thee - only between twenty and 
 thirty mile . " 
 " I should like to see she again , whether or no , if she wouldna be 
 displeased with I for go , " say Seth . 
 " she will be none displeased , " say Adam emphatically , get up and 
 throw off his coat . " it might be a great happiness to we all if she have 
 have thee , for mother take to she so wonderful and seem so content 
 to be with she . " 
 " aye , " say Seth , rather timidly , " and Dinah 's fond o ' Hetty too ; she 
 think a deal about she . " 
 Adam make no reply to that , and no other word but " good - night " pass 
 between they . 
 chapter xxxi 
 in Hetty 's Bed - Chamber 
 it be no long light enough to go to bed without a candle , even in 
 Mrs. Poyser 's early household , and Hetty carry one with she as she 
 go up at last to her bedroom soon after Adam be go , and bolt the 
 door behind she . 
 now she would read her letter . it must - it must have comfort in it . how 
 be Adam to know the truth ? it be always likely he should say what he 
 do say . 
 she set down the candle and take out the letter . it have a faint scent of 
 rose , which make she feel as if Arthur be close to she . she put it to 
 her lip , and a rush of remember sensation for a moment or two sweep 
 away all fear . but her heart begin to flutter strangely , and her hand 
 to tremble as she break the seal . she read slowly ; it be not easy for 
 she to read a gentleman 's handwriting , though Arthur have take pain to 
 write plainly . 
 " DEAREST HETTY - I have speak truly when I have say that I love you , 
 and I shall never forget our love . I shall be your true friend as long 
 as life last , and I hope to prove this to you in many way . if I say 
 anything to pain you in this letter , do not believe it be for want of 
 love and tenderness towards you , for there be nothing I would not do 
 for you , if I know it to be really for your happiness . I can not bear to 
 think of my little Hetty shed tear when I be not there to kiss they 
 away ; and if I follow only my own inclination , I should be with she 
 at this moment instead of write . it be very hard for I to part from 
 her - hard still for I to write word which may seem unkind , though 
 they spring from the true kindness . 
 " dear , dear Hetty , sweet as our love have be to I , sweet as it would 
 be to I for you to love I always , I feel that it would have be 
 well for we both if we have never have that happiness , and that it be 
 my duty to ask you to love I and care for I as little as you can . the 
 fault have all be mine , for though I have be unable to resist the 
 longing to be near you , I have feel all the while that your affection 
 for I might cause you grief . I ought to have resist my feeling . I 
 should have do so , if I have be a well fellow than I be ; but now , 
 since the past can not be alter , I be bind to save you from any evil 
 that I have power to prevent . and I feel it would be a great evil for 
 you if your affection continue so fixed on I that you could think of 
 no other man who might be able to make you happy by his love than I 
 ever can , and if you continue to look towards something in the future 
 which can not possibly happen . for , dear Hetty , if I be to do what you 
 one day speak of , and make you my wife , I should do what you yourself 
 would come to feel be for your misery instead of your welfare . I know 
 you can never be happy except by marry a man in your own station ; and 
 if I be to marry you now , I should only be add to any wrong I have 
 do , besides offend against my duty in the other relation of life . 
 you know nothing , dear Hetty , of the world in which I must always live , 
 and you would soon begin to dislike I , because there would be so little 
 in which we should be alike . 
 " and since I can not marry you , we must part - we must try not to feel 
 like lover any more . I be miserable while I say this , but nothing else 
 can be . be angry with I , my sweet one , I deserve it ; but do not believe 
 that I shall not always care for you - always be grateful to you - always 
 remember my Hetty ; and if any trouble should come that we do not now 
 foresee , trust in I to do everything that lie in my power . 
 " I have tell you where you be to direct a letter to , if you want to 
 write , but I put it down below lest you should have forget . do not 
 write unless there be something I can really do for you ; for , dear 
 Hetty , we must try to think of each other as little as we can . forgive 
 I , and try to forget everything about I , except that I shall be , as 
 long as I live , your affectionate friend , 
 " arthur DONNITHORNE . " 
 slowly Hetty have read this letter ; and when she look up from it there 
 be the reflection of a blanched face in the old dim glass - a white 
 marble face with rounded childish form , but with something sad than 
 a child 's pain in it . Hetty do not see the face - she see nothing - she 
 only feel that she be cold and sick and trembling . the letter shake and 
 rustle in her hand . she lay it down . it be a horrible sensation - this 
 cold and trembling . it sweep away the very idea that produce it , and 
 Hetty get up to reach a warm cloak from her clothe - press , wrap it 
 round she , and sit as if she be think of nothing but get warm . 
 presently she take up the letter with a firm hand , and begin to read 
 it through again . the tear come this time - great rushing tear that 
 blind she and blotch the paper . she feel nothing but that Arthur be 
 cruel - cruel to write so , cruel not to marry she . reason why he could 
 not marry she have no existence for her mind ; how could she believe in 
 any misery that could come to she from the fulfilment of all she have 
 be long for and dream of ? she have not the idea that could make 
 up the notion of that misery . 
 as she throw down the letter again , she catch sight of her face in the 
 glass ; it be redden now , and wet with tear ; it be almost like a 
 companion that she might complain to - that would pity she . she lean 
 forward on her elbow , and look into those dark overfloode eye and 
 at the quivering mouth , and see how the tear come thick and thick , 
 and how the mouth become convulse with sob . 
 the shattering of all her little dream - world , the crush blow on 
 her new - bear passion , afflict her pleasure - crave nature with an 
 overpowering pain that annihilate all impulse to resistance , and 
 suspend her anger . she sit sob till the candle go out , and then , 
 weary , aching , stupefy with crying , throw herself on the bed without 
 undressing and go to sleep . 
 there be a feeble dawn in the room when Hetty awoke , a little after 
 four o'clock , with a sense of dull misery , the cause of which break upon 
 she gradually as she begin to discern the object round she in the dim 
 light . and then come the frightening thought that she have to conceal her 
 misery as well as to bear it , in this dreary daylight that be come . 
 she could lie no long . she get up and go towards the table : there 
 lie the letter . she open her treasure - drawer : there lie the ear - ring 
 and the locket - the sign of all her short happiness - the sign of 
 the lifelong dreariness that be to follow it . look at the little 
 trinket which she have once eye and finger so fondly as the earnest 
 of her future paradise of finery , she live back in the moment when 
 they have be give to she with such tender caress , such strangely 
 pretty word , such glow look , which fill she with a bewilder 
 delicious surprise - they be so much sweet than she have think 
 anything could be . and the Arthur who have speak to she and look at 
 she in this way , who be present with she now - whose arm she feel round 
 she , his cheek against her , his very breath upon she - be the cruel , 
 cruel Arthur who have write that letter , that letter which she snatch 
 and crush and then open again , that she might read it once more . the 
 half - benumb mental condition which be the effect of the last night 's 
 violent crying make it necessary to she to look again and see if she 
 wretched thought be actually true - if the letter be really so cruel . 
 she have to hold it close to the window , else she could not have read it 
 by the faint light . yes ! it be bad - it be more cruel . she crush 
 it up again in anger . she hat the writer of that letter - hat he 
 for the very reason that she hang upon he with all her love - all the 
 girlish passion and vanity that make up her love . 
 she have no tear this morning . she have weep they all away last night , 
 and now she feel that dry - eyed morning misery , which be bad than the 
 first shock because it have the future in it as well as the present . 
 every morning to come , as far as her imagination could stretch , she 
 would have to get up and feel that the day would have no joy for she . 
 for there be no despair so absolute as that which come with the first 
 moment of our first great sorrow , when we have not yet know what it be 
 to have suffer and be heal , to have despair and to have recover 
 hope . as Hetty begin languidly to take off the clothe she have wear all 
 the night , that she might wash herself and brush her hair , she have a 
 sickening sense that her life would go on in this way . she should always 
 be do thing she have no pleasure in , get up to the old task of 
 work , see people she care nothing about , go to church , and to 
 Treddleston , and to tea with Mrs. Best , and carry no happy thought 
 with she . for her short poisonous delight have spoil for ever all the 
 little joy that have once make the sweetness of her life - the new frock 
 ready for Treddleston Fair , the party at Mr. Britton 's at Broxton wake , 
 the beaux that she would say " no " to for a long while , and the prospect 
 of the wedding that be to come at last when she would have a silk gown 
 and a great many clothe all at once . these thing be all flat and 
 dreary to she now ; everything would be a weariness , and she would carry 
 about for ever a hopeless thirst and longing . 
 she pause in the midst of her languid undressing and lean against the 
 dark old clothe - press . her neck and arm be bare , her hair hang down 
 in delicate ring - and they be just as beautiful as they be that 
 night two month ago , when she walk up and down this bed - chamber 
 glowing with vanity and hope . she be not think of her neck and arm 
 now ; even her own beauty be indifferent to she . her eye wander sadly 
 over the dull old chamber , and then look out vacantly towards the 
 grow dawn . do a remembrance of Dinah come across her mind ? of her 
 foreboding word , which have make she angry ? of Dinah 's affectionate 
 entreaty to think of she as a friend in trouble ? no , the impression 
 have be too slight to recur . any affection or comfort Dinah could 
 have give she would have be as indifferent to Hetty this morning as 
 everything else be except her bruised passion . she be only think 
 she could never stay here and go on with the old life - she could well 
 bear something quite new than sink back into the old everyday round . 
 she would like to run away that very morning , and never see any of the 
 old face again . but Hetty 's be not a nature to face difficulty - to 
 dare to loose her hold on the familiar and rush blindly on some unknown 
 condition . Hers be a luxurious and vain nature - not a passionate 
 one - and if she be ever to take any violent measure , she must be urge 
 to it by the desperation of terror . there be not much room for her 
 thought to travel in the narrow circle of her imagination , and she soon 
 fix on the one thing she would do to get away from her old life : she 
 would ask her uncle to let she go to be a lady 's maid . Miss Lydia 's maid 
 would help she to get a situation , if she krew Hetty have her uncle 's 
 leave . 
 when she have think of this , she fasten up her hair and begin to 
 wash : it seem more possible to she to go downstairs and try to behave 
 as usual . she would ask her uncle this very day . on Hetty 's blooming 
 health it would take a great deal of such mental suffering as her to 
 leave any deep impress ; and when she be dress as neatly as usual 
 in her working - dress , with her hair tuck up under her little cap , 
 an indifferent observer would have be more strike with the young 
 roundness of her cheek and neck and the darkness of her eye and 
 eyelash than with any sign of sadness about she . but when she take up 
 the crushed letter and put it in her drawer , that she might lock it out 
 of sight , hard smart tear , have no relief in they as the great 
 drop have that fall last night , force their way into her eye . she 
 wipe they away quickly : she must not cry in the day - time . nobody should 
 find out how miserable she be , nobody should know she be disappoint 
 about anything ; and the thought that the eye of her aunt and uncle 
 would be upon she give she the self - command which often accompany a 
 great dread . for Hetty look out from her secret misery towards the 
 possibility of their ever know what have happen , as the sick and 
 weary prisoner might think of the possible pillory . they would think she 
 conduct shameful , and shame be torture . that be poor little Hetty 's 
 conscience . 
 so she lock up her drawer and go away to her early work . 
 in the evening , when Mr. Poyser be smoke his pipe , and his 
 good - nature be therefore at its superlative moment , Hetty seize the 
 opportunity of her aunt 's absence to say , " Uncle , I wish you would let I go 
 for a lady 's maid . " 
 Mr. Poyser take the pipe from his mouth and look at Hetty in mild 
 surprise for some moment . she be sewing , and go on with her work 
 industriously . 
 " why , what be put that into your head , my wench ? " he say at last , after 
 he have give one conservative puff . 
 " I should like it - I should like it well than farm - work . " 
 " Nay , nay ; you fancy so because you donna know it , my wench . it would not 
 be half so good for your health , nor for your luck I ' life . I would like you 
 to stay wi ' we till you have   get a good husband : you be my own niece , and 
 I would not   have you go to service , though it be a gentleman 's house , as 
 long as I have   get a home for you . " 
 Mr. Poyser pause , and puff away at his pipe . 
 " I like the needlework , " say Hetty , " and I should get good wage . " 
 " have your aunt be a bit sharp wi ' you ? " say Mr. Poyser , not notice 
 Hetty 's further argument . " you mustna mind that , my wench - she do it 
 for your good . she wish you well ; an ' there be not   many aunt as be no 
 kin to you ' ud ha ' do by you as she have . " 
 " no , it be not   my aunt , " say Hetty , " but I should like the work well . " 
 " it be all very well for you to learn the work a bit - an ' I gev my 
 consent to that fast enough , sin ' Mrs. Pomfret be willing to teach you . 
 for if anything be t ' happen , it be well to know how to turn your hand 
 to different sort o ' thing . but I niver mean you to go to service , my 
 wench ; my family 's eat their own bread and cheese as fur back as anybody 
 know , hanna they , Father ? you wouldna like your grand - child to take 
 wage ? " 
 " na - a - y , " say old Martin , with an elongation of the word , mean to make 
 it bitter as well as negative , while he lean forward and look down 
 on the floor . " but the wench take arter her mother . I would hard work t ' 
 hould she in , an ' she marry I ' spite o ' me - a feller wi ' on'y two head 
 o ' stock when there should ha ' be ten on 's farm - she might well die o ' 
 th ' inflammation afore she war thirty . " 
 it be seldom the old man make so long a speech , but his son 's question 
 have fall like a bit of dry fuel on the ember of a long unextinguished 
 resentment , which have always make the grandfather more indifferent to 
 Hetty than to his son 's child . her mother 's fortune have be spend by 
 that good - for - nought Sorrel , and Hetty have Sorrel 's blood in her vein . 
 " poor thing , poor thing ! " say Martin the young , who be sorry to have 
 provoke this retrospective harshness . " she would but bad luck . but Hetty 's 
 get as good a chance o ' get a solid , sober husband as any gell I ' 
 this country . " 
 after throw out this pregnant hint , Mr. Poyser recur to his pipe 
 and his silence , look at Hetty to see if she do not give some sign 
 of have renounce her ill - advise wish . but instead of that , Hetty , 
 in spite of herself , begin to cry , half out of ill temper at the denial , 
 half out of the day 's repressed sadness . 
 " Hegh , hegh ! " say Mr. Poyser , mean to check she playfully , " do not 
 let us have any crying . Crying 's for they as ha ' get no home , not for 
 they as want to get rid o ' one . what dost think ? " he continue to his 
 wife , who now come back into the house - place , knit with fierce 
 rapidity , as if that movement be a necessary function , like the 
 twittering of a crab 's antennae . 
 " think ? why , I think we shall have the fowl steal before we be much 
 old , wi ' that gell forget to lock the pen up o ' night . what be 
 the matter now , Hetty ? what be you cry at ? " 
 " why , she be be want to go for a lady 's maid , " say Mr. Poyser . " I 
 tell she we can do well for she nor that . " 
 " I think she would get some maggot in her head , she be go about wi ' her 
 mouth button up so all day . it be all wi ' go so among they servant 
 at the Chase , as we war fool for let she . she think it ' ud be a 
 fine life than be wi ' they as be akin to she and ha ' bring she up 
 sin ' she war no big nor Marty . she think there be nothing belong to 
 be a lady 's maid but wear fine clothe nor she be bear to , I will 
 be bind . it be what rag she can get to stick on she as she be think on 
 from morning till night , as I often ask she if she would not   like to be 
 the mawkin I ' the field , for then she would be make o ' rag inside and out . 
 I will never gi ' my consent to she go for a lady 's maid , while she be 
 get good friend to take care on she till she be married to somebody 
 well nor one o ' they valet , as be neither a common man nor a 
 gentleman , an ' must live on the fat o ' the land , an 's like enough to 
 stick his hand under his coat - tail and expect his wife to work for 
 he . " 
 " aye , aye , " say Mr. Poyser , " we must have a well husband for her nor 
 that , and there be well at hand . come , my wench , give over crying and 
 get to bed . I will do well for you nor let you go for a lady 's maid . 
 let us hear no more on't . " 
 when Hetty be go upstairs he say , " I canna make it out as she should 
 want to go away , for I think she would get a mind t ' Adam Bede . she be 
 look like it o ' late . " 
 " eh , there be no knowing what she be get a liking to , for thing take 
 no more hold on she than if she be a dried pea . I believe that gell , 
 molly - as be aggravatin ' enough , for the matter o ' that - but I believe 
 she would care more about leave we and the child , for all she be be 
 here but a year come Michaelmas , nor Hetty would . but she be get this 
 notion o ' be a lady 's maid wi ' go among they servant - we might 
 ha ' know what it ' ud lead to when we let she go to learn the fine work . 
 but I will put a stop to it pretty quick . " 
 " Thee'dst be sorry to part wi ' her , if it be not   for her good , " say Mr. 
 Poyser . " she be useful to thee I ' the work . " 
 " sorry ? yes , I be fonder on she nor she deserve - a little hard - hearted 
 hussy , want to leave we I ' that way . I can not   ha ' have she about I 
 these seven year , I reckon , and do for she , and teach she everything 
 wi'out care about she . an ' here I be have linen spun , an ' thinking 
 all the while it will make sheeting and table - clothing for she when she be 
 married , an ' she will live I ' the parish wi ' us , and never go out of 
 our sight - like a fool as I be for think aught about she , as be no 
 well nor a cherry wi ' a hard stone inside it . " 
 " Nay , nay , thee mustna make much of a trifle , " say Mr. Poyser , 
 soothingly . " she be fond on we , I will be bind ; but she be young , an ' get 
 thing in her head as she can not   rightly give account on . they young 
 filly ' ull run away often wi'-ou ; know why . " 
 her uncle 's answer , however , have have another effect on Hetty besides 
 that of disappoint she and make her cry . she know quite well whom 
 he have in his mind in his allusion to marriage , and to a sober , solid 
 husband ; and when she be in her bedroom again , the possibility of she 
 marry Adam present itself to she in a new light . in a mind where no 
 strong sympathy be at work , where there be no supreme sense of 
 right to which the agitated nature can cling and steady itself to quiet 
 endurance , one of the first result of sorrow be a desperate vague 
 clutch after any deed that will change the actual condition . poor 
 Hetty 's vision of consequence , at no time more than a narrow fantastic 
 calculation of her own probable pleasure and pain , be now quite shut 
 out by reckless irritation under present suffering , and she be ready 
 for one of those convulsive , motiveless action by which wretche man 
 and woman leap from a temporary sorrow into a lifelong misery . 
 why should she not marry Adam ? she do not care what she do , so that 
 it make some change in her life . she feel confident that he would still 
 want to marry she , and any further thought about Adam 's happiness in the 
 matter have never yet visit she . 
 " strange ! " perhaps you will say , " this rush of impulse to - ward a course 
 that might have seem the most repugnant to her present state of mind , 
 and in only the second night of her sadness ! " 
 yes , the action of a little trivial soul like Hetty 's , struggle 
 amidst the serious sad destiny of a human being , be strange . so be 
 the motion of a little vessel without ballast toss about on a stormy 
 sea . how pretty it look with its parti - colour sail in the sunlight , 
 moor in the quiet bay ! 
 " let that man bear the loss who loose it from its mooring . " 
 but that will not save the vessel - the pretty thing that might have be 
 a lasting joy . 
 Chapter XXXII 
 Mrs. Poyser " have she say out " 
 the next Saturday evening there be much excited discussion at the 
 Donnithorne arm concern an incident which have occur that very 
 day - no less than a second appearance of the smart man in top - boot say 
 by some to be a mere farmer in treaty for the Chase Farm , by other to 
 be the future steward , but by Mr. Casson himself , the personal witness 
 to the stranger 's visit , pronounce contemptuously to be nothing well 
 than a bailiff , such as Satchell have be before he . no one have think 
 of deny Mr. Casson 's testimony to the fact that he have see 
 the stranger ; nevertheless , he proffer various corroborating 
 circumstance . 
 " I see he myself , " he say ; " I see he come along by the Crab - tree 
 Meadow on a bald - faced hoss . I would just be t ' hev a pint - it be 
 half after ten I ' the fore - noon , when I hev my pint as reg'lar as the 
 clock - and I say to Knowles , as druv up with his waggon , ' you will get 
 a bit o ' barley to - day , Knowles , ' I say , ' if you look about you ' ; and 
 then I go round by the rick - yard , and towart the Treddles'on road , and 
 just as I come up by the big ash - tree , I see the man I ' top - boot come 
 along on a bald - faced hoss - I wish I may never stir if I do not . and I 
 stand still till he come up , and I say , ' good morning , sir , ' I say , 
 for I want to hear the turn of his tongue , as I might know whether he 
 be a this - country man ; so I say , ' good morning , sir : it will ' old hup 
 for the barley this morning , I think . there will be a bit get hin , if 
 we have   good luck . ' and he say , ' eh , ye may be raight , there 's noo 
 tallin ' , ' he say , and I know by that " - here Mr. Casson give a 
 wink - " as he do not   come from a hundred mile off . I daresay he would think 
 I a hodd talker , as you Loamshire folk allay do hany one as talk 
 the right language . " 
 " the right language ! " say Bartle Massey , contemptuously . " you be about 
 as near the right language as a pig 's squeaking be like a tune play on 
 a key - bugle . " 
 " well , I do not   know , " answer Mr. Casson , with an angry smile . " I 
 should think a man as have live among the gentry from a by , be likely to 
 know what be the right language pretty nigh as well as a schoolmaster . " 
 " aye , aye , man , " say Bartle , with a tone of sarcastic consolation , 
 " you talk the right language for you . when Mike Holdsworth 's goat say 
 ba - a - a , it be all right - it ' ud be unnatural for it to make any other 
 noise . " 
 the rest of the party be loamsnire man , Mr. Casson have the laugh 
 strongly against he , and wisely fall back on the previous question , 
 which , far from be exhaust in a single evening , be renew in 
 the churchyard , before service , the next day , with the fresh interest 
 confer on all news when there be a fresh person to hear it ; and 
 that fresh hearer be Martin Poyser , who , as his wife say , " never 
 go boozin ' with that set at Casson 's , a - sittin ' soakin ' in drink , and 
 look as wise as a lot o ' cod - fish wi ' red face . " 
 it be probably owe to the conversation she have have with her husband 
 on their way from church concern this problematic stranger that 
 Mrs. Poyser 's thought immediately revert to he when , a day or two 
 afterwards , as she be stand at the house - door with her knitting , 
 in that eager leisure which come to she when the afternoon cleaning be 
 do , she see the old squire enter the yard on his black pony , 
 follow by John the groom . she always cite it afterwards as a case of 
 prevision , which really have something more in it than her own remarkable 
 penetration , that the moment she set eye on the squire she say to 
 herself , " I shouldna wonder if he be come about that man as be a - go to 
 take the Chase Farm , want Poyser to do something for he without pay . 
 but Poyser 's a fool if he do . " 
 something unwonted must clearly be in the wind , for the old squire 's 
 visit to his tenantry be rare ; and though Mrs. Poyser have during the 
 last twelvemonth recite many imaginary speech , mean even more than 
 meet the ear , which she be quite determined to make to he the next time 
 he appear within the gate of the Hall Farm , the speech have always 
 remain imaginary . 
 " good - day , Mrs. Poyser , " say the old squire , peer at she with his 
 short - sighted eye - a mode of look at she which , as Mrs. Poyser 
 observe , " allay aggravate I : it be as if you be a insect , and he 
 be go to dab his finger - nail on you . " 
 however , she say , " your servant , sir , " and curtsy with an air of 
 perfect deference as she advance towards he : she be not the woman 
 to misbehave towards her better , and fly in the face of the catechism , 
 without severe provocation . 
 " be your husband at home , Mrs. Poyser ? " 
 " yes , sir ; he be only I ' the rick - yard . I will send for he in a minute , if 
 you will please to get down and step in . " 
 " thank you ; I will do so . I want to consult he about a little matter ; 
 but you be quite as much concerned in it , if not more . I must have your 
 opinion too . " 
 " Hetty , run and tell your uncle to come in , " say Mrs. Poyser , as they 
 enter the house , and the old gentleman bow low in answer to Hetty 's 
 curtsy ; while Totty , conscious of a pinafore stain with gooseberry 
 jam , stand hide her face against the clock and peep round 
 furtively . 
 " what a fine old kitchen this be ! " say Mr. Donnithorne , look round 
 admiringly . he always speak in the same deliberate , well - chisel , 
 polite way , whether his word be sugary or venomous . " and you keep it 
 so exquisitely clean , Mrs. Poyser . I like these premise , do you know , 
 beyond any on the estate . " 
 " well , sir , since you be fond of them , I should be glad if you would let a 
 bit o ' repair be do to them , for the boarding 's I ' that state as we be 
 like to be eat up wi ' rat and mouse ; and the cellar , you may stan ' up 
 to your knee I ' water in't , if you like to go down ; but perhaps you would 
 rather believe my word . will not   you please to sit down , sir ? " 
 " not yet ; I must see your dairy . I have not see it for year , and I 
 hear on all hand about your fine cheese and butter , " say the squire , 
 look politely unconscious that there could be any question on which 
 he and Mrs. Poyser might happen to disagree . " I think I see the door 
 open , there . you must not be surprised if I cast a covetous eye on your 
 cream and butter . I do not   expect that Mrs. Satchell 's cream and butter 
 will bear comparison with your . " 
 " I can not   say , sir , I be sure . it be seldom I see other folk 's butter , 
 though there be some on it as one 's no need to see - the smell 's enough . " 
 " ah , now this I like , " say Mr. Donnithorne , look round at the damp 
 temple of cleanliness , but keep near the door . " I be sure I should 
 like my breakfast well if I know the butter and cream come from this 
 dairy . thank you , that really be a pleasant sight . unfortunately , my 
 slight tendency to rheumatism make I afraid of damp : I will sit down 
 in your comfortable kitchen . ah , Poyser , how do you do ? in the midst of 
 business , I see , as usual . I have   be look at your wife 's beautiful 
 dairy - the good manager in the parish , be she not ? " 
 Mr. Poyser have just enter in shirt - sleeve and open waistcoat , with a 
 face a shade red than usual , from the exertion of " pitching . " as 
 he stand , red , rotund , and radiant , before the small , wiry , cool old 
 gentleman , he look like a prize apple by the side of a withered crab . 
 " will you please to take this chair , sir ? " he say , lift his father 's 
 arm - chair forward a little : " you will find it easy . " 
 " no , thank you , I never sit in easy - chair , " say the old gentleman , 
 seat himself on a small chair near the door . " do you know , Mrs. 
 Poyser - sit down , pray , both of you - I have   be far from contented , for 
 some time , with Mrs. Satchell 's dairy management . I think she have not a 
 good method , as you have . " 
 " indeed , sir , I can not   speak to that , " say Mrs. Poyser in a hard voice , 
 roll and unroll her knitting and look icily out of the window , 
 as she continue to stand opposite the squire . Poyser might sit down if 
 he like , she think ; she be not   go to sit down , as if she would give in 
 to any such smooth - tongue palaver . Mr. Poyser , who look and feel the 
 reverse of icy , do sit down in his three - cornered chair . 
 " and now , Poyser , as Satchell be lay up , I be intend to let the 
 Chase Farm to a respectable tenant . I be tired of have a farm on my 
 own hand - nothing be make the good of in such case , as you know . a 
 satisfactory bailiff be hard to find ; and I think you and I , Poyser , 
 and your excellent wife here , can enter into a little arrangement in 
 consequence , which will be to our mutual advantage . " 
 " oh , " say Mr. Poyser , with a good - natured blankness of imagination as 
 to the nature of the arrangement . 
 " if I be call upon to speak , sir , " say Mrs. Poyser , after glance at 
 her husband with pity at his softness , " you know well than I ; but I 
 do not   see what the Chase Farm be t ' us - we have   cumber enough wi ' our own 
 farm . not but what I be glad to hear o ' anybody respectable come into 
 the parish ; there be some as ha ' be bring in as have not   be look on 
 I ' that character . " 
 " you be likely to find Mr. Thurle an excellent neighbour , I assure 
 you - such a one as you will feel glad to have accommodate by the little 
 plan I be go to mention , especially as I hope you will find it as much 
 to your own advantage as his . " 
 " indeed , sir , if it be anything t ' our advantage , it will be the first 
 offer o ' the sort I have   hear on . it be they as take advantage that get 
 advantage I ' this world , I think . folk have to wait long enough afore 
 it be bring to them . " 
 " the fact be , Poyser , " say the squire , ignore Mrs. Poyser 's theory of 
 worldly prosperity , " there be too much dairy land , and too little plough 
 land , on the Chase Farm to suit Thurle 's purpose - indeed , he will only 
 take the farm on condition of some change in it : his wife , it appear , 
 be not a clever dairy - woman , like your . now , the plan I be think of 
 be to effect a little exchange . if you be to have the Hollow Pastures , 
 you might increase your dairy , which must be so profitable under your 
 wife 's management ; and I should request you , Mrs. Poyser , to supply my 
 house with milk , cream , and butter at the market price . on the other 
 hand , Poyser , you might let Thurle have the Lower and Upper Ridges , 
 which really , with our wet season , would be a good riddance for you . 
 there be much less risk in dairy land than corn land . " 
 Mr. Poyser be lean forward , with his elbow on his knee , his head 
 on one side , and his mouth screw up - apparently absorb in make the 
 tip of his finger meet so as to represent with perfect accuracy the 
 rib of a ship . he be much too acute a man not to see through the whole 
 business , and to foresee perfectly what would be his wife 's view of the 
 subject ; but he dislike give unpleasant answer . unless it be on a 
 point of farming practice , he would rather give up than have a quarrel , 
 any day ; and , after all , it matter more to his wife than to he . so , 
 after a few moment ' silence , he look up at she and say mildly , " what 
 dost say ? " 
 Mrs. Poyser have have her eye fix on her husband with cold severity 
 during his silence , but now she turn away her head with a toss , look 
 icily at the opposite roof of the cow - shed , and spear her knitting 
 together with the loose pin , hold it firmly between her clasp hand . 
 " say ? why , I say you may do as you like about give up any o ' your 
 corn - land afore your lease be up , which it will not   be for a year come next 
 Michaelmas , but I will not consent to take more dairy work into my hand , 
 either for love or money ; and there be nayther love nor money here , as I 
 can see , on'y other folk 's love o ' theirselve , and the money as be to 
 go into other folk 's pocket . I know there be they as be bear t ' own 
 the land , and they as be bear to sweat on't " - here Mrs. Poyser pause 
 to gasp a little - " and I know it be christen folk 's duty to submit to 
 their better as fur as flesh and blood ' ull bear it ; but I will not make 
 a martyr o ' myself , and wear myself to skin and bone , and worret 
 myself as if I be a churn wi ' butter a - come in't , for no landlord in 
 England , not if he be King George himself . " 
 " no , no , my dear Mrs. Poyser , certainly not , " say the squire , still 
 confident in his own power of persuasion , " you must not overwork 
 yourself ; but do not   you think your work will rather be lessen than 
 increase in this way ? there be so much milk require at the Abbey 
 that you will have little increase of cheese and butter making from 
 the addition to your dairy ; and I believe sell the milk be the most 
 profitable way of dispose of dairy produce , be it not ? " 
 " Aye , that be true , " say Mr. Poyser , unable to repress an opinion on a 
 question of farming profit , and forget that it be not in this case 
 a purely abstract question . 
 " I daresay , " say Mrs. Poyser bitterly , turn her head half - way 
 towards her husband and look at the vacant arm - chair - " I daresay 
 it be true for man as sit I ' th ' chimney - corner and make believe as 
 everything be cut wi ' in an ' out to fit int ' everything else . if you 
 could make a pudding wi ' thinking o ' the batter , it ' ud be easy get 
 dinner . how do I know whether the milk ' ull be want constant ? what be 
 to make I sure as the house will not   be put o ' board wage afore we be 
 many month old , and then I may have to lie awake o ' night wi ' twenty 
 gallon o ' milk on my mind - and Dingall ' ull take no more butter , let 
 alone pay for it ; and we must fat pig till we be oblige to beg the 
 butcher on our knee to buy them , and lose half of them wi ' the measle . 
 and there be the fetching and carry , as ' ud be welly half a day 's work 
 for a man an ' hoss - that be to be take out o ' the profit , I reckon ? but 
 there be folk ' ud hold a sieve under the pump and expect to carry away 
 the water . " 
 " that difficulty - about the fetching and carry - you will not have , 
 Mrs. Poyser , " say the squire , who think that this entrance into 
 particular indicate a distant inclination to compromise on Mrs. 
 Poyser 's part . " Bethell will do that regularly with the cart and pony . " 
 " oh , sir , beg your pardon , I have   never be use t ' have 
 gentlefolk 's servant come about my back place , a - make love to 
 both the gell at once and keep them with their hand on their hip 
 listen to all manner o ' gossip when they should be down on their 
 knee a - scouring . if we be to go to ruin , it shanna be wi ' have our 
 back kitchen turn into a public . " 
 " well , Poyser , " say the squire , shift his tactic and look as if 
 he think Mrs. Poyser have suddenly withdraw from the proceeding and 
 leave the room , " you can turn the Hollows into feeding - land . I can easily 
 make another arrangement about supply my house . and I shall not 
 forget your readiness to accommodate your landlord as well as a 
 neighbour . I know you will be glad to have your lease renew for three 
 year , when the present one expire ; otherwise , I daresay Thurle , who 
 be a man of some capital , would be glad to take both the farm , as they 
 could be work so well together . but I do not   want to part with an old 
 tenant like you . " 
 to be thrust out of the discussion in this way would have be enough to 
 complete Mrs. Poyser 's exasperation , even without the final threat . 
 her husband , really alarmed at the possibility of their leave the old 
 place where he have be breed and bear - for he believe the old squire 
 have small spite enough for anything - be begin a mild remonstrance 
 explanatory of the inconvenience he should find in have to buy and 
 sell more stock , with , " well , sir , I think as it be rether hard ... " when 
 Mrs. Poyser burst in with the desperate determination to have she say 
 out this once , though it be to rain notice to quit and the only 
 shelter be the work - house . 
 " then , sir , if I may speak - as , for all I be a woman , and there be folk 
 as think a woman 's fool enough to stan ' by an ' look on while the man 
 sign her soul away , I have   a right to speak , for I make one quarter o ' the 
 rent , and save another quarter - I say , if Mr. Thurle 's so ready to take 
 farm under you , it be a pity but what he should take this , and see if 
 he like to live in a house wi ' all the plague o ' Egypt in't   - wi ' 
 the cellar full o ' water , and frog and toad hoppin ' up the step by 
 dozen - and the floor rotten , and the rat and mouse gnaw every bit 
 o ' cheese , and runnin ' over our head as we lie I ' bed till we expect 
 them to eat we up alive - as it be a mercy they hanna eat the child long 
 ago . I should like to see if there be another tenant besides Poyser as 
 ' ud put up wi ' never have a bit o ' repair do till a place tumble 
 down - and not then , on'y wi ' begging and pray and have to pay 
 half - and be string up wi ' the rent as it be much if he get enough 
 out o ' the land to pay , for all he be put his own money into the ground 
 beforehand . see if you will get a stranger to lead such a life here as 
 that : a maggot must be bear I ' the rotten cheese to like it , I reckon . 
 you may run away from my word , sir , " continue Mrs. Poyser , follow 
 the old squire beyond the door - for after the first moment of stunned 
 surprise he have get up , and , wave his hand towards she with a smile , 
 have walk out towards his pony . but it be impossible for he to get 
 away immediately , for John be walk the pony up and down the yard , 
 and be some distance from the causeway when his master beckon . 
 " you may run away from my word , sir , and you may go spinnin ' underhand 
 way o ' do we a mischief , for you have   get Old Harry to your friend , 
 though nobody else be , but I tell you for once as we be not dumb 
 creature to be abuse and make money on by they as ha ' get the lash I ' 
 their hand , for want o ' know how t ' undo the tackle . an ' if I be th ' 
 only one as speak my mind , there be plenty o ' the same way o ' thinking 
 I ' this parish and the next to ' t , for your name be no well than a 
 brimstone match in everybody 's nose - if it isna two - three old folk as 
 you think o ' save your soul by give them a bit o ' flannel and a drop 
 o ' porridge . an ' you may be right I ' think it will take but little to 
 save your soul , for it will be the small savin ' y ' iver make , wi ' all 
 your scrapin ' . " 
 there be occasion on which two servant - girl and a waggoner may be a 
 formidable audience , and as the squire ride away on his black pony , even 
 the gift of short - sightedness do not prevent he from be aware 
 that Molly and Nancy and Tim be grin not far from he . perhaps he 
 suspect that sour old John be grin behind he - which be also 
 the fact . meanwhile the bull - dog , the black - and - tan terrier , Alick 's 
 sheep - dog , and the gander hiss at a safe distance from the pony 's 
 heel carry out the idea of Mrs. Poyser 's solo in an impressive 
 quartet . 
 Mrs. Poyser , however , have no soon see the pony move off than she 
 turn round , give the two hilarious damsel a look which drive they 
 into the back kitchen , and unspeare her knitting , begin to knit again 
 with her usual rapidity as she re - enter the house . 
 " Thee'st do it now , " say Mr. Poyser , a little alarmed and uneasy , but 
 not without some triumphant amusement at his wife 's outbreak . 
 " yes , I know I have   do it , " say Mrs. Poyser ; " but I have   have my say out , 
 and I shall be th ' easy for't all my life . there be no pleasure I ' 
 live if you be to be cork up for ever , and only dribble your mind 
 out by the sly , like a leaky barrel . I shall not   repent say what I 
 think , if I live to be as old as th ' old squire ; and there be little 
 likelihood - for it seem as if they as be not   want here be th ' only 
 folk as be not   want I ' th ' other world . " 
 " but thee wutna like move from th ' old place , this Michaelmas 
 twelvemonth , " say Mr. Poyser , " and go into a strange parish , where 
 thee know'st nobody . it will be hard upon we both , and upo ' Father too . " 
 " eh , it be no use worrete ; there be plenty o ' thing may happen between 
 this and Michaelmas twelvemonth . the captain may be master afore they , 
 for what we know , " say Mrs. Poyser , incline to take an unusually 
 hopeful view of an embarrassment which have be bring about by her own 
 merit and not by other people 's fault . 
 " i'm none for worrete , " say Mr. Poyser , rise from his 
 three - cornered chair and walk slowly towards the door ; " but I should 
 be loath to leave th ' old place , and the parish where I be breed and 
 bear , and Father afore I . we should leave our root behind we , I doubt , 
 and niver thrive again . " 
 Chapter XXXIII 
 More link 
 the barley be all carry at last , and the harvest supper go by 
 without wait for the dismal black crop of bean . the apple and 
 nut be gather and store ; the scent of whey depart from the 
 farm - house , and the scent of brewing come in its stead . the wood 
 behind the Chase , and all the hedgerow tree , take on a solemn splendour 
 under the dark low - hang sky . Michaelmas be come , with its fragrant 
 basketfuls of purple damson , and its pale purple daisy , and its 
 lad and lass leave or seek service and wind along between 
 the yellow hedge , with their bundle under their arm . but though 
 Michaelmas be come , Mr. Thurle , that desirable tenant , do not come to 
 the Chase Farm , and the old squire , after all , have be oblige to put 
 in a new bailiff . it be know throughout the two parish that the 
 squire 's plan have be frustrate because the Poysers have refuse to 
 be " put upon , " and Mrs. Poyser 's outbreak be discuss in all 
 the farm - house with a zest which be only heighten by frequent 
 repetition . the news that " Bony " be come back from Egypt be 
 comparatively insipid , and the repulse of the French in Italy be 
 nothing to Mrs. Poyser 's repulse of the old squire . Mr. Irwine have hear 
 a version of it in every parishioner 's house , with the one exception of 
 the Chase . but since he have always , with marvellous skill , avoid any 
 quarrel with Mr. Donnithorne , he could not allow himself the pleasure 
 of laugh at the old gentleman 's discomfiture with any one besides his 
 mother , who declare that if she be rich she should like to allow Mrs. 
 Poyser a pension for life , and want to invite she to the parsonage 
 that she might hear an account of the scene from Mrs. Poyser 's own lip . 
 " no , no , Mother , " say Mr. Irwine ; " it be a little bit of irregular 
 justice on Mrs. Poyser 's part , but a magistrate like I must not 
 countenance irregular justice . there must be no report spread that I 
 have take notice of the quarrel , else I shall lose the little good 
 influence I have over the old man . " 
 " well , I like that woman even well than her cream - cheese , " say Mrs. 
 Irwine . " she have the spirit of three man , with that pale face of her . 
 and she say such sharp thing too . " 
 " sharp ! yes , her tongue be like a new - set razor . she be quite original 
 in her talk too ; one of those untaught wit that help to stock a country 
 with proverb . I tell you that capital thing I hear she say about 
 Craig - that he be like a cock , who think the sun have rise to hear 
 he crow . now that be an AEsop 's fable in a sentence . " 
 " but it will be a bad business if the old gentleman turn they out of 
 the farm next Michaelmas , eh ? " say Mrs. Irwine . 
 " oh , that must not be ; and Poyser be such a good tenant that Donnithorne 
 be likely to think twice , and digest his spleen rather than turn they 
 out . but if he should give they notice at Lady Day , Arthur and I must 
 move heaven and earth to mollify he . such old parishioner as they be 
 must not go . " 
 " ah , there be no knowing what may happen before Lady day , " say Mrs. 
 Irwine . " it strike I on Arthur 's birthday that the old man be a little 
 shake : he be eighty - three , you know . it be really an unconscionable age . 
 it be only woman who have a right to live as long as that . " 
 " when they have   get old - bachelor son who would be forlorn without they , " 
 say Mr. Irwine , laugh , and kiss his mother 's hand . 
 Mrs. Poyser , too , meet her husband 's occasional foreboding of a notice 
 to quit with " there be no knowing what may happen before Lady day " - one 
 of those undeniable general proposition which be usually intend to 
 convey a particular meaning very far from undeniable . but it be really 
 too hard upon human nature that it should be hold a criminal offence to 
 imagine the death even of the king when he be turn eighty - three . it be 
 not to be believe that any but the dull Britons can be good subject 
 under that hard condition . 
 apart from this foreboding , thing go on much as usual in the Poyser 
 household . Mrs. Poyser think she notice a surprising improvement 
 in Hetty . to be sure , the girl get " close temper , and sometimes she 
 seem as if there would be no draw a word from she with cart - rope , " 
 but she think much less about her dress , and go after the work quite 
 eagerly , without any telling . and it be wonderful how she never want 
 to go out now - indeed , could hardly be persuade to go ; and she bear 
 her aunt 's put a stop to her weekly lesson in fine - work at the Chase 
 without the least grumbling or pouting . it must be , after all , that she 
 have set her heart on Adam at last , and her sudden freak of want to 
 be a lady 's maid must have be cause by some little pique or 
 misunderstanding between they , which have pass by . for whenever Adam 
 come to the Hall Farm , Hetty seem to be in well spirit and to talk 
 more than at other time , though she be almost sullen when Mr. Craig or 
 any other admirer happen to pay a visit there . 
 Adam himself watch she at first with tremble anxiety , which give 
 way to surprise and delicious hope . five day after deliver Arthur 's 
 letter , he have venture to go to the Hall Farm again - not without 
 dread lest the sight of he might be painful to she . she be not in the 
 house - place when he enter , and he sit talk to Mr. and Mrs. Poyser 
 for a few minute with a heavy fear on his heart that they might 
 presently tell he Hetty be ill . but by and by there come a light step 
 that he know , and when Mrs. Poyser say , " Come , Hetty , where have you 
 be ? " Adam be oblige to turn round , though he be afraid to see the 
 change look there must be in her face . he almost start when he see 
 she smile as if she be pleased to see he - look the same as ever 
 at a first glance , only that she have her cap on , which he have never see 
 she in before when he come of an evening . still , when he look at 
 she again and again as she move about or sit at her work , there be a 
 change : the cheek be as pink as ever , and she smile as much as she 
 have ever do of late , but there be something different in her eye , 
 in the expression of her face , in all her movement , Adam 
 thought - something hard , old , less child - like . " poor thing ! " he 
 say to himself , " that be allay likely . it be because she be have her first 
 heartache . but she be get a spirit to bear up under it . thank God for 
 that . " 
 as the week go by , and he see she always look pleased to see 
 he - turn up her lovely face towards he as if she mean he to 
 understand that she be glad for he to come - and go about her work 
 in the same equable way , make no sign of sorrow , he begin to believe 
 that her feeling towards Arthur must have be much slighter than he have 
 imagine in his first indignation and alarm , and that she have be able 
 to think of her girlish fancy that Arthur be in love with she and would 
 marry she as a folly of which she be timely cure . and it perhaps be , 
 as he have sometimes in his more cheerful moment hop it would be - her 
 heart be really turn with all the more warmth towards the man she 
 know to have a serious love for she . 
 possibly you think that Adam be not at all sagacious in his 
 interpretation , and that it be altogether extremely unbecoming in a 
 sensible man to behave as he do - fall in love with a girl who really 
 have nothing more than her beauty to recommend she , attribute imaginary 
 virtue to she , and even condescend to cleave to she after she have 
 fall in love with another man , wait for her kind look as a patient 
 trembling dog wait for his master 's eye to be turn upon he . but in 
 so complex a thing as human nature , we must consider , it be hard to find 
 rule without exception . of course , I know that , as a rule , sensible 
 man fall in love with the most sensible woman of their acquaintance , 
 see through all the pretty deceit of coquettish beauty , never imagine 
 themselves love when they be not love , cease love on all 
 proper occasion , and marry the woman most fit for they in every 
 respect - indeed , so as to compel the approbation of all the maiden 
 lady in their neighbourhood . but even to this rule an exception will 
 occur now and then in the lapse of century , and my friend Adam be 
 one . for my own part , however , I respect he none the less - nay , I think 
 the deep love he have for that sweet , rounded , blossom - like , dark - eye 
 Hetty , of whose inward self he be really very ignorant , come out of the 
 very strength of his nature and not out of any inconsistent weakness . be 
 it any weakness , pray , to be work on by exquisite music ? to feel its 
 wondrous harmony search the subtle winding of your soul , the 
 delicate fibre of life where no memory can penetrate , and bind 
 together your whole being past and present in one unspeakable vibration , 
 melt you in one moment with all the tenderness , all the love that have 
 be scatter through the toilsome year , concentrate in one 
 emotion of heroic courage or resignation all the hard - learn lesson of 
 self - renounce sympathy , blend your present joy with past sorrow and 
 your present sorrow with all your past joy ? if not , then neither be it 
 a weakness to be so wrought upon by the exquisite curve of a woman 's 
 cheek and neck and arm , by the liquid depth of her beseech eye , or 
 the sweet childish pout of her lip . for the beauty of a lovely woman be 
 like music : what can one say more ? Beauty have an expression beyond and 
 far above the one woman 's soul that it clothe , as the word of genius 
 have a wide meaning than the thought that prompt they . it be more 
 than a woman 's love that move we in a woman 's eye - it seem to be a 
 far - off mighty love that have come near to we , and make speech for itself 
 there ; the rounded neck , the dimpled arm , move we by something more 
 than their prettiness - by their close kinship with all we have know 
 of tenderness and peace . the noble nature see the most of this 
 impersonal expression in beauty   it be needless to say that there be 
 gentleman with whisker dye and undyed who see none of it whatever , 
 and for this reason , the noble nature be often the most blind to 
 the character of the one woman 's soul that the beauty clothe . whence , I 
 fear , the tragedy of human life be likely to continue for a long time 
 to come , in spite of mental philosopher who be ready with the good 
 receipt for avoid all mistake of the kind . 
 our good Adam have no fine word into which he could put his feeling for 
 Hetty : he could not disguise mystery in this way with the appearance of 
 knowledge ; he call his love frankly a mystery , as you have hear he . 
 he only know that the sight and memory of she move he deeply , touch 
 the spring of all love and tenderness , all faith and courage within 
 he . how could he imagine narrowness , selfishness , hardness in she ? 
 he create the mind he believe in out of his own , which be large , 
 unselfish , tender . 
 the hope he feel about Hetty soften a little his feeling towards 
 Arthur . surely his attention to Hetty must have be of a slight kind ; 
 they be altogether wrong , and such as no man in Arthur 's position 
 ought to have allow himself , but they must have have an air of 
 playfulness about they , which have probably blind he to their danger 
 and have prevent they from lay any strong hold on Hetty 's heart . as 
 the new promise of happiness rise for Adam , his indignation and jealousy 
 begin to die out . Hetty be not make unhappy ; he almost believe that 
 she like he well ; and the thought sometimes cross his mind that the 
 friendship which have once seem dead for ever might revive in the day 
 to come , and he would not have to say " good - bye " to the grand old wood , 
 but would like they well because they be Arthur 's . for this new 
 promise of happiness follow so quickly on the shock of pain have an 
 intoxicate effect on the sober Adam , who have all his life be use to 
 much hardship and moderate hope . be he really go to have an easy 
 lot after all ? it seem so , for at the beginning of November , Jonathan 
 Burge , find it impossible to replace Adam , have at last make up his 
 mind to offer he a share in the business , without further condition 
 than that he should continue to give his energy to it and renounce 
 all thought of have a separate business of his own . Son - in - law or no 
 son - in - law , Adam have make himself too necessary to be part with , 
 and his headwork be so much more important to Burge than his skill 
 in handicraft that his have the management of the wood make little 
 difference in the value of his service ; and as to the bargain about 
 the squire 's timber , it would be easy to call in a third person . Adam 
 see here an opening into a broaden path of prosperous work such as he 
 have think of with ambitious longing ever since he be a lad : he might 
 come to build a bridge , or a town hall , or a factory , for he have always 
 say to himself that Jonathan Burge 's building business be like an 
 acorn , which might be the mother of a great tree . so he give his hand 
 to Burge on that bargain , and go home with his mind full of happy 
 vision , in which   my refined reader will perhaps be shock when I 
 say it   the image of Hetty hover , and smile over plan for season 
 timber at a trifling expense , calculation as to the cheapening of 
 brick per thousand by water - carriage , and a favourite scheme for the 
 strengthening of roof and wall with a peculiar form of iron girder . 
 what then ? Adam 's enthusiasm lie in these thing ; and our love be 
 inwrought in our enthusiasm as electricity be inwrought in the air , 
 exalt its power by a subtle presence . 
 Adam would be able to take a separate house now , and provide for his 
 mother in the old one ; his prospect would justify his marrying very 
 soon , and if Dinah consent to have Seth , their mother would perhaps 
 be more content to live apart from Adam . but he tell himself that he 
 would not be hasty - he would not try Hetty 's feeling for he until it 
 have have time to grow strong and firm . however , tomorrow , after church , 
 he would go to the Hall Farm and tell they the news . Mr. Poyser , he 
 know , would like it well than a five - pound note , and he should see if 
 Hetty 's eye brighten at it . the month would be short with all he have 
 to fill his mind , and this foolish eagerness which have come over he of 
 late must not hurry he into any premature word . yet when he get home 
 and tell his mother the good news , and eat his supper , while she sit 
 by almost cry for joy and want he to eat twice as much as usual 
 because of this good - luck , he could not help prepare she gently for 
 the come change by talk of the old house be too small for they 
 all to go on live in it always . 
 Chapter XXXIV 
 the Betrothal 
 it be a dry Sunday , and really a pleasant day for the 2d of November . 
 there be no sunshine , but the cloud be high , and the wind be so 
 still that the yellow leaf which flutter down from the hedgerow elm 
 must have fall from pure decay . nevertheless , Mrs. Poyser do not go 
 to church , for she have take a cold too serious to be neglect ; only 
 two winter ago she have be lay up for week with a cold ; and since 
 his wife do not go to church , Mr. Poyser consider that on the whole 
 it would be as well for he to stay away too and " keep her company . " he 
 could perhaps have give no precise form to the reason that determine 
 this conclusion , but it be well known to all experienced mind that our 
 firm conviction be often dependent on subtle impression for which 
 word be quite too coarse a medium . however it be , no one from the 
 Poyser family go to church that afternoon except Hetty and the boy ; 
 yet Adam be bold enough to join they after church , and say that he 
 would walk home with they , though all the way through the village he 
 appear to be chiefly occupy with Marty and Tommy , tell they about 
 the squirrel in Binton Coppice , and promise to take they there some 
 day . but when they come to the field he say to the boy , " now , then , 
 which be the stout walker ? he as get to th ' home - gate first shall 
 be the first to go with I to Binton Coppice on the donkey . but Tommy 
 must have the start up to the next stile , because he be the small . " 
 Adam have never behave so much like a determined lover before . as soon 
 as the boy have both set off , he look down at Hetty and say , " will not 
 you hang on my arm , Hetty ? " in a plead tone , as if he have already 
 ask she and she have refuse . Hetty look up at he smilingly and put 
 her round arm through his in a moment . it be nothing to she , put 
 her arm through Adam 's , but she know he care a great deal about have 
 her arm through his , and she wish he to care . her heart beat no 
 fast , and she look at the half - bare hedgerow and the plough field 
 with the same sense of oppressive dulness as before . but Adam scarcely 
 feel that he be walk . he think Hetty must know that he be 
 press her arm a little - a very little . word rush to his lip that 
 he dare not utter - that he have make up his mind not to utter yet - and 
 so he be silent for the length of that field . the calm patience 
 with which he have once wait for Hetty 's love , content only with her 
 presence and the thought of the future , have forsake he since that 
 terrible shock nearly three month ago . the agitation of jealousy have 
 give a new restlessness to his passion - have make fear and uncertainty 
 too hard almost to bear . but though he might not speak to Hetty of his 
 love , he would tell she about his new prospect and see if she would be 
 pleased . so when he be enough master of himself to talk , he say , " I be 
 go to tell your uncle some news that will surprise he , Hetty ; and I 
 think he will be glad to hear it too . " 
 " what be that ? " Hetty say indifferently . 
 " why , Mr. Burge have offer I a share in his business , and I be go to 
 take it . " 
 there be a change in Hetty 's face , certainly not produce by any 
 agreeable impression from this news . in fact she feel a momentary 
 annoyance and alarm , for she have so often hear it hint by her uncle 
 that Adam might have Mary Burge and a share in the business any day , 
 if he like , that she associate the two object now , and the thought 
 immediately occur that perhaps Adam have give she up because of 
 what have happen lately , and have turn towards Mary Burge . with that 
 thought , and before she have time to remember any reason why it could 
 not be true , come a new sense of forsakenness and disappointment . the 
 one thing - the one person - her mind have rest on in its dull weariness , 
 have slip away from she , and peevish misery fill her eye with 
 tear . she be look on the ground , but Adam see her face , see the 
 tear , and before he have finish say , " Hetty , dear Hetty , what 
 be you cry for ? " his eager rapid thought have fly through all the 
 cause conceivable to he , and have at last alight on half the true 
 one . Hetty think he be go to marry Mary Burge - she do not   like he 
 to marry - perhaps she do not   like he to marry any one but herself ? all 
 caution be sweep away - all reason for it be go , and Adam could feel 
 nothing but tremble joy . he lean towards she and take her hand , as 
 he say : 
 " I could afford to be marry now , Hetty - I could make a wife 
 comfortable ; but I shall never want to be married if you will not   have I . " 
 Hetty look up at he and smile through her tear , as she have do to 
 Arthur that first evening in the wood , when she have think he be not 
 come , and yet he come . it be a feebler relief , a feebler triumph she 
 feel now , but the great dark eye and the sweet lip be as beautiful 
 as ever , perhaps more beautiful , for there be a more luxuriant 
 womanliness about Hetty of late . Adam could hardly believe in the 
 happiness of that moment . his right hand hold she left , and he press 
 her arm close against his heart as he lean down towards she . 
 " do you really love I , Hetty ? will you be my own wife , to love and take 
 care of as long as I live ? " 
 Hetty do not speak , but Adam 's face be very close to her , and she 
 put up her round cheek against his , like a kitten . she want to be 
 caress - she want to feel as if Arthur be with she again . 
 Adam care for no word after that , and they hardly speak through the 
 rest of the walk . he only say , " I may tell your uncle and aunt , may not 
 I , Hetty ? " and she say , " yes . " 
 the red fire - light on the hearth at the Hall Farm shine on joyful face 
 that evening , when Hetty be go upstairs and Adam take the opportunity 
 of tell Mr. and Mrs. Poyser and the grandfather that he see his way 
 to maintain a wife now , and that Hetty have consent to have he . 
 " I hope you have no objection against I for her husband , " say Adam ; 
 " I be a poor man as yet , but she shall want nothing as I can work for . " 
 " objection ? " say Mr. Poyser , while the grandfather lean forward and 
 bring out his long " Nay , nay . " " what objection can we ha ' to you , 
 lad ? never mind your being poorish as yet ; there be money in your 
 head - piece as there be money I ' the sown field , but it must ha ' time . 
 You'n get enough to begin on , and we can do a deal tow'rt the bit o ' 
 furniture you will want . Thee'st get feather and linen to spare - plenty , 
 eh ? " 
 this question be of course address to Mrs. Poyser , who be wrap up 
 in a warm shawl and be too hoarse to speak with her usual facility . 
 at first she only nod emphatically , but she be presently unable to 
 resist the temptation to be more explicit . 
 " it ud be a poor tale if I hadna feather and linen , " she say , 
 hoarsely , " when I never sell a fowl but what be pluck , and the wheel 's 
 a - go every day o ' the week . " 
 " come , my wench , " say Mr. Poyser , when Hetty come down , " come and kiss 
 we , and let we wish you luck . " 
 Hetty go very quietly and kiss the big good - natured man . 
 " there ! " he say , pat she on the back , " go and kiss your aunt and 
 your grandfather . I be as wishful t ' have you settle well as if you be 
 my own daughter ; and so be your aunt , I will be bind , for she be do by 
 you this seven ' ear , Hetty , as if you have be her own . come , come , now , " 
 he go on , become jocose , as soon as Hetty have kiss her aunt and 
 the old man , " Adam want a kiss too , I will warrant , and he be a right to 
 one now . " 
 Hetty turn away , smile , towards her empty chair . 
 " come , Adam , then , take one , " persist Mr. Poyser , " else y ' arena half 
 a man . " 
 Adam get up , blush like a small maiden - great strong fellow as he 
 be - and , put his arm round Hetty stoop down and gently kiss she 
 lip . 
 it be a pretty scene in the red fire - light ; for there be no 
 candle - why should there be , when the fire be so bright and be 
 reflect from all the pewter and the polished oak ? no one want to 
 work on a Sunday evening . even Hetty feel something like contentment 
 in the midst of all this love . Adam 's attachment to she , Adam 's caress , 
 stir no passion in she , be no long enough to satisfy her vanity , 
 but they be the good her life offer she now - they promise she some 
 change . 
 there be a great deal of discussion before Adam go away , about the 
 possibility of his find a house that would do for he to settle in . 
 no house be empty except the one next to Will Maskery 's in the village , 
 and that be too small for Adam now . Mr. Poyser insist that the good 
 plan would be for Seth and his mother to move and leave Adam in the old 
 home , which might be enlarge after a while , for there be plenty of 
 space in the woodyard and garden ; but Adam object to turn his 
 mother out . 
 " well , well , " say Mr. Poyser at last , " we needna fix everything 
 to - night . we must take time to consider . you canna think o ' get 
 marry afore Easter . I be not for long courtship , but there must be a 
 bit o ' time to make thing comfortable . " 
 " Aye , to be sure , " say Mrs. Poyser , in a hoarse whisper ; " Christian 
 folk can not   be marry like cuckoo , I reckon . " 
 " I be a bit daunted , though , " say Mr. Poyser , " when I think as we may 
 have notice to quit , and belike be force to take a farm twenty mile 
 off . " 
 " eh , " say the old man , star at the floor and lift his hand up 
 and down , while his arm rest on the elbow of his chair , " it be a poor 
 tale if I mun leave th ' ould spot an be bury in a strange parish . an ' 
 you will happen ha ' double rate to pay , " he add , look up at his son . 
 " well , thee mustna fret beforehand , father , " say Martin the young . 
 " happen the captain ' ull come home and make our peace wi ' th ' old 
 squire . I build upo ' that , for I know the captain will see folk right 
 if he can . " 
 chapter XXXV 
 the Hidden Dread 
 it be a busy time for Adam - the time between the beginning of November 
 and the beginning of February , and he could see little of Hetty , except 
 on Sundays . but a happy time , nevertheless , for it be take he nearer 
 and nearer to March , when they be to be marry , and all the little 
 preparation for their new housekeeping mark the progress towards the 
 long - for day . two new room have be " run up " to the old house , for 
 his mother and Seth be to live with they after all . Lisbeth have cry 
 so piteously at the thought of leave Adam that he have go to Hetty 
 and ask she if , for the love of he , she would put up with his 
 mother 's way and consent to live with she . to his great delight , Hetty 
 say , " yes ; I would as soon she live with we as not . " Hetty 's mind be 
 oppress at that moment with a bad difficulty than poor Lisbeth 's 
 way ; she could not care about they . so Adam be console for the 
 disappointment he have feel when Seth have come back from his visit to 
 Snowfield and say " it be no use - Dinah 's heart wasna turn towards 
 marrying . " for when he tell his mother that Hetty be willing they 
 should all live together and there be no more need of they to think of 
 parting , she say , in a more contented tone than he have hear her speak 
 in since it have be settle that he be to be marry , " eh , my lad , 
 I will be as still as th ' ould tabby , an ' ne'er want to do aught but 
 th ' offal work , as she wonna like t ' do . an ' then we needna part the 
 platter an ' thing , as ha ' stand on the shelf together sin ' afore thee 
 wast bear . " 
 there be only one cloud that now and then come across Adam 's sunshine : 
 Hetty seem unhappy sometimes . but to all his anxious , tender 
 question , she reply with an assurance that she be quite content 
 and wish nothing different ; and the next time he see she she be more 
 lively than usual . it might be that she be a little overdone with work 
 and anxiety now , for soon after Christmas Mrs. Poyser have take another 
 cold , which have bring on inflammation , and this illness have confine 
 she to her room all through January . Hetty have to manage everything 
 downstair , and half - supply Molly 's place too , while that good damsel 
 wait on her mistress , and she seem to throw herself so entirely into 
 her new function , work with a grave steadiness which be new in she , 
 that Mr. Poyser often tell Adam she be want to show he what a 
 good housekeeper he would have ; but he " doubt the lass be o'erdoe 
 it - she must have a bit o ' rest when her aunt could come downstairs . " 
 this desirable event of Mrs. Poyser 's come downstair happen in the 
 early part of February , when some mild weather thaw the last patch of 
 snow on the Binton Hills . on one of these day , soon after her aunt come 
 down , Hetty go to Treddleston to buy some of the wedding thing which 
 be want , and which Mrs. Poyser have scold she for neglecting , 
 observe that she suppose " it be because they be not for th ' 
 outside , else she would ha ' buy them fast enough . " 
 it be about ten o'clock when Hetty set off , and the slight hoar - frost 
 that have whiten the hedge in the early morning have disappear as 
 the sun mount the cloudless sky . bright February day have a strong 
 charm of hope about they than any other day in the year . one like 
 to pause in the mild ray of the sun , and look over the gate at the 
 patient plough - horse turn at the end of the furrow , and think that 
 the beautiful year be all before one . the bird seem to feel just the 
 same : their note be as clear as the clear air . there be no leaf on 
 the tree and hedgerow , but how green all the grassy field be ! and 
 the dark purplish brown of the plough earth and of the bare branch 
 be beautiful too . what a glad world this look like , as one drive or 
 ride along the valley and over the hill ! I have often think so 
 when , in foreign country , where the field and wood have look to I 
 like our English Loamshire - the rich land till with just as much care , 
 the wood roll down the gentle slope to the green meadow - I have 
 come on something by the roadside which have remind I that I be not 
 in Loamshire : an image of a great agony - the agony of the Cross . it have 
 stand perhaps by the cluster apple - blossom , or in the broad sunshine 
 by the cornfield , or at a turning by the wood where a clear brook be 
 gurgle below ; and surely , if there come a traveller to this world who 
 know nothing of the story of man 's life upon it , this image of agony 
 would seem to he strangely out of place in the midst of this joyous 
 nature . he would not know that hide behind the apple - blossom , or 
 among the golden corn , or under the shroud bough of the wood , there 
 might be a human heart beat heavily with anguish - perhaps a young 
 bloom girl , not know where to turn for refuge from swift - advance 
 shame , understand no more of this life of our than a foolish lost 
 lamb wander far and far in the nightfall on the lonely heath , 
 yet taste the bitter of life 's bitterness . 
 such thing be sometimes hide among the sunny field and behind the 
 blossoming orchard ; and the sound of the gurgle brook , if you come 
 close to one spot behind a small bush , would be mingle for your ear 
 with a despairing human sob . no wonder man 's religion have much sorrow in 
 it : no wonder he need a suffer God . 
 Hetty , in her red cloak and warm bonnet , with her basket in her hand , be 
 turn towards a gate by the side of the Treddleston road , but not that 
 she may have a more lingering enjoyment of the sunshine and think 
 with hope of the long unfolding year . she hardly know that the sun be 
 shin ; and for week , now , when she have hop at all , it have be for 
 something at which she herself tremble and shudder . she only want to 
 be out of the high - road , that she may walk slowly and not care how she 
 face look , as she dwell on wretched thought ; and through this gate 
 she can get into a field - path behind the wide thick hedgerow . her great 
 dark eye wander blankly over the field like the eye of one who be 
 desolate , homeless , unloved , not the promise bride of a brave tender 
 man . but there be no tear in they : her tear be all weep away in 
 the weary night , before she go to sleep . at the next stile the pathway 
 branch off : there be two road before she - one along by the hedgerow , 
 which will by and by lead she into the road again , the other across 
 the field , which will take she much far out of the way into the 
 Scantlands , low shroud pasture where she will see nobody . she choose 
 this and begin to walk a little fast , as if she have suddenly think 
 of an object towards which it be worth while to hasten . soon she be in 
 the Scantlands , where the grassy land slope gradually downwards , and 
 she leave the level ground to follow the slope . far on there be a 
 clump of tree on the low ground , and she be make her way towards it . 
 no , it be not a clump of tree , but a dark shroud pool , so full with 
 the wintry rain that the under bough of the eld - bush lie low 
 beneath the water . she sit down on the grassy bank , against the 
 stoop stem of the great oak that hang over the dark pool . she have 
 thought of this pool often in the night of the month that have just go 
 by , and now at last she be come to see it . she clasp her hand round 
 her knee , and lean forward , and look earnestly at it , as if try to 
 guess what sort of bed it would make for her young round limb . 
 no , she have not courage to jump into that cold watery bed , and if 
 she have , they might find she - they might find out why she have drown 
 herself . there be but one thing leave to she : she must go away , go where 
 they can not   find she . 
 after the first on - come of her great dread , some week after she 
 betrothal to Adam , she have wait and wait , in the blind vague hope 
 that something would happen to set she free from her terror ; but she 
 could wait no long . all the force of her nature have be concentrate 
 on the one effort of concealment , and she have shrink with irresistible 
 dread from every course that could tend towards a betrayal of her 
 miserable secret . whenever the thought of writing to Arthur have occur 
 to she , she have reject it . he could do nothing for she that would 
 shelter she from discovery and scorn among the relative and neighbour 
 who once more make all her world , now her airy dream have vanish . her 
 imagination no long see happiness with Arthur , for he could do 
 nothing that would satisfy or soothe her pride . no , something else 
 would happen - something must happen - to set she free from this dread . in 
 young , childish , ignorant soul there be constantly this blind trust in 
 some unshapen chance : it be as hard to a boy or girl to believe that 
 a great wretchedness will actually befall they as to believe that they 
 will die . 
 but now necessity be press hard upon she - now the time of her 
 marriage be close at hand - she could no long rest in this blind 
 trust . she must run away ; she must hide herself where no familiar eye 
 could detect she ; and then the terror of wander out into the world , 
 of which she know nothing , make the possibility of go to Arthur a 
 thought which bring some comfort with it . she feel so helpless now , so 
 unable to fashion the future for herself , that the prospect of throw 
 herself on he have a relief in it which be strong than her pride . as 
 she sit by the pool and shudder at the dark cold water , the hope that 
 he would receive her tenderly - that he would care for she and think for 
 she - be like a sense of lulling warmth , that make she for the moment 
 indifferent to everything else ; and she begin now to think of nothing 
 but the scheme by which she should get away . 
 she have have a letter from Dinah lately , full of kind word about the 
 come marriage , which she have hear of from Seth ; and when Hetty have 
 read this letter aloud to her uncle , he have say , " I wish Dinah ' ud come 
 again now , for she would be a comfort to your aunt when you be go . what 
 do you think , my wench , o ' go to see she as soon as you can be spar 
 and persuade she to come back wi ' you ? you might happen persuade she 
 wi ' tell she as her aunt want she , for all she write o ' not be 
 able to come . " Hetty have not like the thought of go to Snowfield , 
 and feel no longing to see Dinah , so she only say , " it be so far off , 
 Uncle . " but now she think this propose visit would serve as a pretext 
 for go away . she would tell her aunt when she get home again that she 
 should like the change of go to Snowfield for a week or ten day . and 
 then , when she get to Stoniton , where nobody know she , she would ask 
 for the coach that would take she on the way to Windsor . Arthur be at 
 Windsor , and she would go to he . 
 as soon as Hetty have determine on this scheme , she rise from the 
 grassy bank of the pool , take up her basket , and go on her way to 
 Treddleston , for she must buy the wedding thing she have come out for , 
 though she would never want they . she must be careful not to raise any 
 suspicion that she be go to run away . 
 Mrs. Poyser be quite agreeably surprised that Hetty wish to go and 
 see Dinah and try to bring she back to stay over the wedding . the soon 
 she go the well , since the weather be pleasant now ; and Adam , when 
 he come in the evening , say , if Hetty could set off to - morrow , he 
 would make time to go with she to Treddleston and see she safe into the 
 Stoniton coach . 
 " I wish I could go with you and take care of you , Hetty , " he say , the 
 next morning , lean in at the coach door ; " but you will not   stay much 
 beyond a week - the time ' ull seem long . " 
 he be look at she fondly , and his strong hand hold her in its 
 grasp . Hetty feel a sense of protection in his presence - she be use 
 to it now : if she could have have the past undone and know no other love 
 than her quiet liking for Adam ! the tear rise as she give he the last 
 look . 
 " God bless she for love I , " say Adam , as he go on his way to work 
 again , with Gyp at his heel . 
 but Hetty 's tear be not for Adam - not for the anguish that would come 
 upon he when he find she be go from he for ever . they be for the 
 misery of her own lot , which take she away from this brave tender man 
 who offer up his whole life to she , and throw she , a poor helpless 
 suppliant , on the man who would think it a misfortune that she be 
 oblige to cling to he . 
 at three o'clock that day , when Hetty be on the coach that be to take 
 she , they say , to Leicester - part of the long , long way to Windsor - she 
 feel dimly that she might be travel all this weary journey towards 
 the beginning of new misery . 
 yet Arthur be at Windsor ; he would surely not be angry with she . if he 
 do not mind about she as he use to do , he have promise to be good to 
 she . 
 Book five 
 chapter xxxvi 
 the Journey of Hope 
 a long , lonely journey , with sadness in the heart ; away from the 
 familiar to the strange : that be a hard and dreary thing even to the 
 rich , the strong , the instructed ; a hard thing , even when we be call 
 by duty , not urge by dread . 
 what be it then to Hetty ? with her poor narrow thought , no long 
 melt into vague hope , but press upon by the chill of 
 definite fear , repeat again and again the same small round of 
 memory - shape again and again the same childish , doubtful image 
 of what be to come - see nothing in this wide world but the little 
 history of her own pleasure and pain ; with so little money in her 
 pocket , and the way so long and difficult . unless she could afford 
 always to go in the coach - and she feel sure she could not , for the 
 journey to Stoniton be more expensive than she have expect - it be 
 plain that she must trust to carrier ' cart or slow waggon ; and what 
 a time it would be before she could get to the end of her journey ! the 
 burly old coachman from Oakbourne , see such a pretty young woman 
 among the outside passenger , have invite she to come and sit beside 
 he ; and feel that it become he as a man and a coachman to open the 
 dialogue with a joke , he apply himself as soon as they be off the 
 stone to the elaboration of one suitable in all respect . after many 
 cut with his whip and glance at Hetty out of the corner of his eye , 
 he lift his lip above the edge of his wrapper and say , " he be pretty 
 nigh six foot , I will be bind , isna he , now ? " 
 " who ? " say Hetty , rather startle . 
 " why , the sweetheart as you have   leave behind , or else he as you be go 
 arter - which be it ? " 
 Hetty feel her face flush and then turn pale . she think this 
 coachman must know something about she . he must know Adam , and might 
 tell he where she be go , for it be difficult to country people to 
 believe that those who make a figure in their own parish be not know 
 everywhere else , and it be equally difficult to Hetty to understand 
 that chance word could happen to apply closely to her circumstance . 
 she be too frightened to speak . 
 " Hegh , hegh ! " say the coachman , see that his joke be not so 
 gratifying as he have expect , " you munna take it too ser'ous ; if he be 
 behave ill , get another . such a pretty lass as you can get a sweetheart 
 any day . " 
 Hetty 's fear be allay by and by , when she find that the coachman 
 make no further allusion to her personal concern ; but it still have the 
 effect of prevent she from ask he what be the place on the 
 road to Windsor . she tell he she be only go a little way out of 
 Stoniton , and when she get down at the inn where the coach stop , she 
 hasten away with her basket to another part of the town . when she 
 have form her plan of go to Windsor , she have not foresee any 
 difficulty except that of get away , and after she have overcome 
 this by propose the visit to Dinah , her thought fly to the meeting 
 with Arthur and the question how he would behave to she - not rest on 
 any probable incident of the journey . she be too entirely ignorant 
 of travel to imagine any of its detail , and with all her store 
 of money - her three guineas - in her pocket , she think herself amply 
 provide . it be not until she find how much it cost she to get to 
 Stoniton that she begin to be alarmed about the journey , and then , for 
 the first time , she feel her ignorance as to the place that must be 
 pass on her way . oppress with this new alarm , she walk along the 
 grim Stoniton street , and at last turn into a shabby little inn , 
 where she hop to get a cheap lodging for the night . here she ask 
 the landlord if he could tell she what place she must go to , to get to 
 Windsor . 
 " well , I can not   rightly say . Windsor must be pretty nigh London , for it be 
 where the king live , " be the answer . " anyhow , you would well go t ' Ashby 
 next - that be south'ard . but there be as many place from here to London 
 as there be house in Stoniton , by what I can make out . I have   never be 
 no traveller myself . but how come a lone young woman like you to be 
 think o ' take such a journey as that ? " 
 " I be go to my brother - he be a soldier at Windsor , " say Hetty , 
 frighten at the landlord 's questioning look . " I can not   afford to go 
 by the coach ; do you think there be a cart go toward Ashby in the 
 morning ? " 
 " yes , there may be cart if anybody know where they start from ; but 
 you might run over the town before you find out . you would well set off and 
 walk , and trust to summat overtake you . " 
 every word sink like lead on Hetty 's spirit ; she see the journey 
 stretch bit by bit before she now . even to get to Ashby seem a hard 
 thing : it might take the day , for what she know , and that be nothing 
 to the rest of the journey . but it must be do - she must get to Arthur . 
 oh , how she yearn to be again with somebody who would care for she ! 
 she who have never get up in the morning without the certainty of see 
 familiar face , people on whom she have an acknowledge claim ; whose 
 farth journey have be to Rosseter on the pillion with her uncle ; 
 whose thought have always be take holiday in dream of pleasure , 
 because all the business of her life be manage for she - this 
 kittenlike Hetty , who till a few month ago have never feel any other 
 grief than that of envy Mary Burge a new ribbon , or be gird 
 at by her aunt for neglect Totty , must now make she toilsome way in 
 loneliness , her peaceful home leave behind for ever , and nothing but a 
 tremulous hope of distant refuge before she . now for the first time , as 
 she lie down to - night in the strange hard bed , she feel that her home 
 have be a happy one , that her uncle have be very good to she , that 
 her quiet lot at Hayslope among the thing and people she know , with she 
 little pride in her one good gown and bonnet , and nothing to hide from 
 any one , be what she would like to wake up to as a reality , and find 
 that all the feverish life she have know besides be a short nightmare . 
 she think of all she have leave behind with yearn regret for her own 
 sake . her own misery fill her heart - there be no room in it for other 
 people 's sorrow . and yet , before the cruel letter , Arthur have be so 
 tender and loving . the memory of that have still a charm for she , though 
 it be no more than a soothe draught that just make pain bearable . 
 for Hetty could conceive no other existence for herself in future than 
 a hidden one , and a hidden life , even with love , would have have no 
 delight for she ; still less a life mingle with shame . she know no 
 romance , and have only a feeble share in the feeling which be the 
 source of romance , so that well - read lady may find it difficult to 
 understand her state of mind . she be too ignorant of everything beyond 
 the simple notion and habit in which she have be bring up to have 
 any more definite idea of her probable future than that Arthur would 
 take care of she somehow , and shelter she from anger and scorn . he would 
 not marry she and make she a lady ; and apart from that she could think 
 of nothing he could give towards which she look with longing and 
 ambition . 
 the next morning she rise early , and take only some milk and bread 
 for her breakfast , set out to walk on the road towards Ashby , under a 
 leaden - colour sky , with a narrowing streak of yellow , like a depart 
 hope , on the edge of the horizon . now in her faintness of heart at the 
 length and difficulty of her journey , she be most of all afraid of 
 spend her money , and become so destitute that she would have to ask 
 people 's charity ; for Hettv have the pride not only of a proud nature 
 but of a proud class - the class that pay the most poor - rate , and 
 most shudder at the idea of profit by a poor - rate . it have not yet 
 occur to she that she might get money for her locket and earring 
 which she carry with she , and she apply all her small arithmetic 
 and knowledge of price to calculate how many meal and how many ride 
 be contain in her two guineas , and the odd shilling , which have 
 a melancholy look , as if they be the pale ash of the other 
 bright - flame coin . 
 for the first few mile out of Stoniton , she walk on bravely , always 
 fix on some tree or gate or project bush at the most distant 
 visible point in the road as a goal , and feel a faint joy when she 
 have reach it . but when she come to the fourth milestone , the first she 
 have happen to notice among the long grass by the roadside , and read 
 that she be still only four mile beyond Stoniton , her courage sink . 
 she have come only this little way , and yet feel tired , and almost hungry 
 again in the keen morning air ; for though Hetty be accustom to much 
 movement and exertion indoor , she be not use to long walk which 
 produce quite a different sort of fatigue from that of household 
 activity . as she be look at the milestone she feel some drop 
 fall on her face - it be begin to rain . here be a new trouble 
 which have not enter into her sad thought before , and quite weigh 
 down by this sudden addition to her burden , she sit down on the step of 
 a stile and begin to sob hysterically . the beginning of hardship be like 
 the first taste of bitter food - it seem for a moment unbearable ; yet , 
 if there be nothing else to satisfy our hunger , we take another bite 
 and find it possible to go on . when Hetty recover from her burst of 
 weeping , she rally her fainting courage : it be rain , and she 
 must try to get on to a village where she might find rest and shelter . 
 presently , as she walk on wearily , she hear the rumbling of heavy 
 wheel behind she ; a cover waggon be come , creep slowly along 
 with a slouching driver crack his whip beside the horse . she wait 
 for it , think that if the waggoner be not a very sour - looking man , 
 she would ask he to take she up . as the waggon approach she , the 
 driver have fall behind , but there be something in the front of the 
 big vehicle which encourage she . at any previous moment in her life 
 she would not have notice it , but now , the new susceptibility that 
 suffering have awaken in she cause this object to impress she 
 strongly . it be only a small white - and - liver - colour spaniel which 
 sit on the front ledge of the waggon , with large timid eye , and an 
 incessant trembling in the body , such as you may have see in some of 
 these small creature . Hetty care little for animal , as you know , 
 but at this moment she feel as if the helpless timid creature have some 
 fellowship with she , and without be quite aware of the reason , she 
 be less doubtful about speak to the driver , who now come forward - a 
 large ruddy man , with a sack over his shoulder , by way of scarf or 
 mantle . 
 " could you take I up in your waggon , if you be go towards Ashby ? " 
 say Hetty . " I will pay you for it . " 
 " aw , " say the big fellow , with that slowly dawn smile which belong 
 to heavy face , " I can take y ' up fawst enough wi'out bein ' pay for't 
 if you dooant mind lyin ' a bit closish a - top o ' the wool - pack . where do 
 you coom from ? and what do you want at Ashby ? " 
 " I come from Stoniton . I be go a long way - to Windsor . " 
 " what ! arter some service , or what ? " 
 " go to my brother - he be a soldier there . " 
 " well , I be go no furder nor leicester - and fur enough too - but I will 
 take you , if you dooant mind be a bit long on the road . Th ' hosse 
 wooant feel your weight no more nor they feel the little doog there , as 
 I puck up on the road a fortni't agoo . he war lose , I b'lieve , an 's be 
 all of a tremble iver sin ' . come , gi ' we your basket an ' come behind and 
 let I put y ' in . " 
 to lie on the wool - pack , with a cranny leave between the curtain of the 
 awning to let in the air , be luxury to Hetty now , and she half - sleep 
 away the hour till the driver come to ask she if she want to get down 
 and have ' some victual " ; he himself be go to eat his dinner at this 
 " public . " late at night they reach Leicester , and so this second day 
 of Hetty 's journey be past . she have spend no money except what she 
 have pay for her food , but she feel that this slow journeying would be 
 intolerable for she another day , and in the morning she find her way 
 to a coach - office to ask about the road to Windsor , and see if it would 
 cost she too much to go part of the distance by coach again . yes ! the 
 distance be too great - the coach be too dear - she must give they 
 up ; but the elderly clerk at the office , touch by her pretty anxious 
 face , write down for she the name of the chief place she must pass 
 through . this be the only comfort she get in Leicester , for the man 
 star at she as she go along the street , and for the first time in 
 her life Hetty wish no one would look at she . she set out walk 
 again ; but this day she be fortunate , for she be soon overtake by 
 a carrier 's cart which carry she to Hinckley , and by the help of a 
 return chaise , with a drunken postilion - who frighten she by drive 
 like Jehu the son of Nimshi , and shout hilarious remark at she , 
 twist himself backwards on his saddle - she be before night in the 
 heart of woody Warwickshire : but still almost a hundred mile from 
 Windsor , they tell she . oh what a large world it be , and what hard work 
 for she to find her way in it ! she go by mistake to Stratford - on - Avon , 
 find Stratford set down in her list of place , and then she be tell 
 she have come a long way out of the right road . it be not till the fifth 
 day that she get to Stony Stratford . that seem but a slight journey as 
 you look at the map , or remember your own pleasant travel to and from 
 the meadowy bank of the Avon . but how wearily long it be to Hetty ! 
 it seem to she as if this country of flat field , and hedgerow , and 
 dotted house , and village , and market - town - all so much alike to her 
 indifferent eye - must have no end , and she must go on wander among 
 they for ever , wait tired at toll - gate for some cart to come , and 
 then find the cart go only a little way - a very little way - to the 
 miller 's a mile off perhaps ; and she hat go into the public house , 
 where she must go to get food and ask question , because there be 
 always man lounge there , who star at she and joke she rudely . her 
 body be very weary too with these day of new fatigue and anxiety ; they 
 have make she look more pale and wear than all the time of hide dread 
 she have go through at home . when at last she reach Stony Stratford , 
 her impatience and weariness have become too strong for her economical 
 caution ; she determine to take the coach for the rest of the way , 
 though it should cost she all her remain money . she would need 
 nothing at Windsor but to find Arthur . when she have pay the fare for 
 the last coach , she have only a shilling ; and as she get down at the 
 sign of the Green Man in Windsor at twelve o'clock in the middle of the 
 seventh day , hungry and faint , the coachman come up , and beg she 
 to " remember he . " she put her hand in her pocket and take out the 
 shilling , but the tear come with the sense of exhaustion and the 
 think that she be give away her last mean of get food , which 
 she really require before she could go in search of Arthur . as she 
 hold out the shilling , she lift up her dark tear - fill eye to the 
 coachman 's face and say , " can you give I back sixpence ? " 
 " no , no , " he say , gruffly , " never mind - put the shilling up again . " 
 the landlord of the Green Man have stand near enough to witness this 
 scene , and he be a man whose abundant feeding serve to keep his 
 good nature , as well as his person , in high condition . and that lovely 
 tearful face of Hetty 's would have find out the sensitive fibre in most 
 man . 
 " come , young woman , come in , " he say , " and have adrop o ' something ; 
 you be pretty well knock up , I can see that . " 
 he take she into the bar and say to his wife , " here , missis , take this 
 young woman into the parlour ; she be a little overcome " - for Hetty 's 
 tear be fall fast . they be merely hysterical tear : she think 
 she have no reason for weep now , and be vex that she be too weak 
 and tired to help it . she be at Windsor at last , not far from Arthur . 
 she look with eager , hungry eye at the bread and meat and beer that 
 the landlady bring she , and for some minute she forget everything 
 else in the delicious sensation of satisfy hunger and recover 
 from exhaustion . the landlady sit opposite to she as she eat , and look 
 at she earnestly . no wonder : Hetty have throw off her bonnet , and her 
 curl have fall down . her face be all the more touching in its 
 youth and beauty because of its weary look , and the good woman 's eye 
 presently wander to her figure , which in her hurried dress on her 
 journey she have take no pain to conceal ; moreover , the stranger 's eye 
 detect what the familiar unsuspecting eye leaf unnoticed . 
 " why , you be not very fit for travel , " she say , glance while she 
 speak at Hetty 's ringless hand . " have you come far ? " 
 " yes , " say Hetty , rouse by this question to exert more self - command , 
 and feel the well for the food she have take . " I have   come a good 
 long way , and it be very tiring . but I be well now . could you tell I 
 which way to go to this place ? " here Hetty take from her pocket a bit 
 of paper : it be the end of Arthur 's letter on which he have write his 
 address . 
 while she be speak , the landlord have come in and have begin to look 
 at she as earnestly as his wife have do . he take up the piece of paper 
 which Hetty hand across the table , and read the address . 
 " why , what do you want at this house ? " he say . it be in the nature of 
 innkeeper and all man who have no press business of their own to ask 
 as many question as possible before give any information . 
 " I want to see a gentleman as be there , " say Hetty . 
 " but there be no gentleman there , " return the landlord . " it be shut 
 up - be shut up this fortnight . what gentleman be it you want ? perhaps 
 I can let you know where to find he . " 
 " it be Captain Donnithorne , " say Hetty tremulously , her heart begin 
 to beat painfully at this disappointment of her hope that she should 
 find Arthur at once . 
 " Captain Donnithorne ? stop a bit , " say the landlord , slowly . " be he 
 in the Loamshire Militia ? a tall young officer with a fairish skin and 
 reddish whisker - and have a servant by the name o ' Pym ? " 
 " oh yes , " say Hetty ; " you know he - where be he ? " 
 " a fine sight o ' mile away from here . the Loamshire Militia 's go to 
 Ireland ; it be be go this fortnight . " 
 " look there ! she be faint , " say the landlady , hasten to support 
 Hetty , who have lose her miserable consciousness and look like a 
 beautiful corpse . they carry she to the sofa and loosen her dress . 
 " here be a bad business , I suspect , " say the landlord , as he bring in 
 some water . 
 " ah , it be plain enough what sort of business it be , " say the wife . 
 " she be not a common flaunting dratchell , I can see that . she look like 
 a respectable country girl , and she come from a good way off , to judge 
 by her tongue . she talk something like that ostler we have that come 
 from the north . he be as honest a fellow as we ever have about the 
 house - they be all honest folk in the north . " 
 " I never see a pretty young woman in my life , " say the husband . 
 " she be like a pictur in a shop - winder . it go to one 's ' eart to look at 
 she . " 
 " it ' ud have be a good deal well for she if she have be uglier and 
 have more conduct , " say the landlady , who on any charitable construction 
 must have be suppose to have more " conduct " than beauty . " but she be 
 come to again . fetch a drop more water . " 
 Chapter XXXVII 
 the Journey in despair 
 HETTY be too ill through the rest of that day for any question to be 
 address to she - too ill even to think with any distinctness of the 
 evil that be to come . she only feel that all her hope be crush , 
 and that instead of have find a refuge she have only reach the 
 border of a new wilderness where no goal lie before she . the sensation 
 of bodily sickness , in a comfortable bed , and with the tendance of the 
 good - natured landlady , make a sort of respite for she ; such a respite as 
 there be in the faint weariness which oblige a man to throw himself on 
 the sand instead of toil onward under the scorch sun . 
 but when sleep and rest have bring back the strength necessary for the 
 keenness of mental suffering - when she lie the next morning look at 
 the grow light which be like a cruel task - master return to urge 
 from she a fresh round of hat hopeless labour - she begin to think what 
 course she must take , to remember that all her money be go , to 
 look at the prospect of far wander among stranger with the new 
 clearness shed on it by the experience of her journey to Windsor . but 
 which way could she turn ? it be impossible for she to enter into any 
 service , even if she could obtain it . there be nothing but immediate 
 beggary before she . she think of a young woman who have be find 
 against the church wall at Hayslope one Sunday , nearly dead with cold 
 and hunger - a tiny infant in her arm . the woman be rescue and take 
 to the parish . " the parish ! " you can perhaps hardly understand the 
 effect of that word on a mind like Hetty 's , bring up among people who 
 be somewhat hard in their feeling even towards poverty , who live 
 among the field , and have little pity for want and rag as a cruel 
 inevitable fate such as they sometimes seem in city , but hold they 
 a mark of idleness and vice - and it be idleness and vice that bring 
 burden on the parish . to Hetty the " parish " be next to the prison 
 in obloquy , and to ask anything of stranger - to beg - lie in the same 
 far - off hideous region of intolerable shame that Hetty have all her life 
 think it impossible she could ever come near . but now the remembrance 
 of that wretched woman whom she have see herself , on her way from 
 church , be carry into Joshua Rann 's , come back upon she with the 
 new terrible sense that there be very little now to divide she from 
 the same lot . and the dread of bodily hardship mingle with the dread 
 of shame ; for Hetty have the luxurious nature of a round soft - coat pet 
 animal . 
 how she yearn to be back in her safe home again , cherish and care 
 for as she have always be ! her aunt 's scolding about trifle would have 
 be music to her ear now ; she long for it ; she use to hear it in a 
 time when she have only trifle to hide . could she be the same Hetty that 
 use to make up the butter in the dairy with the Guelder rose peep 
 in at the window - she , a runaway whom her friend would not open their 
 door to again , lie in this strange bed , with the knowledge that 
 she have no money to pay for what she receive , and must offer those 
 stranger some of the clothe in her basket ? it be then she think of 
 her locket and ear - ring , and see her pocket lie near , she reach it 
 and spread the content on the bed before she . there be the locket and 
 ear - ring in the little velvet - line box , and with they there be a 
 beautiful silver thimble which Adam have buy she , the word " remember 
 I " make the ornament of the border ; a steel purse , with her one 
 shilling in it ; and a small red - leather case , fasten with a strap . 
 those beautiful little ear - ring , with their delicate pearl and garnet , 
 that she have try in her ear with such longing in the bright sunshine 
 on the 30th of July ! she have no longing to put they in her ear now : her 
 head with its dark ring of hair lie back languidly on the pillow , and 
 the sadness that rest about her brow and eye be something too hard 
 for regretful memory . yet she put her hand up to her ear : it be 
 because there be some thin gold ring in they , which be also worth 
 a little money . yes , she could surely get some money for her ornament : 
 those Arthur have give she must have cost a great deal of money . the 
 landlord and landlady have be good to she ; perhaps they would help she 
 to get the money for these thing . 
 but this money would not keep she long . what should she do when it be 
 go ? where should she go ? the horrible thought of want and beggary 
 drive she once to think she would go back to her uncle and aunt and ask 
 they to forgive she and have pity on she . but she shrink from that idea 
 again , as she might have shrink from scorch metal . she could never 
 endure that shame before her uncle and aunt , before Mary Burge , and the 
 servant at the Chase , and the people at Broxton , and everybody who know 
 she . they should never know what have happen to she . what could she do ? 
 she would go away from Windsor - travel again as she have do the last 
 week , and get among the flat green field with the high hedge round 
 they , where nobody could see she or know she ; and there , perhaps , when 
 there be nothing else she could do , she should get courage to drown 
 herself in some pond like that in the Scantlands . yes , she would get 
 away from Windsor as soon as possible : she do not   like these people at 
 the inn to know about she , to know that she have come to look for Captain 
 Donnithorne . she must think of some reason to tell they why she have 
 ask for he . 
 with this thought she begin to put the thing back into her pocket , 
 meaning to get up and dress before the landlady come to she . she have she 
 hand on the red - leather case , when it occur to she that there might 
 be something in this case which she have forget - something worth 
 selling ; for without know what she should do with her life , she 
 crave the mean of live as long as possible ; and when we desire 
 eagerly to find something , we be apt to search for it in hopeless 
 place . no , there be nothing but common needle and pin , and dry 
 tulip - petal between the paper leaf where she have write down her 
 little money - account . but on one of these leaf there be a name , 
 which , often as she have see it before , now flash on Hetty 's mind like 
 a newly discover message . the name be - Dinah Morris , Snowfield . there 
 be a text above it , write , as well as the name , by Dinah 's own hand 
 with a little pencil , one evening that they be sit together and 
 Hetty happen to have the red case lie open before she . Hetty do not 
 read the text now : she be only arrest by the name . now , for the first 
 time , she remember without indifference the affectionate kindness 
 Dinah have show she , and those word of Dinah in the bed - chamber - that 
 Hetty must think of she as a friend in trouble . suppose she be to go 
 to Dinah , and ask she to help she ? Dinah do not think about thing as 
 other people do . she be a mystery to Hetty , but Hetty know she be 
 always kind . she could not   imagine Dinah 's face turn away from she in 
 dark reproof or scorn , Dinah 's voice willingly speak ill of she , or 
 rejoice in her misery as a punishment . Dinah do not seem to belong to 
 that world of Hetty 's , whose glance she dread like scorch fire . but 
 even to her Hetty shrank from beseech and confession . she could not 
 prevail on herself to say , " I will go to Dinah " : she only think of 
 that as a possible alternative , if she have not courage for death . 
 the good landlady be amazed when she see Hetty come downstairs soon 
 after herself , neatly dress , and look resolutely self - possess . 
 Hetty tell she she be quite well this morning . she have only be very 
 tired and overcome with her journey , for she have come a long way to ask 
 about her brother , who have run away , and they think he be go for a 
 soldier , and Captain Donnithorne might know , for he have be very 
 kind to her brother once . it be a lame story , and the landlady look 
 doubtfully at Hetty as she tell it ; but there be a resolute air of 
 self - reliance about she this morning , so different from the helpless 
 prostration of yesterday , that the landlady hardly know how to make a 
 remark that might seem like pry into other people 's affair . she only 
 invite she to sit down to breakfast with they , and in the course of it 
 Hetty bring out her ear - ring and locket , and ask the landlord if 
 he could help she to get money for they . her journey , she say , have cost 
 she much more than she expect , and now she have no money to get back to 
 her friend , which she want to do at once . 
 it be not the first time the landlady have see the ornament , for she 
 have examine the content of Hetty 's pocket yesterday , and she and her 
 husband have discuss the fact of a country girl have these beautiful 
 thing , with a strong conviction than ever that Hetty have be 
 miserably delude by the fine young officer . 
 " well , " say the landlord , when Hetty have spread the precious trifle 
 before he , " we might take them to the jeweller 's shop , for there be one 
 not far off ; but Lord bless you , they would not   give you a quarter o ' 
 what the thing be worth . and you would not   like to part with them ? " he 
 add , look at she inquiringly . 
 " oh , I do not   mind , " say Hetty , hastily , ' so as I can get money to go 
 back . " 
 " and they might think the thing be steal , as you want to sell 
 them , " he go on , " for it be not   usual for a young woman like you to have 
 fine jew'llery like that . " 
 the blood rush to Hetty 's face with anger . " I belong to respectable 
 folk , " she say ; " I be not a thief . " 
 " no , that you be not , I will be bind , " say the landlady ; " and you would no 
 call to say that , " look indignantly at her husband . " the thing be 
 gev to she : that be plain enough to be see . " 
 " I do not   mean as I think so , " say the husband , apologetically , 
 " but I say it be what the jeweller might think , and so he would not   be 
 offer much money for them . " 
 " well , " say the wife , ' suppose you be to advance some money on the 
 thing yourself , and then if she like to redeem them when she get home , 
 she could . but if we hear nothing from she after two month , we might 
 do as we like with them . " 
 I will not say that in this accommodate proposition the landlady have 
 no regard whatever to the possible reward of her good nature in the 
 ultimate possession of the locket and ear - ring : indeed , the effect they 
 would have in that case on the mind of the grocer 's wife have present 
 itself with remarkable vividness to her rapid imagination . the landlord 
 take up the ornament and push out his lip in a meditative manner . 
 he wish Hetty well , doubtless ; but pray , how many of your well - wisher 
 would decline to make a little gain out of you ? your landlady be 
 sincerely affect at part with you , respect you highly , and will 
 really rejoice if any one else be generous to you ; but at the same 
 time she hand you a bill by which she gain as high a percentage as 
 possible . 
 " how much money do you want to get home with , young woman ? " say the 
 well - wisher , at length . 
 " three guineas , " answer Hetty , fix on the sum she set out with , for 
 want of any other standard , and afraid of ask too much . 
 " well , I have   no objection to advance you three guineas , " say the 
 landlord ; " and if you like to send it I back and get the jewellery 
 again , you can , you know . the Green Man be not   go to run away . " 
 " oh yes , I will be very glad if you will give I that , " say Hetty , relieve 
 at the thought that she would not have to go to the jeweller 's and be 
 star at and question . 
 " but if you want the thing again , you will write before long , " say the 
 landlady , " because when two month be up , we shall make up our mind as 
 you do not   want them . " 
 " yes , " say Hetty indifferently . 
 the husband and wife be equally content with this arrangement . the 
 husband think , if the ornament be not redeem , he could make a 
 good thing of it by take they to London and sell they . the wife 
 think she would coax the good man into let she keep they . and 
 they be accommodate Hetty , poor thing - a pretty , respectable - look 
 young woman , apparently in a sad case . they decline to take anything 
 for her food and bed : she be quite welcome . and at eleven o'clock Hetty 
 say " good - bye " to they with the same quiet , resolute air she have wear 
 all the morning , mount the coach that be to take she twenty mile 
 back along the way she have come . 
 there be a strength of self - possession which be the sign that the 
 last hope have depart . despair no more lean on other than perfect 
 contentment , and in despair pride cease to be counteract by the sense 
 of dependence . 
 Hetty feel that no one could deliver she from the evil that would make 
 life hateful to she ; and no one , she say to herself , should ever know 
 her misery and humiliation . no ; she would not confess even to Dinah . she 
 would wander out of sight , and drown herself where her body would never 
 be find , and no one should know what have become of she . 
 when she get off this coach , she begin to walk again , and take cheap 
 ride in cart , and get cheap meal , go on and on without distinct 
 purpose , yet strangely , by some fascination , take the way she have 
 come , though she be determined not to go back to her own country . 
 perhaps it be because she have fix her mind on the grassy Warwickshire 
 field , with the bushy tree - stud hedgerow that make a hiding - place 
 even in this leafless season . she go more slowly than she come , often 
 get over the stile and sit for hour under the hedgerow , 
 look before she with blank , beautiful eye ; fancy herself at the 
 edge of a hide pool , low down , like that in the Scantlands ; wonder 
 if it be very painful to be drown , and if there would be anything 
 bad after death than what she dread in life . religious doctrine have 
 take no hold on Hetty 's mind . she be one of those numerous people 
 who have have godfather and godmother , learn their catechism , be 
 confirm , and go to church every Sunday , and yet , for any practical 
 result of strength in life , or trust in death , have never appropriate a 
 single christian idea or christian feeling . you would misunderstand 
 her thought during these wretched day , if you imagine that they be 
 influence either by religious fear or religious hope . 
 she choose to go to Stratford - on - Avon again , where she have go before by 
 mistake , for she remember some grassy field on her former way towards 
 it - field among which she think she might find just the sort of pool 
 she have in her mind . yet she take care of her money still ; she carry 
 her basket ; death seem still a long way off , and life be so strong 
 in she . she crave food and rest - she hasten towards they at the very 
 moment she be picture to herself the bank from which she would leap 
 towards death . it be already five day since she have leave Windsor , for 
 she have wander about , always avoid speech or questioning look , 
 and recover her air of proud self - dependence whenever she be under 
 observation , choose her decent lodging at night , and dress herself 
 neatly in the morning , and set off on her way steadily , or remain 
 under shelter if it rain , as if she have a happy life to cherish . 
 and yet , even in her most self - conscious moment , the face be sadly 
 different from that which have smile at itself in the old speck glass , 
 or smile at other when they glance at it admiringly . a hard and even 
 fierce look have come in the eye , though their lash be as long as 
 ever , and they have all their dark brightness . and the cheek be never 
 dimple with smile now . it be the same rounded , pouting , childish 
 prettiness , but with all love and belief in love depart from it - the 
 sadder for its beauty , like that wondrous Medusa - face , with the 
 passionate , passionless lip . 
 at last she be among the field she have be dream of , on a long 
 narrow pathway lead towards a wood . if there should be a pool in that 
 wood ! it would be well hide than one in the field . no , it be not a 
 wood , only a wild brake , where there have once be gravel - pit , leave 
 mound and hollow stud with brushwood and small tree . she roam up 
 and down , think there be perhaps a pool in every hollow before she 
 come to it , till her limb be weary , and she sit down to rest . the 
 afternoon be far advanced , and the leaden sky be darken , as if the 
 sun be set behind it . after a little while Hetty start up again , 
 feel that darkness would soon come on ; and she must put off find 
 the pool till to - morrow , and make her way to some shelter for the night . 
 she have quite lose her way in the field , and might as well go in one 
 direction as another , for aught she know . she walk through field after 
 field , and no village , no house be in sight ; but there , at the corner 
 of this pasture , there be a break in the hedge ; the land seem to 
 dip down a little , and two tree lean towards each other across the 
 opening . Hetty 's heart give a great heat as she think there must be 
 a pool there . she walk towards it heavily over the tufte grass , with 
 pale lip and a sense of trembling . it be as if the thing be come in 
 spite of herself , instead of be the object of her search . 
 there it be , black under the darken sky : no motion , no sound near . 
 she set down her basket , and then sink down herself on the grass , 
 tremble . the pool have its wintry depth now : by the time it get 
 shallow , as she remember the pool do at Hayslope , in the summer , 
 no one could find out that it be her body . but then there be her 
 basket - she must hide that too . she must throw it into the water - make 
 it heavy with stone first , and then throw it in . she get up to look 
 about for stone , and soon bring five or six , which she lay down 
 beside her basket , and then sit down again . there be no need to 
 hurry - there be all the night to drown herself in . she sit lean she 
 elbow on the basket . she be weary , hungry . there be some bun in her 
 basket - three , which she have supply herself with at the place where 
 she eat her dinner . she take they out now and eat they eagerly , and then 
 sit still again , look at the pool . the soothe sensation that come 
 over she from the satisfaction of her hunger , and this fix dreamy 
 attitude , bring on drowsiness , and presently her head sink down on her 
 knee . she be fast asleep . 
 when she awake it be deep night , and she feel chill . she be frightened 
 at this darkness - frighten at the long night before she . if she could 
 but throw herself into the water ! no , not yet . she begin to walk about 
 that she might get warm again , as if she would have more resolution 
 then . oh how long the time be in that darkness ! the bright hearth and 
 the warmth and the voice of home , the secure uprising and lie down , 
 the familiar field , the familiar people , the sunday and holiday with 
 their simple joy of dress and feasting - all the sweet of her young 
 life rush before she now , and she seem to be stretch her arm 
 towards they across a great gulf . she set her tooth when she think of 
 Arthur . she curse he , without know what her cursing would do . she 
 wish he too might know desolation , and cold , and a life of shame that 
 he dare not end by death . 
 the horror of this cold , and darkness , and solitude - out of all human 
 reach - become great every long minute . it be almost as if she be 
 dead already , and know that she be dead , and long to get back to life 
 again . but no : she be alive still ; she have not take the dreadful 
 leap . she feel a strange contradictory wretchedness and exultation : 
 wretchedness , that she do not dare to face death ; exultation , that she 
 be still in life - that she might yet know light and warmth again . she 
 walk backwards and forwards to warm herself , begin to discern 
 something of the object around she , as her eye become accustomed to 
 the night - the dark line of the hedge , the rapid motion of some live 
 creature - perhaps a field - mouse - rushing across the grass . she no long 
 feel as if the darkness hedge she in . she think she could walk back 
 across the field , and get over the stile ; and then , in the very next 
 field , she think she remember there be a hovel of furze near a 
 sheepfold . if she could get into that hovel , she would be warm . she 
 could pass the night there , for that be what Alick do at Hayslope 
 in lambing - time . the thought of this hovel bring the energy of a new 
 hope . she take up her basket and walk across the field , but it be 
 some time before she get in the right direction for the stile . the 
 exercise and the occupation of find the stile be a stimulus to she , 
 however , and lighten the horror of the darkness and solitude . there 
 be sheep in the next field , and she startle a group as she set down 
 her basket and get over the stile ; and the sound of their movement 
 comfort she , for it assure she that her impression be right - this 
 be the field where she have see the hovel , for it be the field where 
 the sheep be . right on along the path , and she would get to it . she 
 reach the opposite gate , and feel her way along its rail and the 
 rail of the sheep - fold , till her hand encounter the pricking of the 
 gorsy wall . delicious sensation ! she have find the shelter . she grope 
 her way , touch the prickly gorse , to the door , and push it open . 
 it be an ill - smell close place , but warm , and there be straw on 
 the ground . Hetty sink down on the straw with a sense of escape . tear 
 come - she have never shed tear before since she leave Windsor - tear and 
 sob of hysterical joy that she have still hold of life , that she 
 be still on the familiar earth , with the sheep near she . the very 
 consciousness of her own limb be a delight to she : she turn up her 
 sleeve , and kiss her arm with the passionate love of life . soon 
 warmth and weariness lull she in the midst of her sob , and she fall 
 continually into dozing , fancy herself at the brink of the pool 
 again - fancy that she have jump into the water , and then awake 
 with a start , and wonder where she be . but at last deep dreamless 
 sleep come ; her head , guard by her bonnet , find a pillow against 
 the gorsy wall , and the poor soul , drive to and fro between two equal 
 terror , find the one relief that be possible to it - the relief of 
 unconsciousness . 
 alas ! that relief seem to end the moment it have begin . it seem to 
 Hetty as if those dozen dream have only pass into another dream - that 
 she be in the hovel , and her aunt be stand over she with a candle 
 in her hand . she tremble under her aunt 's glance , and open her eye . 
 there be no candle , but there be light in the hovel - the light of 
 early morning through the open door . and there be a face look down 
 on she ; but it be an unknown face , belong to an elderly man in a 
 smock - frock . 
 " why , what do you do here , young woman ? " the man say roughly . 
 Hetty tremble still bad under this real fear and shame than she have 
 do in her momentary dream under her aunt 's glance . she feel that she 
 be like a beggar already - find sleep in that place . but in spite of 
 her trembling , she be so eager to account to the man for her presence 
 here , that she find word at once . 
 " I lose my way , " she say . " I be travel - north'ard , and I get away 
 from the road into the field , and be overtake by the dark . will you 
 tell I the way to the near village ? " 
 she get up as she be speak , and put her hand to her bonnet to 
 adjust it , and then lay hold of her basket . 
 the man look at she with a slow bovine gaze , without give she any 
 answer , for some second . then he turn away and walk towards the 
 door of the hovel , but it be not till he get there that he stand still , 
 and , turn his shoulder half - round towards she , say , " aw , I can show 
 you the way to Norton , if you like . but what do you do gettin ' out o ' 
 the highroad ? " he add , with a tone of gruff reproof . " Y'ull be gettin ' 
 into mischief , if you dooant mind . " 
 " yes , " say Hetty , " I will not   do it again . I will keep in the road , if 
 you will be so good as show I how to get to it . " 
 " why dooant you keep where there be a finger - poasse an ' folk to ax the 
 way on ? " the man say , still more gruffly . " anybody ' ud think you be a 
 wild woman , an ' look at yer . " 
 Hetty be frighten at this gruff old man , and still more at this last 
 suggestion that she look like a wild woman . as she follow he out of 
 the hovel she think she would give he a sixpence for tell she the 
 way , and then he would not suppose she be wild . as he stop to point 
 out the road to she , she put her hand in her pocket to get the six - pence 
 ready , and when he be turn away , without say good - morning , 
 she hold it out to he and say , " thank you ; will you please to take 
 something for your trouble ? " 
 he look slowly at the sixpence , and then say , " I want none o ' your 
 money . you would well take care on't , else you will get it stool from yer , 
 if you go trapesin ' about the field like a mad woman a - thatway . " 
 the man leave she without further speech , and Hetty hold on her way . 
 another day have rise , and she must wander on . it be no use to think of 
 drown herself - she could not do it , at least while she have money leave 
 to buy food and strength to journey on . but the incident on her wake 
 this morning heighten her dread of that time when her money would be 
 all go ; she would have to sell her basket and clothe then , and she 
 would really look like a beggar or a wild woman , as the man have say . 
 the passionate joy in life she have feel in the night , after escape 
 from the brink of the black cold death in the pool , be go now . 
 life now , by the morning light , with the impression of that man 's hard 
 wonder look at she , be as full of dread as death - it be bad ; it 
 be a dread to which she feel chain , from which she shrink and shrink 
 as she do from the black pool , and yet could find no refuge from it . 
 she take out her money from her purse , and look at it . she have still 
 two - and - twenty shilling ; it would serve she for many day more , or it 
 would help she to get on fast to Stonyshire , within reach of 
 Dinah . the thought of Dinah urge itself more strongly now , since the 
 experience of the night have drive her shudder imagination away from 
 the pool . if it have be only go to Dinah - if nobody besides Dinah 
 would ever know - Hetty could have make up her mind to go to she . the 
 soft voice , the pity eye , would have draw she . but afterwards the 
 other people must know , and she could no more rush on that shame than 
 she could rush on death . 
 she must wander on and on , and wait for a low depth of despair to give 
 her courage . perhaps death would come to she , for she be get less 
 and less able to bear the day 's weariness . and yet - such be the strange 
 action of our soul , draw we by a lurking desire towards the very 
 end we dread - Hetty , when she set out again from Norton , ask the 
 straight road northward towards Stonyshire , and keep it all that 
 day . 
 Poor wander Hetty , with the rounded childish face and the hard , 
 unloving , despairing soul look out of it - with the narrow heart 
 and narrow thought , no room in they for any sorrow but her own , and 
 taste that sorrow with the more intense bitterness ! my heart bleed 
 for she as I see she toil along on her weary foot , or seat in 
 a cart , with her eye fix vacantly on the road before she , never 
 think or care whither it tend , till hunger come and make she 
 desire that a village may be near . 
 what will be the end , the end of her objectless wandering , apart from 
 all love , care for human being only through her pride , cling to 
 life only as the hunt wound brute cling to it ? 
 God preserve you and I from be the beginner of such misery ! 
 Chapter XXXVIII 
 the Quest 
 the first ten day after Hetty 's departure pass as quietly as any 
 other day with the family at the Hall Farm , and with Adam at his daily 
 work . they have expect Hetty to stay away a week or ten day at least , 
 perhaps a little long if Dinah come back with she , because there might 
 then be something to detain they at Snowfield . but when a fortnight have 
 pass they begin to feel a little surprise that Hetty do not return ; 
 she must surely have find it pleasanter to be with Dinah than any one 
 could have suppose . Adam , for his part , be get very impatient 
 to see she , and he resolve that , if she do not appear the next day 
  Saturday , he would set out on Sunday morning to fetch she . there 
 be no coach on a Sunday , but by set out before it be light , and 
 perhaps get a lift in a cart by the way , he would arrive pretty 
 early at Snowfield , and bring back Hetty the next day - Dinah too , if she 
 be come . it be quite time Hetty come home , and he would afford to 
 lose his Monday for the sake of bring she . 
 his project be quite approve at the Farm when he go there on 
 Saturday evening . Mrs. Poyser desire he emphatically not to come back 
 without Hetty , for she have be quite too long away , consider the 
 thing she have to get ready by the middle of March , and a week be 
 surely enough for any one to go out for their health . as for Dinah , Mrs. 
 Poyser have small hope of their bring she , unless they could make she 
 believe the folk at Hayslope be twice as miserable as the folk at 
 Snowfield . " though , " say Mrs. Poyser , by way of conclusion , " you might 
 tell she she be get but one aunt leave , and SHE be waste pretty nigh to 
 a shadder ; and we shall p'rhaps all be go twenty mile far off her 
 next Michaelmas , and shall die o ' broken heart among strange folk , and 
 leave the child fatherless and motherless . " 
 " Nay , nay , " say Mr. Poyser , who certainly have the air of a man 
 perfectly heart - whole , " it isna so bad as that . thee't look rarely 
 now , and get flesh every day . but I would be glad for Dinah t ' come , for 
 she would help thee wi ' the little un : they take t ' her wonderful . " 
 so at daybreak , on Sunday , Adam set off . Seth go with he the first 
 mile or two , for the thought of Snowfield and the possibility that Dinah 
 might come again make he restless , and the walk with Adam in the cold 
 morning air , both in their good clothe , help to give he a sense of 
 Sunday calm . it be the last morning in February , with a low grey sky , 
 and a slight hoar - frost on the green border of the road and on the black 
 hedge . they hear the gurgling of the full brooklet hurry down the 
 hill , and the faint twittering of the early bird . for they walk in 
 silence , though with a pleased sense of companionship . 
 " good - bye , lad , " say Adam , lay his hand on Seth 's shoulder and 
 look at he affectionately as they be about to part . " I wish thee 
 wast go all the way wi ' me , and as happy as I be . " 
 " I be content , Addy , I be content , " say Seth cheerfully . " I will be an old 
 bachelor , belike , and make a fuss wi ' thy child . " 
 the'y turn away from each other , and Seth walk leisurely homeward , 
 mentally repeat one of his favourite hymn - he be very fond of 
 hymn : 
 Dark and cheerless be the morn 
 unaccompanie by thee : 
 Joyless be the day 's return 
 till thy mercy 's beam I see : 
 till thou inward light impart , 
 Glad my eye and warm my heart . 
 visit , then , this soul of mine , 
 Pierce the gloom of sin and grief - 
 fill I , Radiancy Divine , 
 Scatter all my unbelief . 
 More and more thyself display , 
 shin to the perfect day . 
 Adam walk much fast , and any one come along the oakbourne road 
 at sunrise that morning must have have a pleasant sight in this tall 
 broad - cheste man , stride along with a carriage as upright and firm 
 as any soldier 's , glance with keen glad eye at the dark - blue hill as 
 they begin to show themselves on his way . seldom in Adam 's life have his 
 face be so free from any cloud of anxiety as it be this morning ; and 
 this freedom from care , as be usual with constructive practical mind 
 like his , make he all the more observant of the object round he 
 and all the more ready to gather suggestion from they towards his 
 own favourite plan and ingenious contrivance . his happy love - the 
 knowledge that his step be carry he near and nearer to Hetty , 
 who be so soon to be his - be to his thought what the sweet morning 
 air be to his sensation : it give he a consciousness of well - being 
 that make activity delightful . every now and then there be a rush of 
 more intense feeling towards she , which chase away other image than 
 Hetty ; and along with that would come a wonder thankfulness that 
 all this happiness be give to he - that this life of our have such 
 sweetness in it . for Adam have a devout mind , though he be perhaps 
 rather impatient of devout word , and his tenderness lie very close 
 to his reverence , so that the one could hardly be stir without the 
 other . but after feeling have well up and pour itself out in this 
 way , busy thought would come back with the great vigour ; and this 
 morning it be intent on scheme by which the road might be improve 
 that be so imperfect all through the country , and on picture all 
 the benefit that might come from the exertion of a single country 
 gentleman , if he would set himself to get the road make good in his 
 own district . 
 it seem a very short walk , the ten mile to Oakbourne , that pretty 
 town within sight of the blue hill , where he break - fast . after 
 this , the country grow barer and barer : no more rolling wood , no more 
 wide - branch tree near frequent homestead , no more bushy hedgerow , 
 but greystone wall intersect the meagre pasture , and dismal 
 wide - scatter greystone house on broken land where mine have be and 
 be no long . " a hungry land , " say Adam to himself . " I would rather go 
 south'ard , where they say it be as flat as a table , than come to live 
 here ; though if Dinah like to live in a country where she can be the 
 most comfort to folk , she be I ' the right to live o ' this side ; for she 
 must look as if she would come straight from heaven , like th ' angel in the 
 desert , to strengthen they as ha ' get nothing t ' eat . " and when at last 
 he come in sight of Snowfield , he think it look like a town that be 
 " fellow to the country , " though the stream through the valley where the 
 great mill stand give a pleasant greenness to the low field . the town 
 lay , grim , stony , and unsheltered , up the side of a steep hill , and Adam 
 do not go forward to it at present , for Seth have tell he where to find 
 Dinah . it be at a thatched cottage outside the town , a little way from 
 the mill - an old cottage , stand sideways towards the road , with a 
 little bit of potato - ground before it . here Dinah lodge with an elderly 
 couple ; and if she and Hetty happen to be out , Adam could learn where 
 they be go , or when they would be at home again . Dinah might be out 
 on some preach errand , and perhaps she would have leave Hetty at home . 
 Adam could not help hop this , and as he recognize the cottage by the 
 roadside before he , there shine out in his face that involuntary smile 
 which belong to the expectation of a near joy . 
 he hurry his step along the narrow causeway , and rap at the door . 
 it be open by a very clean old woman , with a slow palsied shake of 
 the head . 
 " be Dinah Morris at home ? " say Adam . 
 " Eh? ... no , " say the old woman , look up at this tall stranger with 
 a wonder that make she slow of speech than usual . " will you please to 
 come in ? " she add , retire from the door , as if recollect herself . 
 " why , ye're brother to the young man as come afore , arena ye ? " 
 " yes , " say Adam , enter . " that be Seth Bede . I be his brother Adam . 
 he tell I to give his respect to you and your good master . " 
 " Aye , the same t ' he . he be a gracious young man . an ' ye feature he , 
 on'y ye're dark . sit ye down I ' th ' arm - chair . my man isna come home 
 from meeting . " 
 Adam sit down patiently , not like to hurry the shake old woman with 
 question , but look eagerly towards the narrow twisting stair in one 
 corner , for he think it be possible Hetty might have hear his voice 
 and would come down they . 
 " so you be come to see Dinah Morris ? " say the old woman , stand 
 opposite to he . " an ' you didn ' know she be away from home , then ? " 
 " no , " say Adam , " but I think it likely she might be away , see as 
 it be Sunday . but the other young woman - be she at home , or go along 
 with Dinah ? " 
 the old woman look at Adam with a bewildered air . 
 " go along wi ' she ? " she say . " eh , Dinah 's go to Leeds , a big town 
 ye may ha ' heared on , where there be a many o ' the Lord 's people . she be 
 be go sin ' Friday be a fortnight : they send she the money for her 
 journey . you may see her room here , " she go on , open a door and not 
 notice the effect of her word on Adam . he rise and follow she , and 
 dart an eager glance into the little room with its narrow bed , the 
 portrait of Wesley on the wall , and the few book lie on the large 
 Bible . he have have an irrational hope that Hetty might be there . he could 
 not speak in the first moment after see that the room be empty ; an 
 undefined fear have seize he - something have happen to Hetty on the 
 journey . still the old woman be so slow of ; speech and apprehension , 
 that Hetty might be at Snowfield after all . 
 " it be a pity ye didna know , " she say . " have ye come from your own 
 country o ' purpose to see she ? " 
 " but Hetty - Hetty Sorrel , " say Adam , abruptly ; " where be she ? " 
 " I know nobody by that name , " say the old woman , wonderingly . " be it 
 anybody ye've   heared on at Snowfield ? " 
 " do there come no young woman here - very young and pretty - Friday be a 
 fortnight , to see Dinah Morris ? " 
 " Nay ; I'n see no young woman . " 
 " think ; be you quite sure ? a girl , eighteen year old , with dark eye 
 and dark curly hair , and a red cloak on , and a basket on her arm ? you 
 could not   forget she if you see she . " 
 " Nay ; Friday be a fortnight - it be the day as Dinah go away - there 
 come nobody . there be ne'er be nobody ask for she till you come , for 
 the folk about know as she be go . eh dear , eh dear , be there summat 
 the matter ? " 
 the old woman have see the ghastly look of fear in Adam 's face . but he 
 be not stun or confound : he be think eagerly where he could 
 inquire about Hetty . 
 " yes ; a young woman start from our country to see Dinah , Friday be a 
 fortnight . I come to fetch she back . I be afraid something have happen 
 to she . I can not   stop . good - bye . " 
 he hasten out of the cottage , and the old woman follow he to the 
 gate , watch he sadly with her shake head as he almost run towards 
 the town . he be go to inquire at the place where the oakbourne coach 
 stop . 
 no ! no young woman like Hetty have be see there . have any accident 
 happen to the coach a fortnight ago ? no . and there be no coach to 
 take he back to Oakbourne that day . well , he would walk : he could not 
 stay here , in wretched inaction . but the innkeeper , see that Adam be 
 in great anxiety , and enter into this new incident with the eagerness 
 of a man who pass a great deal of time with his hand in his pocket 
 look into an obstinately monotonous street , offer to take he back 
 to Oakbourne in his own " tax cart " this very evening . it be not five 
 o'clock ; there be plenty of time for Adam to take a meal and yet to get 
 to Oakbourne before ten o'clock . the innkeeper declare that he really 
 want to go to Oakbourne , and might as well go to - night ; he should have 
 all Monday before he then . Adam , after make an ineffectual attempt 
 to eat , put the food in his pocket , and , drink a draught of ale , 
 declare himself ready to set off . as they approach the cottage , it 
 occur to he that he would do well to learn from the old woman 
 where Dinah be to be find in Leeds : if there be trouble at the Hall 
 Farm - he only half - admit the foreboding that there would be - the 
 poyser might like to send for Dinah . but Dinah have not leave any 
 address , and the old woman , whose memory for name be infirm , could not 
 recall the name of the " blessed woman " who be Dinah 's chief friend in 
 the Society at Leeds . 
 during that long , long journey in the tax cart , there be time for 
 all the conjecture of importunate fear and struggle hope . in the very 
 first shock of discover that Hetty have not be to Snowfield , the 
 thought of Arthur have dart through Adam like a sharp pang , but he 
 try for some time to ward off its return by busy himself with mode 
 of account for the alarming fact , quite apart from that intolerable 
 think . some accident have happen . Hetty have , by some strange chance , 
 get into a wrong vehicle from Oakbourne : she have be take ill , and do 
 not want to frighten they by let they know . but this frail fence 
 of vague improbability be soon hurl down by a rush of distinct 
 agonizing fear . Hetty have be deceive herself in think that she 
 could love and marry he : she have be love Arthur all the while ; and 
 now , in her desperation at the nearness of their marriage , she have run 
 away . and she be go to he . the old indignation and jealousy 
 rise again , and prompt the suspicion that Arthur have be deal 
 falsely - have write to Hetty - have tempt she to come to he - be 
 unwilling , after all , that she should belong to another man besides 
 himself . perhaps the whole thing have be contrive by he , and he have 
 give her direction how to follow he to Ireland - for Adam know that 
 Arthur have be go thither three week ago , have recently learn it 
 at the Chase . every sad look of Hetty 's , since she have be engage 
 to Adam , return upon he now with all the exaggeration of painful 
 retrospect . he have be foolishly sanguine and confident . the poor thing 
 have not   perhaps know her own mind for a long while ; have think that 
 she could forget Arthur ; have be momentarily draw towards the man who 
 offer she a protect , faithful love . he could not   bear to blame she : 
 she never mean to cause he this dreadful pain . the blame lie with 
 that man who have selfishly play with her heart - have perhaps even 
 deliberately lure she away . 
 at Oakbourne , the ostler at the Royal Oak remember such a young woman 
 as Adam describe get out of the Treddleston coach more than a 
 fortnight ago - be not   likely to forget such a pretty lass as that in 
 a hurry - be sure she have not go on by the Buxton coach that go 
 through Snowfield , but have lose sight of she while he go away with the 
 horse and have never set eye on she again . Adam then go straight to 
 the house from which the stonition coach start : Stoniton be the 
 most obvious place for Hetty to go to first , whatever might be 
 her destination , for she would hardly venture on any but the chief 
 coach - road . she have be notice here too , and be remember to have 
 sit on the box by the coachman ; but the coachman could not be see , for 
 another man have be drive on that road in his stead the last three or 
 four day . he could probably be see at Stoniton , through inquiry at the 
 inn where the coach put up . so the anxious heart - stricken Adam must of 
 necessity wait and try to rest till morning - nay , till eleven o'clock , 
 when the coach start . 
 at Stoniton another delay occur , for the old coachman who have drive 
 Hetty would not be in the town again till night . when he do come he 
 remember Hetty well , and remember his own joke address to she , 
 quote it many time to Adam , and observe with equal frequency that 
 he think there be something more than common , because Hetty have not 
 laugh when he joke she . but he declare , as the people have do at 
 the inn , that he have lose sight of Hetty directly she get down . part of 
 the next morning be consume in inquiry at every house in the town 
 from which a coach start -   all in vain , for you know Hetty do not 
 start from Stonition by coach , but on foot in the grey morning   - and 
 then in walk out to the first toll - gate on the different line of 
 road , in the forlorn hope of find some recollection of she there . no , 
 she be not to be trace any far ; and the next hard task for Adam 
 be to go home and carry the wretched tiding to the Hall Farm . as to 
 what he should do beyond that , he have come to two distinct resolution 
 amidst the tumult of thought and feeling which be go on within he 
 while he go to and fro . he would not mention what he know of Arthur 
 Donnithorne 's behaviour to Hetty till there be a clear necessity for 
 it : it be still possible Hetty might come back , and the disclosure 
 might be an injury or an offence to she . and as soon as he have be home 
 and do what be necessary there to prepare for his further absence , he 
 would start off to Ireland : if he find no trace of Hetty on the road , 
 he would go straight to Arthur Donnithorne and make himself certain 
 how far he be acquaint with her movement . several time the thought 
 occur to he that he would consult Mr. Irwine , but that would be 
 useless unless he tell he all , and so betray the secret about Arthur . 
 it seem strange that Adam , in the incessant occupation of his mind 
 about Hetty , should never have alight on the probability that she have 
 go to Windsor , ignorant that Arthur be no long there . perhaps the 
 reason be that he could not conceive Hetty 's throw herself on Arthur 
 uncalled ; he imagine no cause that could have drive she to such 
 a step , after that letter write in August . there be but two 
 alternative in his mind : either Arthur have write to she again and 
 entice she away , or she have simply flee from her approach marriage 
 with himself because she find , after all , she could not love he well 
 enough , and yet be afraid of her friend ' anger if she retract . 
 with this last determination on his mind , of go straight to Arthur , 
 the thought that he have spend two day in inquiry which have prove to 
 be almost useless , be torture to Adam ; and yet , since he would not 
 tell the poyser his conviction as to where Hetty be go , or his 
 intention to follow her thither , he must be able to say to they that he 
 have trace she as far as possible . 
 it be after twelve o'clock on Tuesday night when Adam reach 
 Treddleston ; and , unwilling to disturb his mother and Seth , and also 
 to encounter their question at that hour , he throw himself without 
 undressing on a bed at the " Waggon Overthrown , " and sleep hard from pure 
 weariness . not more than four hour , however , for before five o'clock he 
 set out on his way home in the faint morning twilight . he always keep a 
 key of the workshop door in his pocket , so that he could let himself in ; 
 and he wish to enter without awake his mother , for he be anxious 
 to avoid tell she the new trouble himself by see Seth first , and 
 ask he to tell she when it should be necessary . he walk gently 
 along the yard , and turn the key gently in the door ; but , as he 
 expect , Gyp , who lie in the workshop , give a sharp bark . it subside 
 when he see Adam , hold up his finger at he to impose silence , and 
 in his dumb , tailless joy he must content himself with rub his body 
 against his master 's leg . 
 Adam be too heart - sick to take notice of Gyp 's fondling . he throw 
 himself on the bench and star dully at the wood and the sign of work 
 around he , wonder if he should ever come to feel pleasure in they 
 again , while Gyp , dimly aware that there be something wrong with his 
 master , lay his rough grey head on Adam 's knee and wrinkle his brow 
 to look up at he . Hitherto , since Sunday afternoon , Adam have be 
 constantly among strange people and in strange place , have no 
 association with the detail of his daily life , and now that by the 
 light of this new morning he be come back to his home and surround 
 by the familiar object that seem for ever rob of their charm , the 
 reality - the hard , inevitable reality of his trouble press upon he 
 with a new weight . right before he be an unfinished chest of drawer , 
 which he have be make in spare moment for Hetty 's use , when his home 
 should be her . 
 Seth have not hear Adam 's entrance , but he have be rouse by Gyp 's 
 bark , and Adam hear he move about in the room above , dress 
 himself . Seth 's first thought be about his brother : he would come 
 home to - day , surely , for the business would be want he sadly by 
 to - morrow , but it be pleasant to think he have have a long holiday than 
 he have expect . and would Dinah come too ? Seth feel that that be the 
 great happiness he could look forward to for himself , though he have 
 no hope leave that she would ever love he well enough to marry he ; but 
 he have often say to himself , it be well to be Dinah 's friend and 
 brother than any other woman 's husband . if he could but be always near 
 she , instead of live so far off ! 
 he come downstairs and open the inner door lead from the kitchen 
 into the workshop , intend to let out Gyp ; but he stand still in 
 the doorway , smite with a sudden shock at the sight of Adam seat 
 listlessly on the bench , pale , unwashed , with sunken blank eye , almost 
 like a drunkard in the morning . but Seth feel in an instant what the 
 mark mean - not drunkenness , but some great calamity . Adam look up at 
 he without speak , and Seth move forward towards the bench , himself 
 tremble so that speech do not come readily . 
 " God have mercy on we , Addy , " he say , in a low voice , sit down on 
 the bench beside Adam , " what be it ? " 
 Adam be unable to speak . the strong man , accustom to suppress the 
 sign of sorrow , have feel his heart swell like a child 's at this first 
 approach of sympathy . he fall on Seth 's neck and sob . 
 Seth be prepare for the bad now , for , even in his recollection of 
 their boyhood , Adam have never sob before . 
 " be it death , Adam ? be she dead ? " he ask , in a low tone , when Adam 
 raise his head and be recover himself . 
 " no , lad ; but she be go - go away from we . she be never be to 
 Snowfield . Dinah 's be go to Leeds ever since last Friday be a 
 fortnight , the very day Hetty set out . I can not   find out where she go 
 after she get to Stoniton . " 
 Seth be silent from utter astonishment : he know nothing that could 
 suggest to he a reason for Hetty 's go away . 
 " Hast any notion what she be do it for ? " he say , at last . 
 " she can not   ha ' love I . she do not   like our marriage when it come 
 nigh - that must be it , " say Adam . he have determine to mention no 
 further reason . 
 " I hear Mother stir , " say Seth . " must we tell she ? " 
 " no , not yet , " say Adam , rise from the bench and push the hair 
 from his face , as if he want to rouse himself . " I can not   have she tell 
 yet ; and I must set out on another journey directly , after I have   be to 
 the village and th ' Hall Farm . I can not   tell thee where I be go , and 
 thee must say to she I be go on business as nobody be to know anything 
 about . I will go and wash myself now . " Adam move towards the door of the 
 workshop , but after a step or two he turn round , and , meet Seth 's 
 eye with a calm sad glance , he say , " I must take all the money out 
 o ' the tin box , lad ; but if anything happen to I , all the rest will be 
 thine , to take care o ' Mother with . " 
 Seth be pale and tremble : he feel there be some terrible secret 
 under all this . " brother , " he say , faintly - he never call Adam 
 " Brother " except in solemn moment - " I do not   believe you will do anything 
 as you can not   ask God 's blessing on . " 
 " nay , lad , " say Adam , " do not   be afraid . I be for do nought but what be 
 a man 's duty . " 
 the thought that if he betray his trouble to his mother , she would 
 only distress he by word , half of blunder affection , half of 
 irrepressible triumph that Hetty prove as unfit to be his wife as she 
 have always foresee , bring back some of his habitual firmness and 
 self - command . he have feel ill on his journey home - he tell she when she 
 come down - have stay all night at Tredddleston for that reason ; and a 
 bad headache , that still hang about he this morning , account for his 
 paleness and heavy eye . 
 he determine to go to the village , in the first place , attend to his 
 business for an hour , and give notice to Burge of his be oblige to 
 go on a journey , which he must beg he not to mention to any one ; for 
 he wish to avoid go to the Hall Farm near breakfast - time , when the 
 child and servant would be in the house - place , and there must be 
 exclamation in their hearing about his have return without Hetty . 
 he wait until the clock strike nine before he leave the work - yard at 
 the village , and set off , through the field , towards the Farm . it be 
 an immense relief to he , as he come near the Home Close , to see Mr. 
 Poyser advance towards he , for this would spare he the pain of go 
 to the house . Mr. Poyser be walk briskly this March morning , with a 
 sense of spring business on his mind : he be go to cast the master 's 
 eye on the shoeing of a new cart - horse , carry his spud as a useful 
 companion by the way . his surprise be great when he catch sight of 
 Adam , but he be not a man give to presentiment of evil . 
 " why , Adam , lad , is't you ? have ye be all this time away and not 
 bring the lass back , after all ? where be they ? " 
 " no , I have   not bring them , " say Adam , turn round , to indicate that 
 he wish to walk back with Mr. Poyser . 
 " why , " say Martin , look with sharp attention at Adam , " ye look 
 bad . be there anything happen ? " 
 " yes , " say Adam , heavily . " a sad thing 's happen . I didna find Hetty 
 at Snowfield . " 
 Mr. Poyser 's good - natured face show sign of troubled astonishment . 
 " not find she ? what be happen to she ? " he say , his thought fly at 
 once to bodily accident . 
 " that I can not   tell , whether anything be happen to she . she never go 
 to Snowfield - she take the coach to Stoniton , but I can not   learn nothing 
 of she after she get down from the Stoniton coach . " 
 " why , you donna mean she be run away ? " say Martin , stand still , so 
 puzzle and bewilder that the fact do not yet make itself feel as a 
 trouble by he . 
 " she must ha ' do , " say Adam . " she do not   like our marriage when it 
 come to the point - that must be it . she would mistook her feeling . " 
 Martin be silent for a minute or two , look on the ground and root 
 up the grass with his spud , without know what he be do . his usual 
 slowness be always treble when the subject of speech be painful . at 
 last he look up , right in Adam 's face , say , " then she didna deserve 
 t ' ha ' ye , my lad . an ' I feel I ' fault myself , for she be my niece , and 
 I be allay hot for her marr'ing ye . there be no amend I can make ye , 
 lad - the more be the pity : it be a sad cut - up for ye , I doubt . " 
 Adam could say nothing ; and Mr. Poyser , after pursue his walk for a 
 little while , go on , " I will be bind she be go after try to get a 
 lady 's maid 's place , for she would get that in her head half a year ago , and 
 want I to gi ' my consent . but I would think well on she " - he add , 
 shake his head slowly and sadly - " I would think well on she , nor to 
 look for this , after she would gi'en y ' her word , an ' everything be get 
 ready . " 
 Adam have the strong motif for encourage this supposition in Mr. 
 Poyser , and he even try to believe that it might possibly be true . he 
 have no warrant for the certainty that she be go to Arthur . 
 " it be well it should be so , " he say , as quietly as he could , " if 
 she feel she could not   like I for a husband . well run away before than 
 repent after . I hope you will not   look harshly on she if she come back , as 
 she may do if she find it hard to get on away from home . " 
 " I canna look on she as I have   do before , " say Martin decisively . 
 " she be act bad by you , and by all of we . but I will not turn my back on 
 she : she be but a young un , and it be the first harm I have   know on she . 
 it will be a hard job for I to tell her aunt . why didna Dinah come back 
 wi ' ye ? she would ha ' help to pacify her aunt a bit . " 
 " Dinah be not   at Snowfield . she be be go to Leeds this fortnight , and 
 I could not   learn from th ' old woman any direction where she be at leed , 
 else I should ha ' bring it you . " 
 " she have a deal well be stay wi ' her own kin , " say Mr. Poyser , 
 indignantly , " than go preach among strange folk a - that'n . " 
 " I must leave you now , Mr. Poyser , " say Adam , " for I have   a deal to see 
 to . " 
 " Aye , you would well be after your business , and I must tell the missis when 
 I go home . it be a hard job . " 
 " but , " say Adam , " I beg particular , you will keep what be happen quiet 
 for a week or two . I have   not tell my mother yet , and there be no knowing 
 how thing may turn out . " 
 " aye , aye ; least say , soon mend . We'n no need to say why the match 
 be break off , an ' we may hear of she after a bit . shake hand wi ' me , 
 lad : I wish I could make thee amend . " 
 there be something in Martin Poyser 's throat at that moment which 
 cause he to bring out those scanty word in rather a broken fashion . 
 yet Adam know what they mean all the well , and the two honest man 
 grasp each other 's hard hand in mutual understanding . 
 there be nothing now to hinder Adam from set off . he have tell Seth 
 to go to the Chase and leave a message for the squire , say that Adam 
 Bede have be oblige to start off suddenly on a journey - and to say as 
 much , and no more , to any one else who make inquiry about he . if the 
 Poysers learn that he be go away again , Adam know they would infer 
 that he be go in search of Hetty . 
 he have intend to go right on his way from the Hall Farm , but now the 
 impulse which have frequently visit he before - to go to Mr. Irwine , 
 and make a confidant of he - recur with the new force which belong 
 to a last opportunity . he be about to start on a long journey - a 
 difficult one - by sea - and no soul would know where he be go . if 
 anything happen to he ? or , if he absolutely need help in any matter 
 concern Hetty ? Mr. Irwine be to be trust ; and the feeling which 
 make Adam shrink from tell anything which be her secret must give 
 way before the need there be that she should have some one else besides 
 himself who would be prepare to defend she in the bad extremity . 
 Towards Arthur , even though he might have incur no new guilt , Adam 
 feel that he be not bind to keep silence when Hetty 's interest call 
 on he to speak . 
 " I must do it , " say Adam , when these thought , which have spread 
 themselves through hour of his sad journeying , now rush upon he in 
 an instant , like a wave that have be slowly gather ; " it be the right 
 thing . I can not   stand alone in this way any long . " 
 chapter XXXIX 
 the Tidings 
 ADAM turn his face towards Broxton and walk with his swift 
 stride , look at his watch with the fear that Mr. Irwine might be go 
 out - hunting , perhaps . the fear and haste together produce a state of 
 strong excitement before he reach the rectory gate , and outside it he 
 see the deep mark of a recent hoof on the gravel . 
 but the hoof be turn towards the gate , not away from it , and though 
 there be a horse against the stable door , it be not Mr. Irwine 's : it 
 have evidently have a journey this morning , and must belong to some one 
 who have come on business . Mr. Irwine be at home , then ; but Adam could 
 hardly find breath and calmness to tell Carroll that he want to speak 
 to the rector . the double suffering of certain and uncertain sorrow have 
 begin to shake the strong man . the butler look at he wonderingly , as 
 he throw himself on a bench in the passage and star absently at the 
 clock on the opposite wall . the master have somebody with he , he say , 
 but he hear the study door open - the stranger seem to be come out , 
 and as Adam be in a hurry , he would let the master know at once . 
 Adam sit look at the clock : the minute - hand be hurry along the 
 last five minute to ten with a loud , hard , indifferent tick , and Adam 
 watch the movement and listen to the sound as if he have have some 
 reason for do so . in our time of bitter suffering there be almost 
 always these pause , when our consciousness be benumb to everything 
 but some trivial perception or sensation . it be as if semi - idiocy come 
 to give we rest from the memory and the dread which refuse to leave we 
 in our sleep . 
 Carroll , come back , recall Adam to the sense of his burden . he 
 be to go into the study immediately . " I can not   think what that strange 
 person 's come about , " the butler add , from mere incontinence of 
 remark , as he precede Adam to the door , " he be go I ' the dining - room . 
 and master look unaccountable - as if he be frightened . " Adam take no 
 notice of the word : he could not care about other people 's business . 
 but when he enter the study and look in Mr. Irwine 's face , he feel 
 in an instant that there be a new expression in it , strangely different 
 from the warm friendliness it have always wear for he before . a letter 
 lie open on the table , and Mr. Irwine 's hand be on it , but the change 
 glance he cast on Adam could not be owe entirely to preoccupation with 
 some disagreeable business , for he be look eagerly towards the door , 
 as if Adam 's entrance be a matter of poignant anxiety to he . 
 " you want to speak to I , Adam , " he say , in that low constrainedly 
 quiet tone which a man use when he be determined to suppress agitation . 
 " sit down here . " he point to a chair just opposite to he , at no more 
 than a yard 's distance from his own , and Adam sit down with a sense 
 that this cold manner of Mr. Irwine 's give an additional unexpected 
 difficulty to his disclosure . but when Adam have make up his mind to 
 a measure , he be not the man to renounce it for any but imperative 
 reason . 
 " I come to you , sir , " he say , " as the gentleman I look up to most of 
 anybody . I have   something very painful to tell you - something as it will 
 pain you to hear as well as I to tell . but if I speak o ' the wrong 
 other people have do , you will see I do not   speak till I would good reason . " 
 Mr. Irwine nod slowly , and Adam go on rather tremulously , " you be 
 t ' ha ' marry I and Hetty Sorrel , you know , sir , o ' the fifteenth o ' 
 this month . I think she love I , and I be th ' happy man I ' the 
 parish . but a dreadful blow 's come upon I . " 
 Mr. Irwine start up from his chair , as if involuntarily , but then , 
 determine to control himself , walk to the window and look out . 
 " she be go away , sir , and we do not   know where . she say she be go 
 to Snowfield o ' Friday be a fortnight , and I go last Sunday to 
 fetch she back ; but she would never be there , and she take the coach to 
 Stoniton , and beyond that I can not   trace she . but now I be go a long 
 journey to look for she , and I can not   trust t ' anybody but you where I be 
 go . " 
 Mr. Irwine come back from the window and sit down . 
 " have you no idea of the reason why she go away ? " he say . 
 " it be plain enough she do not   want to marry I , sir , " say Adam . " she 
 do not   like it when it come so near . but that be not   all , I doubt . 
 there be something else I must tell you , sir . there be somebody else 
 concern besides I . " 
 a gleam of something - it be almost like relief or joy - come across the 
 eager anxiety of Mr. Irwine 's face at that moment . Adam be look on 
 the ground , and pause a little : the next word be hard to speak . 
 but when he go on , he lift up his head and look straight at Mr. 
 Irwine . he would do the thing he have resolve to do , without flinch . 
 " you know who be the man I have   reckon my great friend , " he say , " and 
 use to be proud to think as I should pass my life I ' work for he , 
 and have feel so ever since we be lad .... " 
 Mr. Irwine , as if all self - control have forsake he , grasp Adam 's arm , 
 which lie on the table , and , clutch it tightly like a man in pain , 
 say , with pale lip and a low hurried voice , " no , Adam , no - do not   say 
 it , for God 's sake ! " 
 Adam , surprised at the violence of Mr. Irwine 's feeling , repent of the 
 word that have pass his lip and sit in distressed silence . the grasp 
 on his arm gradually relax , and Mr. Irwine throw himself back in his 
 chair , say , " go on - I must know it . " 
 " that man play with Hetty 's feeling , and behave to she as he would no 
 right to do to a girl in her station o ' life - make her present and use 
 to go and meet she out a - walking . I find it out only two day before 
 he go away - find he a - kiss she as they be part in the Grove . 
 there would be nothing say between I and Hetty then , though I would love 
 she for a long while , and she know it . but I reproach he with his 
 wrong action , and word and blow pass between we ; and he say 
 solemnly to I , after that , as it have be all nonsense and no more 
 than a bit o ' flirting . but I make he write a letter to tell Hetty 
 he have mean nothing , for I see clear enough , sir , by several thing as 
 I have not   understand at the time , as he would got hold of her heart , and 
 I think she would belike go on thinking of he and never come to love 
 another man as want to marry she . and I give she the letter , and she 
 seem to bear it all after a while well than I have expect ... and she 
 behave kind and kinder to I ... I daresay she do not   know her own 
 feeling then , poor thing , and they come back upon she when it be too 
 late ... I do not   want to blame she ... I can not   think as she mean to deceive 
 I . but I be encourage to think she love I , and - you know the rest , 
 sir . but it be on my mind as he be be false to I , and ' tice she away , 
 and she be go to he - and I be go now to see , for I can never go to 
 work again till I know what be become of she . " 
 during Adam 's narrative , Mr. Irwine have have time to recover his 
 self - mastery in spite of the painful thought that crowd upon he . 
 it be a bitter remembrance to he now - that morning when Arthur 
 breakfast with he and seem as if he be on the verge of a 
 confession . it be plain enough now what he have want to confess . and 
 if their word have take another turn ... if he himself have be less 
 fastidious about intruding on another man 's secret ... it be cruel 
 to think how thin a film have shut out rescue from all this guilt and 
 misery . he see the whole history now by that terrible illumination which 
 the present shed back upon the past . but every other feeling as it 
 rush upon his be throw into abeyance by pity , deep respectful pity , 
 for the man who sit before he - already so bruised , go forth with sad 
 blind resignedness to an unreal sorrow , while a real one be close 
 upon he , too far beyond the range of common trial for he ever to have 
 fear it . his own agitation be quell by a certain awe that come 
 over we in the presence of a great anguish , for the anguish he must 
 inflict on Adam be already present to he . again he put his hand on 
 the arm that lie on the table , but very gently this time , as he say 
 solemnly : 
 " Adam , my dear friend , you have have some hard trial in your life . you 
 can bear sorrow manfully , as well as act manfully . God require both 
 task at our hand . and there be a heavy sorrow come upon you than 
 any you have yet know . but you be not guilty - you have not the bad 
 of all sorrow . God help he who have ! " 
 the two pale face look at each other ; in Adam 's there be tremble 
 suspense , in Mr. Irwine 's hesitating , shrink pity . but he go on . 
 " I have have news of Hetty this morning . she be not go to he . she be 
 in Stonyshire - at Stoniton . " 
 Adam start up from his chair , as if he think he could have leap 
 to she that moment . but Mr. Irwine lay hold of his arm again and say , 
 persuasively , " wait , Adam , wait . " so he sit down . 
 " she be in a very unhappy position - one which will make it bad for you 
 to find she , my poor friend , than to have lose she for ever . " 
 Adam 's lip move tremulously , but no sound come . they move again , and 
 he whisper , " tell I . " 
 " she have be arrest ... she be in prison . " 
 it be as if an insulting blow have bring back the spirit of resistance 
 into Adam . the blood rush to his face , and he say , loudly and 
 sharply , " for what ? " 
 " for a great crime - the murder of her child . " 
 " it can't be ! " Adam almost shout , start up from his chair and 
 make a stride towards the door ; but he turn round again , set his 
 back against the bookcase , and look fiercely at Mr. Irwine . " it be not 
 possible . she never have a child . she can not   be guilty . who say it ? " 
 " God grant she may be innocent , Adam . we can still hope she be . " 
 " but who say she be guilty ? " say Adam violently . " tell I everything . " 
 " here be a letter from the magistrate before whom she be take , and the 
 constable who arrest she be in the dining - room . she will not confess 
 her name or where she come from ; but I fear , I fear , there can be no 
 doubt it be Hetty . the description of her person correspond , only 
 that she be say to look very pale and ill . she have a small red - leather 
 pocket - book in her pocket with two name write in it - one at the 
 beginning , ' Hetty Sorrel , Hayslope , ' and the other near the end , ' Dinah 
 Morris , Snowfield . ' she will not say which be her own name - she deny 
 everything , and will answer no question , and application have be make 
 to I , as a magistrate , that I may take measure for identify she , 
 for it be think probable that the name which stand first be her own 
 name . " 
 " but what proof have they get against she , if it be Hetty ? " say Adam , 
 still violently , with an effort that seem to shake his whole frame . 
 " I will not believe it . it could not   ha ' be , and none of we know it . " 
 " terrible proof that she be under the temptation to commit the crime ; 
 but we have room to hope that she do not really commit it . try and read 
 that letter , Adam . " 
 Adam take the letter between his shake hand and try to fix his eye 
 steadily on it . Mr. Irwine meanwhile go out to give some order . when 
 he come back , Adam 's eye be still on the first page - he could not 
 read - he could not put the word together and make out what they mean . 
 he throw it down at last and clench his fist . 
 " it be his doing , " he say ; " if there be be any crime , it be at his door , 
 not at her . he teach she to deceive - he deceive I first . let them put 
 HIM on his trial - let he stand in court beside she , and I will tell them 
 how he get hold of her heart , and ' tice her t ' evil , and then lie to 
 I . be he to go free , while they lie all the punishment on she ... so weak 
 and young ? " 
 the image call up by these last word give a new direction to poor 
 Adam 's maddened feeling . he be silent , look at the corner of the 
 room as if he see something there . then he burst out again , in a tone of 
 appeal anguish , " I can not   bear it ... o God , it be too hard to lay upon 
 I - it be too hard to think she be wicked . " 
 Mr. Irwine have sit down again in silence . he be too wise to utter 
 soothe word at present , and indeed , the sight of Adam before he , 
 with that look of sudden age which sometimes come over a young face in 
 moment of terrible emotion - the hard bloodless look of the skin , the 
 deep line about the quivering mouth , the furrow in the brow - the sight 
 of this strong firm man shatter by the invisible stroke of sorrow , 
 move he so deeply that speech be not easy . Adam stand motionless , 
 with his eye vacantly fix in this way for a minute or two ; in that 
 short space he be live through all his love again . 
 " she can not   ha ' do it , " he say , still without move his eye , as 
 if he be only talk to himself : " it be fear make she hide it ... I 
 forgive she for deceive I ... I forgive thee , Hetty ... thee wast 
 deceive too ... it be go hard wi ' thee , my poor Hetty ... but they will 
 never make I believe it . " 
 he be silent again for a few moment , and then he say , with fierce 
 abruptness , " I will go to he - I will bring he back - I will make he go and 
 look at she in her misery - he shall look at she till he can not   forget 
 it - it shall follow he night and day - as long as he live it shall 
 follow he - he shall not   escape wi ' lie this time - I will fetch he , I will 
 drag he myself . " 
 in the act of go towards the door , Adam pause automatically and 
 look about for his hat , quite unconscious where he be or who be 
 present with he . Mr. Irwine have follow he , and now take he by the 
 arm , say , in a quiet but decide tone , " no , Adam , no ; I be sure you 
 will wish to stay and see what good can be do for she , instead of 
 go on a useless errand of vengeance . the punishment will surely fall 
 without your aid . besides , he be no long in Ireland . he must be on his 
 way home - or would be , long before you arrive , for his grandfather , I 
 know , write for he to come at least ten day ago . I want you now to go 
 with I to Stoniton . I have order a horse for you to ride with we , as 
 soon as you can compose yourself . " 
 while Mr. Irwine be speak , Adam recover his consciousness of the 
 actual scene . he rub his hair off his forehead and listen . 
 " remember , " Mr. Irwine go on , " there be other to think of , and 
 act for , besides yourself , Adam : there be Hetty 's friend , the good 
 Poysers , on whom this stroke will fall more heavily than I can bear to 
 think . I expect it from your strength of mind , Adam - from your sense of 
 duty to God and man - that you will try to act as long as action can be 
 of any use . " 
 in reality , Mr. Irwine propose this journey to Stoniton for Adam 's 
 own sake . Movement , with some object before he , be the good mean of 
 counteract the violence of suffer in these first hour . 
 " you will go with I to Stoniton , Adam ? " he say again , after a moment 's 
 pause . " we have to see if it be really Hetty who be there , you know . " 
 " yes , sir , " say Adam , " I will do what you think right . but the folk at 
 th ' Hall Farm ? " 
 " I wish they not to know till I return to tell they myself . I shall 
 have ascertain thing then which I be uncertain about now , and I shall 
 return as soon as possible . come now , the horse be ready . " 
 Chapter XL 
 the Bitter Waters Spread 
 MR . IRWINE return from Stoniton in a post - chaise that night , and the 
 first word Carroll say to he , as he enter the house , be , that 
 Squire Donnithorne be dead - find dead in his bed at ten o'clock that 
 morning - and that Mrs. Irwine desire he to say she should be awake 
 when Mr. Irwine come home , and she beg he not to go to bed without 
 see she . 
 " well , Dauphin , " Mrs. Irwine say , as her son enter her room , " you be 
 come at last . so the old gentleman 's fidgetiness and low spirit , which 
 make he send for Arthur in that sudden way , really mean something . I 
 suppose Carroll have tell you that Donnithorne be find dead in his bed 
 this morning . you will believe my prognostication another time , though 
 I daresay I shall not   live to prognosticate anything but my own death . " 
 " what have they do about Arthur ? " say Mr. Irwine . " sent a messenger 
 to await he at Liverpool ? " 
 " yes , Ralph be go before the news be bring to we . Dear Arthur , I 
 shall live now to see he master at the Chase , and make good time on 
 the estate , like a generous - hearted fellow as he be . he will be as happy 
 as a king now . " 
 Mr. Irwine could not help give a slight groan : he be wear with 
 anxiety and exertion , and his mother 's light word be almost 
 intolerable . 
 " what be you so dismal about , Dauphin ? be there any bad news ? or be 
 you think of the danger for Arthur in cross that frightful Irish 
 Channel at this time of year ? " 
 " no , Mother , I be not think of that ; but I be not prepared to rejoice 
 just now . " 
 " you have   be worry by this law business that you have   be to Stoniton 
 about . what in the world be it , that you can not   tell I ? " 
 " you will know by and by , mother . it would not be right for I to tell 
 you at present . good - night : you will sleep now you have no long anything 
 to listen for . " 
 Mr. Irwine give up his intention of send a letter to meet Arthur , 
 since it would not now hasten his return : the news of his grandfather 's 
 death would bring he as soon as he could possibly come . he could go 
 to bed now and get some needful rest , before the time come for the 
 morning 's heavy duty of carry his sicken news to the Hall Farm and 
 to Adam 's home . 
 Adam himself be not come back from Stoniton , for though he shrink from 
 see Hetty , he could not bear to go to a distance from she again . 
 " it be no use , sir , " he say to the rector , " it be no use for I to go 
 back . I can not   go to work again while she be here , and I could not   bear 
 the sight o ' the thing and folk round home . I will take a bit of a room 
 here , where I can see the prison wall , and perhaps I shall get , in 
 time , to bear see she . " 
 Adam have not be shake in his belief that Hetty be innocent of the 
 crime she be charge with , for Mr. Irwine , feel that the belief in 
 her guilt would be a crush addition to Adam 's load , have keep from he 
 the fact which leave no hope in his own mind . there be not any reason 
 for thrust the whole burden on Adam at once , and Mr. Irwine , at 
 parting , only say , " if the evidence should tell too strongly against 
 she , Adam , we may still hope for a pardon . her youth and other 
 circumstance will be a plea for she . " 
 " ah , and it be right people should know how she be tempt into the 
 wrong way , " say Adam , with bitter earnestness . " it be right they should 
 know it be a fine gentleman make love to she , and turn her head wi ' 
 notion . you will remember , sir , you have   promise to tell my mother , and 
 Seth , and the people at the farm , who it be as lead she wrong , else 
 they will think hard of she than she deserve . you will be do she a 
 hurt by spar he , and I hold he the guilty before God , let she 
 ha ' do what she may . if you spare he , I will expose he ! " 
 " I think your demand be just , Adam , " say Mr. Irwine , " but when you be 
 calm , you will judge Arthur more mercifully . I say nothing now , only 
 that his punishment be in other hand than our . " 
 Mr. Irwine feel it hard upon he that he should have to tell of Arthur 's 
 sad part in the story of sin and sorrow - he who care for Arthur with 
 fatherly affection , who have care for he with fatherly pride . but he 
 see clearly that the secret must be know before long , even apart from 
 Adam 's determination , since it be scarcely to be suppose that Hetty 
 would persist to the end in her obstinate silence . he make up his mind 
 to withhold nothing from the Poysers , but to tell they the bad at 
 once , for there be no time to rob the tiding of their suddenness . 
 Hetty 's trial must come on at the Lent assize , and they be to be 
 hold at Stoniton the next week . it be scarcely to be hop that Martin 
 Poyser could escape the pain of be call as a witness , and it be 
 well he should know everything as long beforehand as possible . 
 before ten o'clock on Thursday morning the home at the Hall Farm be 
 a house of mourning for a misfortune feel to be bad than death . the 
 sense of family dishonour be too keen even in the kind - hearte Martin 
 Poyser the young to leave room for any compassion towards Hetty . he 
 and his father be simple - minded farmer , proud of their untarnished 
 character , proud that they come of a family which have hold up its head 
 and pay its way as far back as its name be in the parish register ; 
 and Hetty have bring disgrace on they all - disgrace that could never 
 be wipe out . that be the all - conquer feeling in the mind both of 
 father and son - the scorching sense of disgrace , which neutralise all 
 other sensibility - and Mr. Irwine be strike with surprise to observe 
 that Mrs. Poyser be less severe than her husband . we be often startle 
 by the severity of mild people on exceptional occasion ; the reason be , 
 that mild people be most liable to be under the yoke of traditional 
 impression . 
 " I be willing to pay any money as be want towards try to bring she 
 off , " say Martin the young when Mr. Irwine be go , while the old 
 grandfather be cry in the opposite chair , " but I will not go nigh she , 
 nor ever see she again , by my own will . she be make our bread bitter to 
 we for all our life to come , an ' we shall ne'er hold up our head I ' 
 this parish nor I ' any other . the parson talk o ' folk pity we : it be 
 poor amend pity ' ull make we . " 
 " pity ? " say the grandfather , sharply . " I ne'er want folk 's pity I ' 
 my life afore ... an ' I mun begin to be look down on now , an ' I turn 
 seventy - two last St. Thomas 's , an ' all th ' underbearer and pall - bearer 
 as i'n pick for my funeral be I ' this parish and the next to 
 ' t .... it be o ' no use now ... I mun be ta'en to the grave by stranger . " 
 " do not   fret so , father , " say Mrs. Poyser , who have speak very little , 
 be almost overawe by her husband 's unusual hardness and decision . 
 " you will have your child wi ' you ; an ' there be the lad and the little 
 un ' ull grow up in a new parish as well as I ' th ' old un . " 
 " ah , there be no stay I ' this country for we now , " say Mr. Poyser , 
 and the hard tear trickle slowly down his round cheek . " we think 
 it ' ud be bad luck if the old squire give we notice this Lady day , but I 
 must gi ' notice myself now , an ' see if there can anybody be get to come 
 an ' take to the crop as i'n put I ' the ground ; for I wonna stay upo ' 
 that man 's land a day long nor I be force to't . an ' I , as think he 
 such a good upright young man , as I should be glad when he come to be 
 our landlord . I will ne'er lift my hat to he again , nor sit I ' the same 
 church wi ' he ... a man as have bring shame on respectable folk ... an ' 
 pretend to be such a friend t ' everybody .... poor Adam there ... a fine 
 friend he be be t ' Adam , make speech an ' talk so fine , an ' all 
 the while poison the lad 's life , as it be much if he can stay I ' this 
 country any more nor we can . " 
 " An ' you t ' ha ' to go into court , and own you be akin t ' she , " say the 
 old man . " why , they will cast it up to the little un , as be not   four ' ear 
 old , some day - they will cast it up t ' she as she have a cousin try at the 
 ' size for murder . " 
 " it will be their own wickedness , then , " say Mrs. Poyser , with a sob in 
 her voice . " but there be one above ' ull take care o ' the innicent child , 
 else it be but little truth they tell we at church . it will be hard nor 
 ever to die an ' leave the little un , an ' nobody to be a mother to them . " 
 " we would well ha ' send for Dinah , if we have know where she be , " say Mr. 
 Poyser ; " but Adam say she would leave no direction where she would be at Leeds . " 
 " why , she would be wi ' that woman as be a friend t ' her Aunt Judith , " say 
 Mrs. Poyser , comfort a little by this suggestion of her husband . 
 " I have   often hear Dinah talk of she , but I can not   remember what name 
 she call she by . but there be Seth Bede ; he be like enough to know , for 
 she be a preach woman as the Methodists think a deal on . " 
 " I will send to Seth , " say Mr. Poyser . " I will send Alick to tell he to 
 come , or else to send up word o ' the woman 's name , an ' thee canst write 
 a letter ready to send off to Treddles'on as soon as we can make out a 
 direction . " 
 " it be poor work write letter when you want folk to come to you I ' 
 trouble , " say Mrs. Poyser . " happen it will be ever so long on the road , 
 an ' never reach she at last . " 
 before Alick arrive with the message , Lisbeth 's thought too have 
 already fly to Dinah , and she have say to Seth , " eh , there be no 
 comfort for we I ' this world any more , wi'out thee couldst get Dinah 
 Morris to come to we , as she do when my old man die . I would like she to 
 come in an ' take I by th ' hand again , an ' talk to I . she would tell I the 
 right on't , belike - she would happen know some good I ' all this trouble an ' 
 heart - break comin ' upo ' that poor lad , as ne'er do a bit o ' wrong in 's 
 life , but war well nor anybody else 's son , pick the country round . eh , 
 my lad ... Adam , my poor lad ! " 
 " thee wouldstna like I to leave thee , to go and fetch Dinah ? " say 
 Seth , as his mother sob and rock herself to and fro . 
 " fetch she ? " say Lisbeth , look up and pause from her grief , like 
 a cry child who hear some promise of consolation . " why , what place 
 is't she be at , do they say ? " 
 " it be a good way off , mother - Leeds , a big town . but I could be back in 
 three day , if thee couldst spare I . " 
 " Nay , nay , I canna spare thee . thee must go an ' see thy brother , an ' 
 bring I word what he be a - do . Mester Irwine say he would come an ' tell 
 I , but I canna make out so well what it mean when he tell I . Thee 
 must go thysen , sin ' Adam wonna let I go to he . write a letter to 
 Dinah canstna ? thee't fond enough o ' writin ' when nobody want thee . " 
 " I be not sure where she would be I ' that big town , " say Seth . " if I have go 
 myself , I could ha ' find out by ask the member o ' the Society . but 
 perhaps if I put Sarah Williamson , Methodist preacher , Leeds , o ' 
 th ' outside , it might get to she ; for most like she would be wi ' Sarah 
 Williamson . " 
 Alick come now with the message , and Seth , find that Mrs. Poyser be 
 write to Dinah , give up the intention of write himself ; but he go 
 to the Hall Farm to tell they all he could suggest about the address 
 of the letter , and warn they that there might be some delay in the 
 delivery , from his not know an exact direction . 
 on leave Lisbeth , Mr. Irwine have go to Jonathan Burge , who have also 
 a claim to be acquaint with what be likely to keep Adam away from 
 business for some time ; and before six o'clock that evening there be 
 few people in Broxton and Hayslope who have not hear the sad news . Mr. 
 Irwine have not mention Arthur 's name to Burge , and yet the story of 
 his conduct towards Hetty , with all the dark shadow cast upon it by 
 its terrible consequence , be presently as well know as that his 
 grandfather be dead , and that he be come into the estate . for Martin 
 Poyser feel no motive to keep silence towards the one or two neighbour 
 who venture to come and shake he sorrowfully by the hand on the first 
 day of his trouble ; and Carroll , who keep his ear open to all that 
 pass at the rectory , have frame an inferential version of the story , 
 and find early opportunity of communicate it . 
 one of those neighbour who come to Martin Poyser and shake he by the 
 hand without speak for some minute be Bartle Massey . he have shut 
 up his school , and be on his way to the rectory , where he arrive about 
 half - past seven in the evening , and , send his duty to Mr. Irwine , 
 beg pardon for trouble he at that hour , but have something 
 particular on his mind . he be show into the study , where Mr. Irwine 
 soon join he . 
 " well , Bartle ? " say Mr. Irwine , put out his hand . that be not his 
 usual way of salute the schoolmaster , but trouble make we treat all 
 who feel with we very much alike . " sit down . " 
 " you know what I be come about as well as I do , sir , I daresay , " say 
 Bartle . 
 " you wish to know the truth about the sad news that have reach 
 you ... about Hetty Sorrel ? " 
 " Nay , sir , what I wish to know be about Adam Bede . I understand you leave 
 he at Stoniton , and I beg the favour of you to tell I what be the state 
 of the poor lad 's mind , and what he mean to do . for as for that bit o ' 
 pink - and - white they have   take the trouble to put in jail , I do not   value 
 she a rotten nut - not a rotten nut - only for the harm or good that may 
 come out of she to an honest man - a lad I have   set such store 
 by - trust to , that he would make my bit o ' knowledge go a good way in the 
 world .... why , sir , he be the only scholar I have   have in this stupid country 
 that ever have the will or the head - piece for mathematic . if he have not 
 have so much hard work to do , poor fellow , he might have go into the 
 high branch , and then this might never have happen - might never 
 have happen . " 
 Bartle be heat by the exertion of walk fast in an agitated frame 
 of mind , and be not able to check himself on this first occasion of 
 vent his feeling . but he pause now to rub his moist forehead , and 
 probably his moist eye also . 
 " you will excuse I , sir , " he say , when this pause have give he time to 
 reflect , " for run on in this way about my own feeling , like that 
 foolish dog of mine howl in a storm , when there be nobody want to 
 listen to I . I come to hear you speak , not to talk myself - if you will 
 take the trouble to tell I what the poor lad 's doing . " 
 " do not   put yourself under any restraint , Bartle , " say Mr. Irwine . " the 
 fact be , I be very much in the same condition as you just now ; I have   a 
 great deal that be painful on my mind , and I find it hard work to be 
 quite silent about my own feeling and only attend to other . I share 
 your concern for Adam , though he be not the only one whose suffering I 
 care for in this affair . he intend to remain at Stoniton till after the 
 trial : it will come on probably a week to - morrow . he have take a room 
 there , and I encourage he to do so , because I think it well he 
 should be away from his own home at present ; and , poor fellow , he still 
 believe Hetty be innocent - he want to summon up courage to see she if 
 he can ; he be unwilling to leave the spot where she be . " 
 " do you think the creatur 's guilty , then ? " say Bartle . " do you think 
 they will hang she ? " 
 " I be afraid it will go hard with she . the evidence be very strong . and 
 one bad symptom be that she deny everything - deny that she have have 
 a child in the face of the most positive evidence . I see she myself , and 
 she be obstinately silent to I ; she shrink up like a frightened animal 
 when she see I . I be never so shocked in my life as at the change in 
 she . but I trust that , in the bad case , we may obtain a pardon for the 
 sake of the innocent who be involve . " 
 " stuff and nonsense ! " say Bartle , forget in his irritation to whom 
 he be speak . " I beg your pardon , sir , I mean it be stuff and nonsense 
 for the innocent to care about she be hang . for my own part , I 
 think the soon such woman be put out o ' the world the well ; and the 
 man that help them to do mischief have well go along with them for that 
 matter . what good will you do by keep such vermin alive , eat the 
 victual that ' ud feed rational being ? but if Adam 's fool enough to care 
 about it , I do not   want he to suffer more than 's needful .... be he very 
 much cut up , poor fellow ? " Bartle add , take out his spectacle and 
 put they on , as if they would assist his imagination . 
 " yes , I be afraid the grief cut very deep , " say Mr. Irwine . " he look 
 terribly shatter , and a certain violence come over he now and then 
 yesterday , which make I wish I could have remain near he . but I 
 shall go to Stoniton again to - morrow , and I have confidence enough in 
 the strength of Adam 's principle to trust that he will be able to endure 
 the bad without be drive to anything rash . " 
 Mr. Irwine , who be involuntarily utter his own thought rather 
 than address Bartle Massey in the last sentence , have in his mind the 
 possibility that the spirit of vengeance to - ward Arthur , which be 
 the form Adam 's anguish be continually take , might make he seek an 
 encounter that be likely to end more fatally than the one in the Grove . 
 this possibility heighten the anxiety with which he look forward 
 to Arthur 's arrival . but Bartle think Mr. Irwine be refer to 
 suicide , and his face wear a new alarm . 
 " I will tell you what I have in my head , sir , " he say , " and I hope you will 
 approve of it . I be go to shut up my school - if the scholar come , 
 they must go back again , that be all - and I shall go to Stoniton and look 
 after Adam till this business be over . I will pretend I be come to look 
 on at the assize ; he can not   object to that . what do you think about it , 
 sir ? " 
 " well , " say Mr. Irwine , rather hesitatingly , " there would be some real 
 advantage in that ... and I honour you for your friendship towards he , 
 Bartle . but ... you must be careful what you say to he , you know . I be 
 afraid you have too little fellow - feeling in what you consider his 
 weakness about Hetty . " 
 " trust to I , sir - trust to I . I know what you mean . I have   be a fool 
 myself in my time , but that be between you and I . I shall not   thrust myself 
 on he only keep my eye on he , and see that he get some good food , and 
 put in a word here and there . " 
 " then , " say Mr. Irwine , reassure a little as to Bartle 's discretion , 
 " I think you will be do a good deed ; and it will be well for you to let 
 Adam 's mother and brother know that you be go . " 
 " yes , sir , yes , " say Bartle , rise , and take off his spectacle , 
 " I will do that , I will do that ; though the mother be a whimpering 
 thing - I do not   like to come within earshot of she ; however , she be 
 a straight - back , clean woman , none of your slattern . I wish you 
 good - bye , sir , and thank you for the time you have   spar I . you be 
 everybody 's friend in this business - everybody 's friend . it be a heavy 
 weight you have   get on your shoulder . " 
 " good - bye , Bartle , till we meet at Stoniton , as I daresay we shall . " 
 Bartle hurry away from the rectory , evade Carroll 's conversational 
 advance , and say in an exasperate tone to Vixen , whose short leg 
 patter beside he on the gravel , " now , I shall be oblige to take you 
 with I , you good - for - nothing woman . you would go fret yourself to death 
 if I leave you - you know you would , and perhaps get snap up by some 
 tramp . and you will be run into bad company , I expect , put your 
 nose in every hole and corner where you have   no business ! but if you do 
 anything disgraceful , I will disown you - mind that , madam , mind that ! " 
 chapter XLI 
 the Eve of the Trial 
 AN upper room in a dull Stoniton street , with two bed in it - one lay 
 on the floor . it be ten o'clock on Thursday night , and the dark wall 
 opposite the window shut out the moonlight that might have struggle 
 with the light of the one dip candle by which Bartle Massey be 
 pretend to read , while he be really look over his spectacle at 
 Adam Bede , seat near the dark window . 
 you would hardly have know it be Adam without be tell . his face have 
 get thin this last week : he have the sunken eye , the neglect beard 
 of a man just rise from a sick - bed . his heavy black hair hang over his 
 forehead , and there be no active impulse in he which incline he to 
 push it off , that he may be more awake to what be around he . he have one 
 arm over the back of the chair , and he seem to be look down at his 
 clasp hand . he be rouse by a knock at the door . 
 " there he be , " say Bartle Massey , rise hastily and unfasten the 
 door . it be Mr. Irwine . 
 Adam rise from his chair with instinctive respect , as Mr. Irwine 
 approach he and take his hand . 
 " I be late , Adam , " he say , sit down on the chair which Bartle place 
 for he , " but I be later in set off from Broxton than I intend 
 to be , and I have be incessantly occupy since I arrive . I have do 
 everything now , however - everything that can be do to - night , at least . 
 let we all sit down . " 
 Adam take his chair again mechanically , and Bartle , for whom there be 
 no chair remain , sit on the bed in the background . 
 " have you see she , sir ? " say Adam tremulously . 
 " yes , Adam ; I and the chaplain have both be with she this evening . " 
 " do you ask she , sir ... do you say anything about I ? " 
 " yes , " say Mr. Irwine , with some hesitation , " I speak of you . I say 
 you wish to see she before the trial , if she consent . " 
 as Mr. Irwine pause , Adam look at he with eager , question eye . 
 " you know she shrink from see any one , Adam . it be not only 
 you - some fatal influence seem to have shut up her heart against her 
 fellow - creature . she have scarcely say anything more than ' no ' either 
 to I or the chaplain . three or four day ago , before you be mention 
 to she , when I ask she if there be any one of her family whom she 
 would like to see - to whom she could open her mind - she say , with a 
 violent shudder , ' tell they not to come near I - I will not   see any of 
 they . ' " 
 Adam 's head be hang down again , and he do not speak . there be 
 silence for a few minute , and then Mr. Irwine say , " I do not   like 
 to advise you against your own feeling , Adam , if they now urge you 
 strongly to go and see she to - morrow morning , even without her consent . 
 it be just possible , notwithstanding appearance to the contrary , that 
 the interview might affect she favourably . but I grieve to say I have 
 scarcely any hope of that . she do not   seem agitated when I mention 
 your name ; she only say ' no , ' in the same cold , obstinate way as usual . 
 and if the meeting have no good effect on she , it would be pure , useless 
 suffering to you - severe suffering , I fear . she be very much change ... " 
 Adam start up from his chair and seize his hat , which lie on the 
 table . but he stand still then , and look at Mr. Irwine , as if he have a 
 question to ask which it be yet difficult to utter . Bartle Massey rise 
 quietly , turn the key in the door , and put it in his pocket . 
 " be he come back ? " say Adam at last . 
 " no , he be not , " say Mr. Irwine , quietly . " lay down your hat , Adam , 
 unless you like to walk out with I for a little fresh air . I fear you 
 have not be out again to - day . " 
 " you need not   deceive I , sir , " say Adam , look hard at Mr. Irwine and 
 speak in a tone of angry suspicion . " you need not   be afraid of I . 
 I only want justice . I want he to feel what she feel . it be his 
 work ... she be a child as it ' ud ha ' go t ' anybody 's heart to look 
 at ... I do not   care what she be do ... it be he bring she to it . and he 
 shall know it ... he shall feel it ... if there be a just God , he shall feel 
 what it be t ' ha ' bring a child like she to sin and misery . " 
 " I be not deceive you , Adam , " say Mr. Irwine . " Arthur Donnithorne be 
 not come back - be not come back when I leave . I have leave a letter for 
 he : he will know all as soon as he arrive . " 
 " but you do not   mind about it , " say Adam indignantly . " you think it 
 do not   matter as she lie there in shame and misery , and he know 
 nothing about it - he suffer nothing . " 
 " Adam , he will know - he will suffer , long and bitterly . he have a heart 
 and a conscience : I can not   be entirely deceive in his character . I be 
 convinced - I be sure he do not   fall under temptation without a struggle . 
 he may be weak , but he be not callous , not coldly selfish . I be 
 persuade that this will be a shock of which he will feel the effect 
 all his life . why do you crave vengeance in this way ? no amount of 
 torture that you could inflict on he could benefit she . " 
 " no - o God , no , " Adam groan out , sink on his chair again ; " but 
 then , that be the deep curse of all ... that be what make the blackness 
 of it ... it can never be undone . my poor Hetty ... she can never be my 
 sweet Hetty again ... the prettiest thing God have make - smile up at 
 I ... I think she love I ... and be good ... " 
 Adam 's voice have be gradually sink into a hoarse undertone , as if 
 he be only talk to himself ; but now he say abruptly , look at 
 Mr. Irwine , " but she be not   as guilty as they say ? you do not   think she 
 be , sir ? she can not   ha ' do it . " 
 " that perhaps can never be know with certainty , Adam , " Mr. Irwine 
 answer gently . " in these case we sometimes form our judgment on what 
 seem to we strong evidence , and yet , for want of know some small 
 fact , our judgment be wrong . but suppose the bad : you have no right to 
 say that the guilt of her crime lie with he , and that he ought to bear 
 the punishment . it be not for we man to apportion the share of moral 
 guilt and retribution . we find it impossible to avoid mistake even in 
 determining who have commit a single criminal act , and the problem how 
 far a man be to be hold responsible for the unforeseen consequence of 
 his own deed be one that might well make we tremble to look into it . 
 the evil consequence that may lie fold in a single act of selfish 
 indulgence be a thought so awful that it ought surely to awaken some 
 feel less presumptuous than a rash desire to punish . you have a mind 
 that can understand this fully , Adam , when you be calm . do not   suppose 
 I can not   enter into the anguish that drive you into this state 
 of revengeful hatred . but think of this : if you be to obey your 
 passion - for it be passion , and you deceive yourself in call it 
 justice - it might be with you precisely as it have be with Arthur ; nay , 
 worse ; your passion might lead you yourself into a horrible crime . " 
 " no - not bad , " say Adam , bitterly ; " I do not   believe it be bad - I would 
 soon do it - I would soon do a wickedness as I could suffer for by myself 
 than ha ' bring she to do wickedness and then stand by and see them 
 punish she while they let I alone ; and all for a bit o ' pleasure , as , 
 if he have have a man 's heart in he , he would ha ' cut his hand off soon than 
 he would ha ' take it . what if he do not   foresee what be happen ? he foresee 
 enough ; he have no right to expect anything but harm and shame to she . and 
 then he want to smooth it off wi ' lie . no - there be plenty o ' thing 
 folk be hang for not half so hateful as that . let a man do what he 
 will , if he know he be to bear the punishment himself , he be not   half so 
 bad as a mean selfish coward as make thing easy t ' himself and know 
 all the while the punishment will fall on somebody else . " 
 " there again you partly deceive yourself , Adam . there be no sort of 
 wrong deed of which a man can bear the punishment alone ; you can not 
 isolate yourself and say that the evil which be in you shall not spread . 
 man 's life be as thoroughly blend with each other as the air they 
 breathe : evil spread as necessarily as disease . I know , I feel the 
 terrible extent of suffer this sin of Arthur 's have cause to other ; 
 but so do every sin cause suffer to other besides those who commit 
 it . an act of vengeance on your part against Arthur would simply be 
 another evil add to those we be suffer under : you could not bear 
 the punishment alone ; you would entail the bad sorrow on every one 
 who love you . you would have commit an act of blind fury that would 
 leave all the present evil just as they be and add bad evil to 
 they . you may tell I that you meditate no fatal act of vengeance , but 
 the feeling in your mind be what give birth to such action , and as 
 long as you indulge it , as long as you do not see that to fix your mind 
 on Arthur 's punishment be revenge , and not justice , you be in danger 
 of be lead on to the commission of some great wrong . remember what you 
 tell I about your feeling after you have give that blow to Arthur in 
 the Grove . " 
 Adam be silent : the last word have call up a vivid image of the past , 
 and Mr. Irwine leave he to his thought , while he speak to Bartle Massey 
 about old Mr. Donnithorne 's funeral and other matter of an indifferent 
 kind . but at length Adam turn round and say , in a more subdued tone , 
 " I have   not ask about them at th ' Hall Farm , sir . be Mr. Poyser come ? " 
 " he be come ; he be in Stoniton to - night . but I could not advise he to 
 see you , Adam . his own mind be in a very perturbed state , and it be good 
 he should not see you till you be calm . " 
 " be Dinah Morris come to them , sir ? Seth say they would send for she . " 
 " no . Mr. Poyser tell I she be not come when he leave . they be afraid 
 the letter have not reach she . it seem they have no exact address . " 
 Adam sit ruminate a little while , and then say , " I wonder if Dinah 
 ' ud ha ' go to see she . but perhaps the Poysers would ha ' be sorely 
 against it , since they will not   come nigh her themselves . but I think she 
 would , for the Methodists be great folk for go into the prison ; 
 and Seth say he think she would . she have a very tender way with she , 
 Dinah have ; I wonder if she could ha ' do any good . you never see she , 
 sir , do you ? " 
 " yes , I do . I have a conversation with she - she please I a good deal . 
 and now you mention it , I wish she would come , for it be possible that a 
 gentle mild woman like she might move Hetty to open her heart . the jail 
 chaplain be rather harsh in his manner . " 
 " but it be o ' no use if she do not   come , " say Adam sadly . 
 " if I have think of it early , I would have take some measure 
 for find she out , " say Mr. Irwine , " but it be too late now , I 
 fear ... well , Adam , I must go now . try to get some rest to - night . God 
 bless you . I will see you early to - morrow morning . " 
 chapter XLII 
 the Morning of the Trial 
 AT one o'clock the next day , Adam be alone in his dull upper room ; 
 his watch lie before he on the table , as if he be count the 
 long minute . he have no knowledge of what be likely to be say by 
 the witness on the trial , for he have shrink from all the particular 
 connect with Hetty 's arrest and accusation . this brave active man , who 
 would have hasten towards any danger or toil to rescue Hetty from an 
 apprehend wrong or misfortune , feel himself powerless to contemplate 
 irremediable evil and suffering . the susceptibility which would have 
 be an impelling force where there be any possibility of action become 
 helpless anguish when he be oblige to be passive , or else seek an 
 active outlet in the thought of inflict justice on Arthur . energetic 
 nature , strong for all strenuous deed , will often rush away from a 
 hopeless sufferer , as if they be hard - hearted . it be the overmaster 
 sense of pain that drive they . they shrink by an ungovernable instinct , 
 as they would shrink from laceration . Adam have bring himself to think 
 of see Hetty , if she would consent to see he , because he think the 
 meeting might possibly be a good to she - might help to melt away this 
 terrible hardness they tell he of . if she see he bear she no ill will 
 for what she have do to he , she might open her heart to he . but this 
 resolution have be an immense effort - he tremble at the thought of 
 see her change face , as a timid woman tremble at the thought of 
 the surgeon 's knife , and he choose now to bear the long hour of suspense 
 rather than encounter what seem to he the more intolerable agony of 
 witness her trial . 
 Deep unspeakable suffering may well be call a baptism , a regeneration , 
 the initiation into a new state . the yearn memory , the bitter 
 regret , the agonized sympathy , the struggle appeal to the Invisible 
 Right - all the intense emotion which have fill the day and night of 
 the past week , and be compress themselves again like an eager crowd 
 into the hour of this single morning , make Adam look back on all the 
 previous year as if they have be a dim sleepy existence , and he have 
 only now awake to full consciousness . it seem to he as if he have 
 always before think it a light thing that man should suffer , as if all 
 that he have himself endure and call sorrow before be only a moment 's 
 stroke that have never leave a bruise . doubtless a great anguish may do 
 the work of year , and we may come out from that baptism of fire with a 
 soul full of new awe and new pity . 
 " o God , " Adam groan , as he lean on the table and look blankly at 
 the face of the watch , " and man have suffer like this before ... and 
 poor helpless young thing have suffer like she .... such a little while 
 ago look so happy and so pretty ... kiss them all , her grandfather 
 and all of them , and they wish her luck .... o my poor , poor 
 Hetty ... dost think on it now ? " 
 Adam start and look round towards the door . Vixen have begin to 
 whimper , and there be a sound of a stick and a lame walk on the stair . 
 it be Bartle Massey come back . could it be all over ? 
 Bartle enter quietly , and , go up to Adam , grasp his hand and 
 say , " I be just come to look at you , my boy , for the folk be go out 
 of court for a bit . " 
 Adam 's heart beat so violently he be unable to speak - he could only 
 return the pressure of his friend 's hand - and Bartle , draw up the 
 other chair , come and sit in front of he , take off his hat and his 
 spectacle . 
 " that be a thing never happen to I before , " he observe , " to go out o ' 
 the door with my spectacle on . I clean forget to take them off . " 
 the old man make this trivial remark , think it well not to respond 
 at all to Adam 's agitation : he would gather , in an indirect way , that 
 there be nothing decisive to communicate at present . 
 " and now , " he say , rise again , " I must see to your have a bit of 
 the loaf , and some of that wine Mr. Irwine send this morning . he will be 
 angry with I if you do not   have it . come , now , " he go on , bring 
 forward the bottle and the loaf and pour some wine into a cup , " I 
 must have a bit and a sup myself . drink a drop with I , my lad - drink 
 with I . " 
 Adam push the cup gently away and say , entreatingly , " tell I about 
 it , Mr. Massey - tell I all about it . be she there ? have they begin ? " 
 " yes , my boy , yes - it be take all the time since I first go ; but 
 they be slow , they be slow ; and there be the counsel they have   get for she 
 put a spoke in the wheel whenever he can , and make a deal to do with 
 cross - examine the witness and quarrel with the other lawyer . 
 that be all he can do for the money they give he ; and it be a big 
 sum - it be a big sum . but he be a ' cute fellow , with an eye that ' ud pick 
 the needle out of the hay in no time . if a man have get no feeling , it 
 ' ud be as good as a demonstration to listen to what go on in court ; 
 but a tender heart make one stupid . I would have give up figure for ever 
 only to have have some good news to bring to you , my poor lad . " 
 " but do it seem to be go against she ? " say Adam . " tell I what 
 they have   say . I must know it now - I must know what they have to bring 
 against she . " 
 " why , the chief evidence yet have be the doctor ; all but Martin 
 Poyser - poor Martin . everybody in court feel for he - it be like one 
 sob , the sound they make when he come down again . the bad be when 
 they tell he to look at the prisoner at the bar . it be hard work , poor 
 fellow - it be hard work . Adam , my boy , the blow fall heavily on he 
 as well as you ; you must help poor Martin ; you must show courage . drink 
 some wine now , and show I you mean to bear it like a man . " 
 Bartle have make the right sort of appeal . Adam , with an air of quiet 
 obedience , take up the cup and drink a little . 
 " tell I how she look , " he say presently . 
 " Frightened , very frightened , when they first bring she in ; it be the 
 first sight of the crowd and the judge , poor creatur . and there be a lot 
 o ' foolish woman in fine clothe , with gewgaw all up their arm 
 and feather on their head , sit near the judge : they have   dress 
 themselves out in that way , one ' ud think , to be scarecrow and warning 
 against any man ever meddle with a woman again . they put up their 
 glass , and star and whisper . but after that she stand like a white 
 image , star down at her hand and seem neither to hear nor see 
 anything . and she be as white as a sheet . she do not   speak when they 
 ask she if she would plead ' guilty ' or ' not guilty , ' and they plead ' not 
 guilty ' for she . but when she hear her uncle 's name , there seem to go 
 a shiver right through she ; and when they tell he to look at she , she 
 hang her head down , and cower , and hide her face in her hand . 
 he would much ado to speak poor man , his voice tremble so . and the 
 counsellor - who look as hard as nail mostly - I see , spar he as much 
 as they could . Mr. Irwine put himself near he and go with he out o ' 
 court . ah , it be a great thing in a man 's life to be able to stand by a 
 neighbour and uphold he in such trouble as that . " 
 " God bless he , and you too , Mr. Massey , " say Adam , in a low voice , 
 lay his hand on Bartle 's arm . 
 " aye , aye , he be good metal ; he give the right ring when you try he , 
 our parson do . a man o ' sense - say no more than 's needful . he be not 
 one of those that think they can comfort you with chattering , as if 
 folk who stand by and look on know a deal well what the trouble be 
 than those who have to bear it . I have   have to do with such folk in my 
 time - in the south , when I be in trouble myself . Mr. Irwine be to be 
 a witness himself , by and by , on her side , you know , to speak to her 
 character and bring up . " 
 " but the other evidence ... do it go hard against she ! " say Adam . " what 
 do you think , Mr. Massey ? tell I the truth . " 
 " yes , my lad , yes . the truth be the good thing to tell . it must come at 
 last . the doctor ' evidence be heavy on she - be heavy . but she be go 
 on deny she be have a child from first to last . these poor silly 
 woman - thing - they have   not the sense to know it be no use deny what be 
 prove . it will make against she with the jury , I doubt , her be so 
 obstinate : they may be less for recommend she to mercy , if the 
 verdict 's against she . but Mr. Irwine ' ull leave no stone unturned with 
 the judge - you may rely upon that , Adam . " 
 " be there nobody to stand by she and seem to care for she in the court ? " 
 say Adam . 
 " there be the chaplain o ' the jail sit near she , but he be a sharp 
 ferrety - face man - another sort o ' flesh and blood to Mr. Irwine . they 
 say the jail chaplain be mostly the fag - end o ' the clergy . " 
 " there be one man as ought to be there , " say Adam bitterly . presently he 
 draw himself up and look fixedly out of the window , apparently turn 
 over some new idea in his mind . 
 " Mr. Massey , " he say at last , push the hair off his forehead , " I will 
 go back with you . I will go into court . it be cowardly of I to keep away . 
 I will stand by she - I will own she - for all she be be deceitful . they 
 ought not   to cast she off - her own flesh and blood . we hand folk over to 
 God 's mercy , and show none ourselves . I use to be hard sometimes : I will 
 never be hard again . I will go , Mr. Massey - I will go with you . " 
 there be a decision in Adam 's manner which would have prevent Bartle 
 from oppose he , even if he have wish to do so . he only say , " take 
 a bit , then , and another sup , Adam , for the love of I . see , I must stop 
 and eat a morsel . now , you take some . " 
 nerve by an active resolution , Adam take a morsel of bread and drank 
 some wine . he be haggard and unshaven , as he have be yesterday , but he 
 stand upright again , and look more like the Adam Bede of former day . 
 chapter XLIII 
 the Verdict 
 the place fit up that day as a court of justice be a grand old hall , 
 now destroy by fire . the midday light that fall on the close pavement 
 of human head be shed through a line of high point window , 
 variegate with the mellow tint of old paint glass . grim dusty armour 
 hang in high relief in front of the dark oaken gallery at the far 
 end , and under the broad arch of the great mullioned window opposite be 
 spread a curtain of old tapestry , cover with dim melancholy figure , 
 like a doze indistinct dream of the past . it be a place that through 
 the rest of the year be haunt with the shadowy memory of old 
 king and queen , unhappy , discrowne , imprison ; but to - day all those 
 shadow have flee , and not a soul in the vast hall feel the presence of 
 any but a living sorrow , which be quiver in warm heart . 
 but that sorrow seem to have make it itself feebly feel hitherto , now 
 when Adam Bede 's tall figure be suddenly see be usher to the side 
 of the prisoner 's dock . in the broad sunlight of the great hall , among 
 the sleek shaven face of other man , the mark of suffer in his face 
 be startling even to Mr. Irwine , who have last see he in the dim 
 light of his small room ; and the neighbour from Hayslope who be 
 present , and who tell Hetty Sorrel 's story by their fireside in their 
 old age , never forget to say how it move they when Adam Bede , poor 
 fellow , tall by the head than most of the people round he , come into 
 court and take his place by her side . 
 but Hetty do not see he . she be stand in the same position Bartle 
 Massey have describe , her hand cross over each other and her eye 
 fix on they . Adam have not dare to look at she in the first moment , 
 but at last , when the attention of the court be withdraw by the 
 proceeding he turn his face towards she with a resolution not to 
 shrink . 
 why do they say she be so change ? in the corpse we love , it be the 
 likeness we see - it be the likeness , which make itself feel the more 
 keenly because something else be and be not . there they be - the sweet 
 face and neck , with the dark tendril of hair , the long dark lash , the 
 rounded cheek and the pouting lip - pale and thin , yes , but like Hetty , 
 and only Hetty . other think she look as if some demon have cast a 
 blight glance upon she , wither up the woman 's soul in she , and 
 leave only a hard despairing obstinacy . but the mother 's yearning , that 
 complete type of the life in another life which be the essence of 
 real human love , feel the presence of the cherished child even in the 
 debase , degraded man ; and to Adam , this pale , hard - look culprit 
 be the Hetty who have smile at he in the garden under the apple - tree 
 bough - she be that Hetty 's corpse , which he have tremble to look at 
 the first time , and then be unwilling to turn away his eye from . 
 but presently he hear something that compel he to listen , and make 
 the sense of sight less absorbing . a woman be in the witness - box , a 
 middle - aged woman , who speak in a firm distinct voice . she say , " my 
 name be Sarah Stone . I be a widow , and keep a small shop license to 
 sell tobacco , snuff , and tea in Church Lane , Stoniton . the prisoner at 
 the bar be the same young woman who come , look ill and tired , with 
 a basket on her arm , and ask for a lodging at my house on Saturday 
 evening , the 27th of February . she have take the house for a public , 
 because there be a figure against the door . and when I say I do not 
 take in lodger , the prisoner begin to cry , and say she be too tired 
 to go anywhere else , and she only want a bed for one night . and her 
 prettiness , and her condition , and something respectable about her 
 clothe and look , and the trouble she seem to be in make I as I 
 could not   find in my heart to send she away at once . I ask she to sit 
 down , and give she some tea , and ask she where she be go , and 
 where her friend be . she say she be go home to her friend : they 
 be farm folk a good way off , and she would have a long journey that have 
 cost she more money than she expect , so as she would hardly any money leave 
 in her pocket , and be afraid of go where it would cost she much . she 
 have be oblige to sell most of the thing out of her basket , but she would 
 thankfully give a shilling for a bed . I see no reason why I should not 
 take the young woman in for the night . I have only one room , but there 
 be two bed in it , and I tell she she might stay with I . I think 
 she have be lead wrong , and get into trouble , but if she be go to her 
 friend , it would be a good work to keep she out of further harm . " 
 the witness then state that in the night a child be bear , and she 
 identify the baby - clothe then show to she as those in which she have 
 herself dress the child . 
 " those be the clothe . I make they myself , and have keep they by I 
 ever since my last child be bear . I take a deal of trouble both for 
 the child and the mother . I could not   help take to the little thing and 
 be anxious about it . I do not   send for a doctor , for there seem no 
 need . I tell the mother in the day - time she must tell I the name of her 
 friend , and where they live , and let I write to they . she say , by 
 and by she would write herself , but not to - day . she would have no nay , 
 but she would get up and be dress , in spite of everything I could say . 
 she say she feel quite strong enough ; and it be wonderful what spirit 
 she show . but I be not   quite easy what I should do about she , and 
 towards evening I make up my mind I would go , after Meeting be over , and 
 speak to our minister about it . I leave the house about half - past eight 
 o'clock . I do not   go out at the shop door , but at the back door , which 
 open into a narrow alley . I have   only get the ground - floor of the 
 house , and the kitchen and bedroom both look into the alley . I leave the 
 prisoner sit up by the fire in the kitchen with the baby on her lap . 
 she have not   cry or seem low at all , as she do the night before . I 
 think she have a strange look with her eye , and she get a bit flushed 
 towards evening . I be afraid of the fever , and I think I would call and 
 ask an acquaintance of mine , an experienced woman , to come back with 
 I when I go out . it be a very dark night . I do not   fasten the door 
 behind I ; there be no lock ; it be a latch with a bolt inside , and 
 when there be nobody in the house I always go out at the shop door . 
 but I think there be no danger in leave it unfasten that little 
 while . I be long than I mean to be , for I have to wait for the woman 
 that come back with I . it be an hour and a half before we get back , 
 and when we go in , the candle be stand burn just as I leave it , 
 but the prisoner and the baby be both go . she would take her cloak and 
 bonnet , but she would leave the basket and the thing in it .... I be 
 dreadful frightened , and angry with she for go . I do not   go to give 
 information , because I would no thought she mean to do any harm , and I know 
 she have money in her pocket to buy her food and lodging . I do not   like 
 to set the constable after she , for she have a right to go from I if she 
 like . " 
 the effect of this evidence on Adam be electrical ; it give he new 
 force . Hetty could not be guilty of the crime - her heart must have clung 
 to her baby - else why should she have take it with she ? she might have 
 leave it behind . the little creature have die naturally , and then she 
 have hide it . baby be so liable to death - and there might be 
 the strong suspicion without any proof of guilt . his mind be so 
 occupy with imaginary argument against such suspicion , that he 
 could not listen to the cross - examination by Hetty 's counsel , who try , 
 without result , to elicit evidence that the prisoner have show some 
 movement of maternal affection towards the child . the whole time this 
 witness be be examine , Hetty have stand as motionless as before : no 
 word seem to arrest her ear . but the sound of the next witness 's 
 voice touch a chord that be still sensitive , she give a start and a 
 frightened look towards he , but immediately turn away her head and 
 look down at her hand as before . this witness be a man , a rough 
 peasant . he say : 
 " my name be John Olding . I be a labourer , and live at Tedd 's Hole , two 
 mile out of Stoniton . a week last Monday , towards one o'clock in the 
 afternoon , I be go towards Hetton Coppice , and about a quarter of a 
 mile from the coppice I see the prisoner , in a red cloak , sit under 
 a bit of a haystack not far off the stile . she get up when she see I , 
 and seem as if she would be walk on the other way . it be a regular 
 road through the field , and nothing very uncommon to see a young woman 
 there , but I take notice of she because she look white and scared . I 
 should have think she be a beggar - woman , only for her good clothe . I 
 think she look a bit crazy , but it be no business of mine . I stand 
 and look back after she , but she go right on while she be in sight . 
 I have to go to the other side of the coppice to look after some stake . 
 there be a road right through it , and bit of opening here and there , 
 where the tree have be cut down , and some of them not carry away . 
 I do not   go straight along the road , but turn off towards the middle , 
 and take a short way towards the spot I want to get to . I have not   get 
 far out of the road into one of the open place before I hear a strange 
 cry . I think it do not   come from any animal I know , but I be not   for 
 stop to look about just then . but it go on , and seem so strange 
 to I in that place , I could not   help stop to look . I begin to think 
 I might make some money of it , if it be a new thing . but I have hard 
 work to tell which way it come from , and for a good while I keep look 
 up at the bough . and then I think it come from the ground ; and there 
 be a lot of timber - chopping lie about , and loose piece of turf , and 
 a trunk or two . and I look about among they , but could find nothing , 
 and at last the cry stop . so I be for give it up , and I go on 
 about my business . but when I come back the same way pretty nigh an hour 
 after , I could not   help lay down my stake to have another look . and 
 just as I be stoop and lay down the stake , I see something odd 
 and round and whitish lie on the ground under a nut - bush by the side 
 of I . and I stoop down on hand and knee to pick it up . and I see it 
 be a little baby 's hand . " 
 at these word a thrill run through the court . Hetty be visibly 
 trembling ; now , for the first time , she seem to be listen to what a 
 witness say . 
 " there be a lot of timber - chopping put together just where the ground 
 go hollow , like , under the bush , and the hand come out from among 
 they . but there be a hole leave in one place and I could see down it 
 and see the child 's head ; and I make haste and do away the turf and the 
 chopping , and take out the child . it have get comfortable clothe on , 
 but its body be cold , and I think it must be dead . I make haste back 
 with it out of the wood , and take it home to my wife . she say it be 
 dead , and I would well take it to the parish and tell the constable . and I 
 say , ' I will lay my life it be that young woman 's child as I meet go to 
 the coppice . ' but she seem to be go clean out of sight . and I take 
 the child on to Hetton parish and tell the constable , and we go on to 
 Justice Hardy . and then we go look after the young woman till dark 
 at night , and we go and give information at Stoniton , as they might 
 stop she . and the next morning , another constable come to I , to go with 
 he to the spot where I find the child . and when we get there , there 
 be the prisoner a - sitting against the bush where I find the child ; and 
 she cry out when she see we , but she never offer to move . she would get 
 a big piece of bread on her lap . " 
 Adam have give a faint groan of despair while this witness be speak . 
 he have hide his face on his arm , which rest on the boarding in front 
 of he . it be the supreme moment of his suffering : Hetty be guilty ; 
 and he be silently call to God for help . he hear no more of the 
 evidence , and be unconscious when the case for the prosecution have 
 close - unconscious that Mr. Irwine be in the witness - box , tell 
 of Hetty 's unblemished character in her own parish and of the virtuous 
 habit in which she have be bring up . this testimony could have no 
 influence on the verdict , but it be give as part of that plea for 
 mercy which her own counsel would have make if he have be allow to 
 speak for she - a favour not grant to criminal in those stern time . 
 at last Adam lift up his head , for there be a general movement round 
 he . the judge have address the jury , and they be retire . the 
 decisive moment be not far off Adam feel a shudder horror that would 
 not let he look at Hetty , but she have long relapse into her blank hard 
 indifference . all eye be strained to look at she , but she stand like 
 a statue of dull despair . 
 ' there be a mingled rustling , whispering , and low buzzing throughout 
 the court during this interval . the desire to listen be suspend , and 
 every one have some feeling or opinion to express in undertone . Adam 
 sit look blankly before he , but he do not see the object that be 
 right in front of his eye - the counsel and attorney talk with an 
 air of cool business , and Mr. Irwine in low earnest conversation with 
 the judge - do not see Mr. Irwine sit down again in agitation and shake 
 his head mournfully when somebody whisper to he . the inward action 
 be too intense for Adam to take in outward object until some strong 
 sensation rouse he . 
 it be not very long , hardly more than a quarter of an hour , before 
 the knock which tell that the jury have come to their decision fall as a 
 signal for silence on every ear . it be sublime - that sudden pause of a 
 great multitude which tell that one soul move in they all . Deeper and 
 deeply the silence seem to become , like the deepening night , while the 
 juryman 's name be call over , and the prisoner be make to hold up 
 her hand , and the jury be ask for their verdict . 
 " guilty . " 
 it be the verdict every one expect , but there be a sigh 
 of disappointment from some heart that it be follow by no 
 recommendation to mercy . still the sympathy of the court be not with 
 the prisoner . the unnaturalness of her crime stand out the more harshly 
 by the side of her hard immovability and obstinate silence . even the 
 verdict , to distant eye , have not appear to move she , but those who 
 be near see her trembling . 
 the stillness be less intense until the judge put on his black cap , and 
 the chaplain in his canonical be observe behind he . then it deepen 
 again , before the crier have have time to command silence . if any sound 
 be hear , it must have be the sound of beat heart . the judge 
 speak , " Hester Sorrel .... " 
 the blood rush to Hetty 's face , and then flee back again as she 
 look up at the judge and keep her wide - open eye fix on he , as if 
 fascinate by fear . Adam have not yet turn towards she , there be a 
 deep horror , like a great gulf , between they . but at the word " and 
 then to be hang by the neck till you be dead , " a pierce shriek rang 
 through the hall . it be Hetty 's shriek . Adam start to his foot and 
 stretch out his arm towards she . but the arm could not reach she : 
 she have fall down in a fainting - fit , and be carry out of court . 
 Chapter XLIV 
 Arthur 's Return 
 when Arthur Donnithorne land at Liverpool and read the letter from 
 his Aunt Lydia , briefly announce his grand - father 's death , his first 
 feeling be , " Poor Grandfather ! I wish I could have get to he to be 
 with he when he die . he might have feel or wish something at the 
 last that I shall never know now . it be a lonely death . " 
 it be impossible to say that his grief be deep than that . pity 
 and soften memory take place of the old antagonism , and in his busy 
 thought about the future , as the chaise carry he rapidly along 
 towards the home where he be now to be master , there be a continually 
 recur effort to remember anything by which he could show a regard 
 for his grandfather 's wish , without counteract his own cherished 
 aim for the good of the tenant and the estate . but it be not in human 
 nature - only in human pretence - for a young man like Arthur , with a fine 
 constitution and fine spirit , think well of himself , believe that 
 other think well of he , and have a very ardent intention to give 
 they more and more reason for that good opinion - it be not possible for 
 such a young man , just come into a splendid estate through the 
 death of a very old man whom he be not fond of , to feel anything very 
 different from exultant joy . now his real life be begin ; now he 
 would have room and opportunity for action , and he would use they . he 
 would show the Loamshire people what a fine country gentleman be ; he 
 would not exchange that career for any other under the sun . he feel 
 himself rid over the hill in the breezy autumn day , look after 
 favourite plan of drainage and enclosure ; then admire on sombre 
 morning as the good rider on the good horse in the hunt ; speak well 
 of on market - day as a first - rate landlord ; by and by make speech at 
 election dinner , and show a wonderful knowledge of agriculture ; 
 the patron of new plough and drill , the severe upbraider of negligent 
 landowner , and withal a jolly fellow that everybody must like - happy 
 face greet he everywhere on his own estate , and the neighbouring 
 family on the good term with he . the Irwines should dine with he 
 every week , and have their own carriage to come in , for in some very 
 delicate way that Arthur would devise , the lay - impropriator of the 
 Hayslope tithe would insist on pay a couple of hundred more to 
 the vicar ; and his aunt should be as comfortable as possible , and go on 
 live at the Chase , if she like , in spite of her old - maidish way - at 
 least until he be marry , and that event lie in the indistinct 
 background , for Arthur have not yet see the woman who would play the 
 lady - wife to the first - rate country gentleman . 
 these be Arthur 's chief thought , so far as a man 's thought through 
 hour of travel can be compress into a few sentence , which be 
 only like the list of name tell you what be the scene in a long 
 long panorama full of colour , of detail , and of life . the happy face 
 Arthur see greet he be not pale abstraction , but real ruddy 
 face , long familiar to he : Martin Poyser be there - the whole Poyser 
 family . 
 what - Hetty ? 
 yes ; for Arthur be at ease about Hetty - not quite at ease about the 
 past , for a certain burning of the ear would come whenever he think 
 of the scene with Adam last August , but at ease about her present lot . 
 Mr. Irwine , who have be a regular correspondent , tell he all the 
 news about the old place and people , have send he word nearly three 
 month ago that Adam Bede be not to marry Mary Burge , as he have 
 think , but pretty Hetty Sorrel . Martin Poyser and Adam himself have 
 both tell Mr. Irwine all about it - that Adam have be deeply in love 
 with Hetty these two year , and that now it be agree they be to be 
 marry in March . that stalwart rogue Adam be more susceptible than the 
 rector have think ; it be really quite an idyllic love affair ; and if 
 it have not be too long to tell in a letter , he would have like to 
 describe to Arthur the blushing look and the simple strong word with 
 which the fine honest fellow tell his secret . he know Arthur would like 
 to hear that Adam have this sort of happiness in prospect . 
 yes , indeed ! Arthur feel there be not air enough in the room to satisfy 
 his renovated life , when he have read that passage in the letter . he 
 throw up the window , he rush out of door into the December air , and 
 greet every one who speak to he with an eager gaiety , as if there have 
 be news of a fresh Nelson victory . for the first time that day since 
 he have come to Windsor , he be in true boyish spirit . the load that 
 have be press upon he be go , the haunt fear have vanish . he 
 think he could conquer his bitterness towards Adam now - could offer 
 he his hand , and ask to be his friend again , in spite of that painful 
 memory which would still make his ear burn . he have be knock down , 
 and he have be force to tell a lie : such thing make a scar , do what 
 we will . but if Adam be the same again as in the old day , Arthur 
 wish to be the same too , and to have Adam mix up with his business 
 and his future , as he have always desire before the accursed meeting 
 in August . Nay , he would do a great deal more for Adam than he should 
 otherwise have do , when he come into the estate ; Hetty 's husband have 
 a special claim on he - Hetty herself should feel that any pain she 
 have suffer through Arthur in the past be compensate to her a 
 hundredfold . for really she could not have feel much , since she have so 
 soon make up her mind to marry Adam . 
 you perceive clearly what sort of picture Adam and Hetty make in the 
 panorama of Arthur 's thought on his journey homeward . it be March now ; 
 they be soon to be marry : perhaps they be already marry . and now 
 it be actually in his power to do a great deal for they . sweet - sweet 
 little Hetty ! the little puss have not   care for he half as much as 
 he care for she ; for he be a great fool about she still - be almost 
 afraid of see she - indeed , have not care much to look at any other 
 woman since he part from she . that little figure come towards he in 
 the Grove , those dark - fringe childish eye , the lovely lip put up to 
 kiss he - that picture have get no fainter with the lapse of month . and 
 she would look just the same . it be impossible to think how he could 
 meet she : he should certainly tremble . strange , how long this sort of 
 influence last , for he be certainly not in love with Hetty now . he 
 have be earnestly desiring , for month , that she should marry Adam , 
 and there be nothing that contribute more to his happiness in these 
 moment than the thought of their marriage . it be the exaggerate 
 effect of imagination that make his heart still beat a little more 
 quickly at the thought of she . when he see the little thing again as she 
 really be , as Adam 's wife , at work quite prosaically in her new home , 
 he should perhaps wonder at the possibility of his past feeling . thank 
 heaven it have turn out so well ! he should have plenty of affair and 
 interest to fill his life now , and not be in danger of play the fool 
 again . 
 pleasant the crack of the post - boy 's whip ! pleasant the sense of be 
 hurry along in swift ease through english scene , so like those round 
 his own home , only not quite so charming . here be a market - town - very 
 much like Treddleston - where the arm of the neighbour lord of the 
 manor be bear on the sign of the principal inn ; then mere field and 
 hedge , their vicinity to a market - town carry an agreeable suggestion 
 of high rent , till the land begin to assume a trimmer look , the wood 
 be more frequent , and at length a white or red mansion look down 
 from a moderate eminence , or allow he to be aware of its parapet 
 and chimney among the dense - look mass of oak and elm - mass 
 reddened now with early bud . and close at hand come the village : the 
 small church , with its red - tile roof , look humble even among the 
 fade half - timbere house ; the old green gravestone with nettle round 
 they ; nothing fresh and bright but the child , open round eye at 
 the swift post - chaise ; nothing noisy and busy but the gap cur of 
 mysterious pedigree . what a much pretty village Hayslope be ! and it 
 should not be neglect like this place : vigorous repair should go 
 on everywhere among farm - building and cottage , and traveller in 
 post - chaise , come along the Rosseter road , should do nothing but 
 admire as they go . and Adam Bede should superintend all the repair , 
 for he have a share in Burge 's business now , and , if he like , Arthur 
 would put some money into the concern and buy the old man out in another 
 year or two . that be an ugly fault in Arthur 's life , that affair last 
 summer , but the future should make amend . many man would have retain 
 a feeling of vindictiveness towards Adam , but he would not - he would 
 resolutely overcome all littleness of that kind , for he have certainly 
 be very much in the wrong ; and though Adam have be harsh and violent , 
 and have thrust on he a painful dilemma , the poor fellow be in love , 
 and have real provocation . no , Arthur have not an evil feeling in his mind 
 towards any human being : he be happy , and would make every one else 
 happy that come within his reach . 
 and here be dear old Hayslope at last , sleep , on the hill , like a 
 quiet old place as it be , in the late afternoon sunlight , and opposite 
 to it the great shoulder of the Binton Hills , below they the purplish 
 blackness of the hang wood , and at last the pale front of the Abbey , 
 look out from among the oak of the Chase , as if anxious for the 
 heir 's return . " Poor Grandfather ! and he lie dead there . he be a young 
 fellow once , come into the estate and make his plan . so the world 
 go round ! Aunt Lydia must feel very desolate , poor thing ; but she 
 shall be indulge as much as she indulge her fat Fido . " 
 the wheel of Arthur 's chaise have be anxiously listen for at the 
 Chase , for to - day be Friday , and the funeral have already be defer 
 two day . before it draw up on the gravel of the courtyard , all the 
 servant in the house be assemble to receive he with a grave , decent 
 welcome , befit a house of death . a month ago , perhaps , it would have 
 be difficult for they to have maintain a suitable sadness in their 
 face , when Mr. Arthur be come to take possession ; but the heart of 
 the head - servant be heavy that day for another cause than the death 
 of the old squire , and more than one of they be long to be twenty 
 mile away , as Mr. Craig be , know what be to become of Hetty 
 Sorrel - pretty Hetty Sorrel - whom they use to see every week . they have 
 the partisanship of household servant who like their place , and 
 be not inclined to go the full length of the severe indignation feel 
 against he by the farming tenant , but rather to make excuse for he ; 
 nevertheless , the upper servant , who have be on term of neighbourly 
 intercourse with the Poysers for many year , could not help feel that 
 the long - for event of the young squire be come into the estate have 
 be rob of all its pleasantness . 
 to Arthur it be nothing surprising that the servant look grave and 
 sad : he himself be very much touch on see they all again , and 
 feeling that he be in a new relation to they . it be that sort of 
 pathetic emotion which have more pleasure than pain in it - which be 
 perhaps one of the most delicious of all state to a good - natured man , 
 conscious of the power to satisfy his good nature . his heart swell 
 agreeably as he say , " well , Mills , how be my aunt ? " 
 but now Mr. Bygate , the lawyer , who have be in the house ever since 
 the death , come forward to give deferential greeting and answer all 
 question , and Arthur walk with he towards the library , where his 
 Aunt Lydia be expect he . Aunt Lydia be the only person in the 
 house who know nothing about Hetty . her sorrow as a maiden daughter 
 be unmixe with any other thought than those of anxiety about funeral 
 arrangement and her own future lot ; and , after the manner of woman , 
 she mourn for the father who have make her life important , all the more 
 because she have a secret sense that there be little mourning for he in 
 other heart . 
 but Arthur kiss her tearful face more tenderly than he have ever do 
 in his life before . 
 " Dear Aunt , " he say affectionately , as he hold her hand , " your loss be 
 the great of all , but you must tell I how to try and make it up to 
 you all the rest of your life . " 
 " it be so sudden and so dreadful , Arthur , " poor Miss Lydia begin , 
 pour out her little plaint , and Arthur sit down to listen with 
 impatient patience . when a pause come , he say : 
 " now , Aunt , I will leave you for a quarter of an hour just to go to my own 
 room , and then I shall come and give full attention to everything . " 
 " my room be all ready for I , I suppose , Mills ? " he say to the butler , 
 who seem to be linger uneasily about the entrance - hall . 
 " yes , sir , and there be letter for you ; they be all lay on the 
 writing - table in your dressing - room . " 
 on enter the small anteroom which be call a dressing - room , but 
 which Arthur really use only to lounge and write in , he just cast his 
 eye on the writing - table , and see that there be several letter and 
 packet lie there ; but he be in the uncomfortable dusty condition 
 of a man who have have a long hurried journey , and he must really refresh 
 himself by attend to his toilette a little , before he read his 
 letter . Pym be there , make everything ready for he , and soon , with 
 a delightful freshness about he , as if he be prepared to begin a new 
 day , he go back into his dressing - room to open his letter . the level 
 ray of the low afternoon sun enter directly at the window , and as 
 Arthur seat himself in his velvet chair with their pleasant warmth 
 upon he , he be conscious of that quiet well - being which perhaps you 
 and I have feel on a sunny afternoon when , in our bright youth and 
 health , life have open a new vista for we , and long to - morrow of 
 activity have stretch before we like a lovely plain which there be no 
 need for hurrying to look at , because it be all our own . 
 the top letter be place with its address upwards : it be in Mr. 
 Irwine 's handwriting , Arthur see at once ; and below the address be 
 write , " to be deliver as soon as he arrive . " nothing could have 
 be less surprising to he than a letter from Mr. Irwine at that 
 moment : of course , there be something he wish Arthur to know early 
 than it be possible for they to see each other . at such a time as that 
 it be quite natural that Irwine should have something press to say . 
 Arthur break the seal with an agreeable anticipation of soon see the 
 writer . 
 " I send this letter to meet you on your arrival , Arthur , because I may 
 then be at Stoniton , whither I be call by the most painful duty it have 
 ever be give I to perform , and it be right that you should know what 
 I have to tell you without delay . 
 " I will not attempt to add by one word of reproach to the retribution 
 that be now fall on you : any other word that I could write at this 
 moment must be weak and unmeaning by the side of those in which I must 
 tell you the simple fact . 
 " Hetty Sorrel be in prison , and will be try on Friday for the crime of 
 child - murder . " ... 
 Arthur read no more . he start up from his chair and stand for a single 
 minute with a sense of violent convulsion in his whole frame , as if the 
 life be go out of he with horrible throb ; but the next minute he 
 have rush out of the room , still clutch the letter - he be hurry 
 along the corridor , and down the stair into the hall . mill be still 
 there , but Arthur do not see he , as he pass like a hunted man across 
 the hall and out along the gravel . the butler hurry out after he 
 as fast as his elderly limb could run : he guess , he know , where the 
 young squire be go . 
 when Mills get to the stable , a horse be be saddle , and Arthur be 
 force himself to read the remain word of the letter . he thrust 
 it into his pocket as the horse be lead up to he , and at that moment 
 catch sight of Mills ' anxious face in front of he . 
 " tell they I be go - go to Stoniton , " he say in a muffled tone of 
 agitation - spring into the saddle , and set off at a gallop . 
 Chapter XLV 
 in the Prison 
 NEAR sunset that evening an elderly gentleman be stand with his back 
 against the small entrance - door of Stoniton jail , say a few last 
 word to the depart chaplain . the chaplain walk away , but the 
 elderly gentleman stand still , look down on the pavement and stroke 
 his chin with a ruminate air , when he be rouse by a sweet clear 
 woman 's voice , say , " can I get into the prison , if you please ? " 
 he turn his head and look fixedly at the speaker for a few moment 
 without answer . 
 " I have see you before , " he say at last . " do you remember preach on 
 the village green at Hayslope in Loamshire ? " 
 " yes , sir , surely . be you the gentleman that stay to listen on 
 horseback ? " 
 " yes . why do you want to go into the prison ? " 
 " I want to go to Hetty Sorrel , the young woman who have be condemn 
 to death - and to stay with she , if I may be permit . have you power in 
 the prison , sir ? " 
 " yes ; I be a magistrate , and can get admittance for you . but do you 
 know this criminal , Hetty Sorrel ? " 
 " yes , we be kin . my own aunt marry her uncle , Martin Poyser . but I 
 be away at leed , and do not   know of this great trouble in time to get 
 here before to - day . I entreat you , sir , for the love of our heavenly 
 Father , to let I go to she and stay with she . " 
 " how do you know she be condemn to death , if you be only just come 
 from leed ? " 
 " I have see my uncle since the trial , sir . he be go back to his home 
 now , and the poor sinner be forsake of all . I beseech you to get leave 
 for I to be with she . " 
 " what ! have you courage to stay all night in the prison ? she be very 
 sullen , and will scarcely make answer when she be speak to . " 
 " oh , sir , it may please God to open her heart still . do not   let we 
 delay . " 
 " come , then , " say the elderly gentleman , ring and gain admission , 
 " I know you have a key to unlock heart . " 
 Dinah mechanically take off her bonnet and shawl as soon as they be 
 within the prison court , from the habit she have of throw they off 
 when she preach or pray , or visit the sick ; and when they enter 
 the jailer 's room , she lay they down on a chair unthinkingly . there be 
 no agitation visible in she , but a deep concentrated calmness , as if , 
 even when she be speak , her soul be in prayer reposing on an unseen 
 support . 
 after speak to the jailer , the magistrate turn to she and say , 
 " the turnkey will take you to the prisoner 's cell and leave you there 
 for the night , if you desire it , but you can not   have a light during the 
 night - it be contrary to rule . my name be Colonel Townley : if I can 
 help you in anything , ask the jailer for my address and come to I . 
 I take some interest in this Hetty Sorrel , for the sake of that fine 
 fellow , Adam Bede . I happen to see he at Hayslope the same evening I 
 hear you preach , and recognize he in court to - day , ill as he look . " 
 " ah , sir , can you tell I anything about he ? can you tell I where 
 he lodge ? for my poor uncle be too much weigh down with trouble to 
 remember . " 
 " close by here . I inquire all about he of Mr. Irwine . he lodge over 
 a tinman 's shop , in the street on the right hand as you enter the 
 prison . there be an old school - master with he . now , good - bye : I wish 
 you success . " 
 " Farewell , sir . I be grateful to you . " 
 as Dinah cross the prison court with the turnkey , the solemn evening 
 light seem to make the wall high than they be by day , and the 
 sweet pale face in the cap be more than ever like a white flower on 
 this background of gloom . the turnkey look askance at she all the 
 while , but never speak . he somehow feel that the sound of his own rude 
 voice would be grate just then . he strike a light as they enter the 
 dark corridor lead to the condemn cell , and then say in his most 
 civil tone , " it will be pretty nigh dark in the cell a'ready , but I can 
 stop with my light a bit , if you like . " 
 " Nay , friend , thank you , " say Dinah . " I wish to go in alone . " 
 " as you like , " say the jailer , turn the harsh key in the lock and 
 open the door wide enough to admit Dinah . a jet of light from his 
 lantern fall on the opposite corner of the cell , where Hetty be sit 
 on her straw pallet with her face bury in her knee . it seem as if 
 she be asleep , and yet the grating of the lock would have be likely 
 to waken she . 
 the door close again , and the only light in the cell be that of the 
 evening sky , through the small high grating - enough to discern human 
 face by . Dinah stand still for a minute , hesitate to speak because 
 Hetty might be asleep , and look at the motionless heap with a 
 yearn heart . then she say , softly , " Hetty ! " 
 there be a slight movement perceptible in Hetty 's frame - a start such 
 as might have be produce by a feeble electrical shock - but she do 
 not look up . Dinah speak again , in a tone make strong by irrepressible 
 emotion , " Hetty ... it be Dinah . " 
 again there be a slight startled movement through Hetty 's frame , 
 and without uncover her face , she raise her head a little , as if 
 listen . 
 " Hetty ... Dinah be come to you . " 
 after a moment 's pause , Hetty lift her head slowly and timidly from 
 her knee and raise her eye . the two pale face be look at 
 each other : one with a wild hard despair in it , the other full of sad 
 yearn love . Dinah unconsciously open her arm and stretch they 
 out . 
 " do not   you know I , Hetty ? do not   you remember Dinah ? do you think I 
 would not   come to you in trouble ? " 
 Hetty keep her eye fix on Dinah 's face - at first like an animal that 
 gaze , and gaze , and keep aloof . 
 " I be come to be with you , Hetty - not to leave you - to stay with you - to 
 be your sister to the last . " 
 slowly , while Dinah be speak , Hetty rise , take a step forward , and 
 be clasp in Dinah 's arm . 
 they stand so a long while , for neither of they feel the impulse to move 
 apart again . Hetty , without any distinct thought of it , hang on this 
 something that be come to clasp she now , while she be sink helpless 
 in a dark gulf ; and Dinah feel a deep joy in the first sign that her 
 love be welcome by the wretched lose one . the light get fainter as 
 they stand , and when at last they sit down on the straw pallet together , 
 their face have become indistinct . 
 not a word be speak . Dinah wait , hop for a spontaneous word from 
 Hetty , but she sit in the same dull despair , only clutch the hand 
 that hold hers and lean her cheek against Dinah 's . it be the human 
 contact she cling to , but she be not the less sinking into the dark 
 gulf . 
 Dinah begin to doubt whether Hetty be conscious who it be that sit 
 beside she . she think suffering and fear might have drive the poor 
 sinner out of her mind . but it be bear in upon she , as she afterwards 
 say , that she must not hurry God 's work : we be overhasty to speak - as 
 if God do not manifest himself by our silent feeling , and make his love 
 feel through ours . she do not know how long they sit in that way , but 
 it get dark and darker , till there be only a pale patch of light on 
 the opposite wall : all the rest be darkness . but she feel the Divine 
 presence more and more - nay , as if she herself be a part of it , and 
 it be the divine pity that be beat in her heart and be willing the 
 rescue of this helpless one . at last she be prompt to speak and find 
 out how far Hetty be conscious of the present . 
 " Hetty , " she say gently , " do you know who it be that sit by your 
 side ? " 
 " yes , " Hetty answer slowly , " it be Dinah . " 
 " and do you remember the time when we be at the Hall Farm together , 
 and that night when I tell you to be sure and think of I as a friend in 
 trouble ? " 
 " yes , " say Hetty . then , after a pause , she add , " but you can do 
 nothing for I . you can not   make them do anything . they will hang I o ' 
 Monday - it be Friday now . " 
 as Hetty say the last word , she cling close to Dinah , shudder . 
 " no , Hetty , I can not   save you from that death . but be not   the suffering 
 less hard when you have somebody with you , that feel for you - that you 
 can speak to , and say what be in your heart? ... yes , Hetty : you lean on 
 I : you be glad to have I with you . " 
 " you will not   leave I , Dinah ? you will keep close to I ? " 
 " no , Hetty , I will not   leave you . I will stay with you to the last .... but , 
 Hetty , there be some one else in this cell besides I , some one close to 
 you . " 
 Hetty say , in a frightened whisper , " who ? " 
 " some one who have be with you through all your hour of sin and 
 trouble - who have know every thought you have have - have see where you 
 go , where you lay down and rise up again , and all the deed you have 
 try to hide in darkness . and on Monday , when I can not   follow you - when 
 my arm can not   reach you - when death have part we - he who be with 
 we now , and know all , will be with you then . it make no 
 difference - whether we live or die , we be in the presence of God . " 
 " oh , Dinah , will not   nobody do anything for I ? will they hang I for 
 certain? ... I would not   mind if they would let I live . " 
 " my poor Hetty , death be very dreadful to you . I know it be dreadful . 
 but if you have a friend to take care of you after death - in that 
 other world - some one whose love be great than mine - who can do 
 everything? ... if God our Father be your friend , and be willing to 
 save you from sin and suffering , so as you should neither know wicked 
 feeling nor pain again ? if you could believe he love you and would 
 help you , as you believe I love you and will help you , it would not   be so 
 hard to die on Monday , would it ? " 
 " but I can not   know anything about it , " Hetty say , with sullen sadness . 
 " because , Hetty , you be shut up your soul against he , by try 
 to hide the truth . God 's love and mercy can overcome all thing - our 
 ignorance , and weakness , and all the burden of our past wickedness - all 
 thing but our wilful sin , sin that we cling to , and will not give up . 
 you believe in my love and pity for you , Hetty , but if you have not let 
 I come near you , if you would not   have look at I or speak to I , 
 you would have shut I out from help you . I could not   have make you feel 
 my love ; I could not   have tell you what I feel for you . do not   shut God 's 
 love out in that way , by cling to sin .... he can not   bless you while 
 you have one falsehood in your soul ; his pardon mercy can not   reach 
 you until you open your heart to he , and say , ' I have do this great 
 wickedness ; o God , save I , make I pure from sin . ' while you cling to 
 one sin and will not part with it , it must drag you down to misery after 
 death , as it have drag you to misery here in this world , my poor , poor 
 Hetty . it be sin that bring dread , and darkness , and despair : there be 
 light and blessedness for we as soon as we cast it off . God enter our 
 soul then , and teach we , and bring we strength and peace . cast it 
 off now , Hetty - now : confess the wickedness you have do - the sin you 
 have be guilty of against your Heavenly Father . let we kneel down 
 together , for we be in the presence of God . " 
 Hetty obey Dinah 's movement , and sink on her knee . they still hold 
 each other 's hand , and there be long silence . then Dinah say , " Hetty , 
 we be before God . he be wait for you to tell the truth . " 
 still there be silence . at last Hetty speak , in a tone of beseech - 
 " Dinah ... help I ... I can not   feel anything like you ... my heart be hard . " 
 Dinah hold the cling hand , and all her soul go forth in her voice : 
 " Jesus , thou present Saviour ! Thou hast know the depth of all sorrow : 
 thou hast enter that black darkness where God be not , and hast utter 
 the cry of the forsaken . come Lord , and gather of the fruit of thy 
 travail and thy pleading . stretch forth thy hand , thou who art mighty 
 to save to the uttermost , and rescue this lose one . she be clothe round 
 with thick darkness . the fetter of her sin be upon she , and she can not 
 stir to come to thee . she can only feel her heart be hard , and she be 
 helpless . she cry to I , thy weak creature .... saviour ! it be a blind 
 cry to thee . hear it ! pierce the darkness ! look upon she with thy face 
 of love and sorrow that thou didst turn on he who deny thee , and melt 
 her hard heart . 
 " see , Lord , I bring she , as they of old bring the sick and helpless , 
 and thou didst heal they . I bear she on my arm and carry she before 
 thee . fear and trembling have take hold on she , but she tremble only 
 at the pain and death of the body . breathe upon her thy life - give 
 Spirit , and put a new fear within she - the fear of her sin . make she 
 dread to keep the accursed thing within her soul . make she feel the 
 presence of the live God , who behold all the past , to whom the 
 darkness be as noonday ; who be wait now , at the eleventh hour , for 
 she to turn to he , and confess her sin , and cry for mercy - now , before 
 the night of death come , and the moment of pardon be for ever flee , 
 like yesterday that returneth not . 
 " Saviour ! it be yet time - time to snatch this poor soul from everlaste 
 darkness . I believe - I believe in thy infinite love . what be my love or 
 my pleading ? it be quench in thine . I can only clasp she in my weak 
 arm and urge she with my weak pity . thou - thou wilt breathe on the dead 
 soul , and it shall arise from the unanswere sleep of death . 
 " Yea , Lord , I see thee , come through the darkness come , like the 
 morning , with healing on thy wing . the mark of thy agony be upon 
 thee - I see , I see thou art able and willing to save - thou wilt not let 
 her perish for ever . come , mighty saviour ! let the dead hear thy voice . 
 let the eye of the blind be open . let she see that God encompass 
 she . let her tremble at nothing but at the sin that cut she off from 
 he . melt the hard heart . unseal the closed lip : make her cry with her 
 whole soul , ' Father , I have sin . ' ... " 
 " Dinah , " Hetty sob out , throw her arm round Dinah 's neck , " I will 
 speak ... I will tell ... I will not   hide it any more . " 
 but the tear and sob be too violent . Dinah raise she gently from 
 her knee and seat she on the pallet again , sit down by her side . 
 it be a long time before the convulse throat be quiet , and even 
 then they sit some time in stillness and darkness , hold each other 's 
 hand . at last Hetty whisper , " I do do it , Dinah ... I bury it in the 
 wood ... the little baby ... and it cry ... I hear it cry ... ever such a way 
 off ... all night ... and I go back because it cry . " 
 she pause , and then speak hurriedly in a loud , plead tone . 
 " but I think perhaps it would not   die - there might somebody find it . I 
 do not   kill it - I do not   kill it myself . I put it down there and cover 
 it up , and when I come back it be go .... it be because I be so 
 very miserable , Dinah ... I do not   know where to go ... and I try to kill 
 myself before , and I could not . oh , I try so to drown myself in the 
 pool , and I could not . I go to Windsor - I run away - do you know ? I 
 go to find he , as he might take care of I ; and he be go ; and then 
 I do not   know what to do . I daredn't   go back home again - I could not   bear 
 it . I could not   have bear to look at anybody , for they would have scorn I . 
 I think o ' you sometimes , and think I would come to you , for I do not 
 think you would be cross with I , and cry shame on I . I think I could 
 tell you . but then the other folk ' ud come to know it at last , and I 
 could not   bear that . it be partly think o ' you make I come toward 
 Stoniton ; and , besides , I be so frightened at go wander about 
 till I be a beggar - woman , and have nothing ; and sometimes it seem as 
 if I must go back to the farm soon than that . oh , it be so dreadful , 
 Dinah ... I be so miserable ... I wish I would never be bear into this 
 world . I should never like to go into the green field again - I hat 
 them so in my misery . " 
 Hetty pause again , as if the sense of the past be too strong upon she 
 for word . 
 " and then I get to Stoniton , and I begin to feel frightened that night , 
 because I be so near home . and then the little baby be bear , when I 
 do not   expect it ; and the thought come into my mind that I might get 
 rid of it and go home again . the thought come all of a sudden , as I be 
 lie in the bed , and it get strong and strong ... I long so to go 
 back again ... I could not   bear be so lonely and come to beg for want . 
 and it give I strength and resolution to get up and dress myself . I 
 feel I must do it ... I do not   know how ... I think I would find a pool , if 
 I could , like that other , in the corner of the field , in the dark . 
 and when the woman go out , I feel as if I be strong enough to do 
 anything ... I think I should get rid of all my misery , and go back 
 home , and never let them know why I run away I put on my bonnet and 
 shawl , and go out into the dark street , with the baby under my cloak ; 
 and I walk fast till I get into a street a good way off , and there 
 be a public , and I get some warm stuff to drink and some bread . and 
 I walk on and on , and I hardly feel the ground I trod on ; and it get 
 light , for there come the moon - oh , Dinah , it frighten I when it 
 first look at I out o ' the clouds - it never look so before ; and 
 I turn out of the road into the field , for I be afraid o ' meeting 
 anybody with the moon shin on I . and I come to a haystack , where 
 I think I could lie down and keep myself warm all night . there be a 
 place cut into it , where I could make I a bed , and I lay comfortable , 
 and the baby be warm against I ; and I must have go to sleep for a 
 good while , for when I wake it be morning , but not very light , and the 
 baby be cry . and I see a wood a little way off ... I think there would 
 perhaps be a ditch or a pond there ... and it be so early I think I 
 could hide the child there , and get a long way off before folk be up . 
 and then I think I would go home - I would get ride in cart and go home and 
 tell them I would be to try and see for a place , and could not   get one . I 
 long so for it , Dinah , I long so to be safe at home . I do not   know 
 how I feel about the baby . I seem to hate it - it be like a heavy 
 weight hang round my neck ; and yet its crying go through I , and I 
 daredn't   look at its little hand and face . but I go on to the wood , 
 and I walk about , but there be no water .... " 
 Hetty shudder . she be silent for some moment , and when she begin 
 again , it be in a whisper . 
 " I come to a place where there be lot of chip and turf , and I sit 
 down on the trunk of a tree to think what I should do . and all of a 
 sudden I see a hole under the nut - tree , like a little grave . and it 
 dart into I like lightning - I would lay the baby there and cover it with 
 the grass and the chip . I could not   kill it any other way . and I would do 
 it in a minute ; and , oh , it cry so , Dinah - I could not   cover it quite 
 up - I think perhaps somebody ' ud come and take care of it , and then 
 it would not   die . and I make haste out of the wood , but I could hear it 
 cry all the while ; and when I get out into the field , it be as if I 
 be hold fast - I could not   go away , for all I want so to go . and I sit 
 against the haystack to watch if anybody ' ud come . I be very hungry , 
 and I have only a bit of bread leave , but I could not   go away . and after ever 
 such a while - hour and hour - the man come - he in a smock - frock , and 
 he look at I so , I be frightened , and I make haste and go on . I 
 think he be go to the wood and would perhaps find the baby . and I 
 go right on , till I come to a village , a long way off from the wood , 
 and I be very sick , and faint , and hungry . I get something to eat 
 there , and buy a loaf . but I be frightened to stay . I hear the baby 
 crying , and think the other folk hear it too - and I go on . but 
 I be so tired , and it be get towards dark . and at last , by the 
 roadside there be a barn - ever such a way off any house - like the barn 
 in Abbot 's Close , and I think I could go in there and hide myself 
 among the hay and straw , and nobody ' ud be likely to come . I go in , 
 and it be half full o ' truss of straw , and there be some hay too . 
 and I make myself a bed , ever so far behind , where nobody could find 
 I ; and I be so tired and weak , I go to sleep .... but oh , the baby 's 
 crying keep wake I , and I think that man as look at I so be 
 come and lay hold of I . but I must have sleep a long while at last , 
 though I do not   know , for when I get up and go out of the barn , I 
 do not   know whether it be night or morning . but it be morning , for 
 it keep get light , and I turn back the way I would come . I could not 
 help it , Dinah ; it be the baby 's crying make I go - and yet I be 
 frightened to death . I think that man in the smock - frock ' ud see I 
 and know I put the baby there . but I go on , for all that . I would leave off 
 think about go home - it have go out o ' my mind . I see nothing 
 but that place in the wood where I have bury the baby ... I see it now . oh 
 Dinah ! shall I allay see it ? " 
 Hetty clung round Dinah and shudder again . the silence seem long 
 before she go on . 
 " I meet nobody , for it be very early , and I get into the wood .... I know 
 the way to the place ... the place against the nut - tree ; and I could 
 hear it cry at every step .... I think it be alive .... I do not   know 
 whether I be frightened or glad ... I do not   know what I feel . I only know 
 I be in the wood and hear the cry . I do not   know what I feel till I see 
 the baby be go . and when I would put it there , I think I should like 
 somebody to find it and save it from die ; but when I see it be go , 
 I be strike like a stone , with fear . I never think o ' stirring , I 
 feel so weak . I know I could not   run away , and everybody as see I ' ud 
 know about the baby . my heart go like a stone . I could not   wish or try 
 for anything ; it seem like as if I should stay there for ever , and 
 nothing ' ud ever change . but they come and take I away . " 
 Hetty be silent , but she shudder again , as if there be still 
 something behind ; and Dinah wait , for her heart be so full that tear 
 must come before word . at last Hetty burst out , with a sob , " Dinah , do 
 you think God will take away that cry and the place in the wood , now 
 I have   tell everything ? " 
 " let we pray , poor sinner . let we fall on our knee again , and pray to 
 the God of all mercy . " 
 Chapter XLVI 
 the hour of Suspense 
 ON Sunday morning , when the church bell in Stoniton be ring for 
 morning service , Bartle Massey re - enter Adam 's room , after a short 
 absence , and say , " Adam , here be a visitor want to see you . " 
 Adam be seat with be back towards the door , but he start up and 
 turn round instantly , with a flushed face and an eager look . his face 
 be even thin and more worn than we have see it before , but he be 
 wash and shaven this Sunday morning . 
 " be it any news ? " he say . 
 " keep yourself quiet , my lad , " say Bartle ; " keep quiet . it be not what 
 you be think of . it be the young Methodist woman come from the prison . 
 she be at the bottom o ' the stair , and want to know if you think 
 well to see she , for she have something to say to you about that poor 
 castaway ; but she would not   come in without your leave , she say . she 
 think you would perhaps like to go out and speak to she . these preach 
 woman be not so back'ard commonly , " Bartle mutter to himself . 
 " ask she to come in , " say Adam . 
 he be stand with his face towards the door , and as Dinah enter , 
 lift up her mild grey eye towards he , she see at once the great 
 change that have come since the day when she have look up at the tall 
 man in the cottage . there be a trembling in her clear voice as she put 
 her hand into his and say , " be comfort , Adam Bede , the Lord have not 
 forsake she . " 
 " bless you for come to she , " Adam say . " Mr. Massey bring I word 
 yesterday as you be come . " 
 they could neither of they say any more just yet , but stand before each 
 other in silence ; and Bartle Massey , too , who have put on his spectacle , 
 seem transfix , examine Dinah 's face . but he recover himself 
 first , and say , " sit down , young woman , sit down , " place the chair 
 for she and retire to his old seat on the bed . 
 " thank you , friend ; I will not   sit down , " say Dinah , " for I must hasten 
 back . she entreat I not to stay long away . what I come for , Adam 
 Bede , be to pray you to go and see the poor sinner and bid she 
 farewell . she desire to ask your forgiveness , and it be meet you should 
 see she to - day , rather than in the early morning , when the time will be 
 short . " 
 Adam stand tremble , and at last sink down on his chair again . 
 " it will not   be , " he say , " it will be put off - there will perhaps come a 
 pardon . Mr. Irwine say there be hope . he say , I need not   quite give it 
 up . " 
 " that be a blessed thought to I , " say Dinah , her eye fill with 
 tear . " it be a fearful thing hurry her soul away so fast . " 
 " but let what will be , " she add presently . " you will surely come , and 
 let she speak the word that be in her heart . although her poor soul be 
 very dark and discern little beyond the thing of the flesh , she be no 
 long hard . she be contrite , she have confess all to I . the pride of 
 her heart have give way , and she lean on I for help and desire to 
 be teach . this fill I with trust , for I can not but think that the 
 brother sometimes err in measure the divine love by the sinner 's 
 knowledge . she be go to write a letter to the friend at the Hall 
 Farm for I to give they when she be go , and when I tell she you be 
 here , she say , ' I should like to say good - bye to Adam and ask he to 
 forgive I . ' you will come , Adam ? perhaps you will even now come back 
 with I . " 
 " I can not , " Adam say . " I can not   say good - bye while there be any hope . I be 
 listen , and listen - I can not   think o ' nothing but that . it can not   be 
 as she will die that shameful death - I can not   bring my mind to it . " 
 he get up from his chair again and look away out of the window , while 
 Dinah stand with compassionate patience . in a minute or two he turn 
 round and say , " I will come , Dinah ... to - morrow morning ... if it must be . 
 I may have more strength to bear it , if I know it must be . tell she , I 
 forgive she ; tell she I will come - at the very last . " 
 " I will not urge you against the voice of your own heart , " say Dinah . 
 " I must hasten back to she , for it be wonderful how she cling now , and 
 be not willing to let I out of her sight . she use never to make any 
 return to my affection before , but now tribulation have open her heart . 
 Farewell , Adam . our heavenly Father comfort you and strengthen you 
 to bear all thing . " Dinah put out her hand , and Adam press it in 
 silence . 
 Bartle Massey be get up to lift the stiff latch of the door for 
 she , but before he could reach it , she have say gently , " farewell , 
 friend , " and be go , with her light step down the stair . 
 " well , " say Bartle , take off his spectacle and put they into his 
 pocket , " if there must be woman to make trouble in the world , it be 
 but fair there should be woman to be comforter under it ; and she be 
 one - she be one . it be a pity she be a Methodist ; but there be no get a 
 woman without some foolishness or other . " 
 Adam never go to bed that night . the excitement of suspense , 
 heighten with every hour that bring he near the fatal moment , 
 be too great , and in spite of his entreaty , in spite of his promise 
 that he would be perfectly quiet , the schoolmaster watch too . 
 " what do it matter to I , lad ? " Bartle say : " a night 's sleep more 
 or less ? I shall sleep long enough , by and by , underground . let I keep 
 thee company in trouble while I can . " 
 it be a long and dreary night in that small chamber . Adam would 
 sometimes get up and tread backwards and forwards along the short space 
 from wall to wall ; then he would sit down and hide his face , and no 
 sound would be hear but the ticking of the watch on the table , or 
 the fall of a cinder from the fire which the schoolmaster carefully 
 tend . sometimes he would burst out into vehement speech , " if I could 
 ha ' do anything to save she - if my bear anything would ha ' do any 
 good ... but t ' have to sit still , and know it , and do nothing ... it be 
 hard for a man to bear ... and to think o ' what might ha ' be now , if 
 it have not   be for HIM .... o God , it be the very day we should ha ' be 
 married . " 
 " Aye , my lad , " say Bartle tenderly , " it be heavy - it be heavy . but you 
 must remember this : when you think of marry she , you have a notion 
 she would get another sort of a nature inside she . you do not   think she 
 could have get harden in that little while to do what she be do . " 
 " I know - I know that , " say Adam . " I think she be love and 
 tender - hearted , and would not   tell a lie , or act deceitful . how could I 
 think any other way ? and if he would never come near she , and I would marry 
 she , and be love to she , and take care of she , she might never 
 ha ' do anything bad . what would it ha ' signify - my have a bit o ' 
 trouble with she ? it ' ud ha ' be nothing to this . " 
 " there be no knowing , my lad - there be no knowing what might have come . 
 the smart 's bad for you to bear now : you must have time - you must have 
 time . but I have   that opinion of you , that you will rise above it all and be 
 a man again , and there may good come out of this that we do not   see . " 
 " Good come out of it ! " say Adam passionately . " that do not   alter th ' 
 evil : her ruin can not   be undo . I hate that talk o ' people , as if there 
 be a way o ' make amend for everything . they would more need be bring 
 to see as the wrong they do can never be alter . when a man 's spoil 
 his fellow - creatur 's life , he be no right to comfort himself with 
 think good may come out of it . somebody else 's good do not   alter her 
 shame and misery . " 
 " well , lad , well , " say Bartle , in a gentle tone , strangely in contrast 
 with his usual peremptoriness and impatience of contradiction , " it be 
 likely enough I talk foolishness . I be an old fellow , and it be a good 
 many year since I be in trouble myself . it be easy find reason why 
 other folk should be patient . " 
 " Mr. Massey , " say Adam penitently , " I be very hot and hasty . I owe you 
 something different ; but you must not   take it ill of I . " 
 " not i , lad - not I. " 
 so the night wear on in agitation till the chill dawn and the grow 
 light bring the tremulous quiet that come on the brink of despair . 
 there would soon be no more suspense . 
 " let we go to the prison now , Mr. Massey , " say Adam , when he see the 
 hand of his watch at six . " if there be any news come , we shall hear about 
 it . " 
 the people be astir already , move rapidly , in one direction , through 
 the street . Adam try not to think where they be go , as they 
 hurry past he in that short space between his lodging and the prison 
 gate . he be thankful when the gate shut he in from see those 
 eager people . 
 no ; there be no news come - no pardon - no reprieve . 
 Adam linger in the court half an hour before he could bring himself 
 to send word to Dinah that he be come . but a voice catch his ear : he 
 could not shut out the word . 
 " the cart be to set off at half - past seven . " 
 it must be say - the last good - bye : there be no help . 
 in ten minute from that time , Adam be at the door of the cell . Dinah 
 have send he word that she could not come to he ; she could not leave 
 Hetty one moment ; but Hetty be prepare for the meeting . 
 he could not see she when he enter , for agitation deaden his sens , 
 and the dim cell be almost dark to he . he stand a moment after the 
 door close behind he , tremble and stupefy . 
 but he begin to see through the dimness - to see the dark eye lift up 
 to he once more , but with no smile in they . o God , how sad they look ! 
 the last time they have meet his be when he part from she with his 
 heart full of joyous hopeful love , and they look out with a tearful 
 smile from a pink , dimpled , childish face . the face be marble now ; the 
 sweet lip be pallid and half - open and quivering ; the dimple be all 
 go - all but one , that never go ; and the eye - O , the bad of all 
 be the likeness they have to Hetty 's . they be Hetty 's eye look 
 at he with that mournful gaze , as if she have come back to he from the 
 dead to tell he of her misery . 
 she be cling close to Dinah ; her cheek be against Dinah 's . it 
 seem as if her last faint strength and hope lie in that contact , and 
 the pitying love that shine out from Dinah 's face look like a visible 
 pledge of the Invisible Mercy . 
 when the sad eye meet - when Hetty and Adam look at each other - she 
 feel the change in he too , and it seem to strike she with fresh 
 fear . it be the first time she have see any being whose face seem to 
 reflect the change in herself : Adam be a new image of the dreadful past 
 and the dreadful present . she tremble more as she look at he . 
 " speak to he , Hetty , " Dinah say ; " tell he what be in your heart . " 
 Hetty obey she , like a little child . 
 " Adam ... I'm very sorry ... I behave very wrong to you ... will you forgive 
 I ... before I die ? " 
 Adam answer with a half - sob , " yes , I forgive thee Hetty . I forgive 
 thee long ago . " 
 it have seem to Adam as if his brain would burst with the anguish of 
 meet Hetty 's eye in the first moment , but the sound of her voice 
 utter these penitent word touch a chord which have be less 
 strained . there be a sense of relief from what be become unbearable , 
 and the rare tear come - they have never come before , since he have hang 
 on Seth 's neck in the beginning of his sorrow . 
 Hetty make an involuntary movement towards he , some of the love that 
 she have once live in the midst of be come near she again . she keep 
 hold of Dinah 's hand , but she go up to Adam and say timidly , " will 
 you kiss I again , Adam , for all I have   be so wicked ? " 
 Adam take the blanched waste hand she put out to he , and they give 
 each other the solemn unspeakable kiss of a lifelong parting . 
 " and tell he , " Hetty say , in rather a strong voice , " tell he ... for 
 there be nobody else to tell he ... as I go after he and could not   find 
 he ... and I hat he and curse he once ... but Dinah say I should 
 forgive he ... and I try ... for else God will not   forgive I . " 
 there be a noise at the door of the cell now - the key be be turn 
 in the lock , and when the door open , Adam see indistinctly that there 
 be several face there . he be too agitated to see more - even to 
 see that Mr. Irwine 's face be one of they . he feel that the last 
 preparation be begin , and he could stay no long . room 
 be silently make for he to depart , and he go to his chamber in 
 loneliness , leave Bartle Massey to watch and see the end . 
 chapter XLVII 
 the last Moment 
 it be a sight that some people remember well even than their own 
 sorrow - the sight in that grey clear morning , when the fatal cart 
 with the two young woman in it be descry by the waiting watch 
 multitude , cleave its way towards the hideous symbol of a deliberately 
 inflict sudden death . 
 all Stoniton have hear of Dinah Morris , the young Methodist woman who 
 have bring the obstinate criminal to confess , and there be as much 
 eagerness to see she as to see the wretched Hetty . 
 but Dinah be hardly conscious of the multitude . when Hetty have 
 catch sight of the vast crowd in the distance , she have clutch Dinah 
 convulsively . 
 " close your eye , Hetty , " Dinah say , " and let we pray without cease 
 to God . " 
 and in a low voice , as the cart go slowly along through the midst of 
 the gaze crowd , she pour forth her soul with the wrestling intensity 
 of a last pleading , for the trembling creature that clung to she and 
 clutch she as the only visible sign of love and pity . 
 Dinah do not know that the crowd be silent , gaze at she with a sort 
 of awe - she do not even know how near they be to the fatal spot , when 
 the cart stop , and she shrink appal at a loud shout hideous to her 
 ear , like a vast yell of demon . Hetty 's shriek mingle with the sound , 
 and they clasp each other in mutual horror . 
 but it be not a shout of execration - not a yell of exultant cruelty . 
 it be a shout of sudden excitement at the appearance of a horseman 
 cleave the crowd at full gallop . the horse be hot and distressed , but 
 answer to the desperate spurring ; the rider look as if his eye be 
 glaze by madness , and he see nothing but what be unseen by other . 
 see , he have something in his hand - he be hold it up as if it be a 
 signal . 
 the Sheriff know he : it be Arthur Donnithorne , carry in his hand a 
 hard - win release from death . 
 Chapter xlviii 
 another Meeting in the Wood 
 the next day , at evening , two man be walk from opposite point 
 towards the same scene , draw thither by a common memory . the scene be 
 the Grove by Donnithorne Chase : you know who the man be . 
 the old squire 's funeral have take place that morning , the will have be 
 read , and now in the first breathing - space , Arthur Donnithorne have come 
 out for a lonely walk , that he might look fixedly at the new future 
 before he and confirm himself in a sad resolution . he think he could 
 do that good in the Grove . 
 Adam too have come from stontion on Monday evening , and to - day he have 
 not leave home , except to go to the family at the Hall Farm and tell 
 they everything that Mr. Irwine have leave untold . he have agree with the 
 Poysers that he would follow they to their new neighbourhood , wherever 
 that might be , for he mean to give up the management of the wood , 
 and , as soon as it be practicable , he would wind up his business with 
 Jonathan Burge and settle with his mother and Seth in a home within 
 reach of the friend to whom he feel bind by a mutual sorrow . 
 " Seth and I be sure to find work , " he say . " a man that be get our 
 trade at his finger - end be at home everywhere ; and we must make a new 
 start . my mother will not   stand in the way , for she be tell I , since I come 
 home , she would make up her mind to be bury in another parish , if I 
 wish it , and if I would be more comfortable elsewhere . it be wonderful 
 how quiet she be be ever since I come back . it seem as if the very 
 greatness o ' the trouble have quiet and calm she . we shall all be 
 well in a new country , though there be some I shall be loath to leave 
 behind . but I will not   part from you and your , if I can help it , Mr. 
 Poyser . Trouble 's make we kin . " 
 " aye , lad , " say Martin . " we will go out o ' hear o ' that man 's name . 
 but I doubt we shall ne'er go far enough for folk not to find out as 
 we have   get they belong to we as be transport o'er the sea , and 
 be like to be hang . we shall have that flyin ' up in our face , and 
 our child 's after we . " 
 that be a long visit to the Hall Farm , and draw too strongly on Adam 's 
 energy for he to think of see other , or re - enter on his old 
 occupation till the morrow . " but to - morrow , " he say to himself , " I will 
 go to work again . I shall learn to like it again some time , maybe ; and 
 it be right whether I like it or not . " 
 this evening be the last he would allow to be absorb by sorrow : 
 suspense be go now , and he must bear the unalterable . he be resolve 
 not to see Arthur Donnithorne again , if it be possible to avoid he . 
 he have no message to deliver from Hetty now , for Hetty have see Arthur . 
 and Adam distrust himself - he have learn to dread the violence of his 
 own feeling . that word of Mr. Irwine 's - that he must remember what he 
 have feel after give the last blow to Arthur in the Grove - have remain 
 with he . 
 these thought about Arthur , like all thought that be charge with 
 strong feeling , be continually recur , and they always call up 
 the image of the Grove - of that spot under the overarching bough where 
 he have catch sight of the two bend figure , and have be possess 
 by sudden rage . 
 " I will go and see it again to - night for the last time , " he say ; " it will 
 do I good ; it will make I feel over again what I feel when I would knock 
 he down . I feel what poor empty work it be , as soon as I would do it , 
 before I begin to think he might be dead . " 
 in this way it happen that Arthur and Adam be walk towards the 
 same spot at the same time . 
 Adam have on his working - dress again , now , for he have throw off the 
 other with a sense of relief as soon as he come home ; and if he have have 
 the basket of tool over his shoulder , he might have be take , with 
 his pale waste face , for the spectre of the Adam Bede who enter the 
 Grove on that August evening eight month ago . but he have no basket of 
 tool , and he be not walk with the old erectness , look keenly 
 round he ; his hand be thrust in his side pocket , and his eye 
 rest chiefly on the ground . he have not long enter the Grove , and now 
 he pause before a beech . he know that tree well ; it be the boundary 
 mark of his youth - the sign , to he , of the time when some of his 
 early , strong feeling have leave he . he feel sure they would never 
 return . and yet , at this moment , there be a stirring of affection 
 at the remembrance of that Arthur Donnithorne whom he have believe in 
 before he have come up to this beech eight month ago . it be affection 
 for the dead : THAT Arthur exist no long . 
 he be disturb by the sound of approach footstep , but the beech 
 stand at a turning in the road , and he could not see who be come 
 until the tall slim figure in deep mourning suddenly stand before he at 
 only two yard ' distance . they both start , and look at each other 
 in silence . often , in the last fortnight , Adam have imagine himself 
 as close to Arthur as this , assail he with word that should be as 
 harrowing as the voice of remorse , force upon he a just share in the 
 misery he have cause ; and often , too , he have tell himself that such a 
 meeting have well not be . but in imagine the meeting he have always 
 see Arthur , as he have meet he on that evening in the Grove , florid , 
 careless , light of speech ; and the figure before he touch he with 
 the sign of suffering . Adam know what suffering be - he could not lay 
 a cruel finger on a bruised man . he feel no impulse that he need to 
 resist . silence be more just than reproach . Arthur be the first to 
 speak . 
 " Adam , " he say , quietly , " it may be a good thing that we have meet here , 
 for I wish to see you . I should have ask to see you to - morrow . " 
 he pause , but Adam say nothing . 
 " I know it be painful to you to meet I , " Arthur go on , " but it be not 
 likely to happen again for year to come . " 
 " no , sir , " say Adam , coldly , " that be what I mean to write to you 
 to - morrow , as it would be well all dealing should be at an end 
 between we , and somebody else put in my place . " 
 Arthur feel the answer keenly , and it be not without an effort that he 
 speak again . 
 " it be partly on that subject I wish to speak to you . I do not   want 
 to lessen your indignation against I , or ask you to do anything for 
 my sake . I only wish to ask you if you will help I to lessen the 
 evil consequence of the past , which be unchangeable . I do not   mean 
 consequence to myself , but to other . it be but little I can do , I 
 know . I know the bad consequence will remain ; but something may be 
 do , and you can help I . will you listen to I patiently ? " 
 " yes , sir , " say Adam , after some hesitation ; " I will hear what it be . if 
 I can help to mend anything , I will . anger ' ull mend nothing , I know . 
 we have   have enough o ' that . " 
 " I be go to the Hermitage , " say Arthur . " will you go there with I 
 and sit down ? we can talk well there . " 
 the Hermitage have never be enter since they leave it together , for 
 Arthur have lock up the key in his desk . and now , when he open the 
 door , there be the candle burn out in the socket ; there be the 
 chair in the same place where Adam remember sit ; there be the 
 waste - paper basket full of scrap , and deep down in it , Arthur feel in 
 an instant , there be the little pink silk handkerchief . it would have 
 be painful to enter this place if their previous thought have be 
 less painful . 
 they sit down opposite each other in the old place , and Arthur say , 
 " I be go away , Adam ; I be go into the army . " 
 Poor Arthur feel that Adam ought to be affect by this 
 announcement - ought to have a movement of sympathy towards he . but 
 Adam 's lip remain firmly closed , and the expression of his face 
 unchanged . 
 " what I want to say to you , " Arthur continue , " be this : one of my 
 reason for go away be that no one else may leave Hayslope - may leave 
 their home on my account . I would do anything , there be no sacrifice 
 I would not make , to prevent any further injury to other through 
 my - through what have happen . " 
 Arthur 's word have precisely the opposite effect to that he have 
 anticipate . Adam think he perceive in they that notion of 
 compensation for irretrievable wrong , that self - soothe attempt to 
 make evil bear the same fruit as good , which most of all rouse his 
 indignation . he be as strongly impel to look painful fact right in 
 the face as Arthur be to turn away his eye from they . moreover , he 
 have the wakeful suspicious pride of a poor man in the presence of a rich 
 man . he feel his old severity return as he say , " the time 's past for 
 that , sir . a man should make sacrifice to keep clear of do a wrong ; 
 sacrifice will not   undo it when it be do . when people 's feeling have get 
 a deadly wound , they can not   be cure with favour . " 
 " favour ! " say Arthur , passionately ; " no ; how can you suppose I mean 
 that ? but the Poysers - Mr. Irwine tell I the poyser mean to leave the 
 place where they have live so many year - for generation . do not   you 
 see , as Mr. Irwine do , that if they could be persuade to overcome the 
 feeling that drive they away , it would be much well for they in the 
 end to remain on the old spot , among the friend and neighbour who know 
 they ? " 
 " that be true , " say Adam coldly . " but then , sir , folk 's feeling be 
 not so easily overcome . it will be hard for Martin Poyser to go to a 
 strange place , among strange face , when he be be breed up on the Hall 
 Farm , and his father before he ; but then it ' ud be hard for a man 
 with his feeling to stay . I do not   see how the thing be to be make any 
 other than hard . there be a sort o ' damage , sir , that can not   be make up 
 for . " 
 Arthur be silent some moment . in spite of other feeling dominant in 
 he this evening , his pride wince under Adam 's mode of treat he . 
 be not   he himself suffer ? be not he too oblige to renounce his most 
 cherish hope ? it be now as it have be eight month ago - Adam be 
 force Arthur to feel more intensely the irrevocableness of his own 
 wrong - doing . he be present the sort of resistance that be the most 
 irritate to Arthur 's eager ardent nature . but his anger be subdue 
 by the same influence that have subdue Adam 's when they first confront 
 each other - by the mark of suffer in a long familiar face . the 
 momentary struggle end in the feeling that he could bear a great deal 
 from Adam , to whom he have be the occasion of bear so much ; but 
 there be a touch of plead , boyish vexation in his tone as he say , 
 " but people may make injury bad by unreasonable conduct - by give 
 way to anger and satisfy that for the moment , instead of think 
 what will be the effect in the future . 
 " if I be go to stay here and act as landlord , " he add presently , 
 with still more eagerness - " if I be careless about what I have 
 do - what I have   be the cause of , you would have some excuse , Adam , for 
 go away and encourage other to go . you would have some excuse then 
 for try to make the evil bad . but when I tell you I be go away 
 for year - when you know what that mean for I , how it cut off every 
 plan of happiness I have   ever form - it be impossible for a sensible 
 man like you to believe that there be any real ground for the Poysers 
 refuse to remain . I know their feeling about disgrace - Mr. Irwine have 
 tell I all ; but he be of opinion that they might be persuade out of 
 this idea that they be disgrace in the eye of their neighbour , 
 and that they can not   remain on my estate , if you would join he in his 
 effort - if you would stay yourself and go on manage the old wood . " 
 Arthur pause a moment and then add , pleadingly , " you know that be a 
 good work to do for the sake of other people , besides the owner . and 
 you do not   know but that they may have a well owner soon , whom you will 
 like to work for . if I die , my cousin Tradgett will have the estate and 
 take my name . he be a good fellow . " 
 Adam could not help be move : it be impossible for he not to feel 
 that this be the voice of the honest warm - hearted Arthur whom he have 
 love and be proud of in old day ; but near memory would not be 
 thrust away . he be silent ; yet Arthur see an answer in his face that 
 induce he to go on , with grow earnestness . 
 " and then , if you would talk to the Poysers - if you would talk the 
 matter over with Mr. Irwine - he mean to see you to - morrow - and then if 
 you would join your argument to his to prevail on they not to go .... I 
 know , of course , that they would not accept any favour from I - I mean 
 nothing of that kind - but I be sure they would suffer less in the end . 
 Irwine think so too . and Mr. Irwine be to have the chief authority 
 on the estate - he have consent to undertake that . they will really be 
 under no man but one whom they respect and like . it would be the same 
 with you , Adam , and it could be nothing but a desire to give I bad 
 pain that could incline you to go . " 
 Arthur be silent again for a little while , and then say , with some 
 agitation in his voice , " I would not   act so towards you , I know . if you 
 be in my place and I in your , I should try to help you to do the 
 good . " 
 Adam make a hasty movement on his chair and look on the ground . Arthur 
 go on , " perhaps you have   never do anything you have   have bitterly to 
 repent of in your life , Adam ; if you have , you would be more generous . 
 you would know then that it be bad for I than for you . " 
 Arthur rise from his seat with the last word , and go to one of the 
 window , look out and turn his back on Adam , as he continue , 
 passionately , " have not   I love she too ? do not   I see she yesterday ? 
 shall not   I carry the thought of she about with I as much as you will ? and 
 do not   you think you would suffer more if you have be in fault ? " 
 there be silence for several minute , for the struggle in Adam 's mind 
 be not easily decide . facile nature , whose emotion have little 
 permanence , can hardly understand how much inward resistance he overcome 
 before he rise from his seat and turn towards Arthur . Arthur hear the 
 movement , and turn round , meet the sad but soften look with which 
 Adam say , " it be true what you say , sir . I be hard - it be in my nature . 
 I be too hard with my father , for do wrong . I have   be a bit hard t ' 
 everybody but she . I feel as if nobody pity she enough - her suffering 
 cut into I so ; and when I think the folk at the farm be too hard 
 with she , I say I would never be hard to anybody myself again . but feel 
 overmuch about she have perhaps make I unfair to you . I have   know what 
 it be in my life to repent and feel it be too late . I feel I would be too 
 harsh to my father when he be go from I - I feel it now , when I think 
 of he . I have   no right to be hard towards they as have do wrong and 
 repent . " 
 Adam speak these word with the firm distinctness of a man who be 
 resolve to leave nothing unsaid that he be bind to say ; but he go on 
 with more hesitation . 
 " I would not   shake hand with you once , sir , when you ask I - but if 
 you be willing to do it now , for all I refuse then ... " 
 Arthur 's white hand be in Adam 's large grasp in an instant , and with 
 that action there be a strong rush , on both side , of the old , boyish 
 affection . 
 " Adam , " Arthur say , impel to full confession now , " it would never 
 have happen if I have know you love she . that would have help to save 
 I from it . and I do struggle . I never mean to injure she . I deceive 
 you afterwards - and that lead on to bad ; but I think it be force 
 upon I , I think it be the good thing I could do . and in that letter 
 I tell she to let I know if she be in any trouble : do not   think I 
 would not have do everything I could . but I be all wrong from the 
 very first , and horrible wrong have come of it . God know , I would give my 
 life if I could undo it . " 
 they sit down again opposite each other , and Adam say , tremulously , 
 " how do she seem when you leave she , sir ? " 
 " do not   ask I , Adam , " Arthur say ; " I feel sometimes as if I should go 
 mad with thinking of her look and what she say to I , and then , that I 
 could not   get a full pardon - that I could not   save she from that wretched 
 fate of be transport - that I can do nothing for she all those 
 year ; and she may die under it , and never know comfort any more . " 
 " ah , sir , " say Adam , for the first time feel his own pain merge in 
 sympathy for Arthur , " you and me'll often be think o ' the same thing , 
 when we be a long way off one another . I will pray God to help you , as I 
 pray he to help I . " 
 " but there be that sweet woman - that Dinah Morris , " Arthur say , pursue 
 his own thought and not know what have be the sense of Adam 's 
 word , ' she say she shall stay with she to the very last moment - till 
 she go ; and the poor thing cling to she as if she find some comfort 
 in she . I could worship that woman ; I do not   know what I should do if she 
 be not there . Adam , you will see she when she come back . I could say 
 nothing to she yesterday - nothing of what I feel towards she . tell she , " 
 Arthur go on hurriedly , as if he want to hide the emotion with which 
 he speak , while he take off his chain and watch , " tell she I ask you 
 to give she this in remembrance of I - of the man to whom she be the 
 one source of comfort , when he think of ... I know she do not   care about 
 such thing - or anything else I can give she for its own sake . but she 
 will use the watch - I shall like to think of she use it . " 
 " I will give it to she , sir , " Adam say , " and tell she your word . she 
 tell I she should come back to the people at the Hall Farm . " 
 " and you will persuade the Poysers to stay , Adam ? " say Arthur , remind 
 of the subject which both of they have forget in the first interchange 
 of revive friendship . " you will stay yourself , and help Mr. Irwine to 
 carry out the repair and improvement on the estate ? " 
 " there be one thing , sir , that perhaps you do not   take account of , " say 
 Adam , with hesitate gentleness , " and that be what make I hang back 
 long . you see , it be the same with both I and the Poysers : if we stay , 
 it be for our own worldly interest , and it look as if we would put up with 
 anything for the sake o ' that . I know that be what they will feel , and 
 I can not   help feel a little of it myself . when folk have get an 
 honourable independent spirit , they do not   like to do anything that might 
 make them seem base - minded . " 
 " but no one who know you will think that , Adam . that be not a reason 
 strong enough against a course that be really more generous , more 
 unselfish than the other . and it will be know - it shall be make known , 
 that both you and the Poysers stay at my entreaty . Adam , do not   try to 
 make thing bad for I ; I be punish enough without that . " 
 " no , sir , no , " Adam say , look at Arthur with mournful affection . 
 " God forbid I should make thing bad for you . I use to wish I could 
 do it , in my passion - but that be when I think you do not   feel 
 enough . I will stay , sir , I will do the good I can . it be all I have   get to 
 think of now - to do my work well and make the world a bit well place 
 for they as can enjoy it . " 
 " then we will part now , Adam . you will see Mr. Irwine to - morrow , and 
 consult with he about everything . " 
 " be you go soon , sir ? " say Adam . 
 " as soon as possible - after I have   make the necessary arrangement . 
 good - bye , Adam . I shall think of you go about the old place . " 
 " good - bye , sir . God bless you . " 
 the hand be clasp once more , and Adam leave the Hermitage , feel 
 that sorrow be more bearable now hatred be go . 
 as soon as the door be close behind he , Arthur go to the 
 waste - paper basket and take out the little pink silk handkerchief . 
 Book Six 
 chapter XLIX 
 at the Hall Farm 
 the first autumnal afternoon sunshine of 1801 - more than eighteen month 
 after that parting of Adam and Arthur in the Hermitage - be on the 
 yard at the Hall Farm ; and the bull - dog be in one of his most excited 
 moment , for it be that hour of the day when the cow be be drive 
 into the yard for their afternoon milking . no wonder the patient beast 
 run confusedly into the wrong place , for the alarming din of the 
 bull - dog be mingle with more distant sound which the timid feminine 
 creature , with pardonable superstition , imagine also to have some 
 relation to their own movement - with the tremendous crack of the 
 waggoner 's whip , the roar of his voice , and the booming thunder of the 
 waggon , as it leave the rick - yard empty of its golden load . 
 the milking of the cow be a sight Mrs. Poyser love , and at this 
 hour on mild day she be usually stand at the house door , with she 
 knitting in her hand , in quiet contemplation , only heighten to a 
 keener interest when the vicious yellow cow , who have once kick over a 
 pailful of precious milk , be about to undergo the preventive punishment 
 of have her hinder - leg strap . 
 to - day , however , Mrs. Poyser give but a divided attention to the 
 arrival of the cow , for she be in eager discussion with Dinah , who be 
 stitch Mr. Poyser 's shirt - collar , and have bear patiently to have 
 her thread break three time by Totty pull at her arm with a sudden 
 insistence that she should look at " Baby , " that be , at a large wooden 
 doll with no leg and a long skirt , whose bald head Totty , seat in her 
 small chair at Dinah 's side , be caress and press to her fat cheek 
 with much fervour . Totty be large by more than two year ' growth than 
 when you first see she , and she have on a black frock under her pinafore . 
 Mrs. Poyser too have on a black gown , which seem to heighten the family 
 likeness between she and Dinah . in other respect there be little 
 outward change now discernible in our old friend , or in the pleasant 
 house - place , bright with polished oak and pewter . 
 " I never see the like to you , Dinah , " Mrs. Poyser be say , " when 
 you have   once take anything into your head : there be no more move you 
 than the rooted tree . you may say what you like , but I do not   believe 
 that be religion ; for what be the Sermon on the Mount about , as you be so 
 fond o ' reading to the boy , but do what other folk ' ud have you do ? 
 but if it be anything unreasonable they want you to do , like take 
 your cloak off and give it to them , or let them slap you I ' the 
 face , I daresay you would be ready enough . it be only when one ' ud have you 
 do what be plain common sense and good for yourself , as you be obstinate 
 th ' other way . " 
 " Nay , dear Aunt , " say Dinah , smile slightly as she go on with her 
 work , " I be sure your wish ' ud be a reason for I to do anything that I 
 do not   feel it be wrong to do . " 
 " Wrong ! you drive I past bearing . what be there wrong , I should like 
 to know , I ' stay along wi ' your own friend , as be th ' happy for 
 have you with them an ' be willing to provide for you , even if your 
 work do not   more nor pay them for the bit o ' sparrow 's victual y ' eat 
 and the bit o ' rag you put on ? an ' who be it , I should like to know , as 
 you be bind t ' help and comfort I ' the world more nor your own flesh 
 and blood - an ' I th ' only aunt you have   get above - ground , an ' am bring 
 to the brink o ' the grave welly every winter as come , an ' there be the 
 child as sit beside you ' ull break her little heart when you go , an ' 
 the grandfather not be dead a twelvemonth , an ' your uncle ' ull miss 
 you so as never be - a - light his pipe an ' wait on he , an ' now I 
 can trust you wi ' the butter , an ' have have all the trouble o ' teaching 
 you , and there be all the sewing to be do , an ' I must have a strange 
 gell out o ' Treddles'on to do it - an ' all because you must go back to 
 that bare heap o ' stone as the very crow fly over an ' will not   stop at . " 
 " Dear Aunt Rachel , " say Dinah , look up in Mrs. Poyser 's face , " it be 
 your kindness make you say I be useful to you . you do not   really want I 
 now , for Nancy and Molly be clever at their work , and you be in good 
 health now , by the blessing of God , and my uncle be of a cheerful 
 countenance again , and you have neighbour and friend not a few - some 
 of they come to sit with my uncle almost daily . indeed , you will not 
 miss I ; and at Snowfield there be brother and sister in great need , 
 who have none of those comfort you have around you . I feel that I be 
 call back to those amongst whom my lot be first cast . I feel draw 
 again towards the hill where I use to be bless in carry the word 
 of life to the sinful and desolate . " 
 " you feel ! yes , " say Mrs. Poyser , return from a parenthetic glance 
 at the cow , " that be allay the reason I be to sit down wi ' , when you have 
 a mind to do anything contrairy . what do you want to be preach for 
 more than you be preach now ? do not   you go off , the Lord know where , 
 every Sunday a - preach and pray ? an ' have not   you get Methodists 
 enow at Treddles'on to go and look at , if church - folk 's face be too 
 handsome to please you ? an ' be not   there they I ' this parish as you have 
 get under hand , and they be like enough to make friend wi ' Old Harry 
 again as soon as your back be turn ? there be that Bessy Cranage - she will 
 be flaunt I ' new finery three week after you be go , I will be bind . 
 she will no more go on in her new way without you than a dog ' ull stand 
 on its hind - leg when there be nobody look . but I suppose it doesna 
 matter so much about folk 's soul I ' this country , else you would be for 
 stay with your own aunt , for she be none so good but what you might 
 help she to be well . " 
 there be a certain something in Mrs. Poyser 's voice just then , which 
 she do not wish to be notice , so she turn round hastily to look at 
 the clock , and say : " see there ! it be tea - time ; an ' if Martin 's I ' the 
 rick - yard , he will like a cup . here , Totty , my chicken , let mother put 
 your bonnet on , and then you go out into the rick - yard and see if 
 Father 's there , and tell he he must not   go away again without come t ' 
 have a cup o ' tea ; and tell your brother to come in too . " 
 Totty trot off in her flap bonnet , while Mrs. Poyser set out the 
 bright oak table and reach down the tea - cup . 
 " you talk o ' they gell Nancy and Molly be clever I ' their work , " 
 she begin again ; " it be fine talk . they be all the same , clever or 
 stupid - one can not   trust them out o ' one 's sight a minute . they want 
 somebody 's eye on them constant if they be to be keep to their work . 
 an ' suppose I be ill again this winter , as I be the winter before last ? 
 who be to look after them then , if you be go ? an ' there be that bless 
 child - something 's sure t ' happen to she - they will let she tumble into 
 the fire , or get at the kettle wi ' the boiling lard in't , or some 
 mischief as ' ull lame she for life ; an ' it will be all your fault , Dinah . " 
 " Aunt , " say Dinah , " I promise to come back to you in the winter if 
 you be ill . do not   think I will ever stay away from you if you be in real 
 want of I . but , indeed , it be needful for my own soul that I should go 
 away from this life of ease and luxury in which I have all thing too 
 richly to enjoy - at least that I should go away for a short space . no 
 one can know but myself what be my inward need , and the besetment I 
 be most in danger from . your wish for I to stay be not a call of duty 
 which I refuse to hearken to because it be against my own desire ; it 
 be a temptation that I must resist , lest the love of the creature should 
 become like a mist in my soul shut out the heavenly light . " 
 " it pass my cunning to know what you mean by ease and luxury , " say 
 Mrs. Poyser , as she cut the bread and butter . " it be true there be good 
 victual enough about you , as nobody shall ever say I do not   provide 
 enough and to spare , but if there be ever a bit o ' odd an ' end as 
 nobody else ' ud eat , you be sure to pick it out ... but look there ! 
 there 's Adam Bede a - carry the little un in . I wonder how it be he be 
 come so early . " 
 Mrs. Poyser hasten to the door for the pleasure of look at her 
 darling in a new position , with love in her eye but reproof on her 
 tongue . 
 " oh for shame , Totty ! little gell o ' five year old should be ashamed to 
 be carry . why , Adam , she will break your arm , such a big gell as that ; 
 set she down - for shame ! " 
 " Nay , nay , " say Adam , " I can lift she with my hand - I have   no need to 
 take my arm to it . " 
 Totty , look as serenely unconscious of remark as a fat white puppy , 
 be set down at the door - place , and the mother enforce her reproof with 
 a shower of kiss . 
 " you be surprised to see I at this hour o ' the day , " say Adam . 
 " yes , but come in , " say Mrs. Poyser , make way for he ; " there be no 
 bad news , I hope ? " 
 " no , nothing bad , " Adam answer , as he go up to Dinah and put out his 
 hand to she . she have lay down her work and stand up , instinctively , as 
 he approach she . a faint blush die away from her pale cheek as she 
 put her hand in his and look up at he timidly . 
 " it be an errand to you bring I , Dinah , " say Adam , apparently 
 unconscious that he be hold her hand all the while ; " mother 's a bit 
 ailing , and she be set her heart on your come to stay the night with 
 she , if you will be so kind . I tell she I would call and ask you as I come 
 from the village . she overwork herself , and I can not   persuade she to 
 have a little girl t ' help she . I do not   know what be to be do . " 
 Adam release Dinah 's hand as he cease speak , and be expect an 
 answer , but before she have open her lip Mrs. Poyser say , " look there 
 now ! I tell you there be folk enow t ' help I ' this parish , wi'out 
 go far off . there be Mrs. Bede get as old and cas'alty as can 
 be , and she will not   let anybody but you go a - nigh she hardly . the folk at 
 Snowfield have learn by this time to do well wi'out you nor she can . " 
 " I will put my bonnet on and set off directly , if you do not   want anything 
 do first , Aunt , " say Dinah , fold up her work . 
 " yes , I do want something do . I want you t ' have your tea , child ; it be 
 all ready - and you will have a cup , Adam , if y ' arena in too big a hurry . " 
 " yes , I will have a cup , please ; and then I will walk with Dinah . I be go 
 straight home , for I have   get a lot o ' timber valuation to write out . " 
 " why , Adam , lad , be you here ? " say Mr. Poyser , enter warm and 
 coatless , with the two black - eyed boy behind he , still look as much 
 like he as two small elephant be like a large one . " how be it we have 
 get sight o ' you so long before fodder - time ? " 
 " I come on an errand for Mother , " say Adam . " she be get a touch of her 
 old complaint , and she want Dinah to go and stay with she a bit . " 
 " well , we will spare she for your mother a little while , " say Mr. Poyser . 
 " but we wonna spare she for anybody else , on'y her husband . " 
 " Husband ! " say Marty , who be at the most prosaic and literal period of 
 the boyish mind . " why , Dinah have not   get a husband . " 
 " spare she ? " say Mrs. Poyser , place a seed - cake on the table and then 
 seat herself to pour out the tea . " but we must spare she , it seem , 
 and not for a husband neither , but for her own megrim . Tommy , what be 
 you do to your little sister 's doll ? make the child naughty , when 
 she would be good if you would let she . you shanna have a morsel o ' cake if you 
 behave so . " 
 Tommy , with true brotherly sympathy , be amuse himself by turn 
 Dolly 's skirt over her bald head and exhibit her truncated body to 
 the general scorn - an indignity which cut Totty to the heart . 
 " what do you think Dinah 's be a - tell I since dinner - time ? " Mrs. 
 Poyser continue , look at her husband . 
 " eh ! I be a poor un at guess , " say Mr. Poyser . 
 " why , she mean to go back to Snowfield again , and work I ' the mill , 
 and starve herself , as she use to do , like a creatur as have get no 
 friend . " 
 Mr. Poyser do not readily find word to express his unpleasant 
 astonishment ; he only look from his wife to Dinah , who have now seat 
 herself beside Totty , as a bulwark against brotherly playfulness , and 
 be busy herself with the child 's tea . if he have be give to 
 make general reflection , it would have occur to he that there be 
 certainly a change come over Dinah , for she never use to change colour ; 
 but , as it be , he merely observe that her face be flush at that 
 moment . Mr. Poyser think she look the pretty for it : it be 
 a flush no deep than the petal of a monthly rose . perhaps it come 
 because her uncle be look at she so fixedly ; but there be no 
 knowing , for just then Adam be say , with quiet surprise , " why , I 
 hop Dinah be settle among we for life . I think she would give up the 
 notion o ' go back to her old country . " 
 " Thought ! yes , " say Mrs. Poyser , " and so would anybody else ha ' 
 thought , as have get their right end up'ard . but I suppose you must be 
 a Methodist to know what a Methodist ' ull do . it be ill guess what the 
 bat be fly after . " 
 " why , what have we do to you . Dinah , as you must go away from we ? " 
 say Mr. Poyser , still pause over his tea - cup . " it be like break 
 your word , welly , for your aunt never have no thought but you would make this 
 your home . " 
 " Nay , Uncle , " say Dinah , try to be quite calm . " when I first come , I 
 say it be only for a time , as long as I could be of any comfort to my 
 aunt . " 
 " well , an ' who say you would ever leave off be a comfort to I ? " say 
 Mrs. Poyser . " if you didna mean to stay wi ' me , you would well never ha ' 
 come . they as ha ' never have a cushion do not   miss it . " 
 " Nay , nay , " say Mr. Poyser , who object to exaggerated view . " Thee 
 mustna say so ; we should ha ' be ill off wi'out she , Lady day be a 
 twelvemont ' . we mun be thankful for that , whether she stay or no . but 
 I canna think what she mun leave a good home for , to go back int ' a 
 country where the land , most on't , isna worth ten shilling an acre , 
 rent and profit . " 
 " why , that be just the reason she want to go , as fur as she can give a 
 reason , " say Mrs. Poyser . " she say this country 's too comfortable , 
 an ' there be too much t ' eat , an ' folk arena miserable enough . and she be 
 go next week . I canna turn she , say what I will . it be allay the way 
 wi ' they meek - face people ; you may be well pelt a bag o ' feather as 
 talk to them . but I say it isna religion , to be so obstinate - be it now , 
 Adam ? " 
 Adam see that Dinah be more disturbed than he have ever see she by any 
 matter relate to herself , and , anxious to relieve she , if possible , 
 he say , look at she affectionately , " Nay , I can not   find fault with 
 anything Dinah do . I believe her thought be well than our guess , 
 let them be what they may . I should ha ' be thankful for she to stay 
 among we , but if she think well to go , I would not   cross she , or make it 
 hard to she by object . we owe she something different to that . " 
 as it often happen , the word intend to relieve she be just too 
 much for Dinah 's susceptible feeling at this moment . the tear come 
 into the grey eye too fast to be hide and she get up hurriedly , 
 mean it to be understand that she be go to put on her bonnet . 
 " Mother , what be Dinah cry for ? " say Totty . " she be not   a naughty 
 dell . " 
 " Thee'st go a bit too fur , " say Mr. Poyser . " we have   no right t ' 
 interfere with she do as she like . an ' thee'dst be as angry as could 
 be wi ' me , if I say a word against anything she do . " 
 " because you would very like be find fault wi'out reason , " say Mrs. 
 Poyser . " but there be reason I ' what I say , else I shouldna say it . it be 
 easy talk for they as can not   love she so well as her own aunt do . 
 an ' I get so used to she ! I shall feel as uneasy as a new sheared sheep 
 when she be go from I . an ' to think of she leave a parish where 
 she be so look on . there be Mr. Irwine make as much of she as if 
 she be a lady , for all her be a Methodist , an ' wi ' that maggot o ' 
 preach in her head - God forgi'e I if I be I ' the wrong to call it 
 so . " 
 " aye , " say Mr. Poyser , look jocose ; " but thee dostna tell Adam what 
 he say to thee about it one day . the missis be say , Adam , as the 
 preaching be the only fault to be find wi ' Dinah , and Mr. Irwine say , 
 ' but you must not   find fault with she for that , Mrs. Poyser ; you forget 
 she be get no husband to preach to . I will answer for it , you give Poyser 
 many a good sermon . ' the parson have thee there , " Mr. Poyser add , 
 laugh unctuously . " I tell Bartle Massey on it , an ' he laugh too . " 
 " yes , it be a small joke set man laugh when they sit a - star at 
 one another with a pipe I ' their mouth , " say Mrs. Poyser . " give 
 Bartle Massey his way and he would have all the sharpness to himself . if 
 the chaff - cutter have the making of we , we should all be straw , I reckon . 
 Totty , my chicken , go upstairs to cousin Dinah , and see what she be 
 do , and give she a pretty kiss . " 
 this errand be devise for Totty as a means of check certain 
 threaten symptom about the corner of the mouth ; for Tommy , 
 no long expectant of cake , be lift up his eyelid with his 
 forefinger and turn his eyeball towards Totty in a way that she 
 feel to be disagreeably personal . 
 " you be rare and busy now - eh , Adam ? " say Mr. Poyser . " Burge 's getting 
 so bad wi ' his asthmy , it be well if he will ever do much rid about 
 again . " 
 " yes , we have   get a pretty bit o ' building on hand now , " say Adam , " what 
 with the repair on th ' estate , and the new house at Treddles'on . " 
 " I will bet a penny that new house Burge be build on his own bit o ' 
 land be for he and Mary to go to , " say Mr. Poyser . " he will be for 
 lay by business soon , I will warrant , and be want you to take to it 
 all and pay he so much by th ' ' ear . we shall see you live on th ' hill 
 before another twelvemont 's over . " 
 " well , " say Adam , " I should like t ' have the business in my own hand . 
 it be not   as I mind much about get any more money . we have   enough and 
 to spare now , with only our two self and mother ; but I should like 
 t ' have my own way about thing - I could try plan then , as I can not   do 
 now . " 
 " you get on pretty well wi ' the new steward , I reckon ? " say Mr. Poyser . 
 " yes , yes ; he be a sensible man enough ; understand farming - he be 
 carry on the draining , and all that , capital . you must go some day 
 towards the Stonyshire side and see what alteration they be make . but 
 he be get no notion about building . you can so seldom get hold of a man 
 as can turn his brain to more nor one thing ; it be just as if they wear 
 blinker like th ' horse and could see nothing o ' one side of them . now , 
 there be Mr. Irwine have get notion o ' building more nor most architect ; 
 for as for th ' architect , they set up to be fine fellow , but the most 
 of them do not   know where to set a chimney so as it shall not   be quarrel 
 with a door . my notion be , a practical builder that be get a bit o ' 
 taste make the good architect for common thing ; and I have   ten time the 
 pleasure I ' see after the work when I have   make the plan myself . " 
 Mr. Poyser listen with an admire interest to Adam 's discourse on 
 building , but perhaps it suggest to he that the building of his 
 corn - rick have be proceed a little too long without the control of 
 the master 's eye , for when Adam have do speak , he get up and say , 
 " well , lad , I will bid you good - bye now , for I be off to the rick - yard 
 again . " 
 Adam rise too , for he see Dinah enter , with her bonnet on and a 
 little basket in her hand , precede by Totty . 
 " you be ready , I see , Dinah , " Adam say ; ' so we will set off , for the 
 soon I be at home the well . " 
 " Mother , " say Totty , with her treble pipe , " Dinah be say she 
 prayer and cry ever so . " 
 " hush , hush , " say the mother , " little gell must not   chatter . " 
 Whereupon the father , shake with silent laughter , set Totty on the 
 white deal table and desire she to kiss he . Mr. and Mrs. Poyser , you 
 perceive , have no correct principle of education . 
 " come back to - morrow if Mrs. Bede do not   want you , Dinah , " say Mrs. 
 Poyser : " but you can stay , you know , if she be ill . " 
 so , when the good - bye have be say , Dinah and Adam leave the Hall Farm 
 together . 
 Chapter L 
 in the Cottage 
 ADAM do not ask Dinah to take his arm when they get out into the lane . 
 he have never yet do so , often as they have walk together , for he have 
 observe that she never walk arm - in - arm with Seth , and he think , 
 perhaps , that kind of support be not agreeable to she . so they walk 
 apart , though side by side , and the close poke of her little black 
 bonnet hide her face from he . 
 " you can not   be happy , then , to make the Hall Farm your home , Dinah ? " 
 Adam say , with the quiet interest of a brother , who have no anxiety for 
 himself in the matter . " it be a pity , see they be so fond of you . " 
 " you know , Adam , my heart be as their heart , so far as love for they 
 and care for their welfare go , but they be in no present need . their 
 sorrow be heal , and I feel that I be call back to my old work , in 
 which I find a blessing that I have miss of late in the midst of too 
 abundant worldly good . I know it be a vain thought to flee from the work 
 that God appoint we , for the sake of find a great blessing to our 
 own soul , as if we could choose for ourselves where we shall find the 
 fulness of the Divine Presence , instead of seek it where alone it 
 be to be find , in love obedience . but now , I believe , I have a clear 
 show that my work lie elsewhere - at least for a time . in the year 
 to come , if my aunt 's health should fail , or she should otherwise need 
 I , I shall return . " 
 " you know well , Dinah , " say Adam . " I do not   believe you would go against the 
 wish of they that love you , and be akin to you , without a good and 
 sufficient reason in your own conscience . I have   no right to say anything 
 about my be sorry : you know well enough what cause I have to put you 
 above every other friend I have   get ; and if it have be order so that 
 you could ha ' be my sister , and live with we all our life , I should 
 ha ' count it the great blessing as could happen to we now . but 
 Seth tell I there be no hope o ' that : your feeling be different , and 
 perhaps I be take too much upon I to speak about it . " 
 Dinah make no answer , and they walk on in silence for some yard , till 
 they come to the stone stile , where , as Adam have pass through first 
 and turn round to give she his hand while she mount the unusually 
 high step , she could not prevent he from see her face . it strike 
 he with surprise , for the grey eye , usually so mild and grave , have 
 the bright uneasy glance which accompany suppress agitation , and 
 the slight flush in her cheek , with which she have come downstairs , be 
 heighten to a deep rose - colour . she look as if she be only sister 
 to Dinah . Adam be silent with surprise and conjecture for some moment , 
 and then he say , " I hope I have   not hurt or displease you by what I have 
 say , Dinah . perhaps I be make too free . I have   no wish different from 
 what you see to be good , and I be satisfied for you to live thirty mile 
 off , if you think it right . I shall think of you just as much as I do 
 now , for you be bind up with what I can no more help remember than I 
 can help my heart beat . " 
 Poor Adam ! thus do man blunder . Dinah make no answer , but she presently 
 say , " have you hear any news from that poor young man , since we last 
 speak of he ? " 
 Dinah always call Arthur so ; she have never lose the image of he as 
 she have see he in the prison . 
 " yes , " say Adam . " Mr. Irwine read I part of a letter from he 
 yesterday . it be pretty certain , they say , that there will be a peace soon , 
 though nobody believe it will last long ; but he say he do not   mean to 
 come home . he be no heart for it yet , and it be well for other that he 
 should keep away . Mr. Irwine think he be in the right not to come . it be 
 a sorrowful letter . he ask about you and the Poysers , as he always 
 do . there be one thing in the letter cut I a good deal : ' you can not 
 think what an old fellow I feel , ' he say ; ' I make no scheme now . I be 
 the good when I have   a good day 's march or fight before I . ' " 
 " he be of a rash , warm - hearted nature , like Esau , for whom I have always 
 feel great pity , " say Dinah . " that meeting between the brother , where 
 Esau be so loving and generous , and Jacob so timid and distrustful , 
 notwithstanding his sense of the Divine favour , have always touch I 
 greatly . truly , I have be tempt sometimes to say that Jacob be of a 
 mean spirit . but that be our trial : we must learn to see the good in the 
 midst of much that be unlovely . " 
 " ah , " say Adam , " I like to read about Moses well , in th ' Old Testament . 
 he carry a hard business well through , and die when other folk be 
 go to reap the fruit . a man must have courage to look at his life 
 so , and think what will come of it after he be dead and go . a good solid 
 bit o ' work last : if it be only lay a floor down , somebody 's the 
 well for it be do well , besides the man as do it . " 
 they be both glad to talk of subject that be not personal , and 
 in this way they go on till they pass the bridge across the Willow 
 Brook , when Adam turn round and say , " ah , here 's Seth . I think he would 
 be home soon . do he know of you be go , Dinah ? " 
 " yes , I tell he last Sabbath . " 
 Adam remember now that Seth have come home much depressed on Sunday 
 evening , a circumstance which have be very unusual with he of late , 
 for the happiness he have in see Dinah every week seem long to have 
 outweigh the pain of know she would never marry he . this evening 
 he have his habitual air of dreamy benignant contentment , until he come 
 quite close to Dinah and see the trace of tear on her delicate eyelid 
 and eyelash . he give one rapid glance at his brother , but Adam be 
 evidently quite outside the current of emotion that have shake Dinah : he 
 wear his everyday look of unexpectant calm . Seth try not to let Dinah 
 see that he have notice her face , and only say , " I be thankful you be 
 come , Dinah , for Mother 's be hunger after the sight of you all day . 
 she begin to talk of you the first thing in the morning . " 
 when they enter the cottage , Lisbeth be seat in her arm - chair , too 
 tired with set out the evening meal , a task she always perform a 
 long time beforehand , to go and meet they at the door as usual , when she 
 hear the approach footstep . 
 " Coom , child , thee't coom at last , " she say , when Dinah go towards 
 she . " what dost mane by lavin ' I a week an ' ne'er coomin ' a - nigh I ? " 
 " dear friend , " say Dinah , take her hand , " you be not well . if I have 
 know it soon , I would have come . " 
 " An ' how be thee t ' know if thee dostna coom ? Th ' lad on'y know what 
 I tell them . as long as ye can stir hand and foot the man think ye're 
 hearty . but I be none so bad , on'y a bit of a cold set I achin ' . an ' 
 th ' lad tease I so t ' ha ' somebody wi ' me t ' do the work - they make I 
 ache bad wi ' talkin ' . if thee'dst come and stay wi ' I , they would let I 
 alone . the Poysers canna want thee so bad as I do . but take thy bonnet 
 off , an ' let I look at thee . " 
 Dinah be move away , but Lisbeth hold she fast , while she be take 
 off her bonnet , and look at her face as one look into a newly 
 gather snowdrop , to renew the old impression of purity and 
 gentleness . 
 " what be the matter wi ' thee ? " say Lisbeth , in astonishment ; " thee'st 
 be a - cryin ' . " 
 " it be only a grief that will pass away , " say Dinah , who do not wish just 
 now to call forth Lisbeth 's remonstrance by disclose her intention 
 to leave Hayslope . " you shall know about it shortly - we will talk of it 
 to - night . I shall stay with you to - night . " 
 Lisbeth be pacify by this prospect . and she have the whole evening 
 to talk with Dinah alone ; for there be a new room in the cottage , 
 you remember , build nearly two year ago , in the expectation of a new 
 inmate ; and here Adam always sit when he have write to do or plan to 
 make . Seth sit there too this evening , for he know his mother would like 
 to have Dinah all to herself . 
 there be two pretty picture on the two side of the wall in the 
 cottage . on one side there be the broad - shoulder , large - feature , 
 hardy old woman , in her blue jacket and buff kerchief , with her dim - eye 
 anxious look turn continually on the lily face and the slight form 
 in the black dress that be either move lightly about in helpful 
 activity , or seat close by the old woman 's arm - chair , hold she 
 wither hand , with eye lift up towards she to speak a language which 
 Lisbeth understand far well than the Bible or the hymn - book . she would 
 scarcely listen to read at all to - night . " Nay , nay , shut the book , " 
 she say . " we mun talk . I want t ' know what thee be cryin ' about . Hast 
 get trouble o ' thy own , like other folk ? " 
 on the other side of the wall there be the two brother so like each 
 other in the midst of their unlikeness : Adam with knit brow , shaggy 
 hair , and dark vigorous colour , absorb in his " figure " ; Seth , with 
 large rugged feature , the close copy of his brother 's , but with thin , 
 wavy , brown hair and blue dreamy eye , as often as not look vaguely 
 out of the window instead of at his book , although it be a newly buy 
 book - Wesley 's abridgment of Madame Guyon 's life , which be full of 
 wonder and interest for he . Seth have say to Adam , " can I help thee 
 with anything in here to - night ? I do not   want to make a noise in the 
 shop . " 
 " no , lad , " Adam answer , " there be nothing but what I must do myself . 
 Thee'st get thy new book to read . " 
 and often , when Seth be quite unconscious , Adam , as he pause after 
 draw a line with his ruler , look at his brother with a kind smile 
 dawn in his eye . he know " th ' lad like to sit full o ' thought he 
 could give no account of ; they would never come t ' anything , but they make 
 he happy , " and in the last year or so , Adam have be get more and 
 more indulgent to Seth . it be part of that grow tenderness which 
 come from the sorrow at work within he . 
 for Adam , though you see he quite master of himself , work hard and 
 delight in his work after his inborn inalienable nature , have not 
 outlive his sorrow - have not feel it slip from he as a temporary 
 burden , and leave he the same man again . do any of we ? God forbid . it 
 would be a poor result of all our anguish and our wrestling if we win 
 nothing but our old self at the end of it - if we could return to the 
 same blind love , the same self - confident blame , the same light thought 
 of human suffering , the same frivolous gossip over blighted human life , 
 the same feeble sense of that unknown towards which we have send forth 
 irrepressible cry in our loneliness . let we rather be thankful that 
 our sorrow live in we as an indestructible force , only change its 
 form , as force do , and pass from pain into sympathy - the one poor 
 word which include all our good insight and our good love . not that 
 this transformation of pain into sympathy have completely take place 
 in Adam yet . there be still a great remnant of pain , and this he feel 
 would subsist as long as her pain be not a memory , but an exist 
 thing , which he must think of as renew with the light of every 
 new morning . but we get accustomed to mental as well as bodily pain , 
 without , for all that , lose our sensibility to it . it become a habit 
 of our life , and we cease to imagine a condition of perfect ease 
 as possible for we . Desire be chasten into submission , and we be 
 content with our day when we have be able to bear our grief in 
 silence and act as if we be not suffer . for it be at such period 
 that the sense of our life have visible and invisible relation , 
 beyond any of which either our present or prospective self be the 
 centre , grow like a muscle that we be oblige to lean on and exert . 
 that be Adam 's state of mind in this second autumn of his sorrow . his 
 work , as you know , have always be part of his religion , and from very 
 early day he see clearly that good carpentry be God 's will - be that 
 form of God 's will that most immediately concern he . but now there 
 be no margin of dream for he beyond this daylight reality , no 
 holiday - time in the working - day world , no moment in the distance when 
 duty would take off her iron glove and breast - plate and clasp he gently 
 into rest . he conceive no picture of the future but one make up of 
 hard - work day such as he live through , with grow contentment and 
 intensity of interest , every fresh week . love , he think , could never 
 be anything to he but a live memory - a limb lop off , but not go 
 from consciousness . he do not know that the power of love be all the 
 while gain new force within he ; that the new sensibility buy by 
 a deep experience be so many new fibre by which it be possible , nay , 
 necessary to he , that his nature should intertwine with another . yet he 
 be aware that common affection and friendship be more precious to he 
 than they use to be - that he cling more to his mother and Seth , and 
 have an unspeakable satisfaction in the sight or imagination of any small 
 addition to their happiness . the Poysers , too - hardly three or four day 
 pass but he feel the need of see they and interchange word and 
 look of friendliness with they . he would have feel this , probably , even 
 if Dinah have not be with they , but he have only say the simple truth 
 in tell Dinah that he put she above all other friend in the world . 
 could anything be more natural ? for in the dark moment of memory the 
 thought of she always come as the first ray of return comfort . the 
 early day of gloom at the Hall Farm have be gradually turn into soft 
 moonlight by her presence ; and in the cottage , too , for she have come 
 at every spare moment to soothe and cheer poor Lisbeth , who have be 
 stricken with a fear that subdue even her querulousness at the sight of 
 her darle Adam 's grief - wear face . he have become use to watch she 
 light quiet movement , her pretty love way to the child , when he 
 go to the Hall Farm ; to listen for her voice as for a recurrent music ; 
 to think everything she say and do be just right , and could not have 
 be well . in spite of his wisdom , he could not find fault with she 
 for her overindulgence of the child , who have manage to convert Dinah 
 the preacher , before whom a circle of rough man have often tremble a 
 little , into a convenient household slave - though Dinah herself be 
 rather ashamed of this weakness , and have some inward conflict as to she 
 departure from the precept of Solomon . yes , there be one thing that 
 might have be well ; she might have love Seth and consent to marry 
 he . he feel a little vex , for his brother 's sake , and he could not 
 help think regretfully how Dinah , as Seth 's wife , would have make 
 their home as happy as it could be for they all - how she be the one 
 being that would have soothe their mother 's last day into peacefulness 
 and rest . 
 " it be wonderful she do not   love th ' lad , " Adam have say sometimes to 
 himself , " for anybody ' ud think he be just cut out for she . but her 
 heart 's so take up with other thing . she be one o ' those woman that 
 feel no drawing towards have a husband and child o ' their own . she 
 think she should be fill up with her own life then , and she be be 
 use so to live in other folk 's care , she can not   bear the thought of 
 her heart be shut up from them . I see how it be , well enough . she be 
 cut out o ' different stuff from most woman : I see that long ago . she be 
 never easy but when she be help somebody , and marriage ' ud interfere 
 with her way - that be true . I have   no right to be contrive and think 
 it ' ud be well if she would have Seth , as if I be wise than she be - or 
 than God either , for he make she what she be , and that be one o ' the 
 great blessing I have   ever have from his hand , and other besides I . " 
 this self - reproof have recur strongly to Adam 's mind when he gather 
 from Dinah 's face that he have wound she by refer to his wish 
 that she have accept Seth , and so he have endeavour to put into the 
 strong word his confidence in her decision as right - his resignation 
 even to she go away from they and cease to make part of their life 
 otherwise than by live in their thought , if that separation be 
 choose by herself . he feel sure she know quite well enough how much 
 he care to see she continually - to talk to she with the silent 
 consciousness of a mutual great remembrance . it be not possible she 
 should hear anything but self - renounce affection and respect in 
 his assurance that he be content for she to go away ; and yet there 
 remain an uneasy feeling in his mind that he have not say quite the 
 right thing - that , somehow , Dinah have not understand he . 
 Dinah must have rise a little before the sun the next morning , for she 
 be downstairs about five o'clock . so be Seth , for , through Lisbeth 's 
 obstinate refusal to have any woman - helper in the house , he have learn 
 to make himself , as Adam say , " very handy in the housework , " that he 
 might save his mother from too great weariness ; on which ground I hope 
 you will not think he unmanly , any more than you can have think the 
 gallant Colonel Bath unmanly when he make the gruel for his invalid 
 sister . Adam , who have sit up late at his writing , be still asleep , 
 and be not likely , Seth say , to be down till breakfast - time . often as 
 Dinah have visit Lisbeth during the last eighteen month , she have never 
 sleep in the cottage since that night after Thias 's death , when , you 
 remember , Lisbeth praise her deft movement and even give a modify 
 approval to her porridge . but in that long interval Dinah have make great 
 advance in household cleverness , and this morning , since Seth be there 
 to help , she be bent on bring everything to a pitch of cleanliness 
 and order that would have satisfy her Aunt Poyser . the cottage be far 
 from that standard at present , for Lisbeth 's rheumatism have force she 
 to give up her old habit of dilettante scour and polish . when the 
 kitchen be to her mind , Dinah go into the new room , where Adam have 
 be write the night before , to see what sweeping and dust be 
 need there . she open the window and let in the fresh morning air , 
 and the smell of the sweet - brier , and the bright low - slant ray of 
 the early sun , which make a glory about her pale face and pale auburn 
 hair as she hold the long brush , and sweep , sing to herself in a very 
 low tone - like a sweet summer murmur that you have to listen for very 
 closely - one of Charles Wesley 's hymn : 
 Eternal Beam of Light Divine , 
 fountain of unexhausted love , 
 in whom the Father 's glory shine , 
 through earth beneath and heaven above ; 
 Jesus ! the weary wanderer 's rest , 
 give I thy easy yoke to bear ; 
 with steadfast patience arm my breast , 
 with spotless love and holy fear . 
 speak to my war passion , " peace ! " 
 say to my trembling heart , " be still ! " 
 Thy power my strength and fortress be , 
 for all thing serve thy sovereign will . 
 she lay by the brush and take up the duster ; and if you have ever live 
 in Mrs. Poyser 's household , you would know how the duster behave in 
 Dinah 's hand - how it go into every small corner , and on every ledge 
 in and out of sight - how it go again and again round every bar of the 
 chair , and every leg , and under and over everything that lie on the 
 table , till it come to Adam 's paper and ruler and the open desk near 
 they . Dinah dust up to the very edge of these and then hesitate , 
 look at they with a longing but timid eye . it be painful to see 
 how much dust there be among they . as she be look in this way , she 
 hear Seth 's step just outside the open door , towards which her back 
 be turn , and say , raise her clear treble , " Seth , be your brother 
 wrathful when his paper be stir ? " 
 " yes , very , when they be not put back in the right place , " say a deep 
 strong voice , not Seth 's . 
 it be as if Dinah have put her hand unawares on a vibrate chord . 
 she be shake with an intense thrill , and for the instant feel nothing 
 else ; then she know her cheek be glow , and dare not look round , 
 but stand still , distressed because she could not say good - morning in a 
 friendly way . Adam , find that she do not look round so as to see 
 the smile on his face , be afraid she have think he serious about his 
 wrathfulness , and go up to she , so that she be oblige to look at 
 he . 
 " what ! you think I be a cross fellow at home , Dinah ? " he say , smilingly . 
 " Nay , " say Dinah , look up with timid eye , " not so . but you might 
 be put about by find thing meddle with ; and even the man Moses , the 
 meek of man , be wrathful sometimes . " 
 " come , then , " say Adam , look at she affectionately , " I will help you 
 move the thing , and put them back again , and then they can not   get wrong . 
 you be get to be your aunt 's own niece , I see , for particularness . " 
 they begin their little task together , but Dinah have not recover 
 herself sufficiently to think of any remark , and Adam look at she 
 uneasily . Dinah , he think , have seem to disapprove he somehow 
 lately ; she have not be so kind and open to he as she use to be . 
 he want she to look at he , and be as pleased as he be himself with 
 do this bit of playful work . but Dinah do not look at he - it be 
 easy for she to avoid look at the tall man - and when at last there 
 be no more dusting to be do and no further excuse for he to linger 
 near she , he could bear it no long , and say , in rather a plead 
 tone , " Dinah , you be not displeased with I for anything , be you ? I have 
 not say or do anything to make you think ill of I ? " 
 the question surprise she , and relieve she by give a new course to 
 her feeling . she look up at he now , quite earnestly , almost with the 
 tear come , and say , " oh , no , Adam ! how could you think so ? " 
 " I could not   bear you not to feel as much a friend to I as I do to you , " 
 say Adam . " and you do not   know the value I set on the very thought of 
 you , Dinah . that be what I mean yesterday , when I say I would be content 
 for you to go , if you think right . I mean , the thought of you be 
 worth so much to I , I should feel I ought to be thankful , and not 
 grumble , if you see right to go away . you know I do mind part with 
 you , Dinah ? " 
 " yes , dear friend , " say Dinah , trembling , but try to speak calmly , 
 " I know you have a brother 's heart towards I , and we shall often be 
 with one another in spirit ; but at this season I be in heaviness through 
 manifold temptation . you must not mark I . I feel call to leave my 
 kindre for a while ; but it be a trial - the flesh be weak . " 
 Adam see that it pain she to be oblige to answer . 
 " I hurt you by talk about it , Dinah , " he say . " I will say no more . 
 let us see if Seth 's ready with breakfast now . " 
 that be a simple scene , reader . but it be almost certain that you , too , 
 have be in love - perhaps , even , more than once , though you may not 
 choose to say so to all your feminine friend . if so , you will no more 
 think the slight word , the timid look , the tremulous touch , by which 
 two human soul approach each other gradually , like two little quivering 
 rain - stream , before they mingle into one - you will no more think these 
 thing trivial than you will think the first - detect sign of come 
 spring trivial , though they be but a faint indescribable something 
 in the air and in the song of the bird , and the tiny perceptible 
 bud on the hedge - row branch . those slight word and look and 
 touch be part of the soul 's language ; and the fine language , 
 I believe , be chiefly make up of unimposing word , such as " light , " 
 ' sound , " ' star , " " music " - word really not worth look at , or 
 hearing , in themselves , any more than " chip " or ' sawdust . " it be only 
 that they happen to be the sign of something unspeakably great and 
 beautiful . I be of opinion that love be a great and beautiful thing too , 
 and if you agree with I , the small sign of it will not be chip and 
 sawdust to you : they will rather be like those little word , " light " and 
 " music , " stir the long - wind fibre of your memory and enrich 
 your present with your most precious past . 
 Chapter LI 
 Sunday Morning 
 LISBETH 's touch of rheumatism could not be make to appear serious enough 
 to detain Dinah another night from the Hall Farm , now she have make up 
 her mind to leave she aunt so soon , and at evening the friend must 
 part . " for a long while , " Dinah have say , for she have tell Lisbeth of 
 her resolve . 
 " then it will be for all my life , an ' I shall ne'er see thee again , " say 
 Lisbeth . " long while ! I'n get no long while t ' live . an ' I shall be 
 take bad an ' die , an ' thee canst ne'er come a - nigh I , an ' I shall die 
 a - longing for thee . " 
 that have be the key - note of her wail talk all day ; for Adam be not 
 in the house , and so she put no restraint on her complaining . she have 
 try poor Dinah by return again and again to the question , why 
 she must go away ; and refuse to accept reason , which seem to she 
 nothing but whim and " contrairiness " ; and still more , by regret that 
 she " couldna ' ha ' one o ' the lad " and be her daughter . 
 " Thee couldstna put up wi ' Seth , " she say . " he isna cliver enough for 
 thee , happen , but he would ha ' be very good t ' thee - he be as handy as can 
 be at do thing for I when I be bad , an ' he be as fond o ' the Bible 
 an ' chappellin ' as thee art thysen . but happen , thee'dst like a husband 
 well as isna just the cut o ' thysen : the runnin ' brook isna athirst 
 for th ' rain . Adam ' ud ha ' do for thee - I know he would - an ' he might 
 come t ' like thee well enough , if thee'dst stop . but he be as stubborn 
 as th ' iron bar - there be no bend he no way but 's own . but he would be 
 a fine husband for anybody , be they who they will , so look - on an ' so 
 cliver as he be . and he would be rare an ' lovin' : it do I good on'y a 
 look o ' the lad 's eye when he mean kind tow'rt I . " 
 Dinah try to escape from Lisbeth 's close look and question by 
 find little task of housework that keep she move about , and as 
 soon as Seth come home in the evening she put on her bonnet to go . it 
 touch Dinah keenly to say the last good - bye , and still more to look 
 round on her way across the field and see the old woman still stand 
 at the door , gaze after she till she must have be the faint speck 
 in the dim aged eye . " the God of love and peace be with they , " 
 Dinah pray , as she look back from the last stile . " make they glad 
 accord to the day wherein thou hast afflict they , and the year 
 wherein they have see evil . it be thy will that I should part from 
 they ; let I have no will but thine . " 
 Lisbeth turn into the house at last and sit down in the workshop near 
 Seth , who be busy himself there with fit some bit of turn 
 wood he have bring from the village into a small work - box , which he 
 mean to give to Dinah before she go away . 
 " thee't see she again o ' Sunday afore she go , " be her first word . 
 " if thee wast good for anything , thee'dst make she come in again o ' 
 Sunday night wi ' thee , and see I once more . " 
 " Nay , Mother , " say Seth . " Dinah ' ud be sure to come again if she see 
 right to come . I should have no need to persuade she . she only think it 
 ' ud be troubling thee for nought , just to come in to say good - bye over 
 again . " 
 " she would ne'er go away , I know , if Adam ' ud be fond on she an ' marry she , 
 but everything be so contrairy , " say Lisbeth , with a burst of vexation . 
 Seth pause a moment and look up , with a slight blush , at his mother 's 
 face . " what ! have she say anything o ' that sort to thee , Mother ? " he 
 say , in a low tone . 
 " say ? Nay , she will say nothing . it be on'y the man as have to wait till 
 folk say thing afore they find them out . " 
 " well , but what make thee think so , Mother ? what be put it into thy 
 head ? " 
 " it be no matter what be put it into my head . my head 's none so hollow as 
 it must get in , an ' nought to put it there . I know she be fond on he , as 
 I know th ' wind 's comin ' in at the door , an ' that be anoof . an ' he might 
 be willin ' to marry she if he know'd she be fond on he , but he will ne'er 
 think on't   if somebody doesna put it into 's head . " 
 his mother 's suggestion about Dinah 's feeling towards Adam be not quite 
 a new thought to Seth , but her last word alarm he , lest she should 
 herself undertake to open Adam 's eye . he be not sure about Dinah 's 
 feeling , and he think he be sure about Adam 's . 
 " Nay , Mother , nay , " he say , earnestly , " thee mustna think o ' speak 
 o ' such thing to Adam . Thee'st no right to say what Dinah 's feeling 
 be if she hasna tell thee , and it ' ud do nothing but mischief to say 
 such thing to Adam . he feel very grateful and affectionate toward 
 Dinah , but he be no thought towards she that ' ud incline he to make she 
 his wife , and I do not   believe Dinah ' ud marry he either . I do not   think 
 she will marry at all . " 
 " eh , " say Lisbeth , impatiently . " thee think'st so 'cause she wouldna 
 ha ' thee . she will ne'er marry thee ; thee mightst as well like her t ' ha ' 
 thy brother . " 
 Seth be hurt . " Mother , " he say , in a remonstrate tone , " do not   think 
 that of I . I should be as thankful t ' have she for a sister as thee 
 wouldst t ' have she for a daughter . I have   no more thought about myself 
 in that thing , and I shall take it hard if ever thee say'st it again . " 
 " well , well , then thee shouldstna cross I wi ' sayin ' thing arena as I 
 say they be . " 
 " but , Mother , " say Seth , " thee'dst be do Dinah a wrong by tell 
 Adam what thee think'st about she . it ' ud do nothing but mischief , 
 for it ' ud make Adam uneasy if he doesna feel the same to she . and I be 
 pretty sure he feel nothing o ' the sort . " 
 " eh , donna tell I what thee't sure on ; thee know'st nought about it . 
 what be he allay go to the Poysers ' for , if he didna want t ' see she ? 
 he go twice where he use t ' go once . happen he knowsna as he want 
 t ' see she ; he knowsna as I put salt in 's broth , but he would miss it pretty 
 quick if it warna there . he will ne'er think o ' marry if it isna put 
 into 's head , an ' if thee'dst any love for thy mother , thee'dst put he 
 up to't an ' not let she go away out o ' my sight , when I might ha ' she to 
 make a bit o ' comfort for I afore I go to bed to my old man under the 
 white thorn . " 
 " Nay , Mother , " say Seth , " thee mustna think I unkind , but I should 
 be go against my conscience if I take upon I to say what Dinah 's 
 feeling be . and besides that , I think I should give offence to Adam by 
 speak to he at all about marrying ; and I counsel thee not to do't . 
 Thee may'st be quite deceive about Dinah . Nay , I be pretty sure , by 
 word she say to I last Sabbath , as she be no mind to marry . " 
 " eh , thee't as contrairy as the rest on them . if it war summat I didna 
 want , it ' ud be do fast enough . " 
 Lisbeth rise from the bench at this , and go out of the workshop , 
 leave Seth in much anxiety lest she should disturb Adam 's mind about 
 Dinah . he console himself after a time with reflect that , since 
 Adam 's trouble , Lisbeth have be very timid about speak to he on 
 matter of feeling , and that she would hardly dare to approach this 
 tender of all subject . even if she do , he hop Adam would not take 
 much notice of what she say . 
 Seth be right in believe that Lisbeth would be hold in restraint by 
 timidity , and during the next three day , the interval in which she have 
 an opportunity of speak to Adam be too rare and short to cause she 
 any strong temptation . but in her long solitary hour she brood over 
 her regretful thought about Dinah , till they have grow very near that 
 point of unmanageable strength when thought be apt to take wing out 
 of their secret nest in a startling manner . and on Sunday morning , when 
 Seth go away to chapel at Treddleston , the dangerous opportunity come . 
 Sunday morning be the happy time in all the week to Lisbeth , for 
 as there be no service at Hayslope church till the afternoon , Adam be 
 always at home , do nothing but reading , an occupation in which she 
 could venture to interrupt he . moreover , she have always a well dinner 
 than usual to prepare for her son - very frequently for Adam and herself 
 alone , Seth be often away the entire day - and the smell of the roast 
 meat before the clear fire in the clean kitchen , the clock tick in 
 a peaceful Sunday manner , her darle Adam seat near she in his good 
 clothe , do nothing very important , so that she could go and stroke 
 her hand across his hair if she like , and see he look up at her and 
 smile , while Gyp , rather jealous , poke his muzzle up between they - all 
 these thing make poor Lisbeth 's earthly paradise . 
 the book Adam most often read on a Sunday morning be his large picture 
 Bible , and this morning it lie open before he on the round white deal 
 table in the kitchen ; for he sit there in spite of the fire , because he 
 know his mother like to have he with she , and it be the only day in 
 the week when he could indulge she in that way . you would have like to 
 see Adam read his Bible . he never open it on a weekday , and so he 
 come to it as a holiday book , serve he for history , biography , and 
 poetry . he hold one hand thrust between his waistcoat button , and the 
 other ready to turn the page , and in the course of the morning you 
 would have see many change in his face . sometimes his lip move in 
 semi - articulation - it be when he come to a speech that he could fancy 
 himself uttering , such as Samuel 's die speech to the people ; then his 
 eyebrow would be raise , and the corner of his mouth would quiver a 
 little with sad sympathy - something , perhaps old Isaac 's meeting with 
 his son , touch he closely ; at other time , over the New Testament , 
 a very solemn look would come upon his face , and he would every now and 
 then shake his head in serious assent , or just lift up his hand and let 
 it fall again . and on some morning , when he read in the Apocrypha , of 
 which he be very fond , the son of Sirach 's keen - edge word would bring 
 a delighted smile , though he also enjoy the freedom of occasionally 
 differ from an Apocryphal writer . for Adam know the Articles quite 
 well , as become a good churchman . 
 Lisbeth , in the pause of attend to her dinner , always sit opposite 
 to he and watch he , till she could rest no long without go 
 up to he and give he a caress , to call his attention to she . this 
 morning he be read the Gospel accord to St. Matthew , and Lisbeth 
 have be stand close by he for some minute , stroke his hair , 
 which be smooth than usual this morning , and look down at the 
 large page with silent wonderment at the mystery of letter . she be 
 encourage to continue this caress , because when she first go up 
 to he , he have throw himself back in his chair to look at she 
 affectionately and say , " why , Mother , thee look'st rare and hearty this 
 morning . eh , Gyp want I t ' look at he . he can not   abide to think I love 
 thee the good . " Lisbeth say nothing , because she want to say so many 
 thing . and now there be a new leaf to be turn over , and it be 
 a picture - that of the angel seat on the great stone that have be 
 roll away from the sepulchre . this picture have one strong association 
 in Lisbeth 's memory , for she have be remind of it when she first 
 see Dinah , and Adam have no soon turn the page , and lift the book 
 sideways that they might look at the angel , than she say , " that be 
 she - that be Dinah . " 
 Adam smile , and , look more intently at the angel 's face , say , " it 
 be a bit like she ; but Dinah 's pretty , I think . " 
 " well , then , if thee think'st she so pretty , why arn't   fond on she ? " 
 Adam look up in surprise . " why , Mother , dost think I do not   set store 
 by Dinah ? " 
 " Nay , " say Lisbeth , frighten at her own courage , yet feel that 
 she have break the ice , and the water must flow , whatever mischief they 
 might do . " what be th ' use o ' settin ' store by thing as be thirty mile 
 off ? if thee wast fond enough on she , thee wouldstna let she go away . " 
 " but I have   no right t ' hinder she , if she think well , " say Adam , 
 look at his book as if he want to go on reading . he foresee a 
 series of complaint tend to nothing . Lisbeth sit down again in the 
 chair opposite to he , as she say : 
 " but she wouldna think well if thee wastna so contrairy . " Lisbeth dare 
 not venture beyond a vague phrase yet . 
 " Contrairy , mother ? " Adam say , look up again in some anxiety . " what 
 have I do ? what dost mean ? " 
 " why , thee't never look at nothing , nor think o ' nothing , but thy 
 figurin , an ' thy work , " say Lisbeth , half - cry . " an ' dost think thee 
 canst go on so all thy life , as if thee wast a man cut out o ' timber ? 
 An ' what wut do when thy mother 's gone , an ' nobody to take care on thee 
 as thee gett'st a bit o ' victual comfortable I ' the mornin ' ? " 
 " what hast get I ' thy mind , Mother ? " say Adam , vex at this 
 whimpering . " I canna see what thee't drive at . be there anything I 
 could do for thee as I do not   do ? " 
 " Aye , an ' that there be . Thee might'st do as I should ha ' somebody wi ' 
 I to comfort I a bit , an ' wait on I when I be bad , an ' be good to I . " 
 " well , Mother , whose fault be it there isna some tidy body I ' th ' house 
 t ' help thee ? it isna by my wish as thee hast a stroke o ' work to do . we 
 can afford it - I have   tell thee often enough . it ' ud be a deal well for 
 we . " 
 " eh , what be the use o ' talk o ' tidy body , when thee mean'st one o ' 
 th ' wench out o ' th ' village , or somebody from Treddles'on as I ne'er 
 set eye on I ' my life ? I would soon make a shift an ' get into my own 
 coffin afore I die , nor ha ' they folk to put I in . " 
 Adam be silent , and try to go on reading . that be the utmost 
 severity he could show towards his mother on a Sunday morning . but 
 Lisbeth have go too far now to check herself , and after scarcely a 
 minute 's quietness she begin again . 
 " thee mightst know well enough who ' tis I would like t ' ha ' wi ' I . it isna 
 many folk I send for t ' come an ' see I . I reckon . an ' thee'st have the 
 fetchin ' on her time enow . " 
 " thee mean'st Dinah , Mother , I know , " say Adam . " but it be no use 
 set thy mind on what can not   be . if Dinah ' ud be willing to stay at 
 Hayslope , it be not   likely she can come away from her aunt 's house , where 
 they hold she like a daughter , and where she be more bound than she be to 
 we . if it have be so that she could ha ' married Seth , that ' ud ha ' be 
 a great blessing to we , but we can not   have thing just as we like in this 
 life . thee must try and make up thy mind to do without she . " 
 " Nay , but I canna ma ' up my mind , when she be just cut out for thee ; an ' 
 nought shall ma ' I believe as God didna make she an ' send she there o ' 
 purpose for thee . what be it sinnify about her bein ' a methody ! it ' ud 
 happen wear out on her wi ' marryin ' . " 
 Adam throw himself back in his chair and look at his mother . he 
 understand now what she have be aim at from the beginning of the 
 conversation . it be as unreasonable , impracticable a wish as she have 
 ever urge , but he could not help be move by so entirely new an 
 idea . the chief point , however , be to chase away the notion from his 
 mother 's mind as quickly as possible . 
 " Mother , " he say , gravely , " thee't talk wild . do not   let I hear 
 thee say such thing again . it be no good talk o ' what can never be . 
 Dinah 's not for marrying ; she be fix her heart on a different sort o ' 
 life . " 
 " very like , " say Lisbeth , impatiently , " very like she be none for 
 marr'ing , when they as she would be willin ' t ' marry wonna ax she . I 
 shouldna ha ' be for marr'e thy feyther if he have ne'er ax I ; an ' 
 she be as fond o ' thee as e'er I war o ' Thias , poor fellow . " 
 the blood rush to Adam 's face , and for a few moment he be not quite 
 conscious where he be . his mother and the kitchen have vanish for he , 
 and he see nothing but Dinah 's face turn up towards his . it seem 
 as if there be a resurrection of his dead joy . but he wake up very 
 speedily from that dream   the waking be chill and sad , for it would 
 have be very foolish in he to believe his mother 's word - she could 
 have no ground for they . he be prompt to express his disbelief very 
 strongly - perhaps that he might call forth the proof , if there be any 
 to be offer . 
 " what dost say such thing for , Mother , when thee'st get no foundation 
 for them ? Thee know'st nothing as give thee a right to say that . " 
 " then I knowna nought as gi'es I a right to say as the year 's turn , 
 for all I feel it fust thing when I get up I ' th ' morning . she isna fond 
 o ' Seth , I reckon , be she ? she doesna want to marry HIM ? but I can see 
 as she doesna behave tow'rt thee as she dae tow'rt Seth . she make no 
 more o ' Seth 's come a - nigh she nor if he war Gyp , but she be all of a 
 tremble when thee't a - sittin ' down by she at breakfast an ' a - look at 
 she . Thee think'st thy mother know nought , but she war alive afore thee 
 wast bear . " 
 " but thee canstna be sure as the trembling mean love ? " say Adam 
 anxiously . 
 " eh , what else should it mane ? it isna hate , I reckon . an ' what should 
 she do but love thee ? Thee't make to be love - for where be there a 
 straight cliverer man ? an ' what be it sinnify her bein ' a Methody ? it be 
 on'y the marigold I ' th ' parridge . " 
 Adam have thrust his hand in his pocket , and be look down at the 
 book on the table , without see any of the letter . he be tremble 
 like a gold - seeker who see the strong promise of gold but see in the 
 same moment a sicken vision of disappointment . he could not trust his 
 mother 's insight ; she have see what she wish to see . and yet - and yet , 
 now the suggestion have be make to he , he remember so many thing , 
 very slight thing , like the stirring of the water by an imperceptible 
 breeze , which seem to he some confirmation of his mother 's word . 
 Lisbeth notice that he be move . she go on , " An ' thee't find out 
 as thee't poorly aff when she be go . thee't fonder on she nor thee 
 know'st . Thy eye follow she about , welly as Gyp 's follow thee . " 
 Adam could sit still no long . he rise , take down his hat , and go out 
 into the field . 
 the sunshine be on they : that early autumn sunshine which we should 
 know be not summer 's , even if there be not the touch of yellow 
 on the lime and chestnut ; the Sunday sunshine too , which have more than 
 autumnal calmness for the work man ; the morning sunshine , which still 
 leave the dew - crystal on the fine gossamer webs in the shadow of the 
 bushy hedgerow . 
 Adam need the calm influence ; he be amazed at the way in which 
 this new thought of Dinah 's love have take possession of he , with an 
 overmaster power that make all other feeling give way before the 
 impetuous desire to know that the thought be true . strange , that till 
 that moment the possibility of their ever be lover have never cross 
 his mind , and yet now , all his longing suddenly go out towards that 
 possibility . he have no more doubt or hesitation as to his own wish 
 than the bird that fly towards the opening through which the daylight 
 gleam and the breath of heaven enter . 
 the autumnal Sunday sunshine soothe he , but not by prepare he with 
 resignation to the disappointment if his mother - if he himself - prove 
 to be mistake about Dinah . it soothe he by gentle encouragement of 
 his hope . her love be so like that calm sunshine that they seem to 
 make one presence to he , and he believe in they both alike . and Dinah 
 be so bind up with the sad memory of his first passion that he be 
 not forsake they , but rather give they a new sacredness by love 
 she . Nay , his love for she have grow out of that past : it be the noon 
 of that morning . 
 but Seth ? would the lad be hurt ? hardly ; for he have seem quite 
 content of late , and there be no selfish jealousy in he ; he have 
 never be jealous of his mother 's fondness for Adam . but have he see 
 anything of what their mother talk about ? Adam long to know this , 
 for he think he could trust Seth 's observation well than his 
 mother 's . he must talk to Seth before he go to see Dinah , and , with 
 this intention in his mind , he walk back to the cottage and say to 
 his mother , " do Seth say anything to thee about when he be come 
 home ? will he be back to dinner ? " 
 " aye , lad , he will be back for a wonder . he isna go to Treddles'on . he be 
 go somewhere else a - preachin ' and a - prayin ' . " 
 " Hast any notion which way he be go ? " say Adam . 
 " Nay , but he aften go to th ' Common . Thee know'st more o 's going nor 
 I do . " 
 Adam want to go and meet Seth , but he must content himself with 
 walk about the near field and get sight of he as soon as 
 possible . that would not be for more than an hour to come , for Seth 
 would scarcely be at home much before their dinner - time , which be 
 twelve o'clock . but Adam could not sit down to his reading again , and he 
 saunter along by the brook and stand lean against the stile , with 
 eager intense eye , which look as if they see something very vividly ; 
 but it be not the brook or the willow , not the field or the sky . 
 again and again his vision be interrupt by wonder at the strength of 
 his own feeling , at the strength and sweetness of this new love - almost 
 like the wonder a man feel at the add power he find in himself for 
 an art which he have lay aside for a space . how be it that the poet 
 have say so many fine thing about our first love , so few about our 
 later love ? be their first poem their good ? or be not those the good 
 which come from their full thought , their large experience , their 
 deeply - root affection ? the boy 's flutelike voice have its own spring 
 charm ; but the man should yield a rich deep music . 
 at last , there be Seth , visible at the farth stile , and Adam 
 hasten to meet he . Seth be surprised , and think something unusual 
 must have happen , but when Adam come up , his face say plainly enough 
 that it be nothing alarming . 
 " where hast be ? " say Adam , when they be side by side . 
 " I have   be to the Common , " say Seth . " Dinah 's be speak the word 
 to a little company of hearer at Brimstone 's , as they call he . they be 
 folk as never go to church hardly - they on the Common - but they will go 
 and hear Dinah a bit . she be be speak with power this forenoon 
 from the word , ' I come not to call the righteous , but sinner to 
 repentance . ' and there be a little thing happen as be pretty to see . 
 the woman mostly bring their child with them , but to - day there be one 
 stout curly head fellow about three or four year old , that I never see 
 there before . he be as naughty as could be at the beginning while I be 
 pray , and while we be sing , but when we all sit down and Dinah 
 begin to speak , th ' young un stand stock still all at once , and begin to 
 look at she with 's mouth open , and presently he run away from 's mother 
 and go to Dinah , and pull at she , like a little dog , for she to take 
 notice of he . so Dinah lift he up and hold th ' lad on her lap , while 
 she go on speak ; and he be as good as could be till he go to 
 sleep - and the mother cry to see he . " 
 " it be a pity she shouldna be a mother herself , " say Adam , ' so fond as 
 the child be of she . dost think she be quite fix against marrying , 
 Seth ? dost think nothing ' ud turn she ? " 
 there be something peculiar in his brother 's tone , which make Seth 
 steal a glance at his face before he answer . 
 " it ' ud be wrong of I to say nothing ' ud turn she , " he answer . " but 
 if thee mean'st it about myself , I have   give up all thought as she can 
 ever be my wife . she call I her brother , and that be enough . " 
 " but dost think she might ever get fond enough of anybody else to be 
 willing to marry them ? " say Adam rather shyly . 
 " well , " say Seth , after some hesitation , " it be cross my mind 
 sometimes o ' late as she might ; but Dinah ' ud let no fondness for the 
 creature draw she out o ' the path as she believe God have mark out for 
 she . if she think the leading be not from he , she be not one to 
 be bring under the power of it . and she be allay seem clear about 
 that - as her work be to minister t ' other , and make no home for 
 herself I ' this world . " 
 " but suppose , " say Adam , earnestly , ' suppose there be a man as ' ud 
 let she do just the same and not interfere with she - she might do a good 
 deal o ' what she do now , just as well when she be marry as when 
 she be single . other woman of her sort have marry - that be to say , not 
 just like she , but woman as preach and attend on the sick and needy . 
 there be Mrs. Fletcher as she talk of . " 
 a new light have break in on Seth . he turn round , and lay his 
 hand on Adam 's shoulder , say , " why , wouldst like she to marry THEE , 
 Brother ? " 
 Adam look doubtfully at Seth 's inquire eye and say , " wouldst be 
 hurt if she be to be fonder o ' I than o ' thee ? " 
 " Nay , " say Seth warmly , " how canst think it ? have I feel thy trouble so 
 little that I shouldna feel thy joy ? " 
 there be silence a few moment as they walk on , and then Seth say , 
 " I have no notion as thee'dst ever think of she for a wife . " 
 " but be it o ' any use to think of she ? " say Adam . " what dost say ? 
 Mother 's make I as I hardly know where I be , with what she be be 
 say to I this forenoon . she say she be sure Dinah feel for I more 
 than common , and ' ud be willing t ' have I . but I be afraid she speak 
 without book . I want to know if thee'st see anything . " 
 " it be a nice point to speak about , " say Seth , " and I be afraid o ' be 
 wrong ; besides , we have   no right t ' intermeddle with people 's feeling 
 when they would not   tell them themselves . " 
 Seth pause . 
 " but thee mightst ask she , " he say presently . " she take no offence at 
 I for ask , and thee'st more right than I have , only thee't not in the 
 Society . but Dinah do not   hold wi ' they as be for keep the Society 
 so strict to themselves . she do not   mind about make folk enter the 
 Society , so as they be fit t ' enter the kingdom o ' God . some o ' the 
 brother at Treddles'on be displeased with she for that . " 
 " where will she be the rest o ' the day ? " say Adam . 
 " she say she should not   leave the farm again to - day , " say Seth , 
 " because it be she last Sabbath there , and she be go t ' read out o ' the 
 big Bible wi ' the child . " 
 Adam think - but do not say - " then I will go this afternoon ; for if I 
 go to church , my thought ' ull be with she all the while . they must sing 
 th ' anthem without I to - day . " 
 Chapter LII 
 Adam and Dinah 
 it be about three o'clock when Adam enter the farmyard and rouse 
 Alick and the dog from their Sunday dozing . Alick say everybody be 
 go to church " but th ' young missis " - so he call Dinah - but this 
 do not disappoint Adam , although the " everybody " be so liberal as 
 to include Nancy the dairymaid , whose work of necessity be not 
 unfrequently incompatible with church - go . 
 there be perfect stillness about the house . the door be all close , 
 and the very stone and tub seem quieter than usual . Adam hear the 
 water gently dripping from the pump - that be the only sound - and 
 he knock at the house door rather softly , as be suitable in that 
 stillness . 
 the door open , and Dinah stand before he , colour deeply with the 
 great surprise of see Adam at this hour , when she know it be his 
 regular practice to be at church . yesterday he would have say to she 
 without any difficulty , " I come to see you , Dinah : I know the rest be 
 not at home . " but to - day something prevent he from say that , and 
 he put out his hand to she in silence . neither of they speak , and yet 
 both wish they could speak , as Adam enter , and they sit down . Dinah 
 take the chair she have just leave ; it be at the corner of the table 
 near the window , and there be a book lie on the table , but it be not 
 open . she have be sit perfectly still , look at the small bit 
 of clear fire in the bright grate . Adam sit down opposite she , in Mr. 
 Poyser 's three - cornered chair . 
 " your mother be not ill again , I hope , Adam ? " Dinah say , recover 
 herself . " Seth say she be well this morning . " 
 " no , she be very hearty to - day , " say Adam , happy in the sign of Dinah 's 
 feeling at the sight of he , but shy . 
 " there be nobody at home , you see , " Dinah say ; " but you will wait . you have 
 be hinder from go to church to - day , doubtless . " 
 " yes , " Adam say , and then pause , before he add , " I be think 
 about you : that be the reason . " 
 this confession be very awkward and sudden , Adam feel , for he think 
 Dinah must understand all he mean . but the frankness of the word 
 cause she immediately to interpret they into a renewal of his brotherly 
 regret that she be go away , and she answer calmly , " do not be 
 careful and trouble for I , Adam . I have all thing and abound at 
 Snowfield . and my mind be at rest , for I be not seek my own will in 
 go . " 
 " but if thing be different , Dinah , " say Adam , hesitatingly . " if you 
 know thing that perhaps you do not   know now .... " 
 Dinah look at he inquiringly , but instead of go on , he reach a 
 chair and bring it near the corner of the table where she be sit . 
 she wonder , and be afraid - and the next moment her thought fly to 
 the past : be it something about those distant unhappy one that she 
 do not   know ? 
 Adam look at she . it be so sweet to look at her eye , which have now 
 a self - forgetful questioning in they - for a moment he forget that he 
 want to say anything , or that it be necessary to tell she what he 
 mean . 
 " Dinah , " he say suddenly , take both her hand between his , " I love 
 you with my whole heart and soul . I love you next to God who make I . " 
 Dinah 's lip become pale , like her cheek , and she tremble violently 
 under the shock of painful joy . her hand be cold as death between 
 Adam 's . she could not draw they away , because he hold they fast . 
 " do not   tell I you can not   love I , Dinah . do not   tell I we must part and 
 pass our life away from one another . " 
 the tear be tremble in Dinah 's eye , and they fall before she could 
 answer . but she speak in a quiet low voice . 
 " yes , dear Adam , we must submit to another will . we must part . " 
 " not if you love I , Dinah - not if you love I , " Adam say passionately . 
 " tell I - tell I if you can love I well than a brother ? " 
 Dinah be too entirely reliant on the Supreme guidance to attempt to 
 achieve any end by a deceptive concealment . she be recover now from 
 the first shock of emotion , and she look at Adam with simple sincere 
 eye as she say , " yes , Adam , my heart be draw strongly towards you ; 
 and of my own will , if I have no clear showing to the contrary , I could 
 find my happiness in be near you and minister to you continually . 
 I fear I should forget to rejoice and weep with other ; nay , I fear I 
 should forget the divine presence , and seek no love but your . " 
 Adam do not speak immediately . they sit look at each other in 
 delicious silence - for the first sense of mutual love exclude other 
 feeling ; it will have the soul all to itself . 
 " then , Dinah , " Adam say at last , " how can there be anything contrary 
 to what be right in our belong to one another and spend our life 
 together ? who put this great love into our heart ? can anything be 
 holy than that ? for we can help one another in everything as be good . 
 I would never think o ' put myself between you and God , and say you 
 ought not   to do this and you ought not   to do that . you would follow your 
 conscience as much as you do now . " 
 " yes , Adam , " Dinah say , " I know marriage be a holy state for those who 
 be truly call to it , and have no other drawing ; but from my childhood 
 upwards I have be lead towards another path ; all my peace and my joy 
 have come from have no life of my own , no want , no wish for myself , 
 and live only in God and those of his creature whose sorrow and joy 
 he have give I to know . those have be very blessed year to I , and I 
 feel that if I be to listen to any voice that would draw I aside from 
 that path , I should be turn my back on the light that have shine upon 
 I , and darkness and doubt would take hold of I . we could not bless 
 each other , Adam , if there be doubt in my soul , and if I yearn , 
 when it be too late , after that well part which have once be give 
 I and I have put away from I . " 
 " but if a new feeling have come into your mind , Dinah , and if you love I 
 so as to be willing to be near to I than to other people , be not   that 
 a sign that it be right for you to change your life ? do not   the love 
 make it right when nothing else would ? " 
 " Adam , my mind be full of questioning about that ; for now , since you 
 tell I of your strong love towards I , what be clear to I have become 
 dark again . I feel before that my heart be too strongly draw towards 
 you , and that your heart be not as mine ; and the thought of you have 
 take hold of I , so that my soul have lose its freedom , and be become 
 enslave to an earthly affection , which make I anxious and careful 
 about what should befall myself . for in all other affection I have be 
 content with any small return , or with none ; but my heart be begin 
 to hunger after an equal love from you . and I have no doubt that I must 
 wrestle against that as a great temptation , and the command be clear 
 that I must go away . " 
 " but now , dear , dear Dinah , now you know I love you well than you love 
 I ... it be all different now . you will not   think o ' go . you will stay , and 
 be my dear wife , and I shall thank God for give I my life as I never 
 thank he before . " 
 " Adam , it be hard to I to turn a deaf ear ... you know it be hard ; but a 
 great fear be upon I . it seem to I as if you be stretch out your 
 arm to I , and beckon I to come and take my ease and live for my 
 own delight , and Jesus , the Man of Sorrows , be stand look towards 
 I , and point to the sinful , and suffering , and afflict . I have 
 see that again and again when I have be sit in stillness and 
 darkness , and a great terror have come upon I lest I should become hard , 
 and a lover of self , and no more bear willingly the Redeemer 's cross . " 
 Dinah have close her eye , and a faint shudder go through she . " Adam , " 
 she go on , " you would not   desire that we should seek a good through 
 any unfaithfulness to the light that be in we ; you would not   believe that 
 could be a good . we be of one mind in that . " 
 " yes , Dinah , " say Adam sadly , " I will never be the man t ' urge you 
 against your conscience . but I can not   give up the hope that you may come 
 to see different . I do not   believe your love I could shut up your 
 heart - it be only add to what you have   be before , not take away from 
 it . for it seem to I it be the same with love and happiness as with 
 sorrow - the more we know of it the well we can feel what other 
 people 's life be or might be , and so we shall only be more tender to 
 them , and wishful to help them . the more knowledge a man have , the well 
 he will do 's work ; and feel be a sort o ' knowledge . " 
 Dinah be silent ; her eye be fix in contemplation of something 
 visible only to herself . Adam go on presently with his pleading , " and 
 you can do almost as much as you do now . I will not   ask you to go to church 
 with I of a Sunday . you shall go where you like among the people , and 
 teach them ; for though I like church well , I do not   put my soul above 
 your , as if my word be well for you to follow than your own 
 conscience . and you can help the sick just as much , and you will have more 
 mean o ' make them a bit comfortable ; and you will be among all your 
 own friend as love you , and can help them and be a blessing to them till 
 their die day . surely , Dinah , you would be as near to God as if you be 
 live lonely and away from I . " 
 Dinah make no answer for some time . Adam be still hold her hand and 
 look at she with almost tremble anxiety , when she turn her grave 
 love eye on his and say , in rather a sad voice , " Adam there be truth 
 in what you say , and there be many of the brother and sister who have 
 great strength than I have , and find their heart enlarge by the 
 care of husband and kindre . but I have not faith that it would be so 
 with I , for since my affection have be set above measure on you , I 
 have have less peace and joy in God . I have feel as it be a division 
 in my heart . and think how it be with I , Adam . that life I have lead be 
 like a land I have tread in blessedness since my childhood ; and if 
 I long for a moment to follow the voice which call I to another land 
 that I know not , I can not but fear that my soul might hereafter yearn 
 for that early blessedness which I have forsake ; and where doubt enter 
 there be not perfect love . I must wait for clear guidance . I must go 
 from you , and we must submit ourselves entirely to the Divine Will . 
 we be sometimes require to lay our natural lawful affection on the 
 altar . " 
 Adam dare not plead again , for Dinah 's be not the voice of caprice or 
 insincerity . but it be very hard for he ; his eye get dim as he look 
 at she . 
 " but you may come to feel satisfied ... to feel that you may come to I 
 again , and we may never part , Dinah ? " 
 " we must submit ourselves , Adam . with time , our duty will be make clear . 
 it may be when I have enter on my former life , I shall find all these 
 new thought and wish vanish , and become as thing that be not . then 
 I shall know that my calling be not towards marriage . but we must wait . " 
 " Dinah , " say Adam mournfully , " you can not   love I so well as I love you , 
 else you would have no doubt . but it be natural you should not , for I be not 
 so good as you . I can not   doubt it be right for I to love the good thing 
 God 's ever give I to know . " 
 " Nay , Adam . it seem to I that my love for you be not weak , for my 
 heart wait on your word and look , almost as a little child wait on 
 the help and tenderness of the strong on whom it depend . if the thought 
 of you take slight hold of I , I should not fear that it would be an 
 idol in the temple . but you will strengthen I - you will not hinder I 
 in seek to obey to the uttermost . " 
 " let we go out into the sunshine , Dinah , and walk together . I will speak 
 no word to disturb you . " 
 they go out and walk towards the field , where they would meet the 
 family come from church . Adam say , " take my arm , Dinah , " and she take 
 it . that be the only change in their manner to each other since they 
 be last walk together . but no sadness in the prospect of she go 
 away - in the uncertainty of the issue - could rob the sweetness from 
 Adam 's sense that Dinah love he . he think he would stay at the Hall 
 Farm all that evening . he would be near she as long as he could . 
 " hey - day ! there be Adam along wi ' Dinah , " say Mr. Poyser , as he open 
 the far gate into the Home Close . " I couldna think how he happen away 
 from church . why , " add good Martin , after a moment 's pause , " what dost 
 think have just jump into my head ? " 
 " Summat as hadna far to jump , for it be just under our nose . you mean as 
 Adam 's fond o ' Dinah . " 
 " Aye ! hast ever have any notion of it before ? " 
 " to be sure I have , " say Mrs. Poyser , who always decline , if possible , 
 to be take by surprise . " I be not one o ' those as can see the cat I ' the 
 dairy an ' wonder what she be come after . " 
 " thee never saidst a word to I about it . " 
 " well , I be not   like a bird - clapper , force to make a rattle when the 
 wind blow on I . I can keep my own counsel when there be no good I ' 
 speak . " 
 " but Dinah will ha ' none o ' he . dost think she will ? " 
 " Nay , " say Mrs. Poyser , not sufficiently on her guard against a 
 possible surprise , ' she will never marry anybody , if he be not   a Methodist 
 and a cripple . " 
 " it ' ud ha ' be a pretty thing though for them t ' marry , " say Martin , 
 turn his head on one side , as if in pleased contemplation of his new 
 idea . " thee'dst ha ' like it too , wouldstna ? " 
 " ah ! I should . I should ha ' be sure of she then , as she would not 
 go away from I to Snowfield , welly thirty mile off , and I not get a 
 creatur to look to , only neighbour , as be no kin to I , an ' most of 
 them woman as I would be ashamed to show my face , if my dairy thing war like 
 their'n . there may well be streaky butter I ' the market . an ' I should be 
 glad to see the poor thing settle like a christian woman , with a 
 house of her own over her head ; and we would stock she well wi ' linen and 
 feather , for I love she next to my own child . an ' she make one feel 
 safe when she be I ' the house , for she be like the driven snow : anybody 
 might sin for two as have she at their elbow . " 
 " Dinah , " say Tommy , run forward to meet she , " mother say you will 
 never marry anybody but a Methodist cripple . what a silly you must be ! " 
 a comment which Tommy follow up by seize Dinah with both arm , and 
 dance along by her side with incommodious fondness . 
 " why , Adam , we miss you I ' the singing to - day , " say Mr. Poyser . " how 
 be it ? " 
 " I want to see Dinah - she be go away so soon , " say Adam . 
 " ah , lad ! can you persuade she to stop somehow ? find she a good husband 
 somewhere I ' the parish . if you will do that , we will forgive you for 
 missing church . but , anyway , she isna go before the harvest supper 
 o ' Wednesday , and you must come then . there be Bartle Massey comin ' , an ' 
 happen Craig . you will be sure an ' come , now , at seven ? the missis wunna 
 have it a bit later . " 
 " aye , " say Adam , " I will come if I can . but I can not   often say what I will 
 do beforehand , for the work often hold I long than I expect . you will 
 stay till the end o ' the week , Dinah ? " 
 " yes , yes ! " say Mr. Poyser . " we will have no nay . " 
 " she be no call to be in a hurry , " observe Mrs. Poyser . " scarceness 
 o ' victual ' ull keep : there be no need to be hasty wi ' the cooking . an ' 
 scarceness be what there be the big stock of I ' that country . " 
 Dinah smile , but give no promise to stay , and they talk of other 
 thing through the rest of the walk , linger in the sunshine to look 
 at the great flock of geese grazing , at the new corn - rick , and at the 
 surprising abundance of fruit on the old pear - tree ; Nancy and Molly 
 have already hasten home , side by side , each holding , carefully 
 wrap in her pocket - handkerchief , a prayer - book , in which she could 
 read little beyond the large letter and the Amens . 
 surely all other leisure be hurry compare with a sunny walk through the 
 field from " afternoon church " - as such walk use to be in those old 
 leisurely time , when the boat , glide sleepily along the canal , be 
 the new locomotive wonder ; when Sunday book have most of they old 
 brown - leather cover , and open with remarkable precision always in one 
 place . leisure be go - go where the spinning - wheel be go , and the 
 pack - horse , and the slow waggon , and the pedlar , who bring bargain 
 to the door on sunny afternoon . ingenious philosopher tell you , 
 perhaps , that the great work of the steam - engine be to create leisure 
 for mankind . do not believe they : it only create a vacuum for eager 
 think to rush in . even idleness be eager now - eager for amusement ; 
 prone to excursion - train , art museum , periodical literature , and 
 exciting novel ; prone even to scientific theorizing and cursory peep 
 through microscope . old Leisure be quite a different personage . he 
 only read one newspaper , innocent of leader , and be free from 
 that periodicity of sensation which we call post - time . he be a 
 contemplative , rather stout gentleman , of excellent digestion ; of quiet 
 perception , undisease by hypothesis ; happy in his inability to know 
 the cause of thing , prefer the thing themselves . he live chiefly 
 in the country , among pleasant seat and homestead , and be fond of 
 saunter by the fruit - tree wall and scent the apricot when they 
 be warm by the morning sunshine , or of shelter himself under 
 the orchard bough at noon , when the summer pear be fall . he know 
 nothing of weekday service , and think none the bad of the Sunday 
 sermon if it allow he to sleep from the text to the blessing ; like 
 the afternoon service well , because the prayer be the short , 
 and not ashamed to say so ; for he have an easy , jolly conscience , 
 broad - back like himself , and able to carry a great deal of beer or 
 port - wine , not be make squeamish by doubt and qualm and lofty 
 aspiration . life be not a task to he , but a sinecure . he finger the 
 guineas in his pocket , and eat his dinner , and sleep the sleep of the 
 irresponsible , for have he not keep up his character by go to church 
 on the Sunday afternoon ? 
 fine old leisure ! do not be severe upon he , and judge he by our modern 
 standard . he never go to Exeter Hall , or hear a popular preacher , or 
 read Tracts for the Times or Sartor Resartus . 
 Chapter LIII 
 the Harvest supper 
 as Adam be go homeward , on Wednesday evening , in the six o'clock 
 sunlight , he see in the distance the last load of barley wind its way 
 towards the yard - gate of the Hall Farm , and hear the chant of " Harvest 
 home ! " rise and sink like a wave . fainter and fainter , and more 
 musical through the grow distance , the fall die sound still 
 reach he , as he near the Willow Brook . the low westere sun shine 
 right on the shoulder of the old Binton Hills , turn the unconscious 
 sheep into bright spot of light ; shine on the window of the cottage 
 too , and make they a - flame with a glory beyond that of amber or 
 amethyst . it be enough to make Adam feel that he be in a great temple , 
 and that the distant chant be a sacred song . 
 " it be wonderful , " he think , " how that sound go to one 's heart almost 
 like a funeral bell , for all it tell one o ' the joyfull time o ' the 
 year , and the time when man be mostly the thankfull . I suppose it be 
 a bit hard to we to think anything be over and go in our life ; and 
 there be a parting at the root of all our joy . it be like what I feel 
 about Dinah . I should never ha ' come to know that her love ' ud be the 
 great o ' blessing to I , if what I count a blessing have not   be 
 wrench and tear away from I , and leave I with a great need , so as I 
 could crave and hunger for a great and a well comfort . " 
 he expect to see Dinah again this evening , and get leave to accompany 
 she as far as Oakbourne ; and then he would ask she to fix some time when 
 he might go to Snowfield , and learn whether the last good hope that have 
 be bear to he must be resign like the rest . the work he have to do 
 at home , besides put on his good clothe , make it seven before he 
 be on his way again to the Hall Farm , and it be questionable whether , 
 with his long and quick stride , he should be there in time even 
 for the roast beef , which come after the plum pudding , for Mrs. Poyser 's 
 supper would be punctual . 
 Great be the clatter of knife and pewter plate and tin can when Adam 
 enter the house , but there be no hum of voice to this accompaniment : 
 the eating of excellent roast beef , provide free of expense , be too 
 serious a business to those good farm - labourer to be perform with 
 a divided attention , even if they have have anything to say to each 
 other - which they have not . and Mr. Poyser , at the head of the table , be 
 too busy with his carving to listen to Bartle Massey 's or Mr. Craig 's 
 ready talk . 
 " here , Adam , " say Mrs. Poyser , who be stand and look on to see 
 that Molly and Nancy do their duty as waiter , " here be a place keep for 
 you between Mr. Massey and the boy . it be a poor tale you could not   come 
 to see the pudding when it be whole . " 
 Adam look anxiously round for a fourth woman 's figure , but Dinah 
 be not there . he be almost afraid of ask about she ; besides , his 
 attention be claim by greeting , and there remain the hope that 
 Dinah be in the house , though perhaps disinclined to festivity on the 
 eve of her departure . 
 it be a goodly sight - that table , with Martin Poyser 's round 
 good - humour face and large person at the head of it help his 
 servant to the fragrant roast beef and please when the empty plate 
 come again . Martin , though usually bl with a good appetite , really 
 forget to finish his own beef to - night - it be so pleasant to he to 
 look on in the interval of carve and see how the other enjoy their 
 supper ; for be they not man who , on all the day of the year except 
 Christmas Day and Sundays , eat their cold dinner , in a makeshift manner , 
 under the hedgerow , and drink their beer out of wooden bottle - with 
 relish certainly , but with their mouth towards the zenith , after a 
 fashion more endurable to duck than to human bipeds . Martin Poyser have 
 some faint conception of the flavour such man must find in hot roast 
 beef and fresh - draw ale . he hold his head on one side and screw 
 up his mouth , as he nudge Bartle Massey , and watch half - witted Tom 
 Tholer , otherwise know as " Tom Saft , " receive his second plateful of 
 beef . a grin of delight break over Tom 's face as the plate be set down 
 before he , between his knife and fork , which he hold erect , as if 
 they have be sacred taper . but the delight be too strong to continue 
 smoulder in a grin - it burst out the next instant in a long - draw 
 " haw , haw ! " follow by a sudden collapse into utter gravity , as the 
 knife and fork dart down on the prey . Martin Poyser 's large person 
 shake with his silent unctuous laugh . he turn towards Mrs. Poyser to 
 see if she too have be observant of Tom , and the eye of husband and 
 wife meet in a glance of good - natured amusement . 
 " Tom Saft " be a great favourite on the farm , where he play the part 
 of the old jester , and make up for his practical deficiency by his 
 success in repartee . his hit , I imagine , be those of the flail , which 
 fall quite at random , but nevertheless smash an insect now and then . 
 they be much quote at sheep - shearing and haymake time , but I 
 refrain from record they here , lest Tom 's wit should prove to be 
 like that of many other bygone jester eminent in their day - rather of a 
 temporary nature , not deal with the deep and more lasting relation 
 of thing . 
 Tom except , Martin Poyser have some pride in his servant and 
 labourer , think with satisfaction that they be the good worth 
 their pay of any set on the estate . there be Kester Bale , for example 
  Beale , probably , if the truth be know , but he be call Bale , and 
 be not conscious of any claim to a fifth letter , the old man with the 
 close leather cap and the network of wrinkle on his sun - brown face . 
 be there any man in Loamshire who know well the " natur " of all 
 farming work ? he be one of those invaluable labourer who can not only 
 turn their hand to everything , but excel in everything they turn their 
 hand to . it be true Kester 's knee be much bent outward by this time , 
 and he walk with a perpetual curtsy , as if he be among the most 
 reverent of man . and so he be ; but I be oblige to admit that the 
 object of his reverence be his own skill , towards which he perform 
 some rather affect act of worship . he always thatch the rick - for 
 if anything be his forte more than another , it be thatch - and when 
 the last touch have be put to the last beehive rick , Kester , whose home 
 lie at some distance from the farm , would take a walk to the rick - yard 
 in his good clothe on a Sunday morning and stand in the lane , at a due 
 distance , to contemplate his own thatching walk about to get each 
 rick from the proper point of view . as he curtsy along , with his eye 
 upturned to the straw knob imitative of golden globe at the summit 
 of the beehive rick , which indeed be gold of the good sort , you might 
 have imagine he to be engage in some pagan act of adoration . 
 Kester be an old bachelor and repute to have stocking full of coin , 
 concern which his master crack a joke with he every pay - night : 
 not a new unseasoned joke , but a good old one , that have be try 
 many time before and have wear well . " Th ' young measter 's a merry mon , " 
 Kester frequently remark ; for have begin his career by frighten 
 away the crow under the last Martin Poyser but one , he could never 
 cease to account the reign Martin a young master . I be not ashamed 
 of commemorate old Kester . you and I be indebted to the hard hand of 
 such man - hand that have long ago mingle with the soil they till so 
 faithfully , thriftily make the good they could of the earth 's fruit , 
 and receive the small share as their own wage . 
 then , at the end of the table , opposite his master , there be Alick , the 
 shepherd and head - man , with the ruddy face and broad shoulder , not on 
 the good term with old Kester ; indeed , their intercourse be confine 
 to an occasional snarl , for though they probably differ little 
 concern hedging and ditching and the treatment of ewe , there be a 
 profound difference of opinion between they as to their own respective 
 merit . when Tityrus and Meliboeus happen to be on the same farm , they 
 be not sentimentally polite to each other . Alick , indeed , be not by 
 any mean a honeyed man . his speech have usually something of a snarl 
 in it , and his broad - shoulder aspect something of the bull - dog 
 expression - " do not   you meddle with I , and I will not   meddle with you . " but 
 he be honest even to the splitting of an oat - grain rather than he 
 would take beyond his acknowledge share , and as " close - fisted " with 
 his master 's property as if it have be his own - throw very small 
 handfuls of damage barley to the chicken , because a large handful 
 affect his imagination painfully with a sense of profusion . 
 good - temper Tim , the waggoner , who love his horse , have his grudge 
 against Alick in the matter of corn . they rarely speak to each other , 
 and never look at each other , even over their dish of cold potato ; 
 but then , as this be their usual mode of behaviour towards all mankind , 
 it would be an unsafe conclusion that they have more than transient fit 
 of unfriendliness . the bucolic character at Hayslope , you perceive , 
 be not of that entirely genial , merry , broad - grinning sort , apparently 
 observe in most district visit by artist . the mild radiance of a 
 smile be a rare sight on a field - labourer 's face , and there be seldom 
 any gradation between bovine gravity and a laugh . nor be every labourer 
 so honest as our friend Alick . at this very table , among Mr. Poyser 's 
 man , there be that big Ben Tholoway , a very powerful thresher , but 
 detect more than once in carry away his master 's corn in his 
 pocket - an action which , as Ben be not a philosopher , could hardly be 
 ascribe to absence of mind . however , his master have forgive he , and 
 continue to employ he , for the Tholoways have live on the common time 
 out of mind , and have always work for the Poysers . and on the whole , I 
 daresay , society be not much the bad because Ben have not six month 
 of it at the treadmill , for his view of depredation be narrow , and 
 the House of Correction might have enlarge they . as it be , Ben eat his 
 roast beef to - night with a serene sense of have steal nothing more 
 than a few pea and bean as seed for his garden since the last harvest 
 supper , and feel warrant in think that Alick 's suspicious eye , for 
 ever upon he , be an injury to his innocence . 
 but now the roast beef be finish and the cloth be draw , leave 
 a fair large deal table for the bright drinking - can , and the foaming 
 brown jug , and the bright brass candlestick , pleasant to behold . now , 
 the great ceremony of the evening be to begin - the harvest - song , 
 in which every man must join . he might be in tune , if he like to be 
 singular , but he must not sit with closed lip . the movement be oblige 
 to be in triple time ; the rest be ad libitum . 
 as to the origin of this song - whether it come in its actual state from 
 the brain of a single rhapsodist , or be gradually perfect by a school 
 or succession of rhapsodist , I be ignorant . there be a stamp of 
 unity , of individual genius upon it , which incline I to the former 
 hypothesis , though I be not blind to the consideration that this unity 
 may rather have arise from that consensus of many mind which be a 
 condition of primitive thought , foreign to our modern consciousness . 
 some will perhaps think that they detect in the first quatrain 
 an indication of a lost line , which later rhapsodist , fail in 
 imaginative vigour , have supply by the feeble device of iteration . 
 other , however , may rather maintain that this very iteration be an 
 original felicity , to which none but the most prosaic mind can be 
 insensible . 
 the ceremony connect with the song be a drinking ceremony .   that 
 be perhaps a painful fact , but then , you know , we can not reform our 
 forefather .   during the first and second quatrain , sing decidedly 
 forte , no can be fill . 
 here be a health unto our master , 
 the founder of the feast ; 
 here be a health unto our master 
 and to our mistress ! 
 and may his doing prosper , 
 Whate'er he take in hand , 
 for we be all his servant , 
 and be at his command . 
 but now , immediately before the third quatrain or chorus , sung 
 fortissimo , with emphatic rap of the table , which give the effect of 
 cymbal and drum together , Alick 's can be fill , and he be bind to 
 empty it before the chorus cease . 
 then drink , boy , drink ! 
 and see ye do not spill , 
 for if ye do , ye shall drink two , 
 for ' tis our master 's will . 
 when Alick have go successfully through this test of steady - handed 
 manliness , it be the turn of old Kester , at his right hand - and so on , 
 till every man have drink his initiatory pint under the stimulus of the 
 chorus . Tom Saft - the rogue - take care to spill a little by accident ; 
 but Mrs. Poyser   too officiously , Tom think   interfere to prevent the 
 exaction of the penalty . 
 to any listener outside the door it would have be the reverse of 
 obvious why the " Drink , boy , drink ! " should have such an immediate and 
 often - repeat encore ; but once enter , he would have see that all 
 face be at present sober , and most of they serious - it be the 
 regular and respectable thing for those excellent farm - labourer to do , 
 as much as for elegant lady and gentleman to smirk and bow over their 
 wine - glass . Bartle Massey , whose ear be rather sensitive , have 
 go out to see what sort of evening it be at an early stage in the 
 ceremony , and have not finish his contemplation until a silence of 
 five minute declare that " drink , boy , drink ! " be not likely to 
 begin again for the next twelvemonth . much to the regret of the boy 
 and Totty : on they the stillness fall rather flat , after that glorious 
 thumping of the table , towards which Totty , seat on her father 's knee , 
 contribute with her small might and small fist . 
 when Bartle re - enter , however , there appear to be a general desire 
 for solo music after the choral . Nancy declare that Tim the waggoner 
 know a song and be " allay singing like a lark I ' the stable , " 
 whereupon Mr. Poyser say encouragingly , " Come , Tim , lad , let us hear 
 it . " Tim look sheepish , tuck down his head , and say he could not 
 sing , but this encourage invitation of the master 's be echo all 
 round the table . it be a conversational opportunity : everybody could 
 say , " Come , Tim , " except Alick , who never relax into the frivolity of 
 unnecessary speech . at last , Tim 's next neighbour , Ben Tholoway , begin 
 to give emphasis to his speech by nudge , at which Tim , grow rather 
 savage , say , " let I alooan , will ye ? else I will ma ' ye sing a toon ye 
 wonna like . " a good - temper waggoner 's patience have limit , and Tim be 
 not to be urge far . 
 " well , then , David , ye're the lad to sing , " say Ben , willing to show 
 that he be not discomfit by this check . " sing ' my loove be a roo 
 wi'out a thorn . ' " 
 the amatory David be a young man of an unconscious abstract 
 expression , which be due probably to a squint of superior intensity 
 rather than to any mental characteristic ; for he be not indifferent to 
 Ben 's invitation , but blush and laugh and rub his sleeve over his 
 mouth in a way that be regard as a symptom of yield . and for some 
 time the company appear to be much in earnest about the desire to hear 
 David 's song . but in vain . the lyricism of the evening be in the cellar 
 at present , and be not to be draw from that retreat just yet . 
 meanwhile the conversation at the head of the table have take a 
 political turn . Mr. Craig be not above talk politic occasionally , 
 though he pique himself rather on a wise insight than on specific 
 information . he see so far beyond the mere fact of a case that really 
 it be superfluous to know they . 
 " I be no reader o ' the paper myself , " he observe to - night , as he fill 
 his pipe , " though I might read it fast enough if I like , for there be 
 Miss Lyddy have them and be do with them I ' no time . but there be Mills , 
 now , sit I ' the chimney - corner and read the paper pretty nigh 
 from morning to night , and when he be get to th ' end on't   he be more 
 addle - headed than he be at the beginning . he be full o ' this peace now , 
 as they talk on ; he be be read and read , and think he be get to 
 the bottom on't . ' why , Lor ' bless you , mill , ' say I , ' you see no more 
 into this thing nor you can see into the middle of a potato . I will tell 
 you what it be : you think it will be a fine thing for the country . and I be 
 not again ' it - mark my word - I be not again ' it . but it be my opinion as 
 there be they at the head o ' this country as be bad enemy to we 
 nor Bony and all the mounseer he be get at 's back ; for as for the 
 mounseer , you may skewer half - a - dozen of them at once as if they war 
 frog . ' " 
 " aye , aye , " say Martin Poyser , listen with an air of much 
 intelligence and edification , " they ne'er eat a bit o ' beef I ' their 
 life . mostly sallet , I reckon . " 
 " and say I to Mills , " continue Mr. Craig , " ' will you try to make I 
 believe as furriner like they can do we half th ' harm they minister 
 do with their bad government ? if King George ' ud turn them all away and 
 govern by himself , he would see everything right . he might take on Billy 
 Pitt again if he like ; but I do not   see myself what we want wi ' anybody 
 besides King and Parliament . it be that nest o ' minister do the 
 mischief , I tell you . ' " 
 " ah , it be fine talk , " observe Mrs. Poyser , who be now seat near 
 her husband , with Totty on her lap - " it be fine talk . it be hard work 
 to tell which be Old Harry when everybody be get boot on . " 
 " as for this peace , " say Mr. Poyser , turn his head on one side in 
 a dubitative manner and give a precautionary puff to his pipe between 
 each sentence , " I do not   know . Th ' war 's a fine thing for the country , 
 an ' how will you keep up price wi'out it ? an ' they French be a wicked 
 sort o ' folk , by what I can make out . what can you do well nor fight 
 them ? " 
 " Ye're partly right there , Poyser , " say Mr. Craig , " but I be not again ' 
 the peace - to make a holiday for a bit . we can break it when we like , 
 an ' I be in no fear o ' Bony , for all they talk so much o ' his cliverness . 
 that be what I say to Mills this morning . Lor ' bless you , he see no 
 more through Bony! ... why , I put he up to more in three minute than he 
 get from 's paper all the year round . say I , ' be I a gardener as know 
 his business , or arn't   I , mill ? answer I that . ' ' to be sure y ' be , 
 Craig , ' say he - he be not a bad fellow , Mills be not , for a butler , but 
 weak I ' the head . ' well , ' say I , ' you talk o ' Bony 's cliverness ; would 
 it be any use my be a first - rate gardener if I would get nought but a 
 quagmire to work on ? ' ' no , ' say he . ' well , ' I say , ' that be just 
 what it be wi ' Bony . I will not deny but he may be a bit cliver - he be 
 no Frenchman bear , as I understand - but what be he get at 's back but 
 mounseer ? ' " 
 Mr. Craig pause a moment with an emphatic stare after this triumphant 
 speciman of socratic argument , and then add , thump the table rather 
 fiercely , " why , it be a sure thing - and there be they ' ull bear witness 
 to't - as I ' one regiment where there be one man a - miss , they put 
 the regimental on a big monkey , and they fit he as the shell fit the 
 walnut , and you could not   tell the monkey from the mounseer ! " 
 " ah ! think o ' that , now ! " say Mr. Poyser , impress at once with the 
 political bearing of the fact and with its striking interest as an 
 anecdote in natural history . 
 " Come , Craig , " say Adam , " that be a little too strong . you do not   believe 
 that . it be all nonsense about the French be such poor stick . Mr. 
 Irwine be see them in their own country , and he say they have   plenty o ' 
 fine fellow among them . and as for knowledge , and contrivance , and 
 manufacture , there be a many thing as we be a fine sight behind them in . 
 it be poor foolishness to run down your enemy . why , Nelson and the 
 rest of them ' ud have no merit I ' beat them , if they be such offal as 
 folk pretend . " 
 Mr. Poyser look doubtfully at Mr. Craig , puzzle by this opposition of 
 authority . Mr. Irwine 's testimony be not to be dispute ; but , on the 
 other hand , Craig be a know fellow , and his view be less startling . 
 Martin have never " hear tell " of the French be good for much . Mr. 
 Craig have find no answer but such as be imply in take a long 
 draught of ale and then look down fixedly at the proportion of his 
 own leg , which he turn a little outward for that purpose , when Bartle 
 Massey return from the fireplace , where he have be smoke his 
 first pipe in quiet , and break the silence by say , as he thrust his 
 forefinger into the canister , " why , Adam , how happen you not to be at 
 church on Sunday ? answer I that , you rascal . the anthem go limp 
 without you . be you go to disgrace your schoolmaster in his old 
 age ? " 
 " no , Mr. Massey , " say Adam . " Mr. and Mrs. Poyser can tell you where I 
 be . I be in no bad company . " 
 " she be go , Adam - go to Snowfield , " say Mr. Poyser , remind of 
 Dinah for the first time this evening . " I think you would ha ' persuade 
 she well . Nought ' ud hold she , but she must go yesterday forenoon . the 
 missis have hardly get over it . I think she would ha ' no sperrit for th ' 
 harvest supper . " 
 Mrs. Poyser have think of Dinah several time since Adam have come in , 
 but she have have " no heart " to mention the bad news . 
 " what ! " say Bartle , with an air of disgust . " be there a woman 
 concern ? then I give you up , Adam . " 
 " but it be a woman you'n speak well on , Bartle , " say Mr. Poyser . " come 
 now , you canna draw back ; you say once as women wouldna ha ' be a bad 
 invention if they would all be like Dinah . " 
 " I mean her voice , man - I mean her voice , that be all , " say Bartle . 
 " I can bear to hear she speak without want to put wool in my ear . as 
 for other thing , I daresay she be like the rest o ' the woman - think 
 two and two will come to make five , if she cry and bother enough about 
 it . " 
 " aye , aye ! " say Mrs. Poyser ; " one ' ud think , an ' hear some folk talk , 
 as the man war ' cute enough to count the corn in a bag o ' wheat wi ' 
 only smell at it . they can see through a barn - door , they can . perhaps 
 that be the reason they can see so little o ' this side on't . " 
 Martin Poyser shake with delighted laughter and wink at Adam , as much 
 as to say the schoolmaster be in for it now . 
 " ah ! " say Bartle sneeringly , " the woman be quick enough - they be quick 
 enough . they know the right of a story before they hear it , and can 
 tell a man what his thought be before he know them himself . " 
 " like enough , " say Mrs. Poyser , " for the man be mostly so slow , their 
 thought overrun them , an ' they can only catch them by the tail . I can 
 count a stocking - top while a man 's get 's tongue ready an ' when he 
 out wi ' his speech at last , there be little broth to be make on't . it be 
 your dead chick take the long hatchin ' . Howiver , I be not denyin ' the 
 woman be foolish : God Almighty make them to match the man . " 
 " Match ! " say Bartle . " Aye , as vinegar match one 's tooth . if a man 
 say a word , his wife will match it with a contradiction ; if he be a 
 mind for hot meat , his wife will match it with cold bacon ; if he laugh , 
 she will match he with whimpering . she be such a match as the horse - fly 
 be to th ' horse : she be get the right venom to ste he with - the right 
 venom to ste he with . " 
 " yes , " say Mrs. Poyser , " I know what the man like - a poor soft , as ' ud 
 simper at them like the picture o ' the sun , whether they do right or 
 wrong , an ' say thank you for a kick , an ' pretend she didna know which 
 end she stand uppermost , till her husband tell she . that be what a man 
 want in a wife , mostly ; he want to make sure o ' one fool as ' ull tell 
 he he be wise . but there be some man can do wi'out that - they think so 
 much o ' themselves a'ready . an ' that be how it be there be old bachelor . " 
 " Come , Craig , " say Mr. Poyser jocosely , " you mun get marry pretty 
 quick , else you will be set down for an old bachelor ; an ' you see what the 
 woman ' ull think on you . " 
 " well , " say Mr. Craig , willing to conciliate Mrs. Poyser and set a 
 high value on his own compliment , " I like a cleverish woman - a woman o ' 
 sperrit - a manage woman . " 
 " you be out there , Craig , " say Bartle , dryly ; " you be out there . you 
 judge o ' your garden - stuff on a well plan than that . you pick the 
 thing for what they can excel in - for what they can excel in . you do not 
 value your pea for their root , or your carrot for their flower . now , 
 that be the way you should choose woman . their cleverness will never come 
 to much - never come to much - but they make excellent simpleton , ripe 
 and strong - flavour . " 
 " what dost say to that ? " say Mr. Poyser , throw himself back and 
 look merrily at his wife . 
 " say ! " answer Mrs. Poyser , with dangerous fire kindling in her 
 eye . " why , I say as some folk ' tongue be like the clock as run 
 on strikin ' , not to tell you the time o ' the day , but because there be 
 summat wrong I ' their own inside ... " 
 Mrs. Poyser would probably have bring her rejoinder to a further 
 climax , if every one 's attention have not at this moment be call to 
 the other end of the table , where the lyricism , which have at first only 
 manifest itself by David 's sotto voce performance of " my love be a rose 
 without a thorn , " have gradually assume a rather deafening and complex 
 character . Tim , think slightly of David 's vocalization , be impel 
 to supersede that feeble buzz by a spirited commencement of " Three Merry 
 mower , " but David be not to be put down so easily , and show himself 
 capable of a copious crescendo , which be render it doubtful whether 
 the rose would not predominate over the mower , when old Kester , with 
 an entirely unmoved and immovable aspect , suddenly set up a quavering 
 treble - as if he have be an alarum , and the time be come for he to go 
 off . 
 the company at Alick 's end of the table take this form of vocal 
 entertainment very much as a matter of course , be free from musical 
 prejudice ; but Bartle Massey lay down his pipe and put his finger in 
 his ear ; and Adam , who have be long to go ever since he have hear 
 Dinah be not in the house , rise and say he must bid good - night . 
 " I will go with you , lad , " say Bartle ; " I will go with you before my ear 
 be split . " 
 " I will go round by the Common and see you home , if you like , Mr. Massey , " 
 say Adam . 
 " aye , aye ! " say Bartle ; " then we can have a bit o ' talk together . I 
 never get hold of you now . " 
 " eh ! it be a pity but you would sit it out , " say Martin Poyser . " they will all 
 go soon , for th ' missis niver let them stay past ten . " 
 but Adam be resolute , so the good - night be say , and the two friend 
 turn out on their starlight walk together . 
 " there be that poor fool , Vixen , whimpering for I at home , " say Bartle . 
 " I can never bring she here with I for fear she should be strike with 
 Mrs. Poyser 's eye , and the poor bitch might go limp for ever after . " 
 " I have   never any need to drive Gyp back , " say Adam , laugh . " he always 
 turn back of his own head when he find out I be come here . " 
 " aye , aye , " say Bartle . " a terrible woman ! - make of needle , make of 
 needle . but I stick to Martin - I shall always stick to Martin . and 
 he like the needle , God help he ! he be a cushion make on purpose for 
 them . " 
 " but she be a downright good - natur'd woman , for all that , " say Adam , 
 " and as true as the daylight . she be a bit cross wi ' the dog when they 
 offer to come in th ' house , but if they depend on she , she would take care 
 and have them well feed . if her tongue 's keen , her heart 's tender : I have 
 see that in time o ' trouble . she be one o ' those woman as be well 
 than their word . " 
 " well , well , " say Bartle , " I do not   say th ' apple be not   sound at the 
 core ; but it set my tooth on edge - it set my tooth on edge . " 
 Chapter LIV 
 the Meeting on the Hill 
 ADAM understand Dinah 's haste to go away , and draw hope rather than 
 discouragement from it . she be fearful lest the strength of her feeling 
 towards he should hinder she from wait and listen faithfully for 
 the ultimate guide voice from within . 
 " I wish I have ask she to write to I , though , " he think . " and yet even 
 that might disturb she a bit , perhaps . she want to be quite quiet 
 in her old way for a while . and I have   no right to be impatient and 
 interrupt she with my wish . she be tell I what her mind be , 
 and she be not a woman to say one thing and mean another . I will wait 
 patiently . " 
 that be Adam 's wise resolution , and it throve excellently for the first 
 two or three week on the nourishment it get from the remembrance of 
 Dinah 's confession that Sunday afternoon . there be a wonderful amount 
 of sustenance in the first few word of love . but towards the middle 
 of October the resolution begin to dwindle perceptibly , and show 
 dangerous symptom of exhaustion . the week be unusually long : Dinah 
 must surely have have more than enough time to make up her mind . let a 
 woman say what she will after she have once tell a man that she love 
 he , he be a little too flushed and exalt with that first draught she 
 offer he to care much about the taste of the second . he tread the 
 earth with a very elastic step as he walk away from she , and make 
 light of all difficulty . but that sort of glow die out : memory get 
 sadly dilute with time , and be not strong enough to revive we . Adam 
 be no long so confident as he have be . he begin to fear that perhaps 
 Dinah 's old life would have too strong a grasp upon she for any new 
 feeling to triumph . if she have not feel this , she would surely have 
 write to he to give he some comfort ; but it appear that she hold 
 it right to discourage he . as Adam 's confidence wan , his patience 
 wan with it , and he think he must write himself . he must ask Dinah 
 not to leave he in painful doubt long than be needful . he sit up 
 late one night to write she a letter , but the next morning he burn it , 
 afraid of its effect . it would be bad to have a discouraging answer 
 by letter than from her own lip , for her presence reconcile he to she 
 will . 
 you perceive how it be : Adam be hunger for the sight of Dinah , and 
 when that sort of hunger reach a certain stage , a lover be likely to 
 still it though he may have to put his future in pawn . 
 but what harm could he do by go to Snowfield ? Dinah could not be 
 displeased with he for it . she have not forbid he to go . she must 
 surely expect that he would go before long . by the second Sunday in 
 October this view of the case have become so clear to Adam that he be 
 already on his way to Snowfield , on horseback this time , for his hour 
 be precious now , and he have borrow Jonathan Burge 's good nag for the 
 journey . 
 what keen memory go along the road with he ! he have often be to 
 oakbourne and back since that first journey to Snowfield , but beyond 
 Oakbourne the greystone wall , the broken country , the meagre tree , 
 seem to be tell he afresh the story of that painful past which he 
 know so well by heart . but no story be the same to we after a lapse of 
 time - or rather , we who read it be no long the same interpreter - and 
 Adam this morning bring with he new thought through that grey 
 country , thought which give an altered significance to its story of the 
 past . 
 that be a base and selfish , even a blasphemous , spirit which rejoice 
 and be thankful over the past evil that have blight or crush another , 
 because it have be make a source of unforeseen good to ourselves . Adam 
 could never cease to mourn over that mystery of human sorrow which have 
 be bring so close to he ; he could never thank God for another 's 
 misery . and if I be capable of that narrow - sighted joy in Adam 's 
 behalf , I should still know he be not the man to feel it for himself . 
 he would have shake his head at such a sentiment and say , " Evil 's 
 evil , and sorrow 's sorrow , and you can not   alter it be natur by wrap 
 it up in other word . other folk be not create for my sake , that I 
 should think all square when thing turn out well for I . " 
 but it be not ignoble to feel that the full life which a sad 
 experience have bring we be worth our own personal share of pain . 
 surely it be not possible to feel otherwise , any more than it would be 
 possible for a man with cataract to regret the painful process by which 
 his dim blur sight of man as tree walk have be exchange for 
 clear outline and effulgent day . the growth of high feeling within 
 we be like the growth of faculty , bring with it a sense of add 
 strength . we can no more wish to return to a narrow sympathy than 
 a painter or a musician can wish to return to his cruder manner , or a 
 philosopher to his less complete formula . 
 something like this sense of enlarged be be in Adam 's mind this 
 Sunday morning , as he ride along in vivid recollection of the past . his 
 feeling towards Dinah , the hope of pass his life with she , have be 
 the distant unseen point towards which that hard journey from Snowfield 
 eighteen month ago have be lead he . tender and deep as his love 
 for Hetty have be - so deep that the root of it would never be tear 
 away - his love for Dinah be well and more precious to he , for it 
 be the outgrowth of that full life which have come to he from his 
 acquaintance with deep sorrow . " it be like as if it be a new strength to 
 I , " he say to himself , " to love she and know as she love I . I shall 
 look t ' she to help I to see thing right . for she be well than I 
 be - there be less o ' self in she , and pride . and it be a feeling as give 
 you a sort o ' liberty , as if you could walk more fearless , when you have 
 more trust in another than y ' have in yourself . I have   always be 
 think I know well than they as belong to I , and that be a poor 
 sort o ' life , when you can not   look to they near to you t ' help you 
 with a bit well thought than what you have   get inside you a'ready . " 
 it be more than two o'clock in the afternoon when Adam come in sight of 
 the grey town on the hill - side and look searchingly towards the green 
 valley below , for the first glimpse of the old thatched roof near the 
 ugly red mill . the scene look less harsh in the soft October sunshine 
 than it have in the eager time of early spring , and the one grand charm 
 it possess in common with all wide - stretch woodless region - that 
 it fill you with a new consciousness of the overarch sky - have a 
 milder , more soothing influence than usual , on this almost cloudless 
 day . Adam 's doubt and fear melt under this influence as the delicate 
 weblike cloud have gradually melt away into the clear blue above he . 
 he seem to see Dinah 's gentle face assure he , with its look alone , 
 of all he long to know . 
 he do not expect Dinah to be at home at this hour , but he get down from 
 his horse and tie it at the little gate , that he might ask where she 
 be go to - day . he have set his mind on follow she and bring she 
 home . she be go to Sloman 's end , a hamlet about three mile off , over 
 the hill , the old woman tell he - have set off directly after morning 
 chapel , to preach in a cottage there , as her habit be . anybody at the 
 town would tell he the way to Sloman 's end . so Adam get on his horse 
 again and ride to the town , put up at the old inn and take a 
 hasty dinner there in the company of the too chatty landlord , from whose 
 friendly question and reminiscence he be glad to escape as soon as 
 possible and set out towards Sloman 's end . with all his haste it be 
 nearly four o'clock before he could set off , and he think that as 
 Dinah have go so early , she would perhaps already be near return . 
 the little , grey , desolate - look hamlet , unscreene by shelter 
 tree , lie in sight long before he reach it , and as he come near he 
 could hear the sound of voice sing a hymn . " perhaps that be the last 
 hymn before they come away , " Adam think . " I will walk back a bit and 
 turn again to meet she , far off the village . " he walk back till he 
 get nearly to the top of the hill again , and seat himself on a loose 
 stone , against the low wall , to watch till he should see the little 
 black figure leave the hamlet and wind up the hill . he choose 
 this spot , almost at the top of the hill , because it be away from all 
 eye - no house , no cattle , not even a nibble sheep near - no presence 
 but the still light and shadow and the great embrace sky . 
 she be much long come than he expect . he wait an hour at 
 least watch for she and thinking of she , while the afternoon shadow 
 lengthen and the light grow soft . at last he see the little black 
 figure come from between the grey house and gradually approach the 
 foot of the hill . slowly , Adam think , but Dinah be really walk at 
 her usual pace , with a light quiet step . now she be begin to wind 
 along the path up the hill , but Adam would not move yet ; he would not 
 meet she too soon ; he have set his heart on meet she in this assured 
 loneliness . and now he begin to fear lest he should startle she too 
 much . " yet , " he think , ' she be not one to be overstartle ; she be always 
 so calm and quiet , as if she be prepare for anything . " 
 what be she think of as she wind up the hill ? perhaps she have find 
 complete repose without he , and have cease to feel any need of his 
 love . on the verge of a decision we all tremble : hope pause with 
 flutter wing . 
 but now at last she be very near , and Adam rise from the stone wall . 
 it happen that just as he walk forward , Dinah have pause and turn 
 round to look back at the village - who do not pause and look back in 
 mount a hill ? Adam be glad , for , with the fine instinct of a lover , 
 he feel that it would be good for she to hear his voice before she 
 see he . he come within three pace of she and then say , " Dinah ! " she 
 start without look round , as if she connect the sound with no 
 place . " Dinah ! " Adam say again . he know quite well what be in her 
 mind . she be so accustomed to think of impression as purely spiritual 
 monition that she look for no material visible accompaniment of the 
 voice . 
 but this second time she look round . what a look of yearn love it 
 be that the mild grey eye turn on the strong dark - eyed man ! she do 
 not start again at the sight of he ; she say nothing , but move towards 
 he so that his arm could clasp her round . 
 and they walk on so in silence , while the warm tear fall . Adam be 
 content , and say nothing . it be Dinah who speak first . 
 " Adam , " she say , " it be the Divine Will . my soul be so knit to yours 
 that it be but a divide life I live without you . and this moment , now 
 you be with I , and I feel that our heart be fill with the same 
 love . I have a fulness of strength to bear and do our heavenly Father 's 
 will that I have lose before . " 
 Adam pause and look into her sincere eye . 
 " then we will never part any more , Dinah , till death part we . " 
 and they kiss each other with a deep joy . 
 what great thing be there for two human soul than to feel that they 
 be join for life - to strengthen each other in all labour , to rest on 
 each other in all sorrow , to minister to each other in all pain , to be 
 one with each other in silent unspeakable memory at the moment of the 
 last parting ? 
 Chapter LV 
 Marriage Bells 
 in little more than a month after that meeting on the hill - on a rimy 
 morning in depart November - Adam and Dinah be marry . 
 it be an event much thought of in the village . all Mr. Burge 's man have 
 a holiday , and all Mr. Poyser 's , and most of those who have a holiday 
 appear in their good clothe at the wedding . I think there be hardly 
 an inhabitant of Hayslope specially mention in this history and still 
 resident in the parish on this November morning who be not either in 
 church to see Adam and Dinah marry , or near the church door to greet 
 they as they come forth . Mrs. Irwine and her daughter be wait at 
 the churchyard gate in their carriage   for they have a carriage now   to 
 shake hand with the bride and bridegroom and wish they well ; and in the 
 absence of Miss Lydia Donnithorne at Bath , Mrs. Best , Mr. Mills , and 
 Mr. Craig have feel it incumbent on they to represent " the family " at the 
 Chase on the occasion . the churchyard walk be quite line with familiar 
 face , many of they face that have first look at Dinah when she 
 preach on the Green . and no wonder they show this eager interest on 
 her marriage morning , for nothing like Dinah and the history which have 
 bring she and Adam Bede together have be know at Hayslope within the 
 memory of man . 
 Bessy Cranage , in her neat cap and frock , be cry , though she do 
 not exactly know why ; for , as her cousin Wiry Ben , who stand near she , 
 judiciously suggest , Dinah be not go away , and if Bessy be in low 
 spirit , the good thing for she to do be to follow Dinah 's example and 
 marry an honest fellow who be ready to have she . next to Bessy , just 
 within the church door , there be the Poyser child , peep round 
 the corner of the pew to get a sight of the mysterious ceremony ; 
 Totty 's face wear an unusual air of anxiety at the idea of see 
 cousin Dinah come back look rather old , for in Totty 's experience no 
 married people be young . 
 I envy they all the sight they have when the marriage be fairly end 
 and Adam lead Dinah out of church . she be not in black this morning , 
 for her Aunt Poyser would by no mean allow such a risk of incur bad 
 luck , and have herself make a present of the wedding dress , make all of 
 grey , though in the usual Quaker form , for on this point Dinah could not 
 give way . so the lily face look out with sweet gravity from under 
 a grey Quaker bonnet , neither smile nor blushing , but with lip 
 tremble a little under the weight of solemn feeling . Adam , as he 
 press her arm to his side , walk with his old erectness and his head 
 throw rather backward as if to face all the world well . but it be 
 not because he be particularly proud this morning , as be the will not of 
 bridegroom , for his happiness be of a kind that have little reference 
 to man 's opinion of it . there be a tinge of sadness in his deep joy ; 
 Dinah know it , and do not feel aggrieved . 
 there be three other couple , follow the bride and bridegroom : 
 first , Martin Poyser , look as cheery as a bright fire on this rimy 
 morning , lead quiet Mary Burge , the bridesmaid ; then come Seth serenely 
 happy , with Mrs. Poyser on his arm ; and last of all Bartle Massey , with 
 Lisbeth - Lisbeth in a new gown and bonnet , too busy with her pride in 
 her son and her delight in possess the one daughter she have desire 
 to devise a single pretext for complaint . 
 Bartle Massey have consent to attend the wedding at Adam 's earnest 
 request , under protest against marriage in general and the marriage of a 
 sensible man in particular . nevertheless , Mr. Poyser have a joke against 
 he after the wedding dinner , to the effect that in the vestry he have 
 give the bride one more kiss than be necessary . 
 behind this last couple come Mr. Irwine , glad at heart over this good 
 morning 's work of join Adam and Dinah . for he have see Adam in the 
 bad moment of his sorrow ; and what well harvest from that painful 
 seed - time could there be than this ? the love that have bring hope and 
 comfort in the hour of despair , the love that have find its way to the 
 dark prison cell and to poor Hetty 's dark soul - this strong gentle 
 love be to be Adam 's companion and helper till death . 
 there be much shake of hand mingle with " God bless you 's " and other 
 good wish to the four couple , at the churchyard gate , Mr. Poyser 
 answering for the rest with unwonted vivacity of tongue , for he have 
 all the appropriate wedding - day joke at his command . and the woman , he 
 observe , could never do anything but put finger in eye at a wedding . 
 even Mrs. Poyser could not trust herself to speak as the neighbour 
 shake hand with she , and Lisbeth begin to cry in the face of the very 
 first person who tell she she be get young again . 
 Mr. Joshua Rann , have a slight touch of rheumatism , do not join 
 in the ringing of the bell this morning , and , look on with some 
 contempt at these informal greeting which require no official 
 co - operation from the clerk , begin to hum in his musical bass , " oh what 
 a joyful thing it be , " by way of prelude a little to the effect he 
 intend to produce in the wedding psalm next Sunday . 
 " that be a bit of good news to cheer Arthur , " say Mr. Irwine to his 
 mother , as they drive off . " I shall write to he the first thing when we 
 get home . " 
 epilogue 
 it be near the end of June , in 1807 . the workshop have be shut 
 up half an hour or more in Adam Bede 's timber - yard , which use to 
 be Jonathan Burge 's , and the mellow evening light be fall on the 
 pleasant house with the buff wall and the soft grey thatch , very much 
 as it do when we see Adam bring in the key on that June evening 
 nine year ago . 
 there be a figure we know well , just come out of the house , and shade 
 her eye with her hand as she look for something in the distance , for 
 the ray that fall on her white borderless cap and her pale auburn hair 
 be very dazzling . but now she turn away from the sunlight and look 
 towards the door . 
 we can see the sweet pale face quite well now : it be scarcely at all 
 alter - only a little full , to correspond to her more matronly 
 figure , which still seem light and active enough in the plain black 
 dress . 
 " I see he , Seth , " Dinah say , as she look into the house . " let we go 
 and meet he . come , Lisbeth , come with Mother . " 
 the last call be answer immediately by a small fair creature with 
 pale auburn hair and grey eye , little more than four year old , who run 
 out silently and put her hand into her mother 's . 
 " Come , Uncle Seth , " say Dinah . 
 " aye , aye , we be come , " Seth answer from within , and presently 
 appear stoop under the doorway , be tall than usual by the 
 black head of a sturdy two - year - old nephew , who have cause some delay by 
 demand to be carry on uncle 's shoulder . 
 " well take he on thy arm , Seth , " say Dinah , look fondly at the 
 stout black - eyed fellow . " he be troublesome to thee so . " 
 " Nay , nay : Addy like a ride on my shoulder . I can carry he so for a 
 bit . " a kindness which young Addy acknowledge by drum his heel 
 with promising force against Uncle Seth 's chest . but to walk by Dinah 's 
 side , and be tyrannize over by Dinah 's and Adam 's child , be Uncle 
 Seth 's earthly happiness . 
 " where didst see he ? " ask Seth , as they walk on into the adjoining 
 field . " I can not   catch sight of he anywhere . " 
 " between the hedge by the roadside , " say Dinah . " I see his hat and his 
 shoulder . there he be again . " 
 " trust thee for catch sight of he if he be anywhere to be see , " say 
 Seth , smile . " thee't like poor mother use to be . she be always on 
 the look out for Adam , and could see he soon than other folk , for 
 all her eye get dim . " 
 " he be be long than he expect , " say Dinah , take Arthur 's watch 
 from a small side pocket and look at it ; " it be nigh upon seven now . " 
 " Aye , they would have a deal to say to one another , " say Seth , " and the 
 meeting ' ud touch them both pretty closish . why , it be get on towards 
 eight year since they part . " 
 " yes , " say Dinah , " Adam be greatly move this morning at the thought 
 of the change he should see in the poor young man , from the sickness he 
 have undergo , as well as the year which have change we all . and the 
 death of the poor wanderer , when she be come back to we , have be 
 sorrow upon sorrow . " 
 " see , Addy , " say Seth , lower the young one to his arm now and 
 pointing , " there be Father come - at the far stile . " 
 Dinah hasten her step , and little Lisbeth run on at her utmost speed 
 till she clasp her father 's leg . Adam pat her head and lift she 
 up to kiss she , but Dinah could see the mark of agitation on his face 
 as she approach he , and he put her arm within his in silence . 
 " well , youngster , must I take you ? " he say , try to smile , when Addy 
 stretch out his arm - ready , with the usual baseness of infancy , to 
 give up his Uncle Seth at once , now there be some rare patronage at 
 hand . 
 " it be cut I a good deal , Dinah , " Adam say at last , when they be 
 walk on . 
 " Didst find he greatly alter ? " say Dinah . 
 " why , he be alter and yet not alter . I should ha ' know he anywhere . 
 but his colour 's change , and he look sadly . however , the doctor say 
 he will soon be set right in his own country air . he be all sound in th ' 
 inside ; it be only the fever shatter he so . but he speak just the 
 same , and smile at I just as he do when he be a lad . it be wonderful 
 how he be always have just the same sort o ' look when he smile . " 
 " I have   never see he smile , poor young man , " say Dinah . 
 " but thee wilt see he smile , to - morrow , " say Adam . " he ask after 
 thee the first thing when he begin to come round , and we could talk to 
 one another . ' I hope she be not   alter , ' he say , ' I remember her face 
 so well . ' I tell he ' no , ' " Adam continue , look fondly at the eye 
 that be turn towards his , " only a bit plumper , as thee'dst a right 
 to be after seven year . ' I may come and see she to - morrow , may not   I ? ' he 
 say ; ' I long to tell she how I have   think of she all these year . ' " 
 " Didst tell he I would always use the watch ? " say Dinah . 
 " Aye ; and we talk a deal about thee , for he say he never see a woman 
 a bit like thee . ' I shall turn Methodist some day , ' he say , ' when she 
 preach out of door , and go to hear she . ' and I say , ' Nay , sir , you 
 can not   do that , for Conference have forbid the woman preach , and she be 
 give it up , all but talk to the people a bit in their house . ' " 
 " ah , " say Seth , who could not repress a comment on this point , " and a 
 sore pity it be o ' conference ; and if Dinah have see as I do , we would ha ' 
 leave the Wesleyans and join a body that ' ud put no bond on Christian 
 liberty . " 
 " nay , lad , nay , " say Adam , ' she be right and thee wast wrong . there be 
 no rule so wise but what it be a pity for somebody or other . Most o ' 
 the woman do more harm nor good with their preaching - they have   not get 
 Dinah 's gift nor her sperrit - and she be see that , and she think it 
 right to set th ' example o ' submitting , for she be not hold from other 
 sort o ' teaching . and I agree with she , and approve o ' what she do . " 
 Seth be silent . this be a stand subject of difference rarely 
 allude to , and Dinah , wish to quit it at once , say , " Didst 
 remember , Adam , to speak to Colonel Donnithorne the word my uncle and 
 aunt entrust to thee ? " 
 " yes , and he be go to the Hall Farm with Mr. Irwine the day after 
 to - morrow . Mr. Irwine come in while we be talk about it , and he 
 would have it as the Colonel must see nobody but thee to - morrow . he 
 say - and he be in the right of it - as it will be bad for he t ' have his 
 feeling stir with see many people one after another . ' we must 
 get you strong and hearty , ' he say , ' that be the first thing to be do 
 Arthur , and then you shall have your own way . but I shall keep you 
 under your old tutor 's thumb till then . ' Mr. Irwine 's fine and joyful at 
 have he home again . " 
 Adam be silent a little while , and then say , " it be very cutting when 
 we first see one another . he have never hear about poor Hetty till Mr. 
 Irwine meet he in London , for the letter miss he on his journey . 
 the first thing he say to I , when we would get hold o ' one another 's hand 
 be , ' I could never do anything for she , Adam - she live long enough 
 for all the suffering - and I would think so of the time when I might do 
 something for she . but you tell I the truth when you say to I once , 
 " there be a sort of wrong that can never be make up for . " ' " 
 " why , there be Mr. and Mrs. Poyser come in at the yard gate , " say 
 Seth . 
 " so there be , " say Dinah . " Run , Lisbeth , run to meet Aunt Poyser . come 
 in , Adam , and rest ; it have be a hard day for thee . " 
