DANIEL DERONDA 

 by George Eliot 

  Let thy chief terror be of thine own soul : 
  there , ' mid the throng of hurry desire 
  that trample on the dead to seize their spoil , 
  lurk vengeance , footless , irresistible 
  as exhalation laden with slow death , 
  and o'er the fair troop of capture joy 
  breathe pallid pestilence . 

 BOOK I. the SPOILED child . 

 CHAPTER I. 

 Men can do nothing without the make - believe of a beginning . even science , the strict measurer , be oblige to start with a make - believe unit , and must fix on a point in the star ' uncease journey when his sidereal clock shall pretend that time be at Nought . his less accurate grandmother Poetry have always be understand to start in the middle ; but on reflection it appear that her proceeding be not very different from his ; since Science , too , reckon backward as well as forward , divide his unit into billion , and with his clock - finger at Nought really set off in media re . no retrospect will take we to the true beginning ; and whether our prologue be in heaven or on earth , it be but a fraction of that all - presuppose fact with which our story set out . 

 be she beautiful or not beautiful ? and what be the secret of form or expression which give the dynamic quality to her glance ? be the good or the evil genius dominant in those beam ? probably the evil ; else why be the effect that of unrest rather than of undisturbed charm ? why be the wish to look again feel as coercion and not as a longing in which the whole be consent ? 

 she who raise these question in Daniel Deronda 's mind be occupy in gambling : not in the open air under a southern sky , toss copper on a ruin wall , with rag about her limb ; but in one of those splendid resort which the enlightenment of age have prepare for the same specie of pleasure at a heavy cost of guilt moulding , dark - tone color and chubby nudity , all correspondingly heavy form a suitable condenser for human breath belong , in great part , to the high fashion , and not easily procurable to be breathe in elsewhere in the like proportion , at least by person of little fashion . 

 it be near four o'clock on a September day , so that the atmosphere be well - brew to a visible haze . there be deep stillness , break only by a light rattle , a light chink , a small sweeping sound , and an occasional monotone in French , such as might be expect to issue from an ingeniously construct automaton . round two long table be gather two serrie crowd of human being , all save one have their face and attention bent on the table . the one exception be a melancholy little boy , with his knee and calf simply in their natural clothing of epidermis , but for the rest of his person in a fancy dress . he alone have his face turn toward the doorway , and fix on it the blank gaze of a bedizened child station as a masquerade advertisement on the platform of an itinerant show , stand close behind a lady deeply engage at the roulette - table . 

 about this table fifty or sixty person be assemble , many in the outer row , where there be occasionally a deposit of new - comer , be mere spectator , only that one of they , usually a woman , might now and then be observe put down a five - franc with a simper air , just to see what the passion of gambling really be . those who be take their pleasure at a high strength , and be absorb in play , show very distant variety of european type : Livonian and Spanish , Graeco - italian and miscellaneous German , english aristocratic and english plebeian . here certainly be a striking admission of human equality . the white bejewel finger of an english countess be very near touch a bony , yellow , crab - like hand stretch a bared wrist to clutch a heap of coin a hand easy to sort with the square , gaunt face , deep - set eye , grizzle eyebrow , and ill - combed scanty hair which seem a slight metamorphosis of the vulture . and where else would her ladyship have graciously consent to sit by that dry - lipped feminine figure prematurely old , wither after short bloom like her artificial flower , hold a shabby velvet reticule before she , and occasionally put in her mouth the point with which she prick her card ? there too , very near the fair countess , be a respectable London tradesman , blonde and soft - handed , his sleek hair scrupulously part behind and before , conscious of circular address to the nobility and gentry , whose distinguished patronage enable he to take his holiday fashionably , and to a certain extent in their distinguished company . not his gambler 's passion that nullifie appetite , but a well - feed leisure , which , in the interval of win money in business and spend it showily , see no well resource than win money in play and spend it yet more showily reflect always that Providence have never manifest any disapprobation of his amusement , and dispassionate enough to leave off if the sweetness of win much and see other lose have turn to the sourness of lose much and see other win . for the vice of gambling lie in lose money at it . in his bearing there might be something of the tradesman , but in his pleasure he be fit to rank with the owner of the old title . stand close to his chair be a handsome italian , calm , statuesque , reach across he to place the first pile of napoleon from a new bagful just bring he by an envoy with a scrolled mustache . the pile be in half a minute push over to an old bewigge woman with eye - glass pinch her nose . there be a slight gleam , a faint mumbling smile about the lip of the old woman ; but the statuesque Italian remain impassive , and probably secure in an infallible system which place his foot on the neck of chance immediately prepare a new pile . so do a man with the air of an emaciated beau or wear - out libertine , who look at life through one eye - glass , and hold out his hand tremulously when he ask for change . it could surely be no severity of system , but rather some dream of white crow , or the induction that the eighth of the month be lucky , which inspire the fierce yet totter impulsiveness of his play . 

 but , while every single player differ markedly from every other , there be a certain uniform negativeness of expression which have the effect of a mask as if they have all eat of some root that for the time compel the brain of each to the same narrow monotony of action . 

 Deronda 's first thought when his eye fall on this scene of dull , gas - poison absorption , be that the gambling of spanish shepherd - boy have seem to he more enviable : so far Rousseau might be justify in maintain that art and science have do a poor service to mankind . but suddenly he feel the moment become dramatic . his attention be arrest by a young lady who , stand at an angle not far from he , be the last to whom his eye travel . she be bend and speak English to a middle - aged lady seat at play beside she : but the next instant she return to her play , and show the full height of a graceful figure , with a face which might possibly be look at without admiration , but could hardly be pass with indifference . 

 the inward debate which she raise in Deronda give to his eye a grow expression of scrutiny , tend far and far away from the glow of mingle undefined sensibility form admiration . at one moment they follow the movement of the figure , of the arm and hand , as this problematic sylph bend forward to deposit her stake with an air of firm choice ; and the next they return to the face which , at present unaffected by beholder , be direct steadily toward the game . the sylph be a winner ; and as her taper finger , delicately gloved in pale - gray , be adjust the coin which have be push toward she in order to pass they back again to the winning point , she look round she with a survey too markedly cold and neutral not to have in it a little of that nature which we call art conceal an inward exultation . 

 but in the course of that survey her eye meet Deronda 's , and instead of avert they as she would have desire to do , she be unpleasantly conscious that they be arrest how long ? the darting sense that he be measure she and look down on she as an inferior , that he be of different quality from the human dross around she , that he feel himself in a region outside and above she , and be examine she as a speciman of a low order , rouse a tingling resentment which stretch the moment with conflict . it do not bring the blood to her cheek , but it send it away from her lip . she control herself by the help of an inward defiance , and without other sign of emotion than this lip - paleness turn to her play . but Deronda 's gaze seem to have act as an evil eye . her stake be go . no matter ; she have be win ever since she take to roulette with a few napoleon at command , and have a considerable reserve . she have begin to believe in her luck , other have begin to believe in it : she have vision of be follow by a cortege who would worship she as a goddess of luck and watch her play as a directing augury . such thing have be know of male gambler ; why should not a woman have a like supremacy ? her friend and chaperon who have not wish she to play at first be begin to approve , only administer the prudent advice to stop at the right moment and carry money back to England advice to which Gwendolen have reply that she care for the excitement of play , not the winning . on that supposition the present moment ought to have make the flood - tide in her eager experience of gambling . yet , when her next stake be sweep away , she feel the orbit of her eye get hot , and the certainty she have   without look   of that man still watch she be something like a pressure which begin to be torture . the more reason to she why she should not flinch , but go on play as if she be indifferent to loss or gain . her friend touch her elbow and propose that they should quit the table . for reply Gwendolen put ten louis on the same spot : she be in that mood of defiance in which the mind lose sight of any end beyond the satisfaction of enraged resistance ; and with the puerile stupidity of a dominant impulse include luck among its object of defiance . since she be not win strikingly , the next good thing be to lose strikingly . she control her muscle , and show no tremor of mouth or hand . each time her stake be sweep off she double it . many be now watch she , but the sole observation she be conscious of be Deronda 's , who , though she never look toward he , she be sure have not move away . such a drama take no long while to play out : development and catastrophe can often be measure by nothing clumsier than the moment - hand . " faite votre jeu , madame et monsieur , " say the automatic voice of destiny from between the mustache and imperial of the croupier : and Gwendolen 's arm be stretch to deposit her last poor heap of napoleon . " Le jeu ne va plus , " say destiny . and in five second Gwendolen turn from the table , but turn resolutely with her face toward Deronda and look at he . there be a smile of irony in his eye as their glance meet ; but it be at least well that he should have disregard she as one of an insect swarm who have no individual physiognomy . besides , in spite of his superciliousness and irony , it be difficult to believe that he do not admire her spirit as well as her person : he be young , handsome , distinguish in appearance not one of these ridiculous and dowdy Philistines who think it incumbent on they to blight the gaming - table with a sour look of protest as they pass by it . the general conviction that we be admirable do not easily give way before a single negative ; rather when any of Vanity 's large family , male or female , find their performance receive coldly , they be apt to believe that a little more of it will win over the unaccountable dissident . in Gwendolen 's habit of mind it have be take for grant that she know what be admirable and that she herself be admire . this basis of her thinking have receive a disagreeable concussion , and reel a little , but be not easily to be overthrow . 

 in the evening the same room be more stiflingly heat , be brilliant with gas and with the costume of lady who float their train along it or be seat on the othman . 

 the Nereid in sea - green robe and silver ornament , with a pale sea - green feather fasten in silver fall backward over her green hat and light brown hair , be Gwendolen Harleth . she be under the wing , or rather soar by the shoulder , of the lady who have sit by she at the roulette - table ; and with they be a gentleman with a white mustache and clipped hair : solid - browed , stiff and german . they be walk about or stand to chat with acquaintance , and Gwendolen be much observe by the seat group . 

 " a striking girl that Miss Harleth unlike other . " 

 " yes , she have get herself up as a sort of serpent now all green and silver , and wind her neck about a little more than usual . " 

 " oh , she must always be do something extraordinary . she be that kind of girl , I fancy . do you think her pretty , Mr. Vandernoodt ? " 

 " very . a man might risk hang for she I mean a fool might . " 

 " you like a nez retroussť , then , and long narrow eye ? " 

 " when they go with such an ensemble . " 

 " the ensemble du serpent ? " 

 " if you will . woman be tempt by a serpent ; why not man ? " 

 " she be certainly very graceful ; but she want a tinge of color in her cheek . it be a sort of Lamia beauty she have . " 

 " on the contrary , I think her complexion one of her chief charm . it be a warm paleness ; it look thoroughly healthy . and that delicate nose with its gradual little upward curve be distract . and then her mouth there never be a pretty mouth , the lip curl backward so finely , eh , Mackworth ? " 

 " think so ? I can not endure that sort of mouth . it look so self - complacent , as if it know its own beauty the curve be too immovable . I like a mouth that tremble more . " 

 " for my part , I think she odious , " say a dowager . " it be wonderful what unpleasant girl get into vogue . who be these Langens ? do anybody know they ? " 

 " they be quite comme il faut . I have din with they several time at the Russie . the baroness be English . Miss Harleth call her cousin . the girl herself be thoroughly well - breed , and as clever as possible . " 

 " dear I ! and the baron ? " . 

 " a very good furniture picture . " 

 " your baroness be always at the roulette - table , " say Mackworth . " I fancy she have teach the girl to gamble . " 

 " oh , the old woman play a very sober game ; drop a ten - franc piece here and there . the girl be more headlong . but it be only a freak . " 

 " I hear she have lose all her winning to - day . be they rich ? who know ? " 

 " ah , who know ? who know that about anybody ? " say Mr. Vandernoodt , move off to join the Langens . 

 the remark that Gwendolen wind her neck about more than usual this evening be true . but it be not that she might carry out the serpent idea more completely : it be that she watch for any chance of see Deronda , so that she might inquire about this stranger , under whose measuring gaze she be still wince . at last her opportunity come . 

 " Mr. Vandernoodt , you know everybody , " say Gwendolen , not too eagerly , rather with a certain languor of utterance which she sometimes give to her clear soprano . " who be that near the door ? " 

 " there be half a dozen near the door . do you mean that old Adonis in the George the Fourth wig ? " 

 " no , no ; the dark - haired young man on the right with the dreadful expression . " 

 " dreadful , do you call it ? I think he be an uncommonly fine fellow . " 

 " but who be he ? " 

 " he be lately come to our hotel with Sir Hugo Mallinger . " 

 " Sir Hugo Mallinger ? " 

 " yes . do you know he ? " 

 " no . "   Gwendolen color slightly .   " he have a place near we , but he never come to it . what do you say be the name of that gentleman near the door ? " 

 " Deronda Mr. Deronda . " 

 " what a delightful name ! be he an Englishman ? " 

 " yes . he be report to be rather closely related to the baronet . you be interested in he ? " 

 " yes . I think he be not like young man in general . " 

 " and you do not   admire young man in general ? " 

 " not in the least . I always know what they will say . I can not   at all guess what this Mr. Deronda would say . what do he say ? " 

 " nothing , chiefly . I sit with his party for a good hour last night on the terrace , and he never speak and be not smoke either . he look bored . " 

 " another reason why I should like to know he . I be always bored . " 

 " I should think he would be charm to have an introduction . shall I bring it about ? will you allow it , baroness ? " 

 " why not ? since he be relate to Sir Hugo Mallinger . it be a new rŰle of your , Gwendolen , to be always bored , " continue Madame von Langen , when Mr. Vandernoodt have move away . " until now you have always seem eager about something from morning till night . " 

 " that be just because I be bored to death . if I be to leave off play I must break my arm or my collar - bone . I must make something happen ; unless you will go into Switzerland and take I up the Matterhorn . " 

 " perhaps this Mr. Deronda 's acquaintance will do instead of the 
 Matterhorn . " 
 " perhaps . " 

 but Gwendolen do not make Deronda 's acquaintance on this occasion . Mr. Vandernoodt do not succeed in bring he up to she that evening , and when she re - enter her own room she find a letter recall her home . 

 CHAPTER II . 

  this man contrive a secret ' twixt we two , 
  that he may quell I with his meeting eye 
  like one who quell a lioness at bay . 
 this be the letter Gwendolen find on her table : 

 DEAREST CHILD . I have be expect to hear from you for a week . in your last you say the Langens think of leave Leubronn and go to Baden . how could you be so thoughtless as to leave I in uncertainty about your address ? I be in the great anxiety lest this should not reach you . in any case , you be to come home at the end of September , and I must now entreat you to return as quickly as possible , for if you spend all your money it would be out of my power to send you any more , and you must not borrow of the Langens , for I could not repay they . this be the sad truth , my child I wish I could prepare you for it well but a dreadful calamity have befall we all . you know nothing about business and will not understand it ; but Grapnell    Co. have fail for a million , and we be totally ruin your aunt Gascoigne as well as I , only that your uncle have his benefice , so that by put down their carriage and get interest for the boy , the family can go on . all the property our poor father save for we go to pay the liability . there be nothing I can call my own . it be well you should know this at once , though it rend my heart to have to tell it you . of course we can not help think what a pity it be that you go away just when you do . but I shall never reproach you , my dear child ; I would save you from all trouble if I could . on your way home you will have time to prepare yourself for the change you will find . we shall perhaps leave Offendene at once , for we hope that Mr. Haynes , who want it before , may be ready to take it off my hand . of course we can not go to the rectory there be not a corner there to spare . we must get some hut or other to shelter we , and we must live on your uncle Gascoigne 's charity , until I see what else can be do . I shall not be able to pay the debt to the tradesman besides the servant ' wage . Summon up your fortitude , my dear child ; we must resign ourselves to God 's will . but it be hard to resign one 's self to Mr. Lassman 's wicked recklessness , which they say be the cause of the failure . your poor sister can only cry with I and give I no help . if you be once here , there might be a break in the cloud I always feel it impossible that you can have be mean for poverty . if the Langens wish to remain abroad , perhaps you can put yourself under some one else 's care for the journey . but come as soon as you can to your afflict and love mamma , 

 FANNY davilow . 

 the first effect of this letter on Gwendolen be half - stupefying . the implicit confidence that her destiny must be one of luxurious ease , where any trouble that occur would be well clothe and provide for , have be strong in her own mind than in her mamma 's , be feed there by her youthful blood and that sense of superior claim which make a large part of her consciousness . it be almost as difficult for she to believe suddenly that her position have become one of poverty and of humiliating dependence , as it would have be to get into the strong current of her bloom life the chill sense that her death would really come . she stand motionless for a few minute , then toss off her hat and automatically look in the glass . the coil of her smooth light - brown hair be still in order perfect enough for a ball - room ; and as on other night , Gwendolen might have look lingeringly at herself for pleasure   surely an allowable indulgence ; but now she take no conscious note of her reflect beauty , and simply star right before she as if she have be jar by a hateful sound and be wait for any sign of its cause . by - and - by she throw herself in the corner of the red velvet sofa , take up the letter again and read it twice deliberately , let it at last fall on the ground , while she rest her clasp hand on her lap and sit perfectly still , shed no tear . her impulse be to survey and resist the situation rather than to wail over it . there be no inward exclamation of " poor mamma ! " her mamma have never seem to get much enjoyment out of life , and if Gwendolen have be at this moment dispose to feel pity she would have bestow it on herself for be she not naturally and rightfully the chief object of her mamma 's anxiety too ? but it be anger , it be resistance that possess she ; it be bitter vexation that she have lose her gain at roulette , whereas if her luck have continue through this one day she would have have a handsome sum to carry home , or she might have go on play and win enough to support they all . even now be it not possible ? she have only four napoleon leave in her purse , but she possess some ornament which she could sell : a practice so common in stylish society at german bath that there be no need to be ashamed of it ; and even if she have not receive her mamma 's letter , she would probably have decide to get money for an etruscan necklace which she happen not to have be wear since her arrival ; nay , she might have do so with an agreeable sense that she be live with some intensity and escape humdrum . with ten louis at her disposal and a return of her former luck , which seem probable , what could she do well than go on play for a few day ? if her friend at home disapprove of the way in which she get the money , as they certainly would , still the money would be there . Gwendolen 's imagination dwelt on this course and create agreeable consequence , but not with unbroken confidence and rise certainty as it would have do if she have be touch with the gambler 's mania . she have go to the roulette - table not because of passion , but in search of it : her mind be still sanely capable of picture balanced probability , and while the chance of win allure she , the chance of lose thrust itself on she with alternate strength and make a vision from which her pride sink sensitively . for she be resolve not to tell the Langens that any misfortune have befall her family , or to make herself in any way indebted to their compassion ; and if she be to part with her jewelry to any observable extent , they would interfere by inquiry and remonstrance . the course that hold the least risk of intolerable annoyance be to raise money on her necklace early in the morning , tell the Langens that her mother desire her immediate return without give a reason , and take the train for Brussels that evening . she have no maid with she , and the Langens might make difficulty about her return home , but her will be peremptory . 

 instead of go to bed she make as brilliant a light as she could and begin to pack , work diligently , though all the while visit by the scene that might take place on the come day now by the tiresome explanation and farewell , and the whirling journey toward a change home , now by the alternative of stay just another day and stand again at the roulette - table . but always in this latter scene there be the presence of that Deronda , watch she with exasperating irony , and the two keen experience be inevitably revive together behold she again forsake by luck . this importunate image certainly help to sway her resolve on the side of immediate departure , and to urge her pack to the point which would make a change of mind inconvenient . it have strike twelve when she come into her room , and by the time she be assure herself that she have leave out only what be necessary , the faint dawn be steal through the white blind and dull her candle . what be the use of go to bed ? her cold bath be refreshment enough , and she see that a slight trace of fatigue about the eye only make she look the more interesting . before six o'clock she be completely equip in her gray travel dress even to her feel hat , for she mean to walk out as soon as she could count on see other lady on their way to the spring . and happen to be seat sideways before the long strip of mirror between her two window she turn to look at herself , lean her elbow on the back of the chair in an attitude that might have be choose for her portrait . it be possible to have a strong self - love without any self - satisfaction , rather with a self - discontent which be the more intense because one 's own little core of egoistic sensibility be a supreme care ; but Gwendolen know nothing of such inward strife . she have a naive delight in her fortunate self , which any but the harsh saintliness will have some indulgence for in a girl who have every day see a pleasant reflection of that self in her friend ' flattery as well as in the look - glass . and even in this beginning of trouble , while for lack of anything else to do she sit gaze at her image in the grow light , her face gather a complacency gradual as the cheerfulness of the morning . her beautiful lip curl into a more and more decided smile , till at last she take off her hat , lean forward and kiss the cold glass which have look so warm . how could she believe in sorrow ? if it attack she , she feel the force to crush it , to defy it , or run away from it , as she have do already . anything seem more possible than that she could go on bear misery , great or small . 

 Madame von Langen never go out before breakfast , so that Gwendolen could safely end her early walk by take her way homeward through the Obere Strasse in which be the need shop , sure to be open after seven . at that hour any observer whom she mind would be either on their walk in the region of the spring , or would be still in their bedroom ; but certainly there be one grand hotel , the Czarina from which eye might follow she up to Mr. Wiener 's door . this be a chance to be risk : might she not be go in to buy something which have strike her fancy ? this implicit falsehood pass through her mind as she remember that the Czarina be Deronda 's hotel ; but she be then already far up the Obere Strasse , and she walk on with her usual float movement , every line in her figure and drapery fall in gentle curve attractive to all eye except those which discern in they too close a resemblance to the serpent , and object to the revival of serpent - worship . she look neither to the right hand nor to the left , and transact her business in the shop with a coolness which give little Mr. Weiner nothing to remark except her proud grace of manner , and the superior size and quality of the three central turquoise in the necklace she offer he . they have belong to a chain once her father 's : but she have never know her father ; and the necklace be in all respect the ornament she could most conveniently part with . who suppose that it be an impossible contradiction to be superstitious and rationalize at the same time ? roulette encourage a romantic superstition as to the chance of the game , and the most prosaic rationalism as to human sentiment which stand in the way of raise needful money . Gwendolen 's dominant regret be that after all she have only nine louis to add to the four in her purse : these Jew dealer be so unscrupulous in take advantage of Christians unfortunate at play ! but she be the Langens ' guest in their hire apartment , and have nothing to pay there : thirteen louis would do more than take her home ; even if she determine on risk three , the remain ten would more than suffice , since she mean to travel right on , day and night . as she turn homeward , nay , enter and seat herself in the salon to await her friend and breakfast , she still waver as to her immediate departure , or rather she have conclude to tell the Langens simply that she have have a letter from her mamma desire her return , and to leave it still undecided when she should start . it be already the usual breakfast - time , and hear some one enter as she be lean back rather tired and hungry with her eye shut , she rise expect to see one or other of the Langens the word which might determine she linger at least another day , ready - form to pass her lip . but it be the servant bring in a small packet for Miss Harleth , which have at that moment be leave at the door . Gwendolen take it in her hand and immediately hurry into her own room . she look pale and more agitated than when she have first read her mamma 's letter . something she never quite know what reveal to she before she open the packet that it contain the necklace she have just part with . underneath the paper it be wrap in a cambric handkerchief , and within this be a scrap of tear - off note - paper , on which be write with a pencil , in clear but rapid handwriting " a stranger who have find Miss Harleth 's necklace return it to she with the hope that she will not again risk the loss of it . " 

 Gwendolen redden with the vexation of wounded pride . a large corner of the handkerchief seem to have be recklessly tear off to get rid of a mark ; but she at once believe in the first image of " the stranger " that present itself to her mind . it be Deronda ; he must have see she go into the shop ; he must have go in immediately after and repurchase the necklace . he have take an unpardonable liberty , and have dare to place she in a thoroughly hateful position . what could she do ? not , assuredly , act on her conviction that it be he who have send she the necklace and straightway send it back to he : that would be to face the possibility that she have be mistake ; nay , even if the ' stranger " be he and no other , it would be something too gross for she to let he know that she have divine this , and to meet he again with that recognition in their mind . he know very well that he be entangle she in helpless humiliation : it be another way of smile at she ironically , and take the air of a supercilious mentor . Gwendolen feel the bitter tear of mortification rise and roll down her cheek . no one have ever before dare to treat she with irony and contempt . one thing be clear : she must carry out her resolution to quit this place at once ; it be impossible for she to reappear in the public salon , still less stand at the gaming - table with the risk of see Deronda . now come an importunate knock at the door : breakfast be ready . Gwendolen with a passionate movement thrust necklace , cambric , scrap of paper , and all into her nťcessaire , press her handkerchief against her face , and after pause a minute or two to summon back her proud self - control , go to join her friend . such sign of tear and fatigue as be leave seem accordant enough with the account she at once give of she have sit up to do she packing , instead of wait for help from her friend 's maid . there be much protestation , as she have expect , against her travel alone , but she persist in refuse any arrangement for companionship . she would be put into the lady ' compartment and go right on . she could rest exceedingly well in the train , and be afraid of nothing . 

 in this way it happen that Gwendolen never reappear at the roulette - table , but that Thursday evening leave Leubronn for Brussels , and on Saturday morning arrive at Offendene , the home to which she and her family be soon to say a last good - bye . 

 CHAPTER III . 

 " let no flower of the spring pass by we ; let we crown ourselves with rosebud before they be wither . " BOOK of wisdom . 

 Pity that Offendene be not the home of Miss Harleth 's childhood , or endear to she by family memory ! a human life , I think , should be well rooted in some spot of a native land , where it may get the love of tender kinship for the face of earth , for the labor man go forth to , for the sound and accent that haunt it , for whatever will give that early home a familiar unmistakable difference amid the future widening of knowledge : a spot where the definiteness of early memory may be inwrought with affection , and kindly acquaintance with all neighbor , even to the dog and donkey , may spread not by sentimental effort and reflection , but as a sweet habit of the blood . at five year old , mortal be not prepared to be citizen of the world , to be stimulate by abstract noun , to soar above preference into impartiality ; and that prejudice in favor of milk with which we blindly begin , be a type of the way body and soul must get nourish at least for a time . the good introduction to astronomy be to think of the nightly heavens as a little lot of star belong to one 's own homestead . 

 but this bless persistence in which affection can take root have be want in Gwendolen 's life . it be only a year before her recall from Leubronn that Offendene have be choose as her mamma 's home , simply for its nearness to Pennicote Rectory , and that Mrs. Davilow , Gwendolen , and her four half - sister   the governess and the maid follow in another vehicle   have be drive along the avenue for the first time , on a late October afternoon when the rook be crawe loudly above they , and the yellow elm - leaf be whirl . 

 the season suit the aspect of the old oblong red - brick house , rather too anxiously ornament with stone at every line , not except the double row of narrow window and the large square portico . the stone encourage a greenish lichen , the brick a powdery gray , so that though the building be rigidly rectangular there be no harshness in the physiognomy which it turn to the three avenue cut east , west and south in the hundred yard ' breadth of old plantation encircle the immediate ground . one would have like the house to have be lift on a knoll , so as to look beyond its own little domain to the long thatched roof of the distant village , the church tower , the scatter homestead , the gradual rise of surge wood , and the green breadth of undulate park which make the beautiful face of the earth in that part of Wessex . but though stand thus behind , a screen amid flat pasture , it have on one side a glimpse of the wide world in the lofty curve of the chalk down , grand steadfast form play over by the change day . 

 the house be but just large enough to be call a mansion , and be moderately rent , have no manor attach to it , and be rather difficult to let with its sombre furniture and fade upholstery . but inside and outside it be what no beholder could suppose to be inhabit by retire trade - people : a certainty which be worth many convenience to tenant who not only have the taste that shrink from new finery , but also be in that border - territory of rank where annexation be a burn topic : and to take up her abode in a house which have once suffice for dowager countess give a perceptible tinge to Mrs. Davilow 's satisfaction in have an establishment of her own . this , rather mysteriously to Gwendolen , appear suddenly possible on the death of her step - father , Captain Davilow , who have for the last nine year join his family only in a brief and fitful manner , enough to reconcile they to his long absence ; but she care much more for the fact than for the explanation . all her prospect have become more agreeable in consequence . she have dislike their former way of life , rove from one foreign watering - place or parisian apartment to another , always feel new antipathy to new suite of hire furniture , and meet new people under condition which make she appear of little importance ; and the variation of have pass two year at a showy school , where , on all occasion of display , she have be put foremost , have only deepen her sense that so exceptional a person as herself could hardly remain in ordinary circumstance or in a social position less than advantageous . any fear of this latter evil be banish now that her mamma be to have an establishment ; for on the point of birth Gwendolen be quite easy . she have no notion how her maternal grandfather get the fortune inherit by his two daughter ; but he have be a West Indian which seem to exclude further question ; and she know that her father 's family be so high as to take no notice of her mamma , who nevertheless preserve with much pride the miniature of a Lady Molly in that connection . she would probably have know much more about her father but for a little incident which happen when she be twelve year old . Mrs. Davilow have bring out , as she do only at wide interval , various memorial of her first husband , and while show his miniature to Gwendolen recall with a fervor which seem to count on a peculiar filial sympathy , the fact that dear papa have die when his little daughter be in long clothe . Gwendolen , immediately think of the unlovable step - father whom she have be acquaint with the great part of her life while her frock be short , say 

 " why do you marry again , mamma ? it would have be nice if you have not . " 

 Mrs. Davilow color deeply , a slight convulsive movement pass over her face , and straightway shut up the memorial she say , with a violence quite unusual in her 

 " you have no feeling , child ! " 

 Gwendolen , who be fond of her mamma , feel hurt and ashamed , and have never since dare to ask a question about her father . 

 this be not the only instance in which she have bring on herself the pain of some filial compunction . it be always arrange , when possible , that she should have a small bed in her mamma 's room ; for Mrs. Davilow 's motherly tenderness clung chiefly to her eld girl , who have be bear in her happy time . one night under an attack of pain she find that the specific regularly place by her bedside have be forget , and beg Gwendolen to get out of bed and reach it for she . that healthy young lady , snug and warm as a rosy infant in her little couch , object to step out into the cold , and lie perfectly still , grumble a refusal . Mrs. Davilow go without the medicine and never reproach her daughter ; but the next day Gwendolen be keenly conscious of what must be in her mamma 's mind , and try to make amend by caress which cost she no effort . have always be the pet and pride of the household , wait on by mother , sister , governess and maid , as if she have be a princess in exile , she naturally find it difficult to think her own pleasure less important than other make it , and when it be positively thwart feel an astonished resentment apt , in her cruder day , to vent itself in one of those passionate act which look like a contradiction of habitual tendency . though never even as a child thoughtlessly cruel , nay delight to rescue drown insect and watch their recovery , there be a disagreeable silent remembrance of she have strangle her sister 's canary - bird in a final fit of exasperation at its shrill singing which have again and again jarringly interrupt her own . she have take pain to buy a white mouse for her sister in retribution , and though inwardly excuse herself on the ground of a peculiar sensitiveness which be a mark of her general superiority , the thought of that infelonious murder have always make her wince . Gwendolen 's nature be not remorseless , but she like to make her penance easy , and now that she be twenty and more , some of her native force have turn into a self - control by which she guard herself from penitential humiliation . there be more show of fire and will in she than ever , but there be more calculation underneath it . 

 on this day of arrival at Offendene , which not even Mrs. Davilow have see before the place have be take for she by her brother - in - law , Mr. Gascoigne when all have get down from the carriage , and be stand under the porch in front of the open door , so that they could have a general view of the place and a glimpse of the stone hall and staircase hang with sombre picture , but enliven by a bright wood fire , no one speak ; mamma , the four sister and the governess all look at Gwendolen , as if their feeling depend entirely on her decision . of the girl , from Alice in her sixteenth year to Isabel in her tenth , hardly anything could be say on a first view , but that they be girlish , and that their black dress be get shabby . Miss Merry be elderly and altogether neutral in expression . Mrs. Davilow 's wear beauty seem the more pathetic for the look of entire appeal which she cast at Gwendolen , who be glance round at the house , the landscape and the entrance hall with an air of rapid judgment . imagine a young race - horse in the paddock among untrimmed pony and patient hack . 

 " well , dear , what do you think of the place , " say Mrs. Davilow at last , in a gentle , deprecatory tone . 

 " I think it be charming , " say Gwendolen , quickly . " a romantic place ; anything delightful may happen in it ; it would be a good background for anything . no one need be ashamed of live here . " 

 " there be certainly nothing common about it . " 

 " oh , it would do for fall royalty or any sort of grand poverty . we ought properly to have be live in splendor , and have come down to this . it would have be as romantic as could be . but I think my uncle and aunt Gascoigne would be here to meet we , and my cousin Anna , " add Gwendolen , her tone change to sharp surprise . 

 " we be early , " say Mrs. Davilow , and enter the hall , she say to the housekeeper who come forward , " you expect Mr. and Mrs. Gascoigne ? " 

 " yes , madam ; they be here yesterday to give particular order about the fire and the dinner . but as to fire , I have   have them in all the room for the last week , and everything be well air . I could wish some of the furniture pay well for all the cleaning it be have , but I think you will see the brass have be do justice to . I think when Mr. and Mrs. Gascoigne come , they will tell you nothing have be neglect . they will be here at five , for certain . " 

 this satisfied Gwendolen , who be not prepared to have their arrival treat with indifference ; and after trip a little way up the matted stone staircase to take a survey there , she trip down again , and follow by all the girl look into each of the room open from the hall the dining - room all dark oak and wear red satin damask , with a copy of snarling , worry dog from Snyders over the side - board , and a Christ break bread over the mantel - piece ; the library with a general aspect and smell of old brown - leather ; and lastly , the drawing - room , which be enter through a small antechamber crowd with venerable knick - knack . 

 " Mamma , mamma , pray come here ! " say Gwendolen , Mrs. Davilow have follow slowly in talk with the housekeeper . " here be an organ . I will be Saint Cecilia : some one shall paint I as Saint Cecilia . Jocosa   this be her name for Miss Merry , let down my hair . see , mamma ? " 

 she have throw off her hat and glove , and seat herself before the organ in an admirable pose , look upward ; while the submissive and sad Jocosa take out the one comb which fasten the coil of hair , and then shake out the mass till it fall in a smooth light - brown stream far below its owner 's slim waist . 

 Mrs. Davilow smile and say , " a charming picture , my dear ! " not indifferent to the display of her pet , even in the presence of a housekeeper . Gwendolen rise and laugh with delight . all this seem quite to the purpose on enter a new house which be so excellent a background . 

 " what a queer , quaint , picturesque room ! " she go on , look about she . " I like these old embroider chair , and the garland on the wainscot , and the picture that may be anything . that one with the rib nothing but rib and darkness I should think that be spanish , mamma . " 

 " oh , Gwendolen ! " say the small Isabel , in a tone of astonishment , while she hold open a hinged panel of the wainscot at the other end of the room . 

 every one , Gwendolen first , go to look . the open panel have disclose the picture of an upturned dead face , from which an obscure figure seem to be flee with outstretche arm . " how horrible ! " say Mrs. Davilow , with a look of mere disgust ; but Gwendolen shudder silently , and Isabel , a plain and altogether inconvenient child with an alarming memory , say 

 " you will never stay in this room by yourself , Gwendolen . " 

 " how dare you open thing which be mean to be shut up , you perverse little creature ? " say Gwendolen , in her angriest tone . then snatch the panel out of the hand of the culprit , she close it hastily , say , " there be a lock where be the key ? let the key be find , or else let one be make , and let nobody open it again ; or rather , let the key be bring to I . " 

 at this command to everybody in general Gwendolen turn with a face which be flush in reaction from her chill shudder , and say , " let we go up to our own room , mamma . " 

 the housekeeper on search find the key in the drawer of the cabinet close by the panel , and presently hand it to Bugle , the lady's - maid , tell she significantly to give it to her Royal Highness . 

 " I do not   know what you mean , Mrs. Startin , " say Bugle , who have be busy up - stair during the scene in the drawing - room , and be rather offend at this irony in a new servant . 

 " I mean the young lady that be to command we all - and well worthy for look and figure , " reply Mrs. Startin in propitiation . " she will know what key it be . " 

 " if you have lay out what we want , go and see to the other , Bugle , " Gwendolen have say , when she and Mrs. Davilow enter their black and yellow bedroom , where a pretty little white couch be prepare by the side of the black and yellow catafalque know as the good bed . " I will help mamma . " 

 but her first movement be to go to the tall mirror between the window , which reflect herself and the room completely , while her mamma sit down and also look at the reflection . 

 " that be a become glass , Gwendolen ; or be it the black and gold color that set you off ? " say Mrs. Davilow , as Gwendolen stand obliquely with her three - quarter face turn toward the mirror , and her left hand brush back the stream of hair . 

 " I should make a tolerable St. Cecilia with some white rose on my head , " say Gwendolen , " only how about my nose , mamma ? I think saint 's nose never in the least turn up . I wish you have give I your perfectly straight nose ; it would have do for any sort of character a nose of all work . mine be only a happy nose ; it would not do so well for tragedy . " 

 " oh , my dear , any nose will do to be miserable with in this world , " say Mrs. Davilow , with a deep , weary sigh , throw her black bonnet on the table , and rest her elbow near it . 

 " now , mamma , " say Gwendolen , in a strongly remonstrant tone , turn away from the glass with an air of vexation , " do not   begin to be dull here . it spoil all my pleasure , and everything may be so happy now . what have you to be gloomy about now ? " 

 " nothing , dear , " say Mrs. Davilow , seem to rouse herself , and begin to take off her dress . " it be always enough for I to see you happy . " 

 " but you should be happy yourself , " say Gwendolen , still discontentedly , though go to help she mamma with caress touch . " can nobody be happy after they be quite young ? you have make I feel sometimes as if nothing be of any use . with the girl so troublesome , and Jocosa so dreadfully wooden and ugly , and everything make - shift about we , and you look so dull what be the use of my be anything ? but now you might be happy . " 

 " so I shall , dear , " say Mrs. Davilow , pat the cheek that be bend near she . 

 " yes , but really . not with a sort of make - believe , " say Gwendolen , with resolute perseverance . " see what a hand and arm ! much more beautiful than mine . any one can see you be altogether more beautiful . " 

 " no , no , dear ; I be always heavy . never half so charming as you be . " 

 " well , but what be the use of my be charming , if it be to end in my being dull and not mind anything ? be that what marriage always come to ? " 

 " no , child , certainly not . marriage be the only happy state for a woman , as I trust you will prove . " 

 " I will not put up with it if it be not a happy state . I be determined to be happy at least not to go on muddle away my life as other people do , be and do nothing remarkable . I have make up my mind not to let other people interfere with I as they have do . here be some warm water ready for you , mamma , " Gwendolen end , proceed to take off her own dress and then wait to have her hair wound up by her mamma . 

 there be silence for a minute or two , till Mrs. Davilow say , while coil the daughter 's hair , " I be sure I have never cross you , Gwendolen . " 

 " you often want I to do what I do not   like . " 

 " you mean , to give Alice lesson ? " 

 " yes . and I have do it because you ask I . but I do not   see why I should , else . it bore I to death , she be so slow . she have no ear for music , or language , or anything else . it would be much well for she to be ignorant , mamma : it be her rŰle , she would do it well . " 

 " that be a hard thing to say of your poor sister , Gwendolen , who be so good to you , and wait on you hand and foot . " 

 " I do not   see why it be hard to call thing by their right name , and put they in their proper place . the hardship be for I to have to waste my time on she . now let I fasten up your hair , mamma . " 

 " we must make haste ; your uncle and aunt will be here soon . for heaven 's sake , do not   be scornful to they , my dear child ! or to your cousin Anna , whom you will always be go out with . do promise I , Gwendolen . you know , you can not   expect Anna to be equal to you . " 

 " I do not   want she to be equal , " say Gwendolen , with a toss of her head and a smile , and the discussion end there . 

 when Mr. and Mrs. Gascoigne and their daughter come , Gwendolen , far from be scornful , behave as prettily as possible to they . she be introduce herself anew to relative who have not see she since the comparatively unfinished age of sixteen , and she be anxious no , not anxious , but resolve that they should admire she . 

 Mrs. Gascoigne bear a family likeness to her sister . but she be dark and slighter , her face be unworn by grief , her movement be less languid , her expression more alert and critical as that of a rector 's wife bind to exert a beneficent authority . their close resemblance lie in a non - resistant disposition , incline to imitation and obedience ; but this , owe to the difference in their circumstance , have lead they to very different issue . the young sister have be indiscreet , or at least unfortunate in her marriage ; the elder believe herself the most enviable of wife , and her pliancy have end in she sometimes take shape of surprising definiteness . many of her opinion , such as those on church government and the character of Archbishop Laud , seem too decide under every alteration to have be arrive at otherwise than by a wifely receptiveness . and there be much to encourage trust in her husband 's authority . he have some agreeable virtue , some striking advantage , and the failing that be impute to he all lean toward the side of success . 

 one of his advantage be a fine person , which perhaps be even more impressive at fifty - seven than it have be early in life . there be no distinctively clerical line in the face , no trick of starchiness or of affected ease : in his inverness cape he could not have be identify except as a gentleman with handsome dark feature , a nose which begin with an intention to be aquiline but suddenly become straight , and iron - gray , hair . perhaps he owe this freedom from the sort of professional make - up which penetrate skin , tone and gesture and defy all drapery , to the fact that he have once be Captain Gaskin , have take order and a diphthong but shortly before his engagement to Miss Armyn . if any one have object that his preparation for the clerical function be inadequate , his friend might have ask who make a well figure in it , who preach well or have more authority in his parish ? he have a native gift for administration , be tolerant both of opinion and conduct , because he feel himself able to overrule they , and be free from the irritation of conscious feebleness . he smile pleasantly at the foible of a taste which he do not share at floriculture or antiquarianism for example , which be much in vogue among his fellow - clergyman in the diocese : for himself , he prefer follow the history of a campaign , or divine from his knowledge of Nesselrode 's motif what would have be his conduct if our cabinet have take a different course . Mr. Gascoigne 's tone of thinking after some long - quiet fluctuation have become ecclesiastical rather than theological ; not the modern Anglican , but what he would have call sound English , free from nonsense ; such as become a man who look at a national religion by daylight , and see it in its relation to other thing . no clerical magistrate have great weight at session , or less of mischievous impracticableness in relation to worldly affair . indeed , the bad imputation throw out against he be worldliness : it could not be prove that he forsook the less fortunate , but it be not to be deny that the friendship he cultivate be of a kind likely to be useful to the father of six son and two daughter ; and bitter observer for in Wessex , say ten year ago , there be person whose bitterness may now seem incredible remark that the color of his opinion have change in consistency with this principle of action . but cheerful , successful worldliness have a false air of be more selfish than the acrid , unsuccessful kind , whose secret history be sum up in the terrible word , " sell , but not pay for . " 

 Gwendolen wonder that she have not well remember how very fine a man her uncle be ; but at the age of sixteen she be a less capable and more indifferent judge . at present it be a matter of extreme interest to she that she be to have the near countenance of a dignified male relative , and that the family life would cease to be entirely , insipidly feminine . she do not intend that her uncle should control she , but she see at once that it would be altogether agreeable to she that he should be proud of introduce she as his niece . and there be every sign of his be likely to feel that pride . he certainly look at she with admiration as he say 

 " you have outgrow Anna , my dear , " put his arm tenderly round his daughter , whose shy face be a tiny copy of his own , and draw she forward . " she be not so old as you by a year , but her grow day be certainly over . I hope you will be excellent companion . " 

 he do give a compare glance at his daughter , but if he see her inferiority , he might also see that Anna 's timid appearance and miniature figure must appeal to a different taste from that which be attract by Gwendolen , and that the girl could hardly be rival . Gwendolen at least , be aware of this , and kiss her cousin with real cordiality as well as grace , say , " a companion be just what I want . I be so glad we be come to live here . and mamma will be much happy now she be near you , aunt . " 

 the aunt trust indeed that it would be so , and feel it a blessing that a suitable home have be vacant in their uncle 's parish . then , of course , notice have to be take of the four other girl , whom Gwendolen have always feel to be superfluous : all of a girlish average that make four unit utterly unimportant , and yet from her early day an obtrusive influential fact in her life . she be conscious of have be much kind to they than could have be expect . and it be evident to she that her uncle and aunt also feel it a pity there be so many girl : what rational person could feel otherwise , except poor mamma , who never would see how Alice set up her shoulder and lift her eyebrow till she have no forehead leave , how Bertha and Fanny whisper and titter together about everything , or how Isabel be always listen and star and forget where she be , and treading on the toe of her suffer elder ? 

 " you have brother , Anna , " say Gwendolen , while the sister be be notice . " I think you be enviable there . " 

 " yes , " say Anna , simply . " I be very fond of they ; but of course their education be a great anxiety to papa . he use to say they make I a tomboy . I really be a great romp with Rex . I think you will like Rex . he will come home before Christmas . " 

 " I remember I use to think you rather wild and shy ; but it be difficult now to imagine you a romp , " say Gwendolen , smile . 

 " of course , I be alter now ; I be come out , and all that . but in reality I like to go blackberry with Edwy and Lotta as well as ever . I be not very fond of go out ; but I dare say I shall like it well now you will be often with I . I be not at all clever , and I never know what to say . it seem so useless to say what everybody know , and I can think of nothing else , except what papa say . " 

 " I shall like go out with you very much , " say Gwendolen , well disposed toward this naive cousin . " be you fond of rid ? " 

 " yes , but we have only one Shetland pony amongst we . Papa say he can not   afford more , besides the carriage - horse and his own nag ; he have so many expense . " 

 " I intend to have a horse and ride a great deal now , " say Gwendolen , in a tone of decision . " be the society pleasant in this neighborhood ? " 

 " Papa say it be , very . there be the clergyman all about , you know ; and the Quallons , and the arrowpoint , and Lord Brackenshaw , and Sir Hugo Mallinger 's place , where there be nobody that be very nice , because we make picnic there and two or three family at Wanchester : oh , and old Mrs. Vulcany , at Nuttingwood , and " 

 but Anna be relieve of this tax on her descriptive power by the announcement of dinner , and Gwendolen 's question be soon indirectly answer by her uncle , who dwell much on the advantage he have secure for they in get a place like Offendene . except the rent , it involve no more expense than an ordinary house at Wanchester would have do . 

 " and it be always worth while to make a little sacrifice for a good style of house , " say Mr. Gascoigne , in his easy , pleasantly confident tone , which make the world in general seem a very manageable place of residence : " especially where there be only a lady at the head . all the good people will call upon you ; and you need give no expensive dinner . of course , I have to spend a good deal in that way ; it be a large item . but then I get my house for nothing . if I have to pay three hundred a year for my house I could not keep a table . my boy be too great a drain on I . you be well off than we be , in proportion ; there be no great drain on you now , after your house and carriage . " 

 " I assure you , Fanny , now that the child be grow up , I be oblige to cut and contrive , " say Mrs. Gascoigne . " I be not a good manager by nature , but Henry have teach I . he be wonderful for make the good of everything ; he allow himself no extra , and get his curate for nothing . it be rather hard that he have not be make a prebendary or something , as other have be , consider the friend he have make and the need there be for man of moderate opinion in all respect . if the Church be to keep its position , ability and character ought to tell . " 

 " oh , my dear Nancy , you forget the old story thank Heaven , there be three hundred as good as i. and ultimately , we shall have no reason to complain , I be pretty sure . there could hardly be a more thorough friend than Lord Brackenshaw your landlord , you know , Fanny . Lady Brackenshaw will call upon you . and I have speak for Gwendolen to be a member of our Archery Club the Brackenshaw Archery Club the most select thing anywhere . that is , if she have no objection , " add Mr. Gascoigne , look at Gwendolen with pleasant irony . 

 " I should like it of all thing , " say Gwendolen . " there be nothing I enjoy more than take aim and hit , " she end , with a pretty nod and smile . 

 " our Anna , poor child , be too short - sigh for archery . but I consider myself a first - rate shot , and you shall practice with I . I must make you an accomplished archer before our great meeting in July . in fact , as to neighborhood , you could hardly be well place . there be the arrowpoint they be some of our good people . Miss Arrowpoint be a delightful girl she have be present at Court . they have a magnificent place Quetcham Hall worth see in point of art ; and their party , to which you be sure to be invite , be the good thing of the sort we have . the archdeacon be intimate there , and they have always a good kind of people stay in the house . Mrs. Arrowpoint be peculiar , certainly ; something of a caricature , in fact ; but well - meaning . and Miss Arrowpoint be as nice as possible . it be not all young lady who have mother as handsome and graceful as yours and Anna 's . " 

 Mrs. Davilow smile faintly at this little compliment , but the husband and wife look affectionately at each other , and Gwendolen think , " my uncle and aunt , at least , be happy : they be not dull and dismal . " altogether , she feel satisfied with her prospect at Offendene , as a great improvement on anything she have know . even the cheap curate , she incidentally learn , be almost always young man of family , and Mr. Middleton , the actual curate , be say to be quite an acquisition : it be only a pity he be so soon to leave . 

 but there be one point which she be so anxious to gain that she could not allow the evening to pass without take her measure toward secure it . her mamma , she know , intend to submit entirely to her uncle 's judgment with regard to expenditure ; and the submission be not merely prudential , for Mrs. Davilow , conscious that she have always be see under a cloud as poor dear Fanny , who have make a sad blunder with her second marriage , feel a hearty satisfaction in be frankly and cordially identify with her sister 's family , and in have her affair canvass and manage with an authority which presuppose a genuine interest . thus the question of a suitable saddle - horse , which have be sufficiently discuss with mamma , have to be refer to Mr. Gascoigne ; and after Gwendolen have play on the piano , which have be provide from Wanchester , have sing to her hearer ' admiration , and have induce her uncle to join she in a duet what more soften influence than this on any uncle who would have sing finely if his time have not be too much take up by graver matter ? she seize the opportune moment for say , " Mamma , you have not speak to my uncle about my riding . " 

 " gwendolen desire above all thing to have a horse to ride a pretty , light , lady 's horse , " say Mrs. Davilow , look at Mr. Gascoigne . " do you think we can manage it ? " 

 Mr. Gascoigne project his low lip and lift his handsome eyebrow sarcastically at Gwendolen , who have seat herself with much grace on the elbow of her mamma 's chair . 

 " we could lend she the pony sometimes , " say Mrs. Gascoigne , watch her husband 's face , and feel quite ready to disapprove if he do . 

 " that might be inconvenience other , aunt , and would be no pleasure to I . I can not endure pony , " say Gwendolen . " I would rather give up some other indulgence and have a horse . "   be there ever a young lady or gentleman not ready to give up an unspecified indulgence for the sake of the favorite one specify ? 

 " she rid so well . she have have lesson , and the riding - master say she have so good a seat and hand she might be trust with any mount , " say Mrs. Davilow , who , even if she have not wish her darling to have the horse , would not have dare to be lukewarm in try to get it for she . 

 " there be the price of the horse a good sixty with the good chance , and then his keep , " say Mr. Gascoigne , in a tone which , though demur , betray the inward presence of something that favor the demand . " there be the carriage - horse already a heavy item . and remember what you lady cost in toilet now . " 

 " I really wear nothing but two black dress , " say Mrs. Davilow , hastily . " and the young girl , of course , require no toilet at present . besides , Gwendolen will save I so much by give her sister lesson . " here Mrs. Davilow 's delicate cheek show a rapid blush . " if it be not for that , I must really have a more expensive governess , and master besides . " 

 Gwendolen feel some anger with her mamma , but carefully conceal it . 

 " that be good that be decidedly good , " say Mr. Gascoigne , heartily , look at his wife . and Gwendolen , who , it must be own , be a deep young lady , suddenly move away to the other end of the long drawing - room , and busy herself with arrange piece of music . 

 " the dear child have have no indulgence , no pleasure , " say Mrs. Davilow , in a plead undertone . " I feel the expense be rather imprudent in this first year of our settling . but she really need the exercise she need cheer . and if you be to see she on horseback , it be something splendid . " 

 " it be what we could not afford for Anna , " say Mrs. Gascoigne . " but she , dear child , would ride Lotta 's donkey and think it good enough . "   Anna be absorb in a game with Isabel , who have hunt out an old back - gammon - board , and have beg to sit up an extra hour . 

 " certainly , a fine woman never look well than on horseback , " say Mr. Gascoigne . " and Gwendolen have the figure for it . I do not   say the thing should not be consider . " 

 " we might try it for a time , at all event . it can be give up , if necessary , " say Mrs. Davilow . 

 " well , I will consult Lord Brackenshaw 's head groom . he be my fidus 
 Achates in the horsey way . " 
 " thank , " say Mrs. Davilow , much relieved . " you be very kind . " 

 " that he always be , " say Mrs. Gascoigne . and later that night , when she and her husband be in private , she say 

 " I think you be almost too indulgent about the horse for Gwendolen . she ought not to claim so much more than your own daughter would think of . especially before we see how Fanny manage on her income . and you really have enough to do without take all this trouble on yourself . " 

 " my dear Nancy , one must look at thing from every point of view . this girl be really worth some expense : you do not   often see she equal . she ought to make a first - rate marriage , and I should not be do my duty if I spar my trouble in help she forward . you know yourself she have be under a disadvantage with such a father - in - law , and a second family , keep she always in the shade . I feel for the girl , and I should like your sister and her family now to have the benefit of your have marry rather a well speciman of our kind than she do . " 

 " rather well ! I should think so . however , it be for I to be grateful that you will take so much on your shoulder for the sake of my sister and her child . I be sure I would not grudge anything to poor Fanny . but there be one thing I have be think of , though you have never mention it . " 

 " what be that ? " 

 " the boy . I hope they will not be fall in love with Gwendolen . " 

 " do not   presuppose anything of the kind , my dear , and there will be no danger . Rex will never be at home for long together , and Warham be go to India . it be the wise plan to take it for grant that cousin will not fall in love . if you begin with precaution , the affair will come in spite of they . one must not undertake to act for Providence in these matter , which can no more be hold under the hand than a brood of chicken . the boy will have nothing , and Gwendolen will have nothing . they can not   marry . at the bad there would only be a little crying , and you can not   save boy and girl from that . " 

 Mrs. Gascoigne 's mind be satisfy : if anything do happen , there be the comfort of feeling that her husband would know what be to be do , and would have the energy to do it . 

 CHAPTER IV . 

 " Gorgibus .        Je te dis que le mariage e une choose sainte et sacrťe : et que c'est faire en honnete gen , que de dťbuter par la . 

 " Madelon . Mon Dieu ! que si tout le monde vous ressemblait , un roman serait bientűt fini ! La belle choose que ce serait , si d'abord Cyrus ťpousait Mandane , et qu'aronce de plain - pied fut mariť a Clťlie !        laissez - nous faire a loisir le tissu de notre roman , et n'en pressez pas tant la conclusion . " MOLIERE . Les Prťcieuses Ridicules . 

 it would be a little hard to blame the rector of Pennicote that in the course of look at thing from every point of view , he look at Gwendolen as a girl likely to make a brilliant marriage . why should he be expect to differ from his contemporary in this matter , and wish his niece a bad end of her charming maidenhood than they would approve as the good possible ? it be rather to be set down to his credit that his feeling on the subject be entirely good - natured . and in consider the relation of mean to end , it would have be mere folly to have be guide by the exceptional and idyllic to have recommend that Gwendolen should wear a gown as shabby as Griselda 's in order that a marquis might fall in love with she , or to have insist that since a fair maiden be to be seek , she should keep herself out of the way . Mr. Gascoigne 's calculation be of the kind call rational , and he do not even think of get a too frisky horse in order that Gwendolen might be threaten with an accident and be rescue by a man of property . he wish his niece well , and he mean she to be see to advantage in the good society of the neighborhood . 

 her uncle 's intention fall in perfectly with Gwendolen 's own wish . but let no one suppose that she also contemplate a brilliant marriage as the direct end of she witch the world with her grace on horseback , or with any other accomplishment . that she be to be marry some time or other she would have feel oblige to admit ; and that her marriage would not be of a middling kind , such as most girl be content with , she feel quietly , unargumentatively sure . but her thought never dwelt on marriage as the fulfillment of her ambition ; the drama in which she imagine herself a heroine be not work up to that close . to be very much sue or hopelessly sigh for as a bride be indeed an indispensable and agreeable guarantee of womanly power ; but to become a wife and wear all the domestic fetter of that condition , be on the whole a vexatious necessity . her observation of matrimony have incline she to think it rather a dreary state in which a woman could not do what she like , have more child than be desirable , be consequently dull , and become irrevocably immerse in humdrum . of course marriage be social promotion ; she could not look forward to a single life ; but promotion have sometimes to be take with bitter herb a peerage will not quite do instead of leadership to the man who mean to lead ; and this delicate - limbed sylph of twenty mean to lead . for such passion dwell in feminine breast also . in Gwendolen 's , however , they dwelt among strictly feminine furniture , and have no disturbing reference to the advancement of learn or the balance of the constitution ; her knowledge be such as with no sort of standing - room or length of lever could have be expect to move the world . she mean to do what be pleasant to herself in a striking manner ; or rather , whatever she could do so as to strike other with admiration and get in that reflect way a more ardent sense of living , seem pleasant to her fancy . 

 " Gwendolen will not rest without have the world at her foot , " say Miss Merry , the meek governess : hyperbolical word which have long come to carry the most moderate meaning ; for who have not hear of private person have the world at their foot in the shape of some half - dozen item of flattering regard generally know in a genteel suburb ? and word could hardly be too wide or vague to indicate the prospect that make a hazy largeness about poor Gwendolen on the height of her young self - exultation . other people allow themselves to be make slave of , and to have their life blow hither and thither like empty ship in which no will be present . it be not to be so with she ; she would no long be sacrifice to creature worth less than herself , but would make the very good of the chance that life offer she , and conquer circumstance by her exceptional cleverness . certainly , to be settle at Offendene , with the notice of Lady Brackenshaw , the archery club , and invitation to dine with the arrowpoint , as the high light in her scenery , be not a position that seem to offer remarkable chance ; but Gwendolen 's confidence lie chiefly in herself . she feel well equipped for the mastery of life . with regard to much in her lot hitherto , she hold herself rather hardly deal with , but as to her " education , " she would have admit that it have leave she under no disadvantage . in the school - room her quick mind have take readily that strong starch of unexplained rule and disconnected fact which save ignorance from any painful sense of limpness ; and what remain of all thing knowable , she be conscious of be sufficiently acquaint with through novel , play and poem . about her french and music , the two justify accomplishment of a young lady , she feel no ground for uneasiness ; and when to all these qualification , negative and positive , we add the spontaneous sense of capability some happy person be bear with , so that any subject they turn their attention to impress they with their own power of form a correct judgment on it , who can wonder if Gwendolen feel ready to manage her own destiny ? 

 there be many subject in the world perhaps the majority in which she feel no interest , because they be stupid ; for subject be apt to appear stupid to the young as light seem dull to the old ; but she would not have feel at all helpless in relation to they if they have turn up in conversation . it must be remember that no one have dispute her power or her general superiority . as on the arrival at Offendene , so always , the first thought of those about she have be , what will Gwendolen think ? if the footman trod heavily in creak boot , or if the laundress 's work be unsatisfactory , the maid say , " this will never do for Miss Harleth " ; if the wood smoke in the bedroom fireplace , Mrs. Davilow , whose own weak eye suffer much from this inconvenience , speak apologetically of it to Gwendolen . if , when they be under the stress of travel , she do not appear at the breakfast table till every one else have finish , the only question be , how Gwendolen 's coffee and toast should still be of the hot and crispest ; and when she appear with her freshly - brush light - brown hair stream backward and await her mamma 's hand to coil it up , her large brown eye glance bright as a wave - wash onyx from under their long lash , it be always she herself who have to be tolerant to beg that Alice who sit wait on she would not stick up her shoulder in that frightful manner , and that Isabel , instead of push up to she and ask question , would go away to Miss Merry . 

 always she be the princess in exile , who in time of famine be to have her breakfast - roll make of the finest - bolt flour from the seven thin ear of wheat , and in a general decampment be to have her silver fork keep out of the baggage . how be this to be account for ? the answer may seem to lie quite on the surface : in her beauty , a certain unusualness about she , a decision of will which make itself feel in her graceful movement and clear unhesitate tone , so that if she come into the room on a rainy day when everybody else be flaccid and the use of thing in general be not apparent to they , there seem to be a sudden , sufficient reason for keep up the form of life ; and even the waiter at hotel show the more alacrity in do away with crumb and crease and dreg with struggle fly in they . this potent charm , add to the fact that she be the eld daughter , toward whom her mamma have always be in an apologetic state of mind for the evil bring on she by a step - father , may seem so full a reason for Gwendolen 's domestic empire , that to look for any other would be to ask the reason of daylight when the sun be shin . but beware of arrive at conclusion without comparison . I remember have see the same assiduous , apologetic attention award to person who be not at all beautiful or unusual , whose firmness show itself in no very graceful or euphonious way , and who be not eld daughter with a tender , timid mother , compunctious at have subject they to inconvenience . some of they be a very common sort of man . and the only point of resemblance among they all be a strong determination to have what be pleasant , with a total fearlessness in make themselves disagreeable or dangerous when they do not get it . who be so much cajole and serve with trembling by the weak female of a household as the unscrupulous male capable , if he have not free way at home , of go and do bad elsewhere ? hence I be force to doubt whether even without her potent charm and peculiar filial position Gwendolen might not still have play the queen in exile , if only she have keep her inborn energy of egoistic desire , and her power of inspire fear as to what she might say or do . however , she have the charm , and those who fear she be also fond of she ; the fear and the fondness be perhaps both heighten by what may be call the iridescence of her character the play of various , nay , contrary tendency . for Macbeth 's rhetoric about the impossibility of be many opposite thing in the same moment , refer to the clumsy necessity of action and not to the subtler possibility of feeling . we can not speak a loyal word and be meanly silent ; we can not kill and not kill in the same moment ; but a moment be wide enough for the loyal and mean desire , for the outlash of a murderous thought and the sharp backward stroke of repentance . 

 CHAPTER V. 

  " her wit 
  value itself so highly , that to she 
  all matter else seem weak . " 
  much Ado about Nothing . 
 Gwendolen 's reception in the neighborhood fulfil her uncle 's expectation . from Brackenshaw Castle to the Firs at Wanchester , where Mr. Quallon the banker keep a generous house , she be welcome with manifest admiration , and even those lady who do not quite like she , feel a comfort in have a new , strike girl to invite ; for hostess who entertain much must make up their party as minister make up their cabinet , on ground other than personal liking . then , in order to have Gwendolen as a guest , it be not necessary to ask any one who be disagreeable , for Mrs. Davilow always make a quiet , picturesque figure as a chaperon , and Mr. Gascoigne be everywhere in request for his own sake . 

 among the house where Gwendolen be not quite like , and yet invite , be Quetcham Hall . one of her first invitation be to a large dinner - party there , which make a sort of general introduction for she to the society of the neighborhood ; for in a select party of thirty and of well - compose proportion as to age , few visitable family could be entirely leave out . no youthful figure there be comparable to Gwendolen 's as she pass through the long suite of room adorn with light and flower , and , visible at first as a slim figure float along in white drapery , approach through one wide doorway after another into full illumination and definiteness . she have never have that sort of promenade before , and she feel exultingly that it befit she : any one look at she for the first time might have suppose that long gallery and lackey have always be a matter of course in her life ; while her cousin Anna , who be really more familiar with these thing , feel almost as much embarrassed as a rabbit suddenly deposit in that well - light - space . 

 " who be that with Gascoigne ? " say the archdeacon , neglect a discussion of military manoeuvre on which , as a clergyman , he be naturally appeal to . and his son , on the other side of the room a hopeful young scholar , who have already suggest some " not less elegant than ingenious , " emendation of greek text say nearly at the same time , " by George ! who be that girl with the awfully well - set head and jolly figure ? " 

 but to a mind of general benevolence , wish everybody to look well , it be rather exasperating to see how Gwendolen eclipse other : how even the handsome Miss Lawe , explain to be the daughter of Lady Lawe , look suddenly broad , heavy and inanimate ; and how Miss Arrowpoint , unfortunately also dress in white , immediately resemble a carte - de - visite in which one would fancy the skirt alone to have be charge for . since Miss Arrowpoint be generally like for the amiable unpretending way in which she wear her fortune , and make a soften screen for the oddity of her mother , there seem to be some unfitness in Gwendolen 's look so much more like a person of social importance . 

 " she be not really so handsome if you come to examine her feature , " say Mrs. Arrowpoint , later in the evening , confidentially to Mrs. Vulcany . " it be a certain style she have , which produce a great effect at first , but afterward she be less agreeable . " 

 in fact , Gwendolen , not intend it , but intend the contrary , have offend her hostess , who , though not a splenetic or vindictive woman , have her susceptibility . several condition have meet in the Lady of Quetcham which to the reasoner in that neighborhood seem to have an essential connection with each other . it be occasionally recall that she have be the heiress of a fortune gain by some moist or dry business in the city , in order fully to account for she have a squat figure , a harsh parrot - like voice , and a systematically high head - dress ; and since these point make she externally rather ridiculous , it appear to many only natural that she should have what be call literary tendency . a little comparison would have show that all these point be to be find apart ; daughter of alderman be often well - grow and well - feature , pretty woman have sometimes harsh or husky voice , and the production of feeble literature be find compatible with the most diverse form of physique , masculine as well as feminine . 

 Gwendolen , who have a keen sense of absurdity in other , but be kindly dispose toward any one who could make life agreeable to she , mean to win Mrs. Arrowpoint by give she an interest and attention beyond what other be probably incline to show . but self - confidence be apt to address itself to an imaginary dullness in other ; as people who be well off speak in a cajole tone to the poor , and those who be in the prime of life raise their voice and talk artificially to senior , hastily conceive they to be deaf and rather imbecile . Gwendolen , with all her cleverness and purpose to be agreeable , could not escape that form of stupidity : it follow in her mind , unreflectingly , that because Mrs. Arrowpoint be ridiculous she be also likely to be want in penetration , and she go through her little scene without suspicion that the various shade of her behavior be all note . 

 " you be fond of book as well as of music , riding , and archery , I hear , " Mrs. Arrowpoint say , go to she for a tete - a - tete in the drawing - room after dinner . " Catherine will be very glad to have so sympathetic a neighbor . " this little speech might have seem the most graceful politeness , speak in a low , melodious tone ; but with a twang , fatally loud , it give Gwendolen a sense of exercise patronage when she answer , gracefully : 

 " it be I who be fortunate . Miss Arrowpoint will teach I what good music be . I shall be entirely a learner . I hear that she be a thorough musician . " 

 " Catherine have certainly have every advantage . we have a first - rate musician in the house now Herr Klesmer ; perhaps you know all his composition . you must allow I to introduce he to you . you sing , I believe . Catherine play three instrument , but she do not sing . I hope you will let we hear you . I understand you be an accomplished singer . " 

 " oh , no ! ' die Kraft ist schwach , allein die Lust ist gross , ' as 
 Mephistopheles say . " 
 " ah , you be a student of Goethe . young lady be so advanced now . I suppose you have read everything . " 

 " no , really . I shall be so glad if you will tell I what to read . I have be look into all the book in the library at Offendene , but there be nothing readable . the leaf all stick together and smell musty . I wish I could write book to amuse myself , as you can ! how delightful it must be to write book after one 's own taste instead of read other people 's ! home - make book must be so nice . " 

 for an instant Mrs. Arrowpoint 's glance be a little sharp , but the perilous resemblance to satire in the last sentence take the hue of girlish simplicity when Gwendolen add 

 " I would give anything to write a book ! " 

 " and why should you not ? " say Mrs. Arrowpoint , encouragingly . " you have but to begin as I do . Pen , ink , and paper be at everybody 's command . but I will send you all I have write with pleasure . " 

 " thank . I shall be so glad to read your writing . be acquaint with author must give a peculiar understanding of their book : one would be able to tell then which part be funny and which serious . I be sure I often laugh in the wrong place . " here Gwendolen herself become aware of danger , and add quickly , " in Shakespeare , you know , and other great writer that we can never see . but I always want to know more than there be in the book . " 

 " if you be interested in any of my subject I can lend you many extra sheet in manuscript , " say Mrs. Arrowpoint while Gwendolen feel herself painfully in the position of the young lady who profess to like potted sprat . 

 " these be thing I dare say I shall publish eventually : several friend have urge I to do so , and one do not   like to be obstinate . my Tasso , for example I could have make it twice the size . " 

 " I dote on Tasso , " say Gwendolen . 

 " well , you shall have all my paper , if you like . so many , you know , have write about Tasso ; but they be all wrong . as to the particular nature of his madness , and his feeling for Leonora , and the real cause of his imprisonment , and the character of Leonora , who , in my opinion , be a cold - hearted woman , else she would have marry he in spite of her brother they be all wrong . I differ from everybody . " 

 " how very interesting ! " say Gwendolen . " I like to differ from everybody . I think it be so stupid to agree . that be the bad of write your opinion ; and make people agree with you . " this speech renew a slight suspicion in Mrs. Arrowpoint , and again her glance become for a moment examine . but Gwendolen look very innocent , and continue with a docile air : 

 " I know nothing of Tasso except the Gerusalemme Liberata , which we read and learn by heart at school . " 

 " ah , his life be more interesting than his poetry , I have construct the early part of his life as a sort of romance . when one think of his father Bernardo , and so on , there be much that must be true . " 

 " imagination be often true than fact , " say Gwendolen , decisively , though she could no more have explain these glib word than if they have be coptic or etruscan . " I shall be so glad to learn all about Tasso and his madness especially . I suppose poet be always a little mad . " 

 " to be sure ' the poet 's eye in a fine frenzy rolling ' ; and somebody say of Marlowe 

  ' for that fine madness still he do maintain , 
  which always should possess the poet 's brain . ' " 
 " but it be not always find out , be it ? " say Gwendolen innocently . " I suppose some of they roll their eye in private . mad people be often very cunning . " 

 again a shade flit over Mrs. Arrowpoint 's face ; but the entrance of the gentleman prevent any immediate mischief between she and this too quick young lady , who have over - act her naivetť . 

 " ah , here come Herr Klesmer , " say Mrs. Arrowpoint , rise ; and presently bring he to Gwendolen , she leave they to a dialogue which be agreeable on both side , Herr Klesmer be a felicitous combination of the German , the Sclave and the Semite , with grand feature , brown hair float in artistic fashion , and brown eye in spectacle . his English have little foreignness except its fluency ; and his alarming cleverness be make less formidable just then by a certain soften air of silliness which will sometimes befall even genius in the desire of be agreeable to beauty . 

 Music be soon begin . Miss Arrowpoint and Herr Klesmer play a four - handed piece on two piano , which convince the company in general that it be long , and Gwendolen in particular that the neutral , placid - faced Miss Arrowpoint have a mastery of the instrument which put her own execution out of question though she be not discourage as to her often - praise touch and style . after this every one become anxious to hear Gwendolen sing ; especially Mr. Arrowpoint ; as be natural in a host and a perfect gentleman , of whom no one have anything to say but that he marry Miss Cuttler and import the good cigar ; and he lead she to the piano with easy politeness . Herr Klesmer close the instrument in readiness for she , and smile with pleasure at her approach ; then place himself at a distance of a few foot so that he could see she as she sing . 

 Gwendolen be not nervous ; what she undertake to do she do without tremble , and singing be an enjoyment to she . her voice be a moderately powerful soprano   some one have tell she it be like Jenny Lind 's , her ear good , and she be able to keep in tune , so that her singing give pleasure to ordinary hearer , and she have be use to unmingled applause . she have the rare advantage of look almost pretty when she be sing than at other time , and that Herr Klesmer be in front of she seem not disagreeable . her song , determine on beforehand , be a favorite aria of Belini 's , in which she feel quite sure of herself . 

 " Charming ? " say Mr. Arrowpoint , who have remain near , and the word be echo around without more insincerity than we recognize in a brotherly way as human . but Herr Klesmer stand like a statue if a statue can be imagine in spectacle ; at least , he be as mute as a statue . Gwendolen be press to keep her seat and double the general pleasure , and she do not wish to refuse ; but before resolve to do so , she move a little toward Herr Klesmer , say with a look of smile appeal , " it would be too cruel to a great musician . you can not like to hear poor amateur singing . " 

 " no , truly ; but that make nothing , " say Herr Klesmer , suddenly speak in an odious german fashion with staccato ending , quite unobservable in he before , and apparently depend on a change of mood , as Irishmen resume their strong brogue when they be fervid or quarrelsome . " that make nothing . it be always acceptable to see you sing . " 

 be there ever so unexpected an assertion of superiority ? at least before the late teutonic conquest ? Gwendolen color deeply , but , with her usual presence of mind , do not show an ungraceful resentment by move away immediately ; and Miss Arrowpoint , who have be near enough to overhear   and also to observe that Herr Klesmer 's mode of look at Gwendolen be more conspicuously admiring than be quite consistent with good taste , now with the utmost tact and kindness come close to she and say 

 " imagine what I have to go through with this professor ! he can hardly tolerate anything we English do in music . we can only put up with his severity , and make use of it to find out the bad that can be say of we . it be a little comfort to know that ; and one can bear it when every one else be admire . " 

 " I should be very much oblige to he for tell I the bad , " say Gwendolen , recover herself . " I dare say I have be extremely ill teach , in addition to have no talent only like for music . " this be very well express consider that it have never enter her mind before . 

 " yes , it be true : you have not be well teach , " say Herr Klesmer , quietly . woman be dear to he , but music be dearer . " still , you be not quite without gift . you sing in tune , and you have a pretty fair organ . but you produce your note badly ; and that music which you sing be beneath you . it be a form of melody which express a puerile state of culture a dawdling , canting , see - saw kind of stuff the passion and thought of people without any breadth of horizon . there be a sort of self - satisfied folly about every phrase of such melody ; no cry of deep , mysterious passion no conflict no sense of the universal . it make man small as they listen to it . sing now something large . and I shall see . " 

 " oh , not now by - and - by , " say Gwendolen , with a sinking of heart at the sudden width of horizon open round her small musical performance . for a lady desiring to lead , this first encounter in her campaign be startling . but she be bent on not behave foolishly , and Miss Arrowpoint help she by say 

 " yes , by - and - by . I always require half an hour to get up my courage after be criticise by Herr Klesmer . we will ask he to play to we now : he be bind to show we what be good music . " 

 to be quite safe on this point Herr Klesmer play a composition of his own , a fantasia call Freudvoll , Leidvoll , Gedankenvoll an extensive commentary on some melodic idea not too grossly evident ; and he certainly fetch as much variety and depth of passion out of the piano as that moderately responsive instrument lend itself to , have an imperious magic in his finger that seem to send a nerve - thrill through ivory key and wooden hammer , and compel the string to make a quiver linger speech for he . Gwendolen , in spite of her wound egoism , have fullness of nature enough to feel the power of this playing , and it gradually turn she inward sob of mortification into an excitement which lift she for the moment into a desperate indifference about her own doing , or at least a determination to get a superiority over they by laugh at they as if they belong to somebody else . her eye have become bright , her cheek slightly flushed , and her tongue ready for any mischievous remark . 

 " I wish you would sing to we again , Miss Harleth , " say young Clintock , the archdeacon 's classical son , who have be so fortunate as to take she to dinner , and come up to renew conversation as soon as Herr Klesmer 's performance be end , " that be the style of music for I . I never can make anything of this tip - top playing . it be like a jar of leech , where you can never tell either beginning or ending . I could listen to your singing all day . " 

 " yes , we should be glad of something popular now another song from you would be a relaxation , " say Mrs. Arrowpoint , who have also come near with polite intention . 

 " that must be because you be in a puerile state of culture , and have no breadth of horizon . I have just learn that . I have be teach how bad my taste be , and be feel grow pain . they be never pleasant , " say Gwendolen , not take any notice of Mrs. Arrowpoint , and look up with a bright smile at young Clintock . 

 Mrs. Arrowpoint be not insensible to this rudeness , but merely say , " well , we will not press anything disagreeably , " and as there be a perceptible outburst of imprison conversation just then , and a movement of guest seek each other , she remain seat where she be , and look around she with the relief of a hostess at find she be not need . 

 " I be glad you like this neighborhood , " say young Clintock , well - pleased with his station in front of Gwendolen . 

 " exceedingly . there seem to be a little of everything and not much of anything . " 

 " that be rather equivocal praise . " 

 " not with I . I like a little of everything ; a little absurdity , for example , be very amusing . I be thankful for a few queer people ; but much of they be a bore . " 

  Mrs. Arrowpoint , who be hear this dialogue , perceive quite a new tone in Gwendolen 's speech , and feel a revival of doubt as to her interest in Tasso 's madness . 

 " I think there should be more croquet , for one thing , " young Clintock ; " I be usually away , but if I be more here I should go in for a croquet club . you be one of the archer , I think . but depend upon it croquet be the game of the future . it want write up , though . one of our good man have write a poem on it , in four canto ; as good as Pope . I want he to publish it you never read anything well . " 

 " I shall study croquet to - morrow . I shall take to it instead of sing . " 

 " no , no , not that ; but do take to croquet . I will send you Jenning 's poem if you like . I have a manuscript copy . " 

 " be he a great friend of your ? " 

 " well , rather . " 

 " oh , if he be only rather , I think I will decline . or , if you send it to I , will you promise not to catechise I upon it and ask I which part I like well ? because it be not so easy to know a poem without read it as to know a sermon without listen . " 

 " decidedly , " Mrs. Arrowpoint think , " this girl be double and satirical . I shall be on my guard against she . " 

 but Gwendolen , nevertheless , continue to receive polite attention from the family at Quetcham , not merely because invitation have large ground than those of personal liking , but because the try little scene at the piano have awaken a kindly solicitude toward she in the gentle mind of Miss Arrowpoint , who manage all the invitation and visit , her mother be otherwise occupy . 

 CHAPTER VI . 

  " Croyez - vous m'avoir humiliťe pour m'avoir appris que la terre tourne 
  autour du soleil ? Je vous jure que je ne m'en estime pas moin . " 
  FONTENELLE : Pluralitť des Mondes . 
 that lofty criticism have cause Gwendolen a new sort of pain . she would not have choose to confess how unfortunate she think herself in not have have Miss Arrowpoint 's musical advantage , so as to be able to question Herr Klesmer 's taste with the confidence of thorough knowledge ; still less , to admit even to herself that Miss Arrowpoint each time they meet raise an unwonted feeling of jealousy in she : not in the least because she be an heiress , but because it be really provoke that a girl whose appearance you could not characterize except by say that her figure be slight and of middle stature , her feature small , her eye tolerable , and her complexion sallow , have nevertheless a certain mental superiority which could not be explain away an exasperating thoroughness in her musical accomplishment , a fastidious discrimination in her general taste , which make it impossible to force her admiration and keep you in awe of her standard . this insignificant - looking young lady of four - and - twenty , whom any one 's eye would have pass over negligently if she have not be Miss Arrowpoint , might be suspect of a secret opinion that Miss Harleth 's acquirement be rather of a common order , and such an opinion be not make agreeable to think of by be always veil under a perfect kindness of manner . 

 but Gwendolen do not like to dwell on fact which throw an unfavorable light on itself . the musical Magus who have so suddenly widen her horizon be not always on the scene ; and his be constantly backward and forward between London and Quetcham soon begin to be think of as offer opportunity for convert he to a more admiring state of mind . meanwhile , in the manifest pleasure her singing give at Brackenshaw Castle , the Firs , and elsewhere , she recover her equanimity , be disposed to think approval more trustworthy than objection , and not be one of the exceptional person who have a parching thirst for a perfection undemande by their neighbor . perhaps it would have be rash to say then that she be at all exceptional inwardly , or that the unusual in she be more than her rare grace of movement and bearing , and a certain daring which give piquancy to a very common egoistic ambition , such as exist under many clumsy exterior and be take no notice of . for I suppose that the set of the head do not really determine the hunger of the inner self for supremacy : it only make a difference sometimes as to the way in which the supremacy be hold attainable , and a little also to the degree in which it can be attain ; especially when the hungry one be a girl , whose passion for do what be remarkable have an ideal limit in consistency with the high breeding and perfect freedom from the sordid need of income . Gwendolen be as inwardly rebellious against the restraint of family condition , and as ready to look through obligation into her own fundamental want of feeling for they , as if she have be sustain by the bold speculation ; but she really have no such speculation , and would at once have mark herself off from any sort of theoretical or practically reform woman by satirize they . she rejoice to feel herself exceptional ; but her horizon be that of the genteel romance where the heroine 's soul pour out in her journal be full of vague power , originality , and general rebellion , while her life move strictly in the sphere of fashion ; and if she wander into a swamp , the pathos lie partly , so to speak , in she have on her satin shoe . here be a restraint which nature and society have provide on the pursuit of striking adventure ; so that a soul burn with a sense of what the universe be not , and ready to take all existence as fuel , be nevertheless hold captive by the ordinary wirework of social form and do nothing particular . 

 this commonplace result be what Gwendolen find herself threaten with even in the novelty of the first winter at Offendene . what she be clear upon be , that she do not wish to lead the same sort of life as ordinary young lady do ; but what she be not clear upon be , how she should set about lead any other , and what be the particular act which she would assert her freedom by do . Offendene remain a good background , if anything would happen there ; but on the whole the neighborhood be in fault . 

 beyond the effect of her beauty on a first presentation , there be not much excitement to be get out of her early invitation , and she come home after little sally of satire and knowingness , such as have offend Mrs. Arrowpoint , to fill the intervene day with the most girlish device . the strong assertion she be able to make of her individual claim be to leave out Alice 's lesson   on the principle that Alice be more likely to excel in ignorance , and to employ she with Miss Merry , and the maid who be understand to wait on all the lady , in help to arrange various dramatic costume which Gwendolen please herself with have in readiness for some future occasion of act in charade or theatrical piece , occasion which she mean to bring about by force of will or contrivance . she have never act only make a figure in tableaux vivan at school ; but she feel assure that she could act well , and have be once or twice to the Thť tre FranÁais , and also hear her mamma speak of Rachel , her wake dream and cogitation as to how she would manage her destiny sometimes turn on the question whether she would become an actress like Rachel , since she be more beautiful than that thin Jewess . meanwhile the wet day before Christmas be pass pleasantly in the preparation of costume , greek , oriental , and Composite , in which Gwendolen attitudinize and speechify before a domestic audience , include even the housekeeper , who be once press into it that she might swell the note of applause ; but have show herself unworthy by observe that Miss Harleth look far more like a queen in her own dress than in that baggy thing with her arm all bare , she be not invite a second time . 

 " do I look as well as Rachel , mamma ? " say Gwendolen , one day when she have be show herself in her greek dress to Anna , and go through scrap of scene with much tragic intention . 

 " you have well arm than Rachel , " say Mrs. Davilow , " your arm would do for anything , Gwen . but your voice be not so tragic as her ; it be not so deep . " 

 " I can make it deep , if I like , " say Gwendolen , provisionally ; then she add , with decision , " I think a high voice be more tragic : it be more feminine ; and the more feminine a woman be , the more tragic it seem when she do desperate action . " 

 " there may be something in that , " say Mrs. Davilow , languidly . " but I do not   know what good there be in make one 's blood creep . and if there be anything horrible to be do , I should like it to be leave to the man . " 

 " oh , mamma , you be so dreadfully prosaic ! as if all the great poetic criminal be not woman ! I think the man be poor cautious creature . " 

 " well , dear , and you who be afraid to be alone in the night I do not   think you would be very bold in crime , thank God . " 

 " I be not talk about reality , mamma , " say Gwendolen , impatiently . then her mamma be call out of the room , she turn quickly to her cousin , as if take an opportunity , and say , " Anna , do ask my uncle to let we get up some charade at the rectory . Mr. Middleton and Warham could act with we just for practice . Mamma say it will not do to have Mr. Middleton consult and rehearse here . he be a stick , but we could give he suitable part . do ask , or else I will . " 

 " oh , not till Rex come . he be so clever , and such a dear old thing , and he will act Napoleon look over the sea . he look just like Napoleon . Rex can do anything . " 

 " I do not   in the least believe in your Rex , Anna , " say Gwendolen , laugh at she . " he will turn out to be like those wretched blue and yellow water - color of his which you hang up in your bedroom and worship . " 

 " very well , you will see , " say Anna . " it be not that I know what be clever , but he have get a scholarship already , and papa say he will get a fellowship , and nobody be well at game . he be clever than Mr. Middleton , and everybody but you call Mr. Middleton clever . " 

 " so he may be in a dark - lantern sort of way . but he be a stick . if he have to say , ' perdition catch my soul , but I do love she , ' he would say it in just the same tone as , ' here endeth the second lesson . ' " 

 " oh , Gwendolen ! " say Anna , shock at these promiscuous allusion . " and it be very unkind of you to speak so of he , for he admire you very much . I hear Warham say one day to mamma , ' Middleton be regularly spooney upon Gwendolen . ' she be very angry with he ; but I know what it mean . it be what they say at college for be in love . " 

 " how can I help it ? " say Gwendolen , rather contemptuously . " perdition catch my soul if I love he . " 

 " no , of course ; papa , I think , would not wish it . and he be to go away soon . but it make I sorry when you ridicule he . " 

 " what shall you do to I when I ridicule Rex ? " say Gwendolen , wickedly . 

 " now , Gwendolen , dear , you will not ? " say Anna , her eye fill with tear . " I could not bear it . but there really be nothing in he to ridicule . only you may find out thing . for no one ever think of laugh at Mr. Middleton before you . every one say he be nice - looking , and his manner perfect . I be sure I have always be frighten at he because of his learning and his square - cut coat , and his be a nephew of the bishop 's , and all that . but you will not ridicule Rex promise I . " Anna end with a beseech look which touch Gwendolen . 

 " you be a dear little coz , " she say , just touch the tip of Anna 's chin with her thumb and forefinger . " I do not   ever want to do anything that will vex you . especially if Rex be to make everything come off charade and everything . " 

 and when at last Rex be there , the animation he bring into the life of Offendene and the rectory , and his ready partnership in Gwendolen 's plan , leave she no inclination for any ridicule that be not of an open and flattering kind , such as he himself enjoy . he be a fine open - hearted youth , with a handsome face strongly resemble his father 's and Anna 's , but soft in expression than the one , and large in scale than the other : a bright , healthy , love nature , enjoy ordinary innocent thing so much that vice have no temptation for he , and what he know of it lie too entirely in the outer court and little - visit chamber of his mind for he to think of it with great repulsion . vicious habit be with he " what some fellow do " ' stupid stuff " which he like to keep aloof from . he return Anna 's affection as fully as could be expect of a brother whose pleasure apart from she be more than the sum total of her ; and he have never know a strong love . 

 the cousin be continually together at the one house or the other chiefly at Offendene , where there be more freedom , or rather where there be a more complete sway for Gwendolen ; and whatever she wish become a rule purpose for Rex . the charade come off accord to her plan ; and also some other little scene not contemplate by she in which her act be more impromptu . it be at Offendene that the charade and tableaux be rehearse and present , Mrs. Davilow see no objection even to Mr. Middleton 's be invite to share in they , now that Rex too be there especially as his service be indispensable : Warham , who be study for India with a Wanchester " coach , " have no time to spare , and be generally dismal under a cram of everything except the answer need at the forthcoming examination , which might disclose the welfare of our Indian Empire to be somehow connect with a quotable knowledge of Browne 's Pastorals . 

 Mr. Middleton be persuade to play various grave part , Gwendolen have flatter he on his enviable immobility of countenance ; and at first a little pained and jealous at her comradeship with Rex , he presently draw encouragement from the thought that this sort of cousinly familiarity exclude any serious passion . indeed , he occasionally feel that her more formal treatment of himself be such a sign of favor as to warrant his making advance before he leave Pennicote , though he have intend to keep his feeling in reserve until his position should be more assured . Miss Gwendolen , quite aware that she be adore by this unexceptionable young clergyman with pale whisker and square - cut collar , feel nothing more on the subject than that she have no objection to be adore : she turn her eye on he with calm mercilessness and cause he many mildly agitate hope by seem always to avoid dramatic contact with he for all meaning , we know , depend on the key of interpretation . 

 some person might have think beforehand that a young man of anglican leaning , have a sense of sacredness much exercise on small thing as well as great , rarely laugh save from politeness , and in general regard the mention of spade by their naked name as rather coarse , would not have see a fitting bride for himself in a girl who be dare in ridicule , and show none of the special grace require in the clergyman 's wife ; or , that a young man inform by theological reading would have reflect that he be not likely to meet the taste of a lively , restless young lady like Miss Harleth . but be we always oblige to explain why the fact be not what some person think beforehand ? the apology lie on their side , who have that erroneous way of thinking . 

 as for Rex , who would possibly have be sorry for poor Middleton if he have be aware of the excellent curate 's inward conflict , he be too completely absorb in a first passion to have observation for any person or thing . he do not observe Gwendolen ; he only feel what she say or do , and the back of his head seem to be a good organ of information as to whether she be in the room or out . before the end of the first fortnight he be so deeply in love that it be impossible for he to think of his life except as bind up with Gwendolen 's . he could see no obstacle , poor boy ; his own love seem a guarantee of her , since it be one with the unperturbed delight in her image , so that he could no more dream of she give he pain than an Egyptian could dream of snow . she sing and play to he whenever he like , be always glad of his companionship in riding , though his borrow steed be often comic , be ready to join in any fun of his , and show a right appreciation of Anna . no mark of sympathy seem absent . that because Gwendolen be the most perfect creature in the world she be to make a grand match , have not occur to he . he have no conceit at least not more than go to make up the necessary gum and consistence of a substantial personality : it be only that in the young bliss of love he take Gwendolen 's perfection as part of that good which have seem one with life to he , be the outcome of a happy , well - embody nature . 

 one incident which happen in the course of their dramatic attempt impress Rex as a sign of her unusual sensibility . it show an aspect of her nature which could not have be preconceive by any one who , like he , have only see her habitual fearlessness in active exercise and her high spirit in society . 

 after a good deal of rehearse it be resolve that a select party should be invite to Offendene to witness the performance which go with so much satisfaction to the actor . Anna have cause a pleasant surprise ; nothing could be neater than the way in which she play her little part ; one would even have suspect she of hide much sly observation under her simplicity . and Mr. Middleton answer very well by not try to be comic . the main source of doubt and retardation have be Gwendolen 's desire to appear in her greek dress . no word for a charade would occur to she either wake or dream that suit her purpose of get a statuesque pose in this favorite costume . to choose a motive from Racine be of no use , since Rex and the other could not declaim french verse , and improvise speech would turn the scene into burlesque . besides , Mr. Gascoigne prohibit the acting of scene from play : he usually protest against the notion that an amusement which be fitting for every one else be unfit for a clergyman ; but he would not in this matter overstep the line of decorum as draw in that part of Wessex , which do not exclude his sanction of the young people 's act charade in his sister - in - law 's house a very different affair from private theatrical in the full sense of the word . 

 everybody of course be concern to satisfy this wish of Gwendolen 's , and Rex propose that they should wind up with a tableau in which the effect of her majesty would not be mar by any one 's speech . this please she thoroughly , and the only question be the choice of the tableau . 

 " something pleasant , child , I beseech you , " say Mrs. Davilow ; " I can not   have any greek wickedness . " 

 " it be no bad than christian wickedness , mamma , " say Gwendolen , whose mention of Rachelesque heroine have call forth that remark . 

 " and less scandalous , " say Rex . " besides , one think of it as all go by and do with . what do you say to Briseis be lead away ? I would be Achilles , and you would be look round at I after the print we have at the rectory . " 

 " that would be a good attitude for I , " say Gwendolen , in a tone of acceptance . but afterward she say with decision , " no . it will not do . there must be three man in proper costume , else it will be ridiculous . " 

 " I have it , " say Rex , after a little reflection . " Hermione as the statue in Winter 's Tale ? I will be Leontes , and Miss Merry , Paulina , one on each side . our dress will not   signify , " he go on laughingly ; " it will be more shakespearian and romantic if leonte look like Napoleon , and Paulina like a modern spinster . " 

 and Hermione be choose ; all agree that age be of no consequence , but Gwendolen urge that instead of the mere tableau there should be just enough act of the scene to introduce the striking up of the music as a signal for she to step down and advance ; when leonte , instead of embrace she , be to kneel and kiss the hem of her garment , and so the curtain be to fall . the antechamber with fold door lend itself admirably to the purpose of a stage , and the whole of the establishment , with the addition of Jarrett the village carpenter , be absorb in the preparation for an entertainment , which , consider that it be an imitation of acting , be likely to be successful , since we know from ancient fable that an imitation may have more chance of success than the original . 

 Gwendolen be not without a special exultation in the prospect of this occasion , for she know that Herr Klesmer be again at Quetcham , and she have take care to include he among the invited . 

 Klesmer come . he be in one of his placid , silent mood , and sit in serene contemplation , reply to all appeal in benignant - sound syllable more or less articulate as take up his cross meekly in a world overgrown with amateur , or as careful how he move his lion paw lest he should crush a rampant and vociferous mouse . 

 everything indeed go off smoothly and accord to expectation all that be improvise and accidental being of a probable sort until the incident occur which show Gwendolen in an unforeseen phase of emotion . how it come about be at first a mystery . 

 the tableau of Hermione be doubly strike from its dissimilarity with what have go before : it be answer perfectly , and a murmur of applause have be gradually suppress while leonte give his permission that Paulina should exercise her utmost art and make the statue move . 

 Hermione , her arm rest on a pillar , be elevate by about six inch , which she count on as a means of show her pretty foot and instep , when at the give signal she should advance and descend . 

 " Music , awake she , strike ! " say Paulina   Mrs. Davilow , who , by special entreaty , have consent to take the part in a white burnous and hood . 

 Herr Klesmer , who have be good - natured enough to seat himself at the piano , strike a thunderous chord but in the same instant , and before Hermione have put forth her foot , the movable panel , which be on a line with the piano , fly open on the right opposite the stage and disclose the picture of the dead face and the flee figure , bring out in pale definiteness by the position of the wax - light . everyone be startle , but all eye in the act of turn toward the open panel be recall by a pierce cry from Gwendolen , who stand without change of attitude , but with a change of expression that be terrify in its terror . she look like a statue into which a soul of Fear have enter : her pallid lip be part ; her eye , usually narrow under their long lash , be dilate and fix . her mother , less surprised than alarmed , rush toward she , and Rex , too , could not help go to her side . but the touch of her mother 's arm have the effect of an electric charge ; Gwendolen fall on her knee and put her hand before her face . she be still tremble , but mute , and it seem that she have self - consciousness enough to aim at control her sign of terror , for she presently allow herself to be raise from her kneeling posture and lead away , while the company be relieve their mind by explanation . 

 " a magnificent bit of plastik that ! " say Klesmer to Miss Arrowpoint . 
 and a quick fire of undertone question and answer go round . 
 " be it part of the play ? " 

 " oh , no , surely not . Miss Harleth be too much affected . a sensitive creature ! " 

 " dear I ! I be not aware that there be a painting behind that panel ; be you ? " 

 " no ; how should I ? some eccentricity in one of the Earl 's family long ago , I suppose . " 

 " how very painful ! pray shut it up . " 

 " be the door lock ? it be very mysterious . it must be the spirit . " 

 " but there be no medium present . " 

 " how do you know that ? we must conclude that there be , when such thing happen . " 

 " oh , the door be not lock ; it be probably the sudden vibration from the piano that send it open . " 

 this conclusion come from Mr. Gascoigne , who beg Miss Merry if possible to get the key . but this readiness to explain the mystery be think by Mrs. Vulcany unbecoming in a clergyman , and she observe in an undertone that Mr. Gascoigne be always a little too worldly for her taste . however , the key be produce , and the rector turn it in the lock with an emphasis rather offensively rationalize as who should say , " it will not start open again " put the key in his pocket as a security . 

 however , Gwendolen soon reappear , show her usual spirit , and evidently determine to ignore as far as she could the striking change she have make in the part of Hermione . 

 but when Klesmer say to she , " we have to thank you for devise a perfect climax : you could not have choose a fine bit of plastik , " there be a flush of pleasure in her face . she like to accept as a belief what be really no more than delicate feigning . he divine that the betrayal into a passion of fear have be mortify to she , and wish she to understand that he take it for good acting . Gwendolen cherish the idea that now he be strike with her talent as well as her beauty , and her uneasiness about his opinion be half turn to complacency . 

 but too many be in the secret of what have be include in the rehearsal , and what have not , and no one besides Klesmer take the trouble to soothe Gwendolen 's imagine mortification . the general sentiment be that the incident should be let drop . 

 there have really be a medium concerned in the starting open of the panel : one who have quit the room in haste and creep to bed in much alarm of conscience . it be the small Isabel , whose intense curiosity , unsatisfie by the brief glimpse she have have of the strange picture on the day of arrival at Offendene , have keep she on the watch for an opportunity of find out where Gwendolen have put the key , of steal it from the discover drawer when the rest of the family be out , and get on a stool to unlock the panel . while she be indulge her thirst for knowledge in this way , a noise which she fear be an approach footstep alarm she : she close the door and attempt hurriedly to lock it , but fail and not dare to linger , she withdraw the key and trust that the panel would stick , as it seem well inclined to do . in this confidence she have return the key to its former place , still any anxiety by the thought that if the door be discover to be unlocked nobody would know how the unlocking come about . the inconvenient Isabel , like other offender , do not foresee her own impulse to confession , a fatality which come upon she the morning after the party , when Gwendolen say at the breakfast - table , " I know the door be lock before the housekeeper give I the key , for I try it myself afterward . some one must have be to my drawer and take the key . " 

 it seem to Isabel that Gwendolen 's awful eye have rest on she more than on the other sister , and without any time for resolve , she say , with a trembling lip : 

 " please forgive I , Gwendolen . " 

 the forgiveness be soon bestow than it would have be if Gwendolen have not desire to dismiss from her own and every one else 's memory any case in which she have show her susceptibility to terror . she wonder at herself in these occasional experience , which seem like a brief remember madness , an unexplained exception from her normal life ; and in this instance she feel a peculiar vexation that her helpless fear have show itself , not , as usual , in solitude , but in well - light company . her ideal be to be dare in speech and reckless in brave danger , both moral and physical ; and though her practice fall far behind her ideal , this shortcoming seem to be due to the pettiness of circumstance , the narrow theatre which life offer to a girl of twenty , who can not conceive herself as anything else than a lady , or as in any position which would lack the tribute of respect . she have no permanent consciousness of other fetter , or of more spiritual restraint , have always dislike whatever be present to she under the name of religion , in the same way that some people dislike arithmetic and account : it have raise no other emotion in she , no alarm , no longing ; so that the question whether she believe it have not occur to she any more than it have occur to she to inquire into the condition of colonial property and banking , on which , as she have have many opportunity of know , the family fortune be dependent . all these fact about herself she would have be ready to admit , and even , more or less indirectly , to state . what she unwillingly recognize , and would have be glad for other to be unaware of , be that liability of hers to fit of spiritual dread , though this fountain of awe within she have not find its way into connection with the religion teach she or with any human relation . she be ashamed and frighten , as at what might happen again , in remember her tremor on suddenly feel herself alone , when , for example , she be walk without companionship and there come some rapid change in the light . solitude in any wide scene impress she with an undefined feeling of immeasurable existence aloof from she , in the midst of which she be helplessly incapable of assert herself . the little astronomy teach she at school use sometimes to set her imagination at work in a way that make her tremble : but always when some one join she she recover her indifference to the vastness in which she seem an exile ; she find again her usual world in which her will be of some avail , and the religious nomenclature belong to this world be no more identify for she with those uneasy impression of awe than her uncle 's surplice see out of use at the rectory . with human ear and eye about she , she have always hitherto recover her confidence , and feel the possibility of win empire . 

 to her mamma and other her fit of timidity or terror be sufficiently account for by her ' sensitiveness " or the " excitability of her nature " ; but these explanatory phrase require conciliation with much that seem to be blank indifference or rare self - mastery . heat be a great agent and a useful word , but consider as a means of explain the universe it require an extensive knowledge of difference ; and as a means of explain character ' sensitiveness " be in much the same predicament . but who , love a creature like Gwendolen , would not be incline to regard every peculiarity in she as a mark of preeminence ? that be what Rex do . after the Hermione scene he be more persuade than ever that she must be instinct with all feeling , and not only ready to respond to a worshipful love , but able to love well than other girl . Rex feel the summer on his young wing and soar happily . 

 CHAPTER VII . 

  " perigot . as the bonny lasse pass by , 
  Willie . hey , ho , bonnilasse ! 
  P. she roode at I with glaunce eye , 
  W. as clear as the crystal glasse . 
  P. all as the sunny beame so bright , 
  W. Hey , ho , the sunnebeame ! 
  P. Glaunceth from Phoebus ' face forthright , 
  W. so love into thy heart do streame . " 
  SPENSER : Shepard 's Calendar . 
 " the kindliest symptom , yet the most alarming crisis in the ticklish state of youth ; the nourisher and destroyer of hopeful wit ;        the servitude above freedom ; the gentle mind 's religion ; the liberal superstition . " CHARLES LAMB . 

 the first sign of the unimagined snow - storm be like the transparent white cloud that seem to set off the blue . Anna be in the secret of Rex 's feeling ; though for the first time in their life he have say nothing to she about what he most think of , and he only take it for grant that she know it . for the first time , too , Anna could not say to Rex what be continually in her mind . perhaps it might have be a pain which she would have have to conceal , that he should so soon care for some one else more than for herself , if such a feeling have not be thoroughly neutralize by doubt and anxiety on his behalf . Anna admire her cousin would have say with simple sincerity , " Gwendolen be always very good to I , " and hold it in the order of thing for herself to be entirely subject to this cousin ; but she look at she with mingled fear and distrust , with a puzzled contemplation as of some wondrous and beautiful animal whose nature be a mystery , and who , for anything Anna know , might have an appetite for devour all the small creature that be her own particular pet . and now Anna 's heart be sink under the heavy conviction which she dare not utter , that Gwendolen would never care for Rex . what she herself hold in tenderness and reverence have constantly seem indifferent to Gwendolen , and it be easy to imagine her scorn Rex than return any tenderness of his . besides , she be always think of be something extraordinary . and poor Rex ! Papa would be angry with he if he know . and of course he be too young to be in love in that way ; and she , Anna have think that it would be year and year before any thing of that sort come , and that she would be Rex 's housekeeper ever so long . but what a heart must that be which do not return his love ! Anna , in the prospect of his suffering , be begin to dislike she too fascinating cousin . 

 it seem to she , as it do to Rex , that the week have be fill with a tumultuous life evident to all observer : if he have be question on the subject he would have say that he have no wish to conceal what he hop would be an engagement which he should immediately tell his father of : and yet for the first time in his life he be reserve not only about his feeling but which be more remarkable to Anna about certain action . she , on her side , be nervous each time her father or mother begin to speak to she in private lest they should say anything about Rex and Gwendolen . but the elder be not in the least alive to this agitate drama , which go forward chiefly in a sort of pantomime extremely lucid in the mind thus express themselves , but easily miss by spectator who be run their eye over the Guardian or the Clerical Gazette , and regard the triviality of the young one with scarcely more interpretation than they give to the action of lively ant . 

 " where be you go , Rex ? " say Anna one gray morning when her father have set off in his carriage to the session , Mrs. Gascoigne with he , and she have observe that her brother have on his antigropelo , the utmost approach he possess to a hunting equipment . 

 " go to see the hound throw off at the Three Barns . " 

 " be you go to take Gwendolen ? " say Anna , timidly . 

 " she tell you , do she ? " 

 " no , but I think do papa know you be go ? " 

 " not that I be aware of . I do not   suppose he would trouble himself about the matter . " 

 " you be go to use his horse ? " 

 " he know I do that whenever I can . " 

 " do not   let Gwendolen ride after the hound , Rex , " say Anna , whose fear gift she with second - sight . 

 " why not ? " say Rex , smile rather provokingly . 

 " papa and mamma and aunt davilow all wish she not to . they think it be not right for she . " 

 " why should you suppose she be go to do what be not right ? " 

 " gwendolen mind nobody sometimes , " say Anna get bold by dint of a little anger . 

 " then she would not mind I , " say Rex , perversely make a joke of poor Anna 's anxiety . 

 " oh Rex , I can not bear it . you will make yourself very unhappy . " here 
 Anna burst into tear . 
 " Nannie , Nannie , what on earth be the matter with you ? " say Rex , a little impatient at be keep in this way , hat on and whip in hand . 

 " she will not care for you one bit I know she never will ! " say the poor child in a sob whisper . she have lose all control of herself . 

 Rex redden and hurry away from she out of the hall door , leave she to the miserable consciousness of have make herself disagreeable in vain . 

 he do think of her word as he ride along ; they have the unwelcomeness which all unfavorable fortune - telling have , even when laugh at ; but he quickly explain they as spring from little Anna 's tenderness , and begin to be sorry that he be oblige to come away without soothe she . every other feeling on the subject , however , be quickly merge in a resistant belief to the contrary of her , accompany with a new determination to prove that he be right . this sort of certainty have just enough kinship to doubt and uneasiness to hurry on a confession which an untouched security might have delay . 

 Gwendolen be already mount and rid up and down the avenue when Rex appear at the gate . she have provide herself against disappointment in case he do not appear in time by have the groom ready behind she , for she would not have wait beyond a reasonable time . but now the groom be dismiss , and the two ride away in delightful freedom . Gwendolen be in her high spirit , and Rex think that she have never look so lovely before ; her figure , her long white throat , and the curve of her cheek and chin be always set off to perfection by the compact simplicity of her rid dress . he could not conceive a more perfect girl ; and to a youthful lover like Rex it seem that the fundamental identity of the good , the true and the beautiful , be already extant and manifest in the object of his love . Most observer would have hold it more than equally accountable that a girl should have like impression about Rex , for in his handsome face there be nothing correspond to the undefinable stinging quality as it be a trace of demon ancestry which make some beholder hesitate in their admiration of Gwendolen . 

 it be an exquisite January morning in which there be no threat of rain , but a gray sky make the calm background for the charm of a mild winter scene the grassy border of the lane , the hedgerow sprinkle with red berry and haunt with low twittering , the purple bareness of the elm , the rich brown of the furrow . the horse ' hoof make a musical chime , accompany their young voice . she be laugh at his equipment , for he be the reverse of a dandy , and he be enjoy her laughter ; the freshness of the morning mingle with the freshness of their youth ; and every sound that come from their clear throat , every glance they give each other , be the bubble outflow from a spring of joy . it be all morning to they , within and without . and think of they in these moment one be tempt to that futile sort of wish if only thing could have be a little otherwise then , so as to have be greatly otherwise after if only these two beautiful young creature could have pledge themselves to each other then and there , and never through life have swerve from that pledge ! for some of the goodness which Rex believe in be there . Goodness be a large , often a prospective word ; like harvest , which at one stage when we talk of it lie all underground , with an indeterminate future ; be the germ prosper in the darkness ? at another , it have put forth delicate green blade , and by - and - by the trembling blossom be ready to be dash off by an hour of rough wind or rain . each stage have its peculiar blight , and may have the healthy life choke out of it by a particular action of the foul land which rear or neighbor it , or by damage bring from foulness afar . 

 " Anna have get it into her head that you would want to ride after the hound this morning , " say Rex , whose secret association with Anna 's word make this speech seem quite perilously near the most momentous of subject . 

 " do she ? " say Gwendolen , laughingly . " what a little clairvoyant she be ! " 

 " shall you ? " say Rex , who have not believe in her intend to do it if the elder object , but confide in she have good reason . 

 " I do not   know . I can not   tell what I shall do till I get there . clairvoyant be often wrong : they foresee what be likely . I be not fond of what be likely : it be always dull . I do what be unlikely . " 

 " ah , there you tell I a secret . when once I know what people in general would be likely to do , I should know you would do the opposite . so you would have come round to a likelihood of your own sort . I shall be able to calculate on you . you could not   surprise I . " 

 " yes , I could . I should turn round and do what be likely for people in general , " say Gwendolen , with a musical laugh . 

 " you see you can not   escape some sort of likelihood . and contradictoriness make the strong likelihood of all . you must give up a plan . " 

 " no , I shall not . my plan be to do what please I . "   here should any young lady incline to imitate Gwendolen , let she consider the set of her head and neck : if the angle there have be different , the chin protrusive , and the cervical vertebrae a trifle more curved in their position , ten to one Gwendolen 's word would have have a jar in they for the sweet - natured Rex . but everything odd in her speech be humor and pretty banter , which he be only anxious to turn toward one point . 

 " can you manage to feel only what please you ? " say he . 

 " of course not ; that come from what other people do . but if the world be pleasanter , one would only feel what be pleasant . girl ' life be so stupid : they never do what they like . " 

 " I think that be more the case of the man . they be force to do hard thing , and be often dreadfully bored , and knock to piece too . and then , if we love a girl very dearly we want to do as she like , so after all you have your own way . " 

 " I do not   believe it . I never see a married woman who have her own way . " 

 " what should you like to do ? " say Rex , quite guilelessly , and in real anxiety . 

 " oh , I do not   know ! go to the North Pole , or ride steeple - chase , or go to be a queen in the East like Lady Hester Stanhope , " say Gwendolen , flightily . her word be bear on her lip , but she would have be at a loss to give an answer of deep origin . 

 " you do not   mean you would never be marry ? " 

 " no ; I do not   say that . only when I marry , I should not do as other woman do . " 

 " you might do just as you like if you marry a man who love you more dearly than anything else in the world , " say Rex , who , poor youth , be move in theme outside the curriculum in which he have promise to win distinction . " I know one who do . " 

 " do not   talk of Mr. Middleton , for heaven 's sake , " say Gwendolen , hastily , a quick blush spread over her face and neck ; " that be Anna 's chant . I hear the hound . let we go on . " 

 she put she chestnut to a canter , and Rex have no choice but to follow she . still he feel encouraged . Gwendolen be perfectly aware that her cousin be in love with she ; but she have no idea that the matter be of any consequence , have never have the slight visitation of painful love herself . she wish the small romance of Rex 's devotion to fill up the time of his stay at Pennicote , and to avoid explanation which would bring it to an untimely end . besides , she object , with a sort of physical repulsion , to be directly make love to . with all her imaginative delight in be adore , there be a certain fierceness of maidenhood in she . 

 but all other thought be soon lose for she in the excitement of the scene at the Three Barns . several gentleman of the hunt know she , and she exchange pleasant greeting . Rex could not get another word with she . the color , the stir of the field have take possession of Gwendolen with a strength which be not due to habitual association , for she have never yet ride after the hound only say she should like to do it , and so draw forth a prohibition ; her mamma dread the danger , and her uncle declare that for his part he hold that kind of violent exercise unseemly in a woman , and that whatever might be do in other part of the country , no lady of good position follow the Wessex hunt : no one but Mrs. Gadsby , the yeomanry captain 's wife , who have be a kitchenmaid and still speak like one . this last argument have some effect on Gwendolen , and have keep she halting between her desire to assert her freedom and her horror of be class with Mrs. Gadsby . 

 some of the most unexceptionable woman in the neighborhood occasionally go to see the hound throw off ; but it happen that none of they be present this morning to abstain from follow , while Mrs. Gadsby , with her doubtful antecedent , grammatical and otherwise , be not visible to make follow seem unbecoming . thus Gwendolen feel no check on the animal stimulus that come from the stir and tongue of the hound , the pawing of the horse , the vary voice of man , the movement hither and thither of vivid color on the background of green and gray stillness : that utmost excitement of the come chase which consist in feel something like a combination of dog and horse , with the superadded thrill of social vanity and consciousness of centaur - power which belong to humankind . 

 Rex would have feel more of the same enjoyment if he could have keep near to Gwendolen , and not see she constantly occupy with acquaintance , or look at by would - be acquaintance , all on lively horse which veer about and sweep the surround space as effectually as a revolving lever . 

 " glad to see you here this fine morning , Miss Harleth , " say Lord Brackenshaw , a middle - aged peer of aristocratic seediness in stain pink , with easy - go manner which would have make the threaten deluge seem of no consequence . " we shall have a first - rate run . a pity you do not   go with we . have you ever try your little chestnut at a ditch ? you would not   be afraid , eh ? " 

 " not the least in the world , " say Gwendolen . and that be true : she be never fearful in action and companionship . " I have often take he at some rail and a ditch too , near " 

 " ah , by Jove ! " say his lordship , quietly , in notation that something be happen which must break off the dialogue : and as he rein off his horse , Rex be bring his sober hackney up to Gwendolen 's side when the hound give tongue , and the whole field be in motion as if the whirl of the earth be carry it ; Gwendolen along with everything else ; no word of notice to Rex , who without a second thought follow too . could he let Gwendolen go alone ? under other circumstance he would have enjoy the run , but he be just now perturb by the check which have be put on the impetus to utter his love , and get utterance in return , an impetus which could not at once resolve itself into a totally different sort of chase , at least with the consciousness of be on his father 's gray nag , a good horse enough in his way , but of sober year and ecclesiastical habit . Gwendolen on her spirited little chestnut be up with the good , and feel as secure as an immortal goddess , have , if she have think of risk , a core of confidence that no ill luck would happen to she . but she think of no such thing , and certainly not of any risk there might be for her cousin . if she have think of he , it would have strike she as a droll picture that he should be gradually fall behind , and look round in search of gate : a fine lithe youth , whose heart must be pant with all the spirit of a beagle , stick as if under a wizard 's spell on a stiff clerical hackney , would have make her laugh with a sense of fun much too strong for she to reflect on his mortification . but Gwendolen be apt to think rather of those who see she than of those whom she could not see ; and Rex be soon so far behind that if she have look she would not have see he . for I grieve to say that in the search for a gate , along a lane lately mend , Primrose fall , break his knee , and undesignedly throw Rex over his head . 

 fortunately a blacksmith 's son who also follow the hound under disadvantage , namely , on foot   a loose way of hunting which have strike some even frivolous mind as immoral , be naturally also in the rear , and happen to be within sight of Rex 's misfortune . he run to give help which be greatly need , for Rex be a great deal stun , and the complete recovery of sensation come in the form of pain . Joel Dagge on this occasion show himself that most useful of personage , whose knowledge be of a kind suit to the immediate occasion : he not only know perfectly well what be the matter with the horse , how far they be both from the near public - house and from Pennicote Rectory , and could certify to Rex that his shoulder be only a bit out of joint , but also offer experienced surgical aid . 

 " Lord , sir , let I shove it in again for you ! I be see Nash , the bone - setter , do it , and do it myself for our little Sally twice over . it be all one and the same , shoulder be . if you will trusten to I and tighten your mind up a bit , I will do it for you in no time . " 

 " come then , old fellow , " say Rex , who could tighten his mind well than his seat in the saddle . and Joel manage the operation , though not without considerable expense of pain to his patient , who turn so pitiably pale while tighten his mind , that Joel remark , " ah , sir , you be not   use to it , that be how it be . I be see lot and lot o ' joint out . I see a man with his eye push out once that be a rum go as ever I see . you can not   have a bit o ' fun wi'out such sort o ' thing . but it go in again . I be swallow three tooth mysen , as sure as I be alive . now , sirrey "   this be address to Primrose , " come alonk you musn't   make believe as you can not . " 

 Joel be clearly a low character , it be , happily , not necessary to say more of he to the refined reader , than that he help Rex to get home with as little delay as possible . there be no alternative but to get home , though all the while he be in anxiety about Gwendolen , and more miserable in the thought that she , too , might have have an accident , than in the pain of his own bruise and the annoyance he be about to cause his father . he comfort himself about she by reflect that every one would be anxious to take care of she , and that some acquaintance would be sure to conduct her home . 

 Mr. Gascoigne be already at home , and be write letter in his study , when he be interrupt by see poor Rex come in with a face which be not the less handsome and ingratiate for be pale and a little distressed . he be secretly the favorite son , and a young portrait of the father ; who , however , never treat he with any partiality rather , with an extra rigor . Mr. Gascoigne have inquire of Anna , know that Rex have go with Gwendolen to the meet at the Three Barns . 

 " what be the matter ? " he say hastily , not lay down his pen . 

 " I be very sorry , sir ; Primrose have fall down and break his knee . " 

 " where have you be with he ? " say Mr. Gascoigne , with a touch of severity . he rarely give way to temper . 

 " to the Three Barns to see the hound throw off . " 

 " and you be fool enough to follow ? " 

 " yes , sir . I do not   go at any fence , but the horse get his leg into a hole . " 

 " and you get hurt yourself , I hope , eh ! " 

 " I get my shoulder put out , but a young blacksmith put it in again for I . I be just a little battered , that be all . " 

 " well , sit down . " 

 " I be very sorry about the horse , sir ; I know it would be a vexation to you . " 

 " and what have become of Gwendolen ? " say Mr. Gascoigne , abruptly . Rex , who do not imagine that his father have make any inquiry about he , answer at first with a blush , which be the more remarkable for his previous paleness . then he say , nervously 

 " I be anxious to know I should like to go or send at once to Offendene but she rid so well , and I think she would keep up there would most likely be many round she . " 

 " I suppose it be she who lead you on , eh ? " say Mr. Gascoigne , lay down his pen , lean back in his chair , and look at Rex with more marked examination . 

 " it be natural for she to want to go : she do not   intend it beforehand she be lead away by the spirit of the thing . and , of course , I go when she go . " 

 Mr. Gascoigne leave a brief interval of silence , and then say , with quiet irony , " but now you observe , young gentleman , that you be not furnish with a horse which will enable you to play the squire to your cousin . you must give up that amusement . you have spoil my nag for I , and that be enough mischief for one vacation . I shall beg you to get ready to start for Southampton to - morrow and join Stilfox , till you go up to Oxford with he . that will be good for your bruise as well as your study . " 

 Poor Rex feel his heart swell and comport itself as if it have be no well than a girl 's . 

 " I hope you will not insist on my go immediately , sir . " 

 " do you feel too ill ? " 

 " no , not that but " here Rex bite his lip and feel the tear start , to his great vexation ; then he rally and try to say more firmly , " I want to go to Offendene , but I can go this evening . " 

 " I be go there myself . I can bring word about Gwendolen , if that be what you want . " 

 Rex break down . he think he discern an intention fatal to his happiness , nay , his life . he be accustomed to believe in his father 's penetration , and to expect firmness . " Father , I can not   go away without tell she that I love she , and know that she love I . " 

 Mr. Gascoigne be inwardly go through some self - rebuke for not be more wary , and be now really sorry for the lad ; but every consideration be subordinate to that of use the wise tactic in the case . he have quickly make up his mind and to answer the more quietly 

 " my dear boy , you be too young to be take momentous , decisive step of that sort . this be a fancy which you have get into your head during an idle week or two : you must set to work at something and dismiss it . there be every reason against it . an engagement at your age would be totally rash and unjustifiable ; and moreover , alliance between first cousin be undesirable . make up your mind to a brief disappointment . life be full of they . we have all get to be break in ; and this be a mild beginning for you . " 

 " no , not mild . I can not   bear it . I shall be good for nothing . I should not   mind anything , if it be settle between we . I could do anything then , " say Rex , impetuously . " but it be of no use to pretend that I will obey you . I can not   do it . if I say I would , I should be sure to break my word . I should see Gwendolen again . " 

 " well , wait till to - morrow morning , that we may talk of the matter again you will promise I that , " say Mr. Gascoigne , quietly ; and Rex do not , could not refuse . 

 the rector do not even tell his wife that he have any other reason for go to Offendene that evening than his desire to ascertain that Gwendolen have get home safely . he find she more than safe elated . Mr. Quallon , who have win the brush , have deliver the trophy to she , and she have bring it before she , fasten on the saddle ; more than that , Lord Brackenshaw have conduct her home , and have show himself delighted with her spirited riding . all this be tell at once to her uncle , that he might see how well justify she have be in act against his advice ; and the prudential rector do feel himself in a slight difficulty , for at that moment he be particularly sensible that it be his niece 's serious interest to be well regard by the Brackenshaws , and their opinion as to she follow the hound really touch the essence of his objection . however , he be not oblige to say anything immediately , for Mrs. Davilow follow up Gwendolen 's brief triumphant phrase with 

 " still , I do hope you will not do it again , Gwendolen . I should never have a moment 's quiet . her father die by an accident , you know . " 

 here Mrs. Davilow have turn away from Gwendolen , and look at Mr. 
 Gascoigne . 
 " Mamma , dear , " say Gwendolen , kiss she merrily , and pass over the question of the fear which Mrs. Davilow have mean to account for , " child do not   take after their parent in broken leg . " 

 not one word have yet be say about Rex . in fact there have be no anxiety about he at Offendene . Gwendolen have observe to her mamma , " oh , he must have be leave far behind , and go home in despair , " and it could not be deny that this be fortunate so far as it make way for Lord Brackenshaw 's bring her home . but now Mr. Gascoigne say , with some emphasis , look at Gwendolen 

 " well , the exploit have end well for you than for Rex . " 

 " yes , I dare say he have to make a terrible round . you have not teach Primrose to take the fence , uncle , " say Gwendolen , without the faint shade of alarm in her look and tone . 

 " Rex have have a fall , " say Mr. Gascoigne , curtly , throw himself into an arm - chair rest his elbow and fit his palm and finger together , while he close his lip and look at Gwendolen , who say 

 " oh , poor fellow ! he be not hurt , I hope ? " with a correct look of anxiety such as elated mortal try to super - induce when their pulse be all the while quick with triumph ; and Mrs. Davilow , in the same moment , utter a low " good heaven ! there ! " 

 Mr. Gascoigne go on : " he put his shoulder out , and get some bruise , I believe . " here he make another little pause of observation ; but Gwendolen , instead of any such symptom as pallor and silence , have only deepen the compassionateness of her brow and eye , and say again , " oh , poor fellow ! it be nothing serious , then ? " and Mr. Gascoigne hold his diagnosis complete . but he wish to make assurance doubly sure , and go on still with a purpose . 

 " he get his arm set again rather oddly . some blacksmith not a parishioner of mine be on the field a loose fish , I suppose , but handy , and set the arm for he immediately . so after all , I believe , I and Primrose come off worst . the horse 's knee be cut to piece . he come down in a hole , it seem , and pitch Rex over his head . " 

 Gwendolen 's face have allowably become content again , since Rex 's arm have be reset ; and now , at the descriptive suggestion in the latter part of her uncle 's speech , her elated spirit make she feature less unmanageable than usual ; the smile break forth , and finally a descend scale of laughter . 

 " you be a pretty young lady to laugh at other people 's calamity , " say Mr. Gascoigne , with a milder sense of disapprobation than if he have not have counteract reason to be glad that Gwendolen show no deep feeling on the occasion . 

 " pray forgive I , uncle . now Rex be safe , it be so droll to fancy the figure he and Primrose would cut in a lane all by themselves only a blacksmith run up . it would make a capital caricature of ' follow the Hounds . ' " 

 Gwendolen rather value herself on her superior freedom in laugh where other might only see matter for seriousness . indeed , the laughter become her person so well that her opinion of its gracefulness be often share by other ; and it even enter into her uncle 's course of thought at this moment , that it be no wonder a boy should be fascinate by this young witch who , however , be more mischievous than could be desire . 

 " how can you laugh at broken bone , child ? " say Mrs. Davilow , still under her dominant anxiety . " I wish we have never allow you to have the horse . you will see that we be wrong , " she add , look with a grave nod at Mr. Gascoigne " at least I be , to encourage she in ask for it . " 

 " yes , seriously , Gwendolen , " say Mr. Gascoigne , in a judicious tone of rational advice to a person understand to be altogether rational , " I strongly recommend you I shall ask you to oblige I so far not to repeat your adventure of to - day . Lord Brackenshaw be very kind , but I feel sure that he would concur with I in what I say . to be speak of as ' the young lady who hunt ' by way of exception , would give a tone to the language about you which I be sure you would not like . depend upon it , his lordship would not choose that Lady Beatrice or Lady Maria should hunt in this part of the country , if they be old enough to do so . when you be marry , it will be different : you may do whatever your husband sanction . but if you intend to hunt , you must marry a man who can keep horse . " 

 " I do not   know why I should do anything so horrible as to marry without that prospect , at least , " say Gwendolen , pettishly . her uncle 's speech have give her annoyance , which she could not show more directly ; but she feel that she be commit herself , and after move carelessly to another part of the room , go out . 

 " she always speak in that way about marriage , " say Mrs. Davilow ; " but it will be different when she have see the right person . " 

 " her heart have never be in the least touch , that you know of ? " say 
 Mr. Gascoigne . 
 Mrs. Davilow shake her head silently . " it be only last night she say to I , ' Mamma , I wonder how girl manage to fall in love . it be easy to make they do it in book . but man be too ridiculous . ' " 

 Mr. Gascoigne laugh a little , and make no further remark on the subject . the next morning at breakfast he say 

 " how be your bruise , Rex ? " 

 " oh , not very mellow yet , sir ; only begin to turn a little . " 

 " you do not   feel quite ready for a journey to Southampton ? " 

 " not quite , " answer Rex , with his heart metaphorically in his mouth . 

 " well , you can wait till to - morrow , and go to say goodbye to they at 
 Offendene . " 
 Mrs. Gascoigne , who now know the whole affair , look steadily at her coffee lest she also should begin to cry , as Anna be do already . 

 Mr. Gascoigne feel that he be apply a sharp remedy to poor Rex 's acute attack , but he believe it to be in the end the kind . to let he know the hopelessness of his love from Gwendolen 's own lip might be curative in more way than one . 

 " I can only be thankful that she do not   care about he , " say Mrs. Gascoigne , when she join her husband in his study . " there be thing in Gwendolen I can not reconcile myself to . my Anna be worth two of she , with all her beauty and talent . it look very ill in she that she will not help in the school with Anna not even in the Sunday - school . what you or I advise be of no consequence to she : and poor Fannie be completely under her thumb . but I know you think well of she , " Mrs. Gascoigne end with a deferential hesitation . 

 " oh , my dear , there be no harm in the girl . it be only that she have a high spirit , and it will not do to hold the rein too tight . the point be , to get she well married . she have a little too much fire in she for her present life with her mother and sister . it be natural and right that she should be marry soon not to a poor man , but one who can give she a fitting position . " 

 presently Rex , with his arm in a sling , be on his two mile ' walk to Offendene . he be rather puzzle by the unconditional permission to see Gwendolen , but his father 's real ground of action could not enter into his conjecture . if it have , he would first have think it horribly cold - blooded , and then have disbelieve in his father 's conclusion . 

 when he get to the house , everybody be there but Gwendolen . the four girl , hear he speak in the hall , rush out of the library , which be their school - room , and hang round he with compassionate inquiry about his arm . Mrs. Davilow want to know exactly what have happen , and where the blacksmith live , that she might make he a present ; while Miss Merry , who take a subdued and melancholy part in all family affair , doubt whether it would not be give too much encouragement to that kind of character . Rex have never find the family troublesome before , but just now he wish they all away and Gwendolen there , and he be too uneasy for good - natured feigning . when at last he have say , " where be Gwendolen ? " and Mrs. Davilow have tell Alice to go and see if her sister be come down , add , " I send up her breakfast this morning . she need a long rest . " Rex take the short way out of his endurance by say , almost impatiently , " Aunt , I want to speak to Gwendolen I want to see she alone . " 

 " very well , dear ; go into the drawing - room . I will send she there , " say Mrs. Davilow , who have observe that he be fond of be with Gwendolen , as be natural , but have not think of this as have any bearing on the reality of life : it seem merely part of the Christmas holiday which be spin themselves out . 

 Rex for his part think that the reality of life be all hang on this interview . he have to walk up and down the drawing - room in expectation for nearly ten minute ample space for all imaginative fluctuation ; yet , strange to say , he be unvaryingly occupy in think what and how much he could do , when Gwendolen have accept he , to satisfy his father that the engagement be the most prudent thing in the world , since it inspire he with double energy for work . he be to be a lawyer , and what reason be there why he should not rise as high as Eldon do ? he be force to look at life in the light of his father 's mind . 

 but when the door open and she whose presence he be long for enter , there come over he suddenly and mysteriously a state of tremor and distrust which he have never feel before . Miss Gwendolen , simple as she stand there , in her black silk , cut square about the round white pillar of her throat , a black band fasten her hair which stream backward in smooth silky abundance , seem more queenly than usual . perhaps it be that there be none of the latent fun and tricksiness which have always pierce in her greeting of Rex . how much of this be due to her presentiment from what he have say yesterday that he be go to talk of love ? how much from her desire to show regret about his accident ? something of both . but the wisdom of age have hint that there be a side of the bed which have a malign influence if you happen to get out on it ; and this accident befall some charming person rather frequently . perhaps it have befall Gwendolen this morning . the hastening of her toilet , the way in which Bugle use the brush , the quality of the shill serial mistakenly write for her amusement , the probability of the come day , and , in short , social institution generally , be all objectionable to she . it be not that she be out of temper , but that the world be not equal to the demand of her fine organism . 

 however it might be , Rex see an awful majesty about she as she enter and put out her hand to he , without the least approach to a smile in eye or mouth . the fun which have move she in the evening have quite evaporate from the image of his accident , and the whole affair seem stupid to she . but she say with perfect propriety , " I hope you be not much hurt , Rex ; I deserve that you should reproach I for your accident . " 

 " not at all , " say Rex , feel the soul within he spread itself like an attack of illness . " there be hardly any thing the matter with I . I be so glad you have the pleasure : I would willingly pay for it by a tumble , only I be sorry to break the horse 's knee . " 

 Gwendolen walk to the hearth and stand look at the fire in the most inconvenient way for conversation , so that he could only get a side view of her face . 

 " my father want I to go to Southampton for the rest of the vacation , " say Rex , his baritone tremble a little . 

 " Southampton ! that be a stupid place to go to , be not   it ? " say 
 Gwendolen , chilly . 
 " it would be to I , because you would not be there . " silence . 

 " should you mind about I go away , Gwendolen ? " 

 " of course . every one be of consequence in this dreary country , " say Gwendolen , curtly . the perception that poor Rex want to be tender make she curl up and harden like a sea - anemone at the touch of a finger . 

 " be you angry with I , Gwendolen ? why do you treat I in this way all at once ? " say Rex , flush , and with more spirit in his voice , as if he too be capable of be angry . 

 Gwendolen look round at he and smile . " treat you ? nonsense ! I be only rather cross . why do you come so very early ? you must expect to find temper in dishabille . " 

 " be as cross with I as you like only do not   treat I with indifference , " say Rex , imploringly . " all the happiness of my life depend on your love I if only a little well than any one else . " 

 he try to take her hand , but she hastily elude his grasp and move to the other end of the hearth , face he . 

 " pray do not   make love to I ! I hate it ! " she look at he fiercely . 

 Rex turn pale and be silent , but could not take his eye off she , and the impetus be not yet exhaust that make hers dart death at he . Gwendolen herself could not have foresee that she should feel in this way . it be all a sudden , new experience to she . the day before she have be quite aware that her cousin be in love with she ; she do not mind how much , so that he say nothing about it ; and if any one have ask she why she object to love - make speech , she would have say , laughingly , " oh I be tired of they all in the book . " but now the life of passion have begin negatively in she . she feel passionately averse to this volunteered love . 

 to Rex at twenty the joy of life seem at an end more absolutely than it can do to a man at forty . but before they have cease to look at each other , he do speak again . 

 " be that last word you have to say to I , Gwendolen ? will it always be so ? " 

 she could not help see his wretchedness and feel a little regret for the old Rex who have not offend she . decisively , but yet with some return of kindness , she say 

 " about make love ? yes . but I do not   dislike you for anything else . " 

 there be just a perceptible pause before he say a low " good - bye . " and pass out of the room . almost immediately after , she hear the heavy hall door bang behind he . 

 Mrs. Davilow , too , have hear Rex 's hasty departure , and presently come into the drawing - room , where she find Gwendolen seat on the low couch , her face bury , and her hair fall over her figure like a garment . she be sob bitterly . " my child , my child , what be it ? " cry the mother , who have never before see her darling strike down in this way , and feel something of the alarmed anguish that woman , feel at the sight of overpower sorrow in a strong man ; for this child have be her ruler . sit down by she with circle arm , she press her cheek against Gwendolen 's head , and then try to draw it upward . Gwendolen give way , and let her head rest against her mother , cry out sobbingly , " oh , mamma , what can become of my life ? there be nothing worth live for ! " 

 " why , dear ? " say Mrs. Davilow . usually she herself have be rebuke by her daughter for involuntary sign of despair . 

 " I shall never love anybody . I can not   love people . I hate they . " 

 " the time will come , dear , the time will come . " 

 Gwendolen be more and more convulsed with sobbing ; but put her arm round her mother 's neck with an almost painful clinging , she say brokenly , " I can not   bear any one to be very near I but you . " 

 then the mother begin to sob , for this spoiled child have never show such dependence on she before : and so they cling to each other . 

 CHAPTER VIII . 

  what name doth Joy most borrow 
  when life be fair ? 
  " to - morrow . " 
  what name doth well fit Sorrow 
  in young despair ? 
  " to - morrow . " 
 there be a much more lasting trouble at the rectory . Rex arrive there only to throw himself on his bed in a state of apparent apathy , unbroken till the next day , when it begin to be interrupt by more positive sign of illness . nothing could be say about his go to Southampton : instead of that , the chief thought of his mother and Anna be how to tend this patient who do not want to be well , and from be the bright , most grateful spirit in the household , be metamorphose into an irresponsive , dull - eyed creature who meet all affectionate attempt with a murmur of " let I alone . " his father look beyond the crisis , and believe it to be the short way out of an unlucky affair ; but he be sorry for the inevitable suffering , and go now and then to sit by he in silence for a few minute , part with a gentle pressure of his hand on Rex 's blank brow , and a " God bless you , my boy . " Warham and the young child use to peep round the edge of the door to see this incredible thing of their lively brother be lay low ; but finger be immediately shake at they to drive they back . the guardian who be always there be Anna , and her little hand be allow to rest within her brother 's , though he never give it a welcoming pressure . her soul be divide between anguish for Rex and reproach of Gwendolen . 

 " perhaps it be wicked of I , but I think I never can love she again , " come as the recurrent burden of poor little Anna 's inward monody . and even Mrs. Gascoigne have an angry feeling toward her niece which she could not refrain from express   apologetically   to her husband . 

 " I know of course it be well , and we ought to be thankful that she be not in love with the poor boy ; but really . Henry , I think she be hard ; she have the heart of a coquette . I can not help think that she must have make he believe something , or the disappointment would not have take hold of he in that way . and some blame attache to poor Fanny ; she be quite blind about that girl . " 

 Mr. Gascoigne answer imperatively : " the less say on that point the well , Nancy . I ought to have be more awake myself . as to the boy , be thankful if nothing bad ever happen to he . let the thing die out as quickly as possible ; and especially with regard to Gwendolen let it be as if it have never be . " 

 the rector 's dominant feeling be that there have be a great escape . 
 Gwendolen in love with Rex in return would have make a much hard 
 problem , the solution of which might have be take out of his hand . 
 but he have to go through some further difficulty . 
 one fine morning Rex ask for his bath , and make his toilet as usual . Anna , full of excitement at this change , could do nothing but listen for his come down , and at last hear his step , run to the foot of the stair to meet he . for the first time he give she a faint smile , but it look so melancholy on his pale face that she could hardly help cry . 

 " Nannie ! " he say gently , take her hand and lead she slowly along with he to the drawing - room . his mother be there , and when she come to kiss he , he say : " what a plague I be ! " 

 then he sit still and look out of the bow - window on the lawn and shrub cover with hoar - frost , across which the sun be send faint occasional gleam : something like that sad smile on Rex 's face , Anna think . he feel as if he have have a resurrection into a new world , and do not know what to do with himself there , the old interest be leave behind . Anna sit near he , pretend to work , but really watch he with yearn look . beyond the garden hedge there be a road where wagon and cart sometimes go on field - work : a rail opening be make in the hedge , because the upland with its border wood and clump of ash - tree against the sky be a pretty sight . presently there come along a wagon laden with timber ; the horse be strain their grand muscle , and the driver have crack his whip , run along anxiously to guide the leader 's head , fear a swerve . Rex seem to be shake into attention , rise and look till the last quivering trunk of the timber have disappear , and then walk once or twice along the room . Mrs. Gascoigne be no long there , and when he come to sit down again , Anna , see a return of speech in her brother 's eye , could not resist the impulse to bring a little stool and seat herself against his knee , look up at he with an expression which seem to say , " do speak to I . " and he speak . 

 " I will tell you what I be think of , Nannie . I will go to Canada , or somewhere of that sort . "   Rex have not study the character of our colonial possession . 

 " oh , Rex , not for always ! " 

 " yes , to get my bread there . I should like to build a hut , and work hard at clearing , and have everything wild about I , and a great wide quiet . " 

 " and not take I with you ? " say Anna , the big tear come fast . 

 " how could I ? " 

 " I should like it well than anything ; and settler go with their family . I would soon go there than stay here in England . I could make the fire , and mend the clothe , and cook the food ; and I could learn how to make the bread before we go . it would be nice than anything like play at life over again , as we use to do when we make our tent with the drugget , and have our little plate and dish . " 

 " Father and mother would not let you go . " 

 " yes , I think they would , when I explain everything . it would save money ; and papa would have more to bring up the boy with . " 

 there be further talk of the same practical kind at interval , and it end in Rex 's be oblige to consent that Anna should go with he when he speak to his father on the subject . 

 of course it be when the rector be alone in his study . their mother would become reconcile to whatever he decide on , but mention to her first , the question would have distress she . 

 " well , my child ! " say Mr. Gascoigne , cheerfully , as they enter . 
 it be a comfort to see Rex about again . 
 " may we sit down with you a little , papa ? " say Anna . " Rex have something to say . " 

 " with all my heart . " 

 it be a noticeable group that these three creature make , each of they with a face of the same structural type the straight brow , the nose suddenly straighten from an intention of be aquiline , the short upper lip , the short but strong and well - hang chin : there be even the same tone of complexion and set of the eye . the gray - haired father be at once massive and keen - look ; there be a perpendicular line in his brow which when he speak with any force of interest deepen ; and the habit of ruling give he an air of reserved authoritativeness . Rex would have seem a vision of his father 's youth , if it have be possible to imagine Mr. Gascoigne without distinct plan and without command , smite with a heart sorrow , and have no more notion of concealment than a sick animal ; and Anna be a tiny copy of Rex , with hair draw back and knot , her face follow his in its change of expression , as if they have one soul between they . 

 " you know all about what have upset I , father , " Rex begin , and Mr. 
 Gascoigne nod . 
 " I be quite do up for life in this part of the world . I be sure it will be no use my go back to Oxford . I could not   do any reading . I should fail , and cause you expense for nothing . I want to have your consent to take another course , sir . " 

 Mr. Gascoigne nod more slowly , the perpendicular line on his brow deepen , and Anna 's trembling increase . 

 " if you would allow I a small outfit , I should like to go to the colony and work on the land there . " Rex think the vagueness of the phrase prudential ; " the colony " necessarily embrace more advantage , and be less capable of be rebut on a single ground than any particular settlement . 

 " oh , and with I , papa , " say Anna , not bear to be leave out from the proposal even temporarily . " Rex would want some one to take care of he , you know some one to keep house . and we shall never , either of we , be marry . and I should cost nothing , and I should be so happy . I know it would be hard to leave you and mamma ; but there be all the other to bring up , and we two should be no trouble to you any more . " 

 Anna have rise from her seat , and use the feminine argument of go close to her papa as she speak . he do not smile , but he draw she on his knee and hold she there , as if to put she gently out of the question while he speak to Rex . 

 " you will admit that my experience give I some power of judge for you , and that I can probably guide you in practical matter well than you can guide yourself ? " 

 Rex be oblige to say , " yes , sir . " 

 " and perhaps you will admit though I do not   wish to press that point that you be bind in duty to consider my judgment and wish ? " 

 " I have never yet place myself in opposition to you , sir . " Rex in his secret soul could not feel that he be bind not to go to the colony , but to go to Oxford again which be the point in question . 

 " but you will do so if you persist in set your mind toward a rash and foolish procedure , and deafen yourself to consideration which my experience of life assure I of . you think , I suppose , that you have have a shock which have change all your inclination , stupefy your brain , unfit you for anything but manual labor , and give you a dislike to society ? be that what you believe ? " 

 " something like that . I shall never be up to the sort of work I must do to live in this part of the world . I have not the spirit for it . I shall never be the same again . and without any disrespect to you , father , I think a young fellow should be allow to choose his way of life , if he do nobody any harm . there be plenty to stay at home , and those who like might be allow to go where there be empty place . " 

 " but suppose I be convince on good evidence as I be that this state of mind of yours be transient , and that if you go off as you propose , you would by - and - by repent , and feel that you have let yourself slip back from the point you have be gain by your education till now ? have you not strength of mind enough to see that you have well act on my assurance for a time , and test it ? in my opinion , so far from agree with you that you should be free to turn yourself into a colonist and work in your shirt - sleeve with spade and hatchet in my opinion you have no right whatever to expatriate yourself until you have honestly endeavor to turn to account the education you have receive here . I say nothing of the grief to your mother and I . " 

 " I be very sorry ; but what can I do ? I can not   study that be certain , " say Rex . 

 " not just now , perhaps . you will have to miss a term . I have make arrangement for you how you be to spend the next two month . but I confess I be disappoint in you , Rex . I think you have more sense than to take up such idea to suppose that because you have fall into a very common trouble , such as most man have to go through , you be loosen from all bond of duty just as if your brain have soften and you be no long a responsible being . " 

 what could Rex say ? inwardly he be in a state of rebellion , but he have no argument to meet his father 's ; and while he be feel , in spite of any thing that might be say , that he should like to go off to " the colony " to - morrow , it lie in a deep fold of his consciousness that he ought to feel if he have be a well fellow he would have feel more about his old tie . this be the sort of faith we live by in our soul sickness . 

 Rex get up from his seat , as if he hold the conference to be at an end . " you assent to my arrangement , then ? " say Mr. Gascoigne , with that distinct resolution of tone which seem to hold one in a vise . 

 there be a little pause before Rex answer , " I will try what I can do , sir . I can not   promise . " his thought be , that try would be of no use . 

 her father keep Anna , hold she fast , though she want to follow Rex . " oh , papa , " she say , the tear come with her word when the door have close ; " it be very hard for he . do not   he look ill ? " 

 " yes , but he will soon be well ; it will all blow over . and now , Anna , be as quiet as a mouse about it all . never let it be mention when he be go . " 

 " no , papa . but I would not be like Gwendolen for any thing to have people fall in love with I so . it be very dreadful . " 

 Anna dare not say that she be disappoint at not be allow to go to the colony with Rex ; but that be her secret feeling , and she often afterward go inwardly over the whole affair , say to herself , " I should have do with go out , and glove , and crinoline , and have to talk when I be take to dinner and all that ! " 

 I like to mark the time , and connect the course of individual life with the historic stream , for all class of thinker . this be the period when the broadening of gauge in crinoline seem to demand an agitation for the general enlargement of church , ball - room , and vehicle . but Anna Gascoigne 's figure would only allow the size of skirt manufacture for young lady of fourteen . 

 CHAPTER IX . 

  I will tell thee , Berthold , what man 's hope be like : 
  a silly child that , quiver with joy , 
  would cast its little mimic fishing - line 
  bait with loadstone for a bowl of toy 
  in the salt ocean . 
 eight month after the arrival of the family at Offendene , that be to say in the end of the following June , a rumor be spread in the neighborhood which to many person be matter of exciting interest . it have no reference to the result of the american war , but it be one which touch all class within a certain circuit round Wanchester : the corn - factor , the brewer , the horse - dealer , and saddler , all hold it a laudable thing , and one which be to be rejoice in on abstract ground , as show the value of an aristocracy in a free country like England ; the blacksmith in the hamlet of Diplow feel that a good time have come round ; the wife of labor man hop their nimble boy of ten or twelve would be take into employ by the gentleman in livery ; and the farmer about Diplow admit , with a tincture of bitterness and reserve that a man might now again perhaps have an easy market or exchange for a rick of old hay or a wagon - load of straw . if such be the hope of low person not in society , it may be easily infer that their better have well reason for satisfaction , probably connect with the pleasure of life rather than its business . marriage , however , must be consider as come under both head ; and just as when a visit of majesty be announce , the dream of knighthood or a baronetcy be to be find under various municipal nightcap , so the news in question raise a float indeterminate vision of marriage in several well - breed imagination . 

 the news be that Diplow Hall , Sir Hugo Mallinger 's place , which have for a couple of year turn its white window - shutter in a painfully wall - eyed manner on its fine elm and beech , its lilie pool and grassy acre speck with deer , be be prepare for a tenant , and be for the rest of the summer and through the hunting season to be inhabit in a fitting style both as to house and stable . but not by Sir Hugo himself : by his nephew , Mr. Mallinger Grandcourt , who be presumptive heir to the baronetcy , his uncle 's marriage have produce nothing but girl . nor be this the only contingency with which fortune flatter young Grandcourt , as he be pleasantly call ; for while the chance of the baronetcy come through his father , his mother have give a baronial streak to his blood , so that if certain intervene person slightly paint in the middle distance die , he would become a baron and peer of this realm . 

 it be the uneven allotment of nature that the male bird alone have the tuft , but we have not yet follow the advice of hasty philosopher who would have we copy nature entirely in these matter ; and if Mr. Mallinger Grandcourt become a baronet or a peer , his wife would share the title which in addition to his actual fortune be certainly a reason why that wife , be at present unchosen , should be think of by more than one person with a sympathetic interest as a woman sure to be well provide for . 

 some reader of this history will doubtless regard it as incredible that people should construct matrimonial prospect on the mere report that a bachelor of good fortune and possibility be come within reach , and will reject the statement as a mere outflow of gall : they will aver that neither they nor their first cousin have mind so unbridled ; and that in fact this be not human nature , which would know that such speculation might turn out to be fallacious , and would therefore not entertain they . but , let it be observe , nothing be here narrated of human nature generally : the history in its present stage concern only a few people in a corner of Wessex whose reputation , however , be unimpeached , and who , I be in the proud position of be able to state , be all on visit term with person of rank . 

 there be the arrowpoint , for example , in their beautiful place at Quetcham : no one could attribute sordid view in relation to their daughter 's marriage to parent who could leave she at least half a million ; but have affectionate anxiety about their Catherine 's position   she have resolutely refuse Lord Slogan , an unexceptionable irish peer , whose estate want nothing but drainage and population , they wonder , perhaps from something more than a charitable impulse , whether Mr. Grandcourt be good - look , of sound constitution , virtuous , or at least reform , and if liberal - conservative , not too liberal - conservative ; and without wish anybody to die , think his succession to the title an event to be desire . 

 if the Arrowpoints have such rumination , it be the less surprising that they be stimulate in Mr. Gascoigne , who for be a clergyman be not the less subject to the anxiety of a parent and guardian ; and we have see how both he and Mrs. Gascoigne might by this time have come to feel that he be overcharge with the management of young creature who be hardly to be hold in with bit or bridle , or any sort of metaphor that would stand for judicious advice . 

 naturally , people do not tell each other all they feel and think about young Grandcourt 's advent : on no subject be this openness find prudently practicable not even on the generation of acid , or the destination of the fix star : for either your contemporary with a mind turn toward the same subject may find your idea ingenious and forestall you in apply they , or he may have other view on acid and fix star , and think ill of you in consequence . Mr. Gascoigne do not ask Mr. Arrowpoint if he have any trustworthy source of information about Grandcourt consider as a husband for a charming girl ; nor do Mrs. Arrowpoint observe to Mrs. Davilow that if the possible peer seek a wife in the neighborhood of Diplow , the only reasonable expectation be that he would offer his hand to Catherine , who , however , would not accept he unless he be in all respect fit to secure her happiness . indeed , even to his wife the rector be silent as to the contemplation of any matrimonial result , from the probability that Mr. Grandcourt would see Gwendolen at the next Archery Meeting ; though Mrs. Gascoigne 's mind be very likely still more active in the same direction . she have say interjectionally to her sister , " it would be a mercy , Fanny , if that girl be well married ! " to which Mrs. Davilow discern some criticism of her darling in the fervor of that wish , have not choose to make any audible reply , though she have say inwardly , " you will not get she to marry for your pleasure " ; the mild mother become rather saucy when she identify herself with her daughter . 

 to her husband Mrs. Gascoigne say , " I hear Mr. Grandcourt have get two place of his own , but he come to Diplow for the hunting . it be to be hop he will set a good example in the neighborhood . have you hear what sort of a young man he be , Henry ? " 

 Mr. Gascoigne have not hear ; at least , if his male acquaintance have gossip in his hearing , he be not disposed to repeat their gossip , or to give it any emphasis in his own mind . he hold it futile , even if it have be become , to show any curiosity as to the past of a young man whose birth , wealth , and consequent leisure make many habit venial which under other circumstance would have be inexcusable . whatever Grandcourt have do , he have not ruin himself ; and it be well - know that in gambling , for example , whether of the business or holiday sort , a man who have the strength of mind to leave off when he have only ruin other , be a reform character . this be an illustration merely : Mr. Gascoigne have not hear that Grandcourt have be a gambler ; and we can hardly pronounce he singular in feel that a land proprietor with a mixture of noble blood in his vein be not to be an object of suspicious inquiry like a reform character who offer himself as your butler or footman . Reformation , where a man can afford to do without it , can hardly be other than genuine . moreover , it be not certain on any other showing hitherto , that Mr. Grandcourt have need reformation more than other young man in the ripe youth of five - and - thirty ; and , at any rate , the significance of what he have be must be determine by what he actually be . 

 Mrs. Davilow , too , although she would not respond to her sister 's pregnant remark , could not be inwardly indifferent to an advent that might promise a brilliant lot for Gwendolen . a little speculation on " what may be " come naturally , without encouragement come inevitably in the form of image , when unknown person be mention ; and Mr. Grandcourt 's name raise in Mrs. Davilow 's mind first of all the picture of a handsome , accomplished , excellent young man whom she would be satisfied with as a husband for her daughter ; but then come the further speculation would Gwendolen be satisfied with he ? there be no knowing what would meet that girl 's taste or touch her affection it might be something else than excellence ; and thus the image of the perfect suitor give way before a fluctuating combination of quality that might be imagine to win Gwendolen 's heart . in the difficulty of arrive at the particular combination which would insure that result , the mother even say to herself , " it would not signify about she be in love , if she would only accept the right person . " for whatever marriage have be for herself , how could she the less desire it for her daughter ? the difference her own misfortune make be , that she never dare to dwell much to Gwendolen on the desirableness of marriage , dread an answer something like that of the future Madame Roland , when her gentle mother urge the acceptance of a suitor , say , " Tu seras heureuse , ma chere . " " Oui , maman , comme toi . " 

 in relation to the problematic Mr. Grandcourt least of all would Mrs. Davilow have willingly let fall a hint of the aerial castle - building which she have the good taste to be ashamed of ; for such a hint be likely enough to give an adverse poise to Gwendolen 's own thought , and make she det the desirable husband beforehand . since that scene after poor Rex 's farewell visit , the mother have feel a new sense of peril in touch the mystery of her child 's feeling , and in rashly determine what be her welfare : only she could think of welfare in no other shape than marriage . 

 the discussion of the dress that Gwendolen be to wear at the Archery Meeting be a relevant topic , however ; and when it have be decide that as a touch of color on her white cashmere , nothing , for her complexion , be comparable to pale green a feather which she be try in her hat before the look - glass have settle the question Mrs. Davilow feel her ear tingle when Gwendolen , suddenly throw herself into the attitude of draw her bow , say with a look of comic enjoyment 

 " how I pity all the other girl at the Archery Meeting all thinking of 
 Mr. Grandcourt ! and they have not a shadow of a chance . " 
 Mrs. Davilow have not the presence of mind to answer immediately , and 
 Gwendolen turn round quickly toward she , say , wickedly 
 " now you know they have not , mamma . you and my uncle and aunt you all intend he to fall in love with I . " 

 Mrs. Davilow , pique into a little stratagem , say , " oh , my , dear , that be not so certain . Miss Arrowpoint have charm which you have not . " 

 " I know , but they demand think . my arrow will pierce he before he have time for thought . he will declare himself my slave I shall send he round the world to bring I back the wedding ring of a happy woman in the meantime all the man who be between he and the title will die of different disease he will come back Lord Grandcourt but without the ring and fall at my foot . I shall laugh at he he will rise in resentment I shall laugh more he will call for his steed and ride to Quetcham , where he will find Miss Arrowpoint just marry to a needy musician , Mrs. Arrowpoint tear her cap off , and Mr. Arrowpoint stand by . exit Lord Grandcourt , who return to diplow , and , like M. Jabot , change de linge . " 

 be ever any young witch like this ? you think of hide thing from she sit upon your secret and look innocent , and all the while she know by the corner of your eye that it be exactly five pound ten you be sit on ! as well turn the key to keep out the damp ! it be probable that by dint of divination she already know more than any one else do of Mr. Grandcourt . that idea in Mrs. Davilow 's mind prompt the sort of question which often come without any other apparent reason than the faculty of speech and the not know what to do with it . 

 " why , what kind of a man do you imagine he to be , Gwendolen ? " 

 " let I see ! " say the witch , put her forefinger to her lip , with a little frown , and then stretch out the finger with decision . " short just above my shoulder cry to make himself tall by turn up his mustache and keep his beard long a glass in his right eye to give he an air of distinction a strong opinion about his waistcoat , but uncertain and trim about the weather , on which he will try to draw I out . he will stare at I all the while , and the glass in his eye will cause he to make horrible face , especially when he smile in a flattering way . I shall cast down my eye in consequence , and he will perceive that I be not indifferent to his attention . I shall dream that night that I be look at the extraordinary face of a magnify insect and the next morning he will make an offer of his hand ; the sequel as before . " 

 " that be a portrait of some one you have see already , Gwen . Mr. 
 Grandcourt may be a delightful young man for what you know . " 
 " oh , yes , " say Gwendolen , with a high note of careless admission , take off her good hat and turn it round on her hand contemplatively . " I wonder what sort of behavior a delightful young man would have ? I know he would have hunter and racer , and a London house and two country - house one with battlement and another with a veranda . and I feel sure that with a little murdering he might get a title . " 

 the irony of this speech be of the doubtful sort that have some genuine belief mix up with it . poor Mrs. Davilow feel uncomfortable under it . her own meaning be usually literal and in intention innocent ; and she say with a distressed brow : 

 " do not   talk in that way , child , for heaven 's sake ! you do read such book they give you such idea of everything . I declare when your aunt and I be your age we know nothing about wickedness . I think it be well so . " 

 " why do you not bring I up in that way , mamma ? " say Gwendolen . but immediately perceive in the crushed look and rise sob that she have give a deep wound , she toss down her hat and knelt at her mother 's foot cry 

 " Mamma , mamma ! I be only speak in fun . I mean nothing . " 

 " how could I , Gwendolen ? " say poor Mrs. Davilow , unable to hear the retraction , and sob violently while she make the effort to speak . " your will be always too strong for I if everything else have be different . " 

 this disjoin logic be intelligible enough to the daughter . " dear mamma , I do not   find fault with you I love you , " say Gwendolen , really compunctious . " how can you help what I be ? besides , I be very charming . Come , now . " here Gwendolen with her handkerchief gently rub away her mother 's tear . " really I be content with myself . I like myself well than I should have like my aunt and you . how dreadfully dull you must have be ! " 

 such tender cajolery serve to quiet the mother , as it have often do before after like collision . not that the collision have often be repeat at the same point ; for in the memory of both they leave an association of dread with the particular topic which have occasion they : Gwendolen dread the unpleasant sense of compunction toward her mother , which be the near approach to self - condemnation and self - distrust that she have know ; and Mrs. Davilow 's timid maternal conscience dread whatever have bring on the slight hint of reproach . hence , after this little scene , the two concur in exclude Mr. Grandcourt from their conversation . 

 when Mr. Gascoigne once or twice refer to he , Mrs. Davilow fear least Gwendolen should betray some of her alarming keen - sightedness about what be probably in her uncle 's mind ; but the fear be not justify . Gwendolen know certain difference in the character with which she be concern as bird know climate and weather ; and for the very reason that she be determined to evade her uncle 's control , she be determined not to clash with he . the good understanding between they be much foster by their enjoyment of archery together : Mr. Gascoigne , as one of the good bowman in Wessex , be gratified to find the element of like skill in his niece ; and Gwendolen be the more careful not to lose the shelter of his fatherly indulgence , because since the trouble with Rex both Mrs. Gascoigne and Anna have be unable to hide what she feel to be a very unreasonable alienation from she . toward Anna she take some pain to behave with a regretful affectionateness ; but neither of they dare to mention Rex 's name , and Anna , to whom the thought of he be part of the air she breathe , be ill at ease with the lively cousin who have ruin his happiness . she try dutifully to repress any sign of she change feeling ; but who in pain can imitate the glance and hand - touch of pleasure . 

 this unfair resentment have rather a harden effect on Gwendolen , and throw she into a more defiant temper . her uncle too might be offend if she refuse the next person who fall in love with she ; and one day when that idea be in her mind she say 

 " Mamma , I see now why girl be glad to be married to escape be expect to please everybody but themselves . " 

 happily , Mr. Middleton be go without have make any avowal ; and notwithstanding the admiration for the handsome Miss Harleth , extend perhaps over thirty square mile in a part of Wessex well stud with family whose number include several disengage young man , each glad to seat himself by the lively girl with whom it be so easy to get on in conversation , notwithstanding these ground for argue that Gwendolen be likely to have other suitor more explicit than the cautious curate , the fact be not so . 

 Care have be take not only that the tree should not sweep the star down , but also that every man who admire a fair girl should not be enamor of she , and even that every man who be enamored should not necessarily declare himself . there be various refined shape in which the price of corn , know to be potent cause in their relation , might , if inquire into , show why a young lady , perfect in person , accomplishment , and costume , have not the trouble of reject many offer ; and nature 's order be certainly benignant in not oblige we one and all to be desperately in love with the most admirable mortal we have ever see . Gwendolen , we know , be far from hold that supremacy in the mind of all observer . besides , it be but a poor eight month since she have come to Offendene , and some inclination become manifest slowly , like the sunward creeping of plant . 

 in face of this fact that not one of the eligible young man already in the neighborhood have make Gwendolen an offer , why should Mr. Grandcourt be think of as likely to do what they have leave undo ? 

 perhaps because he be think of as still more eligible ; since a great deal of what pass for likelihood in the world be simply the reflex of a wish . Mr. and Mrs. Arrowpoint , for example , have no anxiety that Miss Harleth should make a brilliant marriage , have quite a different likelihood in their mind . 

 CHAPTER X. 

  1st gent . what woman should be ? Sir , consult the taste 
  of marriageable man . this planet 's store 
  in iron , cotton , wool , or chemical 
  all matter render to our plastic skill , 
  be work in shape responsive to demand ; 
  the market 's pulse make index high or low , 
  by rule sublime . our daughter must be wife , 
  and to the wife must be what man will choose ; 
  Men 's taste be woman 's test . you mark the phrase ? 
  ' tis good , I think ? the sense well - wing and poise 
  with t 's and s 's . 
  2nd Gent . Nay , but turn it round ; 
  give we the test of taste . a fine menu 
  be it to - day what roman epicure 
  insist that a gentleman must eat 
  to earn the dignity of dining well ? 
 Brackenshaw Park , where the Archery Meeting be hold , look out from its gentle height far over the neighboring valley to the outlying eastern down and the broad , slow rise of cultivate country , hang like a vast curtain toward the west . the castle which stand on the high platform of the cluster hill , be build of rough - hewn limestone , full of light and shadow make by the dark dust of lichen and the washing of the rain . mass of beech and fir shelter it on the north , and spread down here and there along the green slope like flock seek the water which gleam below . the archery - ground be a carefully - keep enclosure on a bit of table - land at the farth end of the park , protect toward the southwest by tall elm and a thick screen of holly , which keep the gravel walk and the bit of newly - mow turf where the target be place in agreeable afternoon shade . the Archery Hall with an arcade in front show like a white temple against the greenery on the north side . 

 what could make a well background for the flower - group of lady , move and bow and turn their neck as it would become the leisurely lily to do if they take to locomotion . the sound too be very pleasant to hear , even when the military band from Wanchester cease to play : musical laugh in all the register and a harmony of happy , friendly speech , now rise toward mild excitement , now sink to an agreeable murmur . 

 no open - air amusement could be much free from those noisy , crowd condition which spoil most modern pleasure ; no Archery Meeting could be more select , the number of friend accompany the member be restrict by an award of ticket , so as to keep the maximum within the limit of convenience for the dinner and ball to be hold in the castle . within the enclosure no plebeian spectator be admit except Lord Brackenshaw 's tenant and their family , and of these it be chiefly the feminine member who use the privilege , bring their little boy and girl or young brother and sister . the male among they relieve the insipidity of the entertainment by imaginative betting , in which the stake be " anything you like , " on their favorite archer ; but the young maiden , have a different principle of discrimination , be consider which of those sweetly - dress lady they would choose to be , if the choice be allow they . probably the form these rural soul would most have strive for as a tabernacle , be some other than Gwendolen 's one with more pink in her cheek and hair of the most fashionable yellow ; but among the male judge in the rank immediately surround she there be unusual unanimity in pronounce she the fine girl present . 

 no wonder she enjoy her existence on that July day . Pre - eminence be sweet to those who love it , even under mediocre circumstance . perhaps it be not quite mythical that a slave have be proud to be buy first ; and probably a barn - door fowl on sale , though he may not have understand himself to be call the good of a bad lot , may have a self - inform consciousness of his relative importance , and strut console . but for complete enjoyment the outward and the inward must concur . and that concurrence be happen to Gwendolen . 

 who can deny that bow and arrow be among the prettiest weapon in the world for feminine form to play with ? they prompt attitude full of grace and power , where that fine concentration of energy see in all markmanship , be free from association of bloodshed . the time - honor british resource of " kill something " be no long carry on with bow and quiver ; band defend their pass against an invade nation fight under another sort of shade than a cloud of arrow ; and poison dart be harmless survival either in rhetoric or in region comfortably remote . archery have no ugly smell of brimstone ; break nobody 's shin , breed no athletic monster ; its only danger be that of failing , which for generous blood be enough to mould skilful action . and among the Brackenshaw archer the prize be all of the nobler symbolic kind ; not properly to be carry off in a parcel , degrade honor into gain ; but the gold arrow and the silver , the gold star and the silver , to be wear for a long time in sign of achievement and then transfer to the next who do excellently . these sign of pre - eminence have the virtue of wreath without their inconvenience , which might have produce a melancholy effect in the heat of the ball - room . altogether the Brackenshaw Archery Club be an institution frame with good taste , so as not to have by necessity any ridiculous incident . 

 and to - day all incalculable element be in its favor . there be mild warmth , and no wind to disturb either hair or drapery or the course of the arrow ; all skillful preparation have fair play , and when there be a general march to extract the arrow , the promenade of joyous young creature in light speech and laughter , the graceful movement in common toward a common object , be a show worth look at . here Gwendolen seem a calypso among her nymph . it be in her attitude and movement that every one be oblige to admit her surpass charm . 

 " that girl be like a high - mettle racer , " say Lord Brackenshaw to young Clintock , one of the invite spectator . 

 " first chop ! tremendously pretty too , " say the elegant Grecian , who have be pay her assiduous attention ; " I never see she look well . " 

 perhaps she have never look so well . her face be beam with young pleasure in which there be no malign ray of discontent ; for be satisfied with her own chance , she feel kindly toward everybody and be satisfied with the universe . not to have the high distinction in rank , not to be mark out as an heiress , like Miss Arrowpoint , give an add triumph in eclipse those advantage . for personal recommendation she would not have care to change the family group accompany she for any other : her mamma 's appearance would have suit an amiable duchess ; her uncle and aunt Gascoigne with Anna make equally gratifying figure in their way ; and Gwendolen be too full of joyous belief in herself to feel in the least jealous though Miss Arrowpoint be one of the good archeresse . 

 even the reappearance of the formidable Herr Klesmer , which cause some surprise in the rest of the company , seem only to fall in with Gwendolen 's inclination to be amuse . Short of Apollo himself , what great musical maestro could make a good figure at an archery meeting ? there be a very satirical light in Gwendolen 's eye as she look toward the Arrowpoint party on their first entrance , when the contrast between Klesmer and the average group of english country people seem at its utmost intensity in the close neighborhood of his host or patron , as Mrs. Arrowpoint would have like to hear they call , that she might deny the possibility of any long patronize genius , its royalty be universally acknowledge . the contrast might have amuse a graver personage than Gwendolen . we English be a miscellaneous people , and any chance fifty of we will present many variety of animal architecture or facial ornament ; but it must be admit that our prevail expression be not that of a lively , impassioned race , preoccupy with the ideal and carry the real as a mere make - weight . the strong point of the english gentleman pure be the easy style of his figure and clothing ; he object to mark in and out in his costume , and he also object to look inspire . 

 Fancy an assemblage where the man have all that ordinary stamp of the well - breed Englishman , watch the entrance of Herr Klesmer his mane of hair float backward in massive inconsistency with the chimney - pot hat , which have the look of have be put on for a joke above his pronounced but well - model feature and powerful clear - shaven mouth and chin ; his tall , thin figure clothe in a way which , not be strictly english , be all the bad for its apparent emphasis of intention . drape in a loose garment with a florentine berretta on his head , he would have be fit to stand by the side of Leonardo de Vinci ; but how when he present himself in trouser which be not what english feeling demand about the knee ? and when the fire that show itself in his glance and the movement of his head , as he look round he with curiosity , be turn into comedy by a hat which rule that mankind should have well - crop hair and a staid demeanor , such , for example , as Mr. Arrowsmith 's , whose nullity of face and perfect tailoring might pass everywhere without ridicule ? one feel why it be often well for greatness to be dead , and to have get rid of the outward man . 

 many present know Klesmer , or know of he ; but they have only see he on candle - light occasion when he appear simply as a musician , and he have not yet that supreme , world - wide celebrity which make an artist great to the most ordinary people by their knowledge of his great expensiveness . it be literally a new light for they to see he in present unexpectedly on this July afternoon in an exclusive society : some be inclined to laugh , other feel a little disgust at the want of judgment show by the arrowpoint in this use of an introductory card . 

 " what extreme guy those artistic fellow usually be ? " say young Clintock to Gwendolen . " do look at the figure he cut , bow with his hand on his heart to Lady Brackenshaw and Mrs. Arrowpoint 's feather just reach his shoulder . " 

 " you be one of the profane , " say Gwendolen . " you be blind to the majesty of genius . Herr Klesmer smite I with awe ; I feel crushed in his presence ; my courage all ooze from I . " 

 " ah , you understand all about his music . " 

 " no , indeed , " say Gwendolen , with a light laugh ; " it be he who understand all about mine and think it pitiable . " Klesmer 's verdict on her singing have be an easy joke to she since he have be strike by her plastik . 

 " it be not address to the ear of the future , I suppose . I be glad of that : it suit mine . " 

 " oh , you be very kind . but how remarkably well Miss Arrowpoint look to - day ! she would make quite a fine picture in that gold - color dress . " 

 " too splendid , do not   you think ? " 

 " well , perhaps a little too symbolical too much like the figure of 
 Wealth in an allegory . " 
 this speech of Gwendolen 's have rather a malicious sound , but it be not really more than a bubble of fun . she do not wish Miss Arrowpoint or any one else to be out of the way , believe in her own good fortune even more than in her skill . the belief in both naturally grow strong as the shooting go on , for she promise to achieve one of the good score a success which astonish every one in a new member ; and to Gwendolen 's temperament one success determine another . she trod on air , and all thing pleasant seem possible . the hour be enough for she , and she be not oblige to think what she should do next to keep her life at the due pitch . 

 " how do the scoring stand , I wonder ? " say Lady Brackenshaw , a gracious personage who , adorn with two little girl and a boy of stout make , sit as lady paramount . her lord have come up to she in one of the interval of shooting . " it seem to I that Miss Harleth be likely to win the gold arrow . " 

 " Gad , I think she will , if she carry it on ! she be run Juliet Fenn hard . it be wonderful for one in her first year . Catherine be not up to her usual mark , " continue his lordship , turn to the heiress 's mother who sit near . " but she get the gold arrow last time . and there be a luck even in these game of skill . that be well . it give the hinder one a chance . " 

 " Catherine will be very glad for other to win , " say Mrs. Arrowpoint , ' she be so magnanimous . it be entirely her considerateness that make we bring Herr Klesmer instead of Canon Stopley , who have express a wish to come . for her own pleasure , I be sure she would rather have bring the Canon ; but she be always think of other . I tell she it be not quite en regle to bring one so far out of our own set ; but she say , ' Genius itself be not en regle ; it come into the world to make new rule . ' and one must admit that . " 

 " ay , to be sure , " say Lord Brackenshaw , in a tone of careless dismissal , add quickly , " for my part , I be not magnanimous ; I should like to win . but , confound it ! I never have the chance now . I be get old and idle . the young one beat I . as old Nestor say the god do not   give we everything at one time : I be a young fellow once , and now I be get an old and wise one . Old , at any rate ; which be a gift that come to everybody if they live long enough , so it raise no jealousy . " the Earl smile comfortably at his wife . 

 " oh , my lord , people who have be neighbor twenty year must not talk to each other about age , " say Mrs. Arrowpoint . " year , as the Tuscans say , be make for the letting of house . but where be our new neighbor ? I think Mr. Grandcourt be to be here to - day . " 

 " ah , by the way , so he be . the time 's get on too , " say his lordship , look at his watch . " but he only get to diplow the other day . he come to we on Tuesday and say he have be a little bother . he may have be pull in another direction . why , Gascoigne ! " the rector be just then cross at a little distance with Gwendolen on his arm , and turn in compliance with the call " this be a little too bad ; you not only beat we yourself , but you bring up your niece to beat all the archeresse . " 

 " it be rather scandalous in she to get the well of eld member , " say Mr. Gascoigne , with much inward satisfaction curl his short upper lip . " but it be not my doing , my lord . I only mean she to make a tolerable figure , without surpass any one . " 

 " it be not my fault , either , " say Gwendolen , with pretty archness . " if 
 I be to aim , I can not   help hit . " 
 " ay , ay , that may be a fatal business for some people , " say Lord Brackenshaw , good - humoredly ; then take out his watch and look at Mrs. Arrowpoint again " the time 's get on , as you say . but Grandcourt be always late . I notice in town he be always late , and he be no bowman understand nothing about it . but I tell he he must come ; he would see the flower of the neighborhood here . he ask about you have see Arrowpoint 's card . I think you have not make his acquaintance in town . he have be a good deal abroad . People do not   know he much . " 

 " no ; we be stranger , " say Mrs. Arrowpoint . " but that be not what might have be expect . for his uncle Sir Hugo Mallinger and I be great friend when we meet . " 

 " I do not   know ; uncle and nephew be not so likely to be see together as uncle and niece , " say his lordship , smile toward the rector . " but just come with I one instant , Gascoigne , will you ? I want to speak a word about the clout - shooting . " 

 Gwendolen choose to go too and be deposit in the same group with her mamma and aunt until she have to shoot again . that Mr. Grandcourt might after all not appear on the archery - ground , have begin to enter into Gwendolen 's thought as a possible deduction from the completeness of her pleasure . under all her saucy satire , provoke chiefly by her divination that her friend think of he as a desirable match for she , she feel something very far from indifference as to the impression she would make on he . true , he be not to have the slight power over she   for Gwendolen have not consider that the desire to conquer be itself a sort of subjection ; she have make up her mind that he be to be one of those complimentary and assiduously admire man of whom even her narrow experience have show she several with various - colored beard and various style of bearing ; and the sense that her friend would want she to think he delightful , give she a resistant inclination to presuppose he ridiculous . but that be no reason why she could spare his presence : and even a pass prevision of trouble in case she despise and refuse he , raise not the shadow of a wish that he should save she that trouble by show no disposition to make she an offer . Mr. Grandcourt take hardly any notice of she , and become shortly engaged to Miss Arrowpoint , be not a picture which flatter her imagination . 

 hence Gwendolen have be all ear to Lord Brackenshaw 's mode of account for Grandcourt 's non - appearance ; and when he do arrive , no consciousness not even Mrs. Arrowpoint 's or Mr. Gascoigne 's be more awake to the fact than her , although she steadily avoid look toward any point where he be likely to be . there should be no slight shifting of angle to betray that it be of any consequence to she whether the much - talk - of Mr. Mallinger Grandcourt present himself or not . she become again absorb in the shooting , and so resolutely abstain from look round observantly that , even suppose he to have take a conspicuous place among the spectator , it might be clear she be not aware of he . and all the while the certainty that he be there make a distinct thread in her consciousness . perhaps her shooting be the well for it : at any rate , it gain in precision , and she at last raise a delightful storm of clapping and applause by three hit run in the gold a feat which among the Brackenshaw archer have not the vulgar reward of a shill poll - tax , but that of a special gold star to be wear on the breast . that moment be not only a happy one to herself it be just what her mamma and her uncle would have choose for she . there be a general fall into rank to give her space that she might advance conspicuously to receive the gold star from the hand of Lady Brackenshaw ; and the perfect movement of her fine form be certainly a pleasant thing to behold in the clear afternoon light when the shadow be long and still . she be the central object of that pretty picture , and every one present must gaze at she . that be enough : she herself be determined to see nobody in particular , or to turn her eye any way except toward Lady Brackenshaw , but her thought undeniably turn in other way . it enter a little into her pleasure that Herr Klesmer must be observe she at a moment when music be out of the question , and his superiority very far in the back - ground ; for vanity be as ill at ease under indifference as tenderness be under a love which it can not return ; and the unconquered Klesmer throw a trace of his malign power even across her pleasant consciousness that Mr. Grandcourt be see she to the utmost advantage , and be probably give she an admiration unmixe with criticism . she do not expect to admire he , but that be not necessary to her peace of mind . 

 Gwendolen meet Lady Brackenshaw 's gracious smile without blush   which only come to she when she be take by surprise , but with a charming gladness of expression , and then bent with easy grace to have the star fix near her shoulder . that little ceremony have be over long enough for she to have exchange playful speech and receive congratulation as she move among the group who be now interesting themselves in the result of the scoring ; but it happen that she stand outside examine the point of an arrow with rather an absent air when Lord Brackenshaw come up to she and say : 

 " Miss Harleth , here be a gentleman who be not willing to wait any long for an introduction . he have be get Mrs. Davilow to send I with he . will you allow I to introduce Mr. Mallinger Grandcourt ? " 

 BOOK II meeting STREAMS . 

 CHAPTER XI . 

 the beginning of an acquaintance whether with person or thing be to get a definite outline for our ignorance . 

 Mr. Grandcourt 's wish to be introduce have no suddenness for Gwendolen ; but when Lord Brackenshaw move aside a little for the prefigure stranger to come forward and she feel herself face to face with the real man , there be a little shock which flush her cheek and vexatiously deepen with her consciousness of it . the shock come from the reversal of her expectation : Grandcourt could hardly have be more unlike all her imaginary portrait of he . he be slightly tall than herself , and their eye seem to be on a level ; there be not the faint smile on his face as he look at she , not a trace of self - consciousness or anxiety in his bearing : when he raise his hat he show an extensive baldness surround with a mere fringe of reddish - blonde hair , but he also show a perfect hand ; the line of feature from brow to chin undisguise by beard be decidedly handsome , with only moderate departure from the perpendicular , and the slight whisker too be perpendicular . it be not possible for a human aspect to be free from grimace or solicitous wriggling : also it be perhaps not possible for a breathing man wide awake to look less animate . the correct Englishman , draw himself up from his bow into rigidity , assent severely , and seem to be in a state of internal drill , suggest a suppress vivacity , and may be suspect of let go with some violence when he be release from parade ; but Grandcourt 's bearing have no rigidity , it incline rather to the flaccid . his complexion have a fade fairness resemble that of an actress when bare of the artificial white and red ; his long narrow gray eye express nothing but indifference . attempt at description be stupid : who can all at once describe a human being ? even when he be present to we we only begin that knowledge of his appearance which must be complete by innumerable impression under differ circumstance . we recognize the alphabet ; we be not sure of the language . I be only mention the point that Gwendolen see by the light of a prepared contrast in the first minute of her meeting with Grandcourt : they be sum up in the word , " he be not ridiculous . " but forthwith Lord Brackenshaw be go , and what be call conversation have begin , the first and constant element in it be that Grandcourt look at Gwendolen persistently with a slightly explore gaze , but without change of expression , while she only occasionally look at he with a flash of observation a little soften by coquetry . also , after her answer there be a long or short pause before he speak again . 

 " I use to think archery be a great bore , " Grandcourt begin . he speak with a fine accent , but with a certain break drawl , as of a distinguished personage with a distinguished cold on his chest . 

 " be you convert to - day ? " say Gwendolen . 

  Pause , during which she imagine various degree and mode of opinion about herself that might be entertain by Grandcourt . 

 " yes , since I see you shoot . in thing of this sort one generally see people miss and simpering . " 

 " I suppose you be a first - rate shot with a rifle . " 

  Pause , during which Gwendolen , have take a rapid observation of Grandcourt , make a brief graphic description of he to an indefinite hearer . 

 " I have leave off shooting . " 

 " oh then you be a formidable person . People who have do thing once and leave they off make one feel very contemptible , as if one be use cast - off fashion . I hope you have not leave off all folly , because I practice a great many . " 

  Pause , during which Gwendolen make several interpretation of her own speech . 

 " what do you call folly ? " 

 " well , in general I think , whatever be agreeable be call a folly . but you have not leave off hunting , I hear . " 

  Pause , wherein Gwendolen recall what she have hear about Grandcourt 's position , and decide that he be the most aristocratic - look man she have ever see . 

 " one must do something . " 

 " and do you care about the turf ? or be that among the thing you have leave off ? " 

  Pause , during which Gwendolen think that a man of extremely calm , cold manner might be less disagreeable as a husband than other man , and not likely to interfere with his wife 's preference . 

 " I run a horse now and then ; but I do not   go in for the thing as some man do . be you fond of horse ? " 

 " yes , indeed : I never like my life so well as when I be on horseback , have a great gallop . I think of nothing . I only feel myself strong and happy . " 

  Pause , wherein Gwendolen wonder whether Grandcourt would like what she say , but assure herself that she be not go to disguise her taste . 

 " do you like danger ? " 

 " I do not   know . when I be on horseback I never think of danger . it seem to I that if I break my bone I should not feel it . I should go at anything that come in my way . " 

  pause during which Gwendolen have run through a whole hunting season with two choose hunter to ride at will . 

 " you would perhaps like tiger - hunting or pig - sticking . I see some of that for a season or two in the East . everything here be poor stuff after that . " 

 " you be fond of danger , then ? " 

  Pause , wherein Gwendolen speculate on the probability that the man of cold manner be the most adventurous , and feel the strength of her own insight , suppose the question have to be decide . 

 " one must have something or other . but one get use to it . " 

 " I begin to think I be very fortunate , because everything be new to I : it be only that I can not   get enough of it . I be not use to anything except be dull , which I should like to leave off as you have leave off shooting . " 

  Pause , during which it occur to Gwendolen that a man of cold and distinguished manner might possibly be a dull companion ; but on the other hand she think that most person be dull , that she have not observe husband to be companion and that after all she be not go to accept Grandcourt . 

 " why be you dull ? " 

 " this be a dreadful neighborhood . there be nothing to be do in it . 
 that be why I practice my archery . " 
  Pause , during which Gwendolen reflect that the life of an unmarried woman who could not go about and have no command of anything must necessarily be dull through all degree of comparison as time go on . 

 " you have make yourself queen of it . I imagine you will carry the first prize . " 

 " I do not   know that . I have great rival . do you not observe how well 
 Miss Arrowpoint shoot ? " 
  Pause , wherein Gwendolen be think that man have be know to choose some one else than the woman they most admire , and recall several experience of that kind in novel . 

 " Miss Arrowpoint . no that be , yes . " 

 " shall we go now and hear what the scoring say ? every one be go to the other end now shall we join they ? I think my uncle be look toward I . he perhaps want I . " 

 Gwendolen find a relief for herself by thus change the situation : not that the tete - a - tete be quite disagreeable to she ; but while it last she apparently could not get rid of the unwonted flush in her cheek and the sense of surprise which make she feel less mistress of herself than usual . and this Mr. Grandcourt , who seem to feel his own importance more than he do hers a sort of unreasonableness few of we can tolerate must not take for grant that he be of great moment to she , or that because other speculate on he as a desirable match she hold herself altogether at his beck . how Grandcourt have fill up the pause will be more evident hereafter . 

 " you have just miss the gold arrow , Gwendolen , " say Mr. Gascoigne . 
 " Miss Juliet Fenn score eight above you . " 
 " I be very glad to hear it . I should have feel that I be make myself too disagreeable take the good of everything , " say Gwendolen , quite easily . 

 it be impossible to be jealous of Juliet Fenn , a girl as middling as mid - day market in everything but her archery and plainness , in which last she be noticeable like her father : underhung and with recede brow resemble that of the more intelligent fish .   surely , consider the importance which be give to such an accident in female offspring , marriageable man , or what the new English call " intend bridegroom , " should look at themselves dispassionately in the glass , since their natural selection of a mate pretty than themselves be not certain to bar the effect of their own ugliness . 

 there be now a lively movement in the mingle group , which carry the talk along with it . every one speak to every one else by turn , and Gwendolen , who choose to see what be go on around she now , observe that Grandcourt be have Klesmer present to he by some one unknown to she a middle - aged man , with dark , full face and fat hand , who seem to be on the easy term with both , and presently lead the way in join the arrowpoint , whose acquaintance have already be make by both he and Grandcourt . who this stranger be she do not care much to know ; but she wish to observe what be Grandcourt 's manner toward other than herself . precisely the same : except that he do not look much at Miss Arrowpoint , but rather at Klesmer , who be speak with animation now stretch out his long finger horizontally , now point downward with his fore - finger , now fold his arm and toss his mane , while he address himself first to one and then to the other , include Grandcourt , who listen with an impassive face and narrow eye , his left fore - finger in his waistcoat - pocket , and his right slightly touch his thin whisker . 

 " I wonder which style Miss Arrowpoint admire most , " be a thought that glance through Gwendolen 's mind , while her eye and lip gather rather a mocking expression . but she would not indulge her sense of amusement by watch , as if she be curious , and she give all her animation to those immediately around she , determine not to care whether Mr. Grandcourt come near she again or not . 

 he do not come , however , and at a moment when he could propose to conduct Mrs. Davilow to her carriage , " shall we meet again in the ball - room ? " she say as he raise his hat at parting . the " yes " in reply have the usual slight drawl and perfect gravity . 

 " you be wrong for once Gwendolen , " say Mrs. Davilow , during their few minute ' drive to the castle . 

 " in what , mamma ? " 

 " about Mr. Grandcourt 's appearance and manner . you can not   find anything ridiculous in he . " 

 " I suppose I could if I try , but I do not   want to do it , " say 
 Gwendolen , rather pettishly ; and her mother be afraid to say more . 
 it be the rule on these occasion for the lady and gentleman to dine apart , so that the dinner might make a time of comparative ease and rest for both . indeed , the gentleman have a set of archery story about the epicurism of the lady , who have somehow be report to show a revolt masculine judgment in venison , even ask for the fat a proof of the frightful rate at which corruption might go on in woman , but for severe social restraint , and every year the amiable Lord Brackenshaw , who be something of a gourmet , mention Byron 's opinion that a woman should never be see eat , introduce it with a confidential " the fact be " as if he be for the first time admit his concurrence in that sentiment of the refined poet . 

 in the lady ' dining - room it be evident that Gwendolen be not a general favorite with her own sex : there be no beginning of intimacy between she and other girl , and in conversation they rather notice what she say than speak to she in free exchange . perhaps it be that she be not much interested in they , and when leave alone in their company have a sense of empty bench . Mrs. Vulcany once remark that Miss Harleth be too fond of the gentleman ; but we know that she be not in the least fond of they she be only fond of their homage and woman do not give her homage . the exception to this willing aloofness from she be Miss Arrowpoint , who often manage unostentatiously to be by her side , and talk to she with quiet friendliness . 

 " she know , as I do , that our friend be ready to quarrel over a husband for we , " think Gwendolen , " and she be determined not to enter into the quarrel . " 

 " I think Miss Arrowpoint have the good manner I ever see , " say Mrs. 
 Davilow , when she and Gwendolen be in a dressing - room with Mrs. 
 Gascoigne and Anna , but at a distance where they could have their talk 
 apart . 
 " I wish I be like she , " say Gwendolen . 

 " why ? be you get discontent with yourself , Gwen ? " 

 " no ; but I be discontent with thing . she seem content . " 

 " I be sure you ought to be satisfied to - day . you must have enjoy the shooting . I see you do . " 

 " oh , that be over now , and I do not   know what will come next , " say Gwendolen , stretch herself with a sort of moan and throw up her arm . they be bare now ; it be the fashion to dance in the archery dress , throw off the jacket ; and the simplicity of her white cashmere with its border of pale green set off her form to the utmost . a thin line of gold round her neck , and the gold star on her breast , be her only ornament . her smooth soft hair pile up into a grand crown make a clear line about her brow . Sir Joshua would have be glad to take her portrait ; and he would have have an easy task than the historian at least in this , that he would not have have to represent the truth of change only to give stability to one beautiful moment . 

 " the dancing will come next , " say Mrs. Davilow " you be sure to enjoy that . " 

 " I shall only dance in the quadrille . I tell Mr. Clintock so . I shall not waltz or polk with any one . " 

 " why in the world do you say that all on a sudden ? " 

 " I can not   bear have ugly people so near I . " 

 " whom do you mean by ugly people ? " 

 " oh , plenty . " 

 " Mr. Clintock , for example , be not ugly . " Mrs. Davilow dare not mention Grandcourt . 

 " well , I hate woolen cloth touch I . " 

 " Fancy ! " say Mrs. Davilow to her sister who now come up from the other end of the room . " Gwendolen say she will not waltz or polk . " 

 " she be rather give to whim , I think , " say Mrs. Gascoigne , gravely . " it would be more become in she to behave as other young lady do on such an occasion as this ; especially when she have have the advantage of first - rate dancing lesson . " 

 " why should I dance if I do not   like it , aunt ? it be not in the catechism . " 

 " my dear ! " say Mrs. Gascoigne , in a tone of severe check , and Anna look frightened at Gwendolen 's daring . but they all pass on without say any more . 

 apparently something have change Gwendolen 's mood since the hour of exulting enjoyment in the archery - ground . but she do not look the bad under the chandelier in the ball - room , where the soft splendor of the scene and the pleasant odor from the conservatory could not but be soothe to the temper , when accompany with the consciousness of be preeminently seek for . hardly a dancing man but be anxious to have she for a partner , and each whom she accept be in a state of melancholy remonstrance that she would not waltz or polk . 

 " be you under a vow , Miss Harleth ? " " why be you so cruel to we all ? " " you waltz with I in February . " " and you who waltz so perfectly ! " be exclamation not without piquancy for she . the lady who waltz naturally think that Miss Harleth only want to make herself particular ; but her uncle when he overhear her refusal support she by say 

 " Gwendolen have usually good reason . " he think she be certainly more distinguished in not waltzing , and he wish she to be distinguish . the archery ball be intend to be keep at the subdue pitch that suit all dignity clerical and secular ; it be not an escapement for youthful high spirit , and he himself be of opinion that the fashionable dance be too much of a romp . 

 among the remonstrant dancing man , however , Mr. Grandcourt be not number . after stand up for a quadrille with Miss Arrowpoint , it seem that he mean to ask for no other partner . Gwendolen observe he frequently with the arrowpoint , but he never take an opportunity of approach she . Mr. Gascoigne be sometimes speak to he ; but Mr. Gascoigne be everywhere . it be in her mind now that she would probably after all not have the least trouble about he : perhaps he have look at she without any particular admiration , and be too much use to everything in the world to think of she as more than one of the girl who be invite in that part of the country . of course ! it be ridiculous of elder to entertain notion about what a man would do , without have see he even through a telescope . probably he mean to marry Miss Arrowpoint . whatever might come , she , Gwendolen , be not go to be disappoint : the affair be a joke whichever way it turn , for she have never commit herself even by a silent confidence in anything Mr. Grandcourt would do . still , she notice that he do sometimes quietly and gradually change his position accord to her , so that he could see she whenever she be dance , and if he do not admire she so much the bad for he . 

 this movement for the sake of be in sight of she be more direct than usual rather late in the evening , when Gwendolen have accept Klesmer as a partner ; and that wide - glance personage , who see everything and nothing by turn , say to she when they be walk , " Mr. Grandcourt be a man of taste . he like to see you dance . " 

 " perhaps he like to look at what be against his taste , " say Gwendolen , with a light laugh ; she be quite courageous with Klesmer now . " he may be so tired of admire that he like disgust for variety . " 

 " those word be not suitable to your lip , " say Klesmer , quickly , with one of his grand frown , while he shake his hand as if to banish the discordant sound . 

 " be you as critical of word as of music ? " 

 " certainly I be . I should require your word to be what your face and form be always among the meaning of a noble music . " 

 " that be a compliment as well as a correction . I be oblige for both . but do you know I be bold enough to wish to correct you , and require you to understand a joke ? " 

 " one may understand joke without like they , " say the terrible Klesmer . " I have have opera book send I full of joke ; it be just because I understand they that I do not like they . the comic people be ready to challenge a man because he look grave . ' you do not   see the witticism , sir ? ' ' no , sir , but I see what you mean . ' then I be what we call ticket as a fellow without esprit . but , in fact , " say Klesmer , suddenly drop from his quick narrative to a reflective tone , with an impressive frown , " I be very sensible to wit and humor . " 

 " I be glad you tell I that , " say Gwendolen , not without some wickedness of intention . but Klesmer 's thought have fly off on the wing of his own statement , as their habit be , and she have the wickedness all to herself . " pray , who be that stand near the card - room door ? " she go on , see there the same stranger with whom Klesmer have be in animate talk on the archery ground . " he be a friend of your , I think . " 

 " no , no ; an amateur I have see in town ; Lush , a Mr. Lush too fond of 
 Meyerbeer and Scribe too fond of the mechanical - dramatic . " 
 " thank . I want to know whether you think his face and form require that his word should be among the meaning of noble music ? " Klesmer be conquer , and flash at she a delightful smile which make they quite friendly until she beg to be deposit by the side of her mamma . 

 three minute afterward her preparation for Grandcourt 's indifference be all cancel . turn her head after some remark to her mother , she find that he have make his way up to she . 

 " may I ask if you be tired of dancing , Miss Harleth ? " he begin , look down with his former unperturbed expression . 

 " not in the least . " 

 " will you do I the honor the next or another quadrille ? " 

 " I should have be very happy , " say Gwendolen look at her card , " but I be engage for the next to Mr. Clintock and indeed I perceive that I be doom for every quadrille ; I have not one to dispose of . " she be not sorry to punish Mr. Grandcourt 's tardiness , yet at the same time she would have like to dance with he . she give he a charming smile as she look up to deliver her answer , and he stand still look down at she with no smile at all . 

 " I be unfortunate in be too late , " he say , after a moment 's pause . 

 " it seem to I that you do not care for dancing , " say Gwendolen . " I think it might be one of the thing you have leave off . " 

 " yes , but I have not begin to dance with you , " say Grandcourt . always there be the same pause before he take up his cue . " you make dance a new thing , as you make archery . " 

 " be novelty always agreeable ? " 

 " no , no not always . " 

 " then I do not   know whether to feel flattered or not . when you have once dance with I there would be no more novelty in it . " 

 " on the contrary , there would probably be much more . " 

 " that be deep . I do not   understand . " 

 " it be difficult to make Miss Harleth understand her power ? " here Grandcourt have turn to Mrs. Davilow , who , smile gently at her daughter , say 

 " I think she do not generally strike people as slow to understand . " 

 " Mamma , " say Gwendolen , in a deprecating tone , " I be adorably stupid , and want everything explain to I when the meaning be pleasant . " 

 " if you be stupid , I admit that stupidity be adorable , " return Grandcourt , after the usual pause , and without change of tone . but clearly he know what to say . 

 " I begin to think that my cavalier have forget I , " Gwendolen observe after a little while . " I see the quadrille be be form . " 

 " he deserve to be renounce , " say Grandcourt . 

 " I think he be very pardonable , " say Gwendolen . 

 " there must have be some misunderstanding , " say Mrs. Davilow . " Mr. 
 Clintock be too anxious about the engagement to have forget it . " 
 but now Lady Brackenshaw come up and say , " Miss Harleth , Mr. Clintock have charge I to express to you his deep regret that he be oblige to leave without have the pleasure of dance with you again . an express come from his father , the archdeacon ; something important ; he be to go . he be au dťsespoir . " 

 " oh , he be very good to remember the engagement under the circumstance , " say Gwendolen . " I be sorry he be call away . " it be easy to be politely sorrowful on so felicitous an occasion . 

 " then I can profit by Mr. Clintock 's misfortune ? " say Grandcourt . " May 
 I hope that you will let I take his place ? " 
 " I shall be very happy to dance the next quadrille with you . " 

 the appropriateness of the event seem an augury , and as Gwendolen stand up for the quadrille with Grandcourt , there be a revival in she of the exultation the sense of carry everything before she , which she have feel early in the day . no man could have walk through the quadrille with more irreproachable ease than Grandcourt ; and the absence of all eagerness in his attention to she suit his partner 's taste . she be now convinced that he mean to distinguish she , to mark his admiration of she in a noticeable way ; and it begin to appear probable that she would have it in her power to reject he , whence there be a pleasure in reckon up the advantage which would make her rejection splendid , and in give Mr. Grandcourt his utmost value . it be also agreeable to divine that this exclusive selection of she to dance with , from among all the unmarried lady present , would attract observation ; though she studiously avoid see this , and at the end of the quadrille walk away on Grandcourt 's arm as if she have be one of the short sight instead of the long and widest sighted of mortal . they encounter Miss Arrowpoint , who be stand with Lady Brackenshaw and a group of gentleman . the heiress look at Gwendolen invitingly and say , " I hope you will vote with we , Miss Harleth , and Mr. Grandcourt too , though he be not an archer . " Gwendolen and Grandcourt pause to join the group , and find that the voting turn on the project of a picnic archery meeting to be hold in Cardell Chase , where the evening entertainment would be more poetic than a ball under , chandelier a feast of sunset light along the glade and through the branch and over the solemn tree - top . 

 Gwendolen think the scheme delightful equal to play Robin Hood and Maid Marian : and Mr. Grandcourt , when appeal to a second time , say it be a thing to be do ; whereupon Mr. Lush , who stand behind Lady Brackenshaw 's elbow , draw Gwendolen 's notice by say with a familiar look and tone to Grandcourt , " diplow would be a good place for the meeting , and more convenient : there be a fine bit between the oak toward the north gate . " 

 impossible to look more unconscious of be address than Grandcourt ; but Gwendolen take a new survey of the speaker , decide , first , that he must be on term of intimacy with the tenant of Diplow , and , secondly , that she would never , if she could help it , let he come within a yard of she . she be subject to physical antipathy , and Mr. Lush 's prominent eye , fat though not clumsy figure , and strong black gray - besprinkle hair of frizzy thickness , which , with the rest of his prosperous person , be enviable to many , create one of the strong of her antipathy . to be safe from his look at she , she murmur to Grandcourt , " I should like to continue walk . " 

 he obey immediately ; but when they be thus away from any audience , he speak no word for several minute , and she , out of a half - amuse , half - serious inclination for experiment , would not speak first . they turn into the large conservatory , beautifully light up with chinese lamp . the other couple there be at a distance which would not have interfere with any dialogue , but still they walk in silence until they have reach the farth end where there be a flush of pink light , and the second wide opening into the ball - room . Grandcourt , when they have half turn round , pause and say languidly 

 " do you like this kind of thing ? " 

 if the situation have be describe to Gwendolen half an hour before , she would have laugh heartily at it , and could only have imagine herself return a playful , satirical answer . but for some mysterious reason it be a mystery of which she have a faint wondering consciousness she dare not be satirical : she have begin to feel a wand over she that make she afraid of offend Grandcourt . 

 " yes , " she say , quietly , without consider what " kind of thing " be mean whether the flower , the scent , the ball in general , or this episode of walk with Mr. Grandcourt in particular . and they return along the conservatory without farther interpretation . she then propose to go and sit down in her old place , and they walk among scatter couple prepare for the waltz to the spot where Mrs. Davilow have be seat all the evening . as they approach it her seat be vacant , but she be come toward it again , and , to Gwendolen 's shudder annoyance , with Mr. Lush at her elbow . there be no avoid the confrontation : her mamma come close to she before they have reach the seat , and , after a quiet greeting smile , say innocently , " Gwendolen , dear , let I present Mr. Lush to you . " have just make the acquaintance of this personage , as an intimate and constant companion of Mr. Grandcourt 's , Mrs. Davilow imagine it altogether desirable that her daughter also should make the acquaintance . 

 it be hardly a bow that Gwendolen give rather , it be the slight forward sweep of the head away from the physiognomy that incline itself toward she , and she immediately move toward her seat , say , " I want to put on my burnous . " no soon have she reach it , than Mr. Lush be there , and have the burnous in his hand : to annoy this supercilious young lady , he would incur the offense of forestall Grandcourt ; and , hold up the garment close to Gwendolen , he say , " pray , permit I ? " but she , wheel away from he as if he have be a muddy hound , glide on to the ottoman , say , " no , thank you . " 

 a man who forgave this would have much christian feeling , suppose he have intend to be agreeable to the young lady ; but before he seize the burnous Mr. Lush have cease to have that intention . Grandcourt quietly take the drapery from he , and Mr. Lush , with a slight bow , move away . " you have perhaps well put it on , " say Mr. Grandcourt , look down on she without change of expression . 

 " thank ; perhaps it would be wise , " say Gwendolen , rise , and submit very gracefully to take the burnous on her shoulder . 

 after that , Mr. Grandcourt exchange a few polite speech with Mrs. Davilow , and , in take leave , ask permission to call at Offendene the next day . he be evidently not offend by the insult direct toward his friend . certainly Gwendolen 's refusal of the burnous from Mr. Lush be open to the interpretation that she wish to receive it from Mr. Grandcourt . but she , poor child , have no design in this action , and be simply follow her antipathy and inclination , confide in they as she do in the more reflective judgment into which they enter as sap into leafage . Gwendolen have no sense that these man be dark enigma to she , or that she need any help in draw conclusion about they Mr. Grandcourt at least . the chief question be , how far his character and way might answer her wish ; and unless she be satisfied about that , she have say to herself that she would not accept his offer . 

 could there be a slenderer , more insignificant thread in human history than this consciousness of a girl , busy with her small inference of the way in which she could make her life pleasant ? in a time , too , when idea be with fresh vigor make army of themselves , and the universal kinship be declare itself fiercely ; when woman on the other side of the world would not mourn for the husband and son who die bravely in a common cause , and man stint of bread on our side of the world hear of that willing loss and be patient : a time when the soul of man be walk to pulse which have for century be beat in he unfelt , until their full sum make a new life of terror or of joy . 

 what in the midst of that mighty drama be girl and their blind vision ? they be the Yea or Nay of that good for which man be endure and fight . in these delicate vessel be bear onward through the age the treasure of human affection . 

 CHAPTER XII . 

  " o gentleman , the time of life be short ; 
  to spend that shortness basely be too long , 
  if life do ride upon a dial 's point , 
  still end at the arrival of an hour . " 
  SHAKESPEARE : Henry IV . 
 on the second day after the Archery Meeting , Mr. Henleigh Mallinger Grandcourt be at his breakfast - table with Mr. Lush . everything around they be agreeable : the summer air through the open window , at which the dog could walk in from the old green turf on the lawn ; the soft , purplish color of the park beyond , stretch toward a mass of border wood ; the still life in the room , which seem the stiller for its sober antiquated elegance , as if it keep a conscious , well - breed silence , unlike the restlessness of vulgar furniture . 

 whether the gentleman be agreeable to each other be less evident . Mr. Grandcourt have draw his chair aside so as to face the lawn , and with his left leg over another chair , and his right elbow on the table , be smoke a large cigar , while his companion be still eat . the dog half - a - dozen of various kind be move lazily in and out , take attitude of brief attention give a vacillate preference first to one gentleman , then to the other ; be dog in such good circumstance that they could play at hunger , and like to be serve with delicacy which they decline to put in their mouth ; all except Fetch , the beautiful liver - color water - spaniel , which sit with its forepaw firmly plant and its expressive brown face turn upward , watch Grandcourt with unshaken constancy . he hold in his lap a tiny maltese dog with a tiny silver collar and bell , and when he have a hand unused by cigar or coffee - cup , it rest on this small parcel of animal warmth . I fear that Fetch be jealous , and wound that her master give she no word or look ; at last it seem that she could bear this neglect no long , and she gently put her large silky paw on her master 's leg . Grandcourt look at she with unchanged face for half a minute , and then take the trouble to lay down his cigar while he lift the unimpassioned Fluff close to his chin and give it caress pat , all the while gravely watch Fetch , who , poor thing , whimper interruptedly , as if try to repress that sign of discontent , and at last rest her head beside the appealing paw , look up with piteous beseeching . so , at least , a lover of dog must have interpret Fetch , and Grandcourt keep so many dog that he be repute to love they ; at any rate , his impulse to act just in that way start from such an interpretation . but when the amusing anguish burst forth in a howl bark , Grandcourt push Fetch down without speak , and , deposit Fluff carelessly on the table   where his black nose predominate over a salt - cellar , begin to look to his cigar , and find , with some annoyance against Fetch as the cause , that the brute of a cigar require relighting . Fetch , have begin to wail , find , like other of her sex , that it be not easy to leave off ; indeed , the second howl be a loud one , and the third be like unto it . 

 " turn out that brute , will you ? " say Grandcourt to Lush , without raise his voice or look at he as if he count on attention to the small sign . 

 and Lush immediately rise , lift Fetch , though she be rather heavy , and he be not fond of stoop , and carry she out , dispose of she in some way that take he a couple of minute before he return . he then light a cigar , place himself at an angle where he could see Grandcourt 's face without turn , and presently say 

 " shall you ride or drive to Quetcham to - day ? " 

 " I be not go to Quetcham . " 

 " you do not go yesterday . " 

 Grandcourt smoke in silence for half a minute , and then say 

 " I suppose you send my card and inquiry . " 

 " I go myself at four , and say you be sure to be there shortly . they would suppose some accident prevent you from fulfil the intention . especially if you go to - day . " 

 silence for a couple of minute . then Grandcourt say , " what man be invite here with their wife ? " 

 Lush draw out a note - book . " the Captain and Mrs. Torrington come next week . then there be Mr. Hollis and Lady Flora , and the Cushats and the Gogoffs . " 

 " rather a ragged lot , " remark Grandcourt , after a while . " why do you ask the Gogoffs ? when you write invitation in my name , be good enough to give I a list , instead of bring down a giantess on I without my knowledge . she spoil the look of the room . " 

 " you invite the Gogoffs yourself when you meet they in Paris . " 

 " what have my meet they in Paris to do with it ? I tell you to give I a list . " 

 Grandcourt , like many other , have two remarkably different voice . Hitherto we have hear he speak in a superficial interrupted drawl suggestive chiefly of languor and ennui . but this last brief speech be utter in subdue inward , yet distinct , tone , which Lush have long be use to recognize as the expression of a peremptory will . 

 " be there any other couple you would like to invite ? " 

 " yes ; think of some decent people , with a daughter or two . and one of your damned musician . but not a comic fellow . " 

 " I wonder if Klesmer would consent to come to we when he leave 
 Quetcham . nothing but first - class music will go down with Miss 
 Arrowpoint . " 
 Lush speak carelessly , but he be really seize an opportunity and fix an observant look on Grandcourt , who now for the first time , turn his eye toward his companion , but slowly and without speak until he have give two long luxuriant puff , when he say , perhaps in a low tone than ever , but with a perceptible edge of contempt 

 " what in the name of nonsense have I to do with Miss Arrowpoint and her music ? " 

 " well , something , " say Lush , jocosely . " you need not give yourself much trouble , perhaps . but some form must be go through before a man can marry a million . " 

 " very likely . but I be not go to marry a million . " 

 " that be a pity to fle away an opportunity of this sort , and knock down your own plan . " 

 " your plan , I suppose you mean . " 

 " you have some debt , you know , and thing may turn out inconveniently after all . the heirship be not absolutely certain . " 

 Grandcourt do not answer , and Lush go on . 

 " it really be a fine opportunity . the father and mother ask for nothing well , I can see , and the daughter 's look and manner require no allowance , any more than if she have not   a sixpence . she be not beautiful ; but equal to carry any rank . and she be not likely to refuse such prospect as you can offer she . " 

 " perhaps not . " 

 " the father and mother would let you do anything you like with they . " 

 " but I should not like to do anything with they . " 

 here it be Lush who make a little pause before speak again , and then he say in a deep voice of remonstrance , " Good God , Grandcourt ! after your experience , will you let a whim interfere with your comfortable settlement in life ? " 

 " spare your oratory . I know what I be go to do . " 

 " what ? " Lush put down his cigar and thrust his hand into his side pocket , as if he have to face something exasperating , but mean to keep his temper . 

 " I be go to marry the other girl . " 

 " have you fall in love ? " this question carry a strong sneer . 

 " I be go to marry she . " 

 " you have make she an offer already , then ? " 

 " no . " 

 " she be a young lady with a will of her own , I fancy . extremely well fit to make a rumpus . she would know what she like . " 

 " she do not   like you , " say Grandcourt , with the ghost of a smile . 

 " perfectly true , " say Lush , add again in a markedly sneer tone . " however , if you and she be devoted to each other , that will be enough . " 

 Grandcourt take no notice of this speech , but sip his coffee , rise , and stroll out on the lawn , all the dog follow he . 

 Lush glance after he a moment , then resume his cigar and light it , but smoke slowly , consult his beard with inspect eye and finger , till he finally stroke it with an air of have arrive at some conclusion , and say in a subdue voice 

 " check , old boy ! " 

 Lush , be a man of some ability , have not know Grandcourt for fifteen year without learn what sort of measure be useless with he , though what sort might be useful remain often dubious . in the beginning of his career he hold a fellowship , and be near take order for the sake of a college living , but not be fond of that prospect accept instead the office of travel companion to a marquess , and afterward to young Grandcourt , who have lose his father early , and who find Lush so convenient that he have allow he to become prime minister in all his more personal affair . the habit of fifteen year have make Grandcourt more and more in need of Lush 's handiness , and Lush more and more in need of the lazy luxury to which his transaction on behalf of Grandcourt make no interruption worth reckon . I can not say that the same lengthen habit have intensify Grandcourt 's want of respect for his companion since that want have be absolute from the beginning , but it have confirm his sense that he might kick Lush if he choose only he never do choose to kick any animal , because the act of kicking be a compromise attitude , and a gentleman 's dog should be kick for he . he only say thing which might have expose himself to be kick if his confidant have be a man of independent spirit . but what son of a vicar who have stint his wife and daughter of calico in order to send his male offspring to Oxford , can keep an independent spirit when he be bent on dining with high discrimination , rid good horse , live generally in the most luxuriant honey - blossom clover and all without work ? Mr. Lush have pass for a scholar once , and have still a sense of scholarship when he be not try to remember much of it ; but the bachelor 's and other art which soften manner be a time - honor preparation for sinecure ; and Lush 's present comfortable provision be as good a sinecure in not require more than the odor of depart learning . he be not unconscious of be hold kickable , but he prefer count that estimate among the peculiarity of Grandcourt 's character , which make one of his incalculable mood or judgment as good as another . since in his own opinion he have never do a bad action , it do not seem necessary to consider whether he should be likely to commit one if his love of ease require it . Lush 's love of ease be well - satisfied at present , and if his pudding be roll toward he in the dust , he take the inside bit and find they relish . 

 this morning , for example , though he have encounter more annoyance than usual , he go to his private sitting - room and play a good hour on the violoncello . 

 CHAPTER XIII . 

 " Philistia , be thou glad of I ! " 

 Grandcourt have make up his mind to marry Miss Harleth , show a power of adapt mean to end . during the next fortnight there be hardly a day on which by some arrangement or other he do not see she , or prove by emphatic attention that she occupy his thought . his cousin , Mrs. Torrington , be now do the honor of his house , so that Mrs. Davilow and Gwendolen could be invite to a large party at Diplow in which there be many witness how the host distinguish the dowerless beauty , and show no solicitude about the heiress . the world I mean Mr. Gascoigne and all the family worth speak of within visit distance of Pennicote feel an assurance on the subject which in the rector 's mind convert itself into a resolution to do his duty by his niece and see that the settlement be adequate . indeed the wonder to he and Mrs. Davilow be that the offer for which so many suitable occasion present themselves have not be already make ; and in this wonder Grandcourt himself be not without a share . when he have tell his resolution to Lush he have think that the affair would be conclude more quickly , and to his own surprise he have repeatedly promise himself in a morning that he would to - day give Gwendolen the opportunity of accept he , and have find in the evening that the necessary formality be still unaccomplished . this remarkable fact serve to heighten his determination on another day . he have never admit to himself that Gwendolen might refuse he , but heaven help we all ! we be often unable to act on our certainty ; our objection to a contrary issue   be it possible   be so strong that it rise like a spectral illusion between we and our certainty ; we be rationally sure that the blind worm can not bite we mortally , but it would be so intolerable to be bite , and the creature have a biting look we decline to handle it . 

 he have ask leave to have a beautiful horse of his bring for Gwendolen to ride . Mrs. Davilow be to accompany she in the carriage , and they be to go to Diplow to lunch , Grandcourt conduct they . it be a fine mid - harvest time , not too warm for a noonday ride of five mile to be delightful ; the poppy glow on the border of the field , there be enough breeze to move gently like a social spirit among the ear of uncut corn , and to wing the shadow of a cloud across the soft gray down ; here the sheaf be stand , there the horse be strain their muscle under the last load from a wide space of stubble , but everywhere the green pasture make a broad setting for the corn - field , and the cattle take their rest under wide branch . the road lie through a bit of country where the dairy - farm look much as they do in the day of our forefather where peace and permanence seem to find a home away from the busy change that send the railway train fly in the distance . 

 but the spirit of peace and permanence do not penetrate poor Mrs. Davilow 's mind so as to overcome her habit of uneasy foreboding . Gwendolen and Grandcourt canter in front of she , and then slacken their pace to a conversational walk till the carriage come up with they again , make a gratify sight ; but it serve chiefly to keep up the conflict of hope and fear about her daughter 's lot . here be an irresistible opportunity for a lover to speak and put an end to all uncertainty , and Mrs. Davilow could only hope with tremble that Gwendolen 's decision would be favorable . certainly if Rex 's love have be repugnant to she , Mr. Grandcourt have the advantage of be in complete contrast with Rex ; and that he have produce some quite novel impression on she seem evident in her marked abstinence from satirical observation , nay , her total silence about his characteristic , a silence which Mrs. Davilow do not dare to break . " be he a man she would be happy with ? " be a question that inevitably arise in the mother 's mind . " well , perhaps as happy as she would be with any one else or as most other woman be " be the answer with which she try to quiet herself ; for she could not imagine Gwendolen under the influence of any feeling which would make she satisfied in what we traditionally call " mean circumstance . " 

 Grandcourt 's own thought be look in the same direction : he want to have do with the uncertainty that belong to his not have speak . as to any further uncertainty well , it be something without any reasonable basis , some quality in the air which act as an irritant to his wish . 

 Gwendolen enjoy the riding , but her pleasure do not break forth in girlish unpremeditated chat and laughter as it do on that morning with Rex . she speak a little , and even laugh , but with a lightness as of a far - off echo : for she too there be some peculiar quality in the air not , she be sure , any subjugation of she will by Mr. Grandcourt , and the splendid prospect he mean to offer she ; for Gwendolen desire every one , that dignified gentleman himself include , to understand that she be go to do just as she like , and that they have well not calculate on her please they . if she choose to take this husband , she would have he know that she be not go to renounce her freedom , or accord to her favorite formula , " not go to do as other woman do . " 

 Grandcourt 's speech this morning be , as usual , all of that brief sort which never fail to make a conversational figure when the speaker be hold important in his circle . stop so soon , they give sign of a suppressed and formidable ability so say more , and have also the meritorious quality of allow lengthiness to other . 

 " how do you like Criterion 's pace ? " he say , after they have enter the park and be slack from a canter to a walk . 

 " he be delightful to ride . I should like to have a leap with he , if it would not frighten mamma . there be a good wide channel we pass five minute ago . I should like to have a gallop back and take it . " 

 " pray do . we can take it together . " 

 " no , thank . Mamma be so timid if she see I it might make she ill . " 

 " let I go and explain . criterion would take it without fail . " 

 " no indeed you be very kind but it would alarm she too much . I dare take any leap when she be not by ; but I do it and do not   tell she about it . " 

 " we can let the carriage pass and then set off . " 

 " no , no , pray do not   think of it any more : I speak quite randomly , " say Gwendolen ; she begin to feel a new objection to carry out her own proposition . 

 " but Mrs. Davilow know I shall take care of you . " 

 " yes , but she would think of you as have to take care of my broken neck . " 

 there be a considerable pause before Grandcourt say , look toward she , " I should like to have the right always to take care of you . " 

 Gwendolen do not turn her eye on he ; it seem to she a long while that she be first blushing , and then turn pale , but to Grandcourt 's rate of judgment she answer soon enough , with the light flute - tone and a careless movement of the head , " oh , I be not sure that I want to be take care of : if I choose to risk break my neck , I should like to be at liberty to do it . " 

 she check her horse as she speak , and turn in her saddle , look toward the advance carriage . her eye sweep across Grandcourt as she make this movement , but there be no language in they to correct the carelessness of her reply . at that very moment she be aware that she be risk something not her neck , but the possibility of finally check Grandcourt 's advance , and she do not feel contented with the possibility . 

 " damn she ! " think Grandcourt , as he too check his horse . he be not a wordy thinker , and this explosive phrase stand for mixed impression which eloquent interpreter might have expand into some sentence full of an irritated sense that he be be mystify , and a determination that this girl should not make a fool of he . do she want he to throw himself at her foot and declare that he be die for she ? it be not by that gate that she could enter on the privilege he could give she . or do she expect he to write his proposal ? equally a delusion . he would not make his offer in any way that could place he definitely in the position of be reject . but as to she accept he , she have do it already in accept his marked attention : and anything which happen to break they off would be understand to her disadvantage . she be merely coquet , then ? 

 however , the carriage come up , and no far tete - a - tete could well occur before their arrival at the house , where there be abundant company , to whom Gwendolen , clothe in riding - dress , with her hat lay aside , clothe also in the repute of be choose by Mr. Grandcourt , be naturally a centre of observation ; and since the objectionable Mr. Lush be not there to look at she , this stimulus of admire attention heighten her spirit , and disperse , for the time , the uneasy consciousness of divided impulse which threaten she with repentance of her own act . whether Grandcourt have be offend or not there be no judging : his manner be unchanged , but Gwendolen 's acuteness have not go deep than to discern that his manner be no clue for she , and because these be unchanged she be not the less afraid of he . 

 she have not be at diplow before except to dine ; and since certain point of view from the window and the garden be worth show , Lady Flora Hollis propose after luncheon , when some of the guest have disperse , and the sun be slop toward four o'clock , that the remain party should make a little exploration . here come frequent opportunity when Grandcourt might have retain Gwendolen apart , and have speak to her unheard . but no ! he indeed speak to no one else , but what he say be nothing more eager or intimate than it have be in their first interview . he look at she not less than usual ; and some of her defiant spirit have come back , she look full at he in return , not care rather prefer that his eye have no expression in they . 

 but at last it seem as if he entertain some contrivance . after they have nearly make the tour of the ground , the whole party stop by the pool to be amuse with Fetch 's accomplishment of bring a water lily to the bank like Cowper 's spaniel Beau , and have be disappoint in his first attempt insist on his try again . 

 here Grandcourt , who stand with Gwendolen outside the group , turn deliberately , and fix his eye on a knoll plant with american shrub , and have a winding path up it , say languidly 

 " this be a bore . shall we go up there ? " 

 " oh , certainly since we be explore , " say Gwendolen . she be rather pleased , and yet afraid . 

 the path be too narrow for he to offer his arm , and they walk up in silence . when they be on the bit of platform at the summit , Grandcourt say 

 " there be nothing to be see here : the thing be not worth climb . " 

 how be it that Gwendolen do not laugh ? she be perfectly silent , hold up the fold of her robe like a statue , and give a hard grasp to the handle of her whip , which she have snatch up automatically with her hat when they have first set off . 

 " what sort of a place do you prefer ? " say Grandcourt . 

 " different place be agreeable in their way . on the whole , I think , I prefer place that be open and cheerful . I be not fond of anything sombre . " 

 " your place of Offendene be too sombre . " 

 " it be , rather . " 

 " you will not remain there long , I hope . " 

 " oh , yes , I think so . Mamma like to be near her sister . " 

 silence for a short space . 

 " it be not to be suppose that you will always live there , though 
 Mrs. Davilow may . " 
 " I do not   know . we woman can not   go in search of adventure to find out the North - West Passage or the source of the Nile , or to hunt tiger in the East . we must stay where we grow , or where the gardener like to transplant we . we be bring up like the flower , to look as pretty as we can , and be dull without complain . that be my notion about the plant ; they be often bored , and that be the reason why some of they have get poisonous . what do you think ? " Gwendolen have run on rather nervously , lightly whip the rhododendron bush in front of she . 

 " I quite agree . Most thing be bore , " say Grandcourt , his mind have be push into an easy current , away from its intend track . but , after a moment 's pause , he continue in his break , refined drawl 

 " but a woman can be marry . " 

 " some woman can . " 

 " you , certainly , unless you be obstinately cruel . " 

 " I be not sure that I be not both cruel and obstinate . " here Gwendolen suddenly turn her head and look full at Grandcourt , whose eye she have feel to be upon she throughout their conversation . she be wonder what the effect of look at he would be on herself rather than on he . 

 he stand perfectly still , half a yard or more away from she ; and it flash through her mind what a sort of lotus - eater 's stupor have begin in he and be take possession of she . then he say 

 " be you as uncertain about yourself as you make other about you ? " 

 " I be quite uncertain about myself ; I do not   know how uncertain other may be . " 

 " and you wish they to understand that you do not   care ? " say Grandcourt , with a touch of new hardness in his tone . 

 " I do not say that , " Gwendolen reply , hesitatingly , and turn her eye away whip the rhododendron bush again . she wish she be on horseback that she might set off on a canter . it be impossible to set off run down the knoll . 

 " you do care , then , " say Grandcourt , not more quickly , but with a soften drawl . 

 " ha ! my whip ! " say Gwendolen , in a little scream of distress . she have let it go what could be more natural in a slight agitation ? and but this seem less natural in a gold - handle whip which have be leave altogether to itself it have go with some force over the immediate shrub , and have lodge itself in the branch of an azalea half - way down the knoll . she could run down now , laugh prettily , and Grandcourt be oblige to follow ; but she be beforehand with he in rescue the whip , and continue on her way to the level ground , when she pause and look at Grandcourt with an exasperating brightness in her glance and a heighten color , as if she have carry a triumph , and these indication be still noticeable to Mrs. Davilow when Gwendolen and Grandcourt join the rest of the party . 

 " it be all coquet , " think Grandcourt ; " the next time I beckon she will come down . " 

 it seem to he likely that this final beckoning might happen the very next day , when there be to be a picnic archery meeting in Cardell Chase , accord to the plan project on the evening of the ball . 

 even in Gwendolen 's mind that result be one of two likelihood that present themselves alternately , one of two decision toward which she be be precipitate , as if they be two side of a boundary - line , and she do not know on which she should fall . this subjection to a possible self , a self not to be absolutely predict about , cause she some astonishment and terror ; her favorite key of life do as she like seem to fail she , and she could not foresee what at a give moment she might like to do . the prospect of marry Grandcourt really seem more attractive to she than she have believe beforehand that any marriage could be : the dignity , the luxury , the power of do a great deal of what she like to do , which have now come close to she , and within her choice to secure or to lose , take hold of her nature as if it have be the strong odor of what she have only imagine and long for before . and Grandcourt himself ? he seem as little of a flaw in his fortune as a lover and husband could possibly be . Gwendolen wish to mount the chariot and drive the plunge horse herself , with a spouse by her side who would fold his arm and give she his countenance without look ridiculous . certainly , with all her perspicacity , and all the reading which seem to her mamma dangerously instructive , her judgment be consciously a little at fault before Grandcourt . he be adorably quiet and free from absurdity he would be a husband to suit with the good appearance a woman could make . but what else be he ? he have be everywhere , and see everything . that be desirable , and especially gratifying as a preamble to his supreme preference for Gwendolen Harleth . he do not appear to enjoy anything much . that be not necessary : and the less he have of particular taste , or desire , the more freedom his wife be likely to have in follow her . Gwendolen conceive that after marriage she would most probably be able to manage he thoroughly . 

 how be it that he cause her unusual constraint now ? that she be less daring and playful in her talk with he than with any other admirer she have know ? that absence of demonstrativeness which she be glad of , act as a charm in more sens than one , and be slightly benumb . Grandcourt after all be formidable a handsome lizard of a hitherto unknown specie , not of the lively , dart kind . but Gwendolen know hardly anything about lizard , and ignorance give one a large range of probability . this splendid speciman be probably gentle , suitable as a boudoir pet : what may not a lizard be , if you know nothing to the contrary ? her acquaintance with Grandcourt be such that no accomplishment suddenly reveal in he would have surprise she . and he be so little suggestive of drama , that it hardly occur to she to think with any detail how his life of thirty - six year have be pass : in general , she imagine he always cold and dignified , not likely ever to have commit himself . he have hunt the tiger have he ever be in love or make love ? the one experience and the other seem alike remote in Gwendolen 's fancy from the Mr. Grandcourt who have come to diplow in order apparently to make a chief epoch in her destiny perhaps by introduce she to that state of marriage which she have resolve to make a state of great freedom than her girlhood . and on the whole she wish to marry he ; he suit her purpose ; her prevail , deliberate intention be , to accept he . 

 but be she go to fulfill her deliberate intention ? she begin to be afraid of herself , and to find out a certain difficulty in do as she like . already her assertion of independence in evade his advance have be carry far than be necessary , and she be think with some anxiety what she might do on the next occasion . 

 seat accord to her habit with she back to the horse on their drive homeward , she be completely under the observation of her mamma , who take the excitement and changefulness in the expression of her eye , her unwonted absence of mind and total silence , as unmistakable sign that something unprecedented have occur between she and Grandcourt . Mrs. Davilow 's uneasiness determine she to risk some speech on the subject : the Gascoignes be to dine at Offendene , and in what have occur this morning there might be some reason for consult the rector ; not that she expect he anymore than herself to influence Gwendolen , but that her anxious mind want to be disburden . 

 " something have happen , dear ? " she begin , in a tender tone of question . 

 Gwendolen look round , and seem to be rouse to the consciousness of her physical self , take off her glove and then her hat , that the soft breeze might blow on her head . they be in a retired bit of the road , where the long afternoon shadow from the border tree fall across it and no observer be within sight . her eye continue to meet her mother 's , but she do not speak . 

 " Mr. Grandcourt have be say something ? tell I , dear . " the last word be utter beseechingly . 

 " what be I to tell you , mamma ? " be the perverse answer . 

 " I be sure something have agitate you . you ought to confide in I , Gwen . you ought not to leave I in doubt and anxiety . " Mrs. Davilow 's eye fill with tear . 

 " Mamma , dear , please do not   be miserable , " say Gwendolen , with pettish remonstrance . " it only make I more so . I be in doubt myself . " 

 " about Mr. Grandcourt 's intention ? " say Mrs. Davilow , gather determination from her alarm . 

 " no ; not at all , " say Gwendolen , with some curtness , and a pretty little toss of the head as she put on her hat again . 

 " about whether you will accept he , then ? " 

 " precisely . " 

 " have you give he a doubtful answer ? " 

 " I have give he no answer at all . " 

 " he have speak so that you could not misunderstand he ? " 

 " as far as I would let he speak . " 

 " you expect he to persevere ? " Mrs. Davilow put this question rather anxiously , and receive no answer , ask another : " you do not   consider that you have discourage he ? " 

 " I dare say not . " 

 " I think you like he , dear , " say Mrs. Davilow , timidly . 

 " so I do , mamma , as like go . there be less to dislike about he than about most man . he be quiet and distinguť . " Gwendolen so far speak with a pouting sort of gravity ; but suddenly she recover some of her mischievousness , and her face break into a smile as she add " indeed he have all the quality that would make a husband tolerable battlement , veranda , stable , etc . , no grin and no glass in his eye . " 

 " do be serious with I for a moment , dear . be I to understand that you mean to accept he ? " 

 " oh , pray , mamma , leave I to myself , " say Gwendolen , with a pettish distress in her voice . 

 and Mrs. Davilow say no more . 

 when they get home Gwendolen declare that she would not dine . she be tired , and would come down in the evening after she have take some rest . the probability that her uncle would hear what have pass do not trouble she . she be convince that whatever he might say would be on the side of she accept Grandcourt , and she wish to accept he if she could . at this moment she would willingly have have weight hang on her own caprice . 

 Mr. Gascoigne do hear not Gwendolen 's answer repeat verbatim , but a soften generalize account of they . the mother convey as vaguely as the keen rector 's question would let she the impression that Gwendolen be in some uncertainty about her own mind , but incline on the whole to acceptance . the result be that the uncle feel himself call on to interfere ; he do not conceive that he should do his duty in witholde direction from his niece in a momentous crisis of this kind . Mrs. Davilow venture a hesitate opinion that perhaps it would be safe to say nothing Gwendolen be so sensitive   she do not like to say willful . but the rector 's be a firm mind , grasp its first judgment tenaciously and act on they promptly , whence counter - judgment be no more for he than shadow fleet across the solid ground to which he adjust himself . 

 this match with Grandcourt present itself to he as a sort of public affair ; perhaps there be way in which it might even strengthen the establishment . to the rector , whose father   nobody would have suspect it , and nobody be tell   have rise to be a provincial corn - dealer , aristocratic heirship resemble regal heirship in except its possessor from the ordinary standard of moral judgment , Grandcourt , the almost certain baronet , the probable peer , be to be range with public personage , and be a match to be accept on broad general ground national and ecclesiastical . such public personage , it be true , be often in the nature of giant which an ancient community may have feel pride and safety in possess , though , regard privately , these bear eminence must often have be inconvenient and even noisome . but of the future husband personally Mr. Gascoigne be disposed to think the good . Gossip be a sort of smoke that come from the dirty tobacco - pipe of those who diffuse it : it prove nothing but the bad taste of the smoker . but if Grandcourt have really make any deep or more unfortunate experiment in folly than be common in young man of high prospect , he be of an age to have finish they . all account can be suitably wind up when a man have not ruin himself , and the expense may be take as an insurance against future error . this be the view of practical wisdom ; with reference to high view , repentance have a supreme moral and religious value . there be every reason to believe that a woman of well - regulate mind would be happy with Grandcourt . 

 it be no surprise to Gwendolen on come down to tea to be tell that her uncle wish to see she in the dining - room . he throw aside the paper as she enter and greet she with his usual kindness . as his wife have remark , he always " make much " of Gwendolen , and her importance have rise of late . " my dear , " he say , in a fatherly way , move a chair for she as he hold her hand , " I want to speak to you on a subject which be more momentous than any other with regard to your welfare . you will guess what I mean . but I shall speak to you with perfect directness : in such matter I consider myself bind to act as your father . you have no objection , I hope ? " 

 " oh dear , no , uncle . you have always be very kind to I , " say Gwendolen , frankly . this evening she be willing , if it be possible , to be a little fortified against her troublesome self , and her resistant temper be in abeyance . the rector 's mode of speech always convey a thrill of authority , as of a word of command : it seem to take for grant that there could be no wavering in the audience , and that every one be go to be rationally obedient . 

 " it be naturally a satisfaction to I that the prospect of a marriage for you advantageous in the high degree have present itself so early . I do not know exactly what have pass between you and Mr. Grandcourt , but I presume there can be little doubt , from the way in which he have distinguish you , that he desire to make you his wife . " 

 Gwendolen do not speak immediately , and her uncle say with more emphasis 

 " have you any doubt of that yourself , my dear ? " 

 " I suppose that be what he have be think of . but he may have change his mind to - morrow , " say Gwendolen . 

 " why to - morrow ? have he make advance which you have discourage ? " 

 " I think he mean he begin to make advance but I do not encourage they . I turn the conversation . " 

 " will you confide in I so far as to tell I your reason ? " 

 " I be not sure that I have any reason , uncle . " Gwendolen laugh rather artificially . 

 " you be quite capable of reflect , Gwendolen . you be aware that this be not a trivial occasion , and it concern your establishment for life under circumstance which may not occur again . you have a duty here both to yourself and your family . I wish to understand whether you have any ground for hesitate as to your acceptance of Mr. Grandcourt . " 

 " I suppose I hesitate without ground . " Gwendolen speak rather poutingly , and her uncle grow suspicious . 

 " be he disagreeable to you personally ? " 

 " no . " 

 " have you hear anything of he which have affect you disagreeably ? " the rector think it impossible that Gwendolen could have hear the gossip he have hear , but in any case he must endeavor to put all thing in the right light for she . 

 " I have hear nothing about he except that he be a great match , " say 
 Gwendolen , with some sauciness ; " and that affect I very agreeably . " 
 " then , my dear Gwendolen , I have nothing further to say than this : you hold your fortune in your own hand a fortune such as rarely happen to a girl in your circumstance a fortune in fact which almost take the question out of the range of mere personal feeling , and make your acceptance of it a duty . if Providence offer you power and position especially when unclog by any condition that be repugnant to you your course be one of responsibility , into which caprice must not enter . a man do not like to have his attachment trifle with : he may not be at once repel these thing be matter of individual disposition . but the trifling may be carry too far . and I must point out to you that in case Mr. Grandcourt be repel without your have refuse he without your have intend ultimately to refuse he , your situation would be a humiliating and painful one . I , for my part , should regard you with severe disapprobation , as the victim of nothing else than your own coquetry and folly . " 

 Gwendolen become pallid as she listen to this admonitory speech . the idea it raise have the force of sensation . her resistant courage would not help she here , because her uncle be not urge she against her own resolve ; he be press upon she the motif of dread which she already feel ; he be make she more conscious of the risk that lie within herself . she be silent , and the rector observe that he have produce some strong effect . 

 " I mean this in kindness , my dear . " his tone have soften . 

 " I be aware of that , uncle , " say Gwendolen , rise and shake her head back , as if to rouse herself out of painful passivity . " I be not foolish . I know that I must be marry some time before it be too late . and I do not   see how I could do well than marry Mr. Grandcourt . I mean to accept he , if possible . " she feel as if she be reinforce herself by speak with this decisiveness to her uncle . 

 but the rector be a little startled by so bare a version of his own meaning from those young lip . he wish that in her mind his advice should be take in an infusion of sentiment proper to a girl , and such as be presuppose in the advice of a clergyman , although he may not consider they always appropriate to be put forward . he wish his niece park , carriage , a title everything that would make this world a pleasant abode ; but he wish she not to be cynical to be , on the contrary , religiously dutiful , and have warm domestic affection . 

 " my dear Gwendolen , " he say , rise also , and speak with benignant gravity , " I trust that you will find in marriage a new fountain of duty and affection . marriage be the only true and satisfactory sphere of a woman , and if your marriage with Mr. Grandcourt should be happily decide upon , you will have , probably , an increase power , both of rank and wealth , which may be use for the benefit of other . these consideration be something high than romance ! you be fit by natural gift for a position which , consider your birth and early prospect , could hardly be look forward to as in the ordinary course of thing ; and I trust that you will grace it , not only by those personal gift , but by a good and consistent life . " 

 " I hope mamma will be the happy , " say Gwendolen , in a more cheerful way , lift her hand backward to her neck and move toward the door . she want to waive those high consideration . 

 Mr. Gascoigne feel that he have come to a satisfactory understanding with his niece , and have further her happy settlement in life by further her engagement to Grandcourt . meanwhile there be another person to whom the contemplation of that issue have be a motive for some activity , and who believe that he , too , on this particular day have do something toward bring about a favorable decision in his sense which happen to be the reverse of the rector 's . 

 Mr. Lush 's absence from Diplow during Gwendolen 's visit have be due , not to any fear on his part of meet that supercilious young lady , or of be abash by her frank dislike , but to an engagement from which he expect important consequence . he be go , in fact , to the Wanchester station to meet a lady , accompany by a maid and two child , whom he put into a fly , and afterward follow to the hotel of the Golden Keys , in that town . an impressive woman , whom many would turn to look at again in pass ; her figure be slim and sufficiently tall , her face rather emaciated , so that its sculpturesque beauty be the more pronounced , her crisp hair perfectly black , and her large , anxious eye what we call black . her dress be soberly correct , her age , perhaps , physically more advanced than the number of year would imply , but hardly less than seven - and - thirty . an uneasy - look woman : her glance seem to presuppose that the people and thing be go to be unfavorable to she , while she be , nevertheless , ready to meet they with resolution . the child be lovely a dark - haired girl of six or more , a fair boy of five . when Lush incautiously express some surprise at she have bring the child , she say , with a sharp - toned intonation 

 " do you suppose I should come wander about here by myself ? why should I not bring all four if I like ? " 

 " oh , certainly , " say Lush , with his usual fluent nonchalance . 

 he stay an hour or so in conference with she , and ride back to Diplow in a state of mind that be at once hopeful and busily anxious as to the execution of the little plan on which his hopefulness be base . Grandcourt 's marriage to Gwendolen Harleth would not , he believe , be much of a good to either of they , and it would plainly be fraught with disagreeable to himself . but now he feel confident enough to say inwardly , " I will take , nay , I will lay odd that the marriage will never happen . " 

 CHAPTER XIV . 

  I will not clothe myself in wreck wear gem 
  saw from cramped finger - bone of woman drown ; 
  feel chilly vaporous hand of ireful ghost 
  clutch my necklace : trick my maiden breast 
  with orphan ' heritage . let your dead love 
  Marry it be dead . 
 Gwendolen look lovely and vigorous as a tall , newly - open lily the next morning : there be a reaction of young energy in she , and yesterday 's self - distrust seem no more than the transient shiver on the surface of a full stream . the rove archery match in Cardell Chase be a delightful prospect for the sport 's sake : she feel herself beforehand move about like a wood - nymph under the beech   in appreciative company , and the imagined scene lend a charm to further advance on the part of Grandcourt not an impassioned lyrical Daphnis for the wood - nymph , certainly : but so much the well . to - day Gwendolen foresee he make slow conversational approach to a declaration , and foresaw herself await and encourage it accord to the rational conclusion which she have express to her uncle . 

 when she come down to breakfast   after every one have leave the table except Mrs. Davilow   there be letter on her plate . one of they she read with a gathering smile , and then hand it to her mamma , who , on return it , smile also , find new cheerfulness in the good spirit her daughter have show ever since wake , and say 

 " you do not   feel inclined to go a thousand mile away ? " 

 " not exactly so far . " 

 " it be a sad omission not to have write again before this . can not   you write how before we set out this morning ? " 

 " it be not so pressing . to - morrow will do . you see they leave town to - day . I must write to Dover . they will be there till Monday . " 

 " shall I write for you , dear if it tease you ? " 

 Gwendolen do not speak immediately , but after sip her coffee , answer brusquely , " oh no , let it be ; I will write to - morrow . " then , feel a touch of compunction , she look up and say with playful tenderness , " dear , old , beautiful mamma ! " 

 " old , child , truly . " 

 " please do not , mamma ! I mean old for darling . you be hardly twenty - five year old than I be . when you talk in that way my life shrivel up before I . " 

 " one can have a great deal of happiness in twenty - five year , my dear . " 

 " I must lose no time in begin , " say Gwendolen , merrily . " the soon I get my palace and coach the well . " 

 " and a good husband who adore you , Gwen , " say Mrs. Davilow , encouragingly . 

 Gwendolen put out her lip saucily and say nothing . 

 it be a slight drawback on her pleasure in start that the rector be detain by magistrate 's business , and would probably not be able to get to Cardell Chase at all that day . she care little that Mrs. Gascoigne and Anna choose not to go without he , but her uncle 's presence would have seem to make it a matter of course that the decision take would be act on . for decision in itself begin to be formidable . have come close to accept Grandcourt , Gwendolen feel this lot of unhoped - for fullness round itself too definitely . when we take to wish a great deal for ourselves , whatever we get soon turn into mere limitation and exclusion . still there be the reassuring thought that marriage would be the gate into a large freedom . 

 the place of meeting be a grassy spot call Green Arbor , where a bit of hang wood make a shelter amphitheatre . it be here that the coachful of servant with provision have to prepare the picnic meal ; and the warden of the Chase be to guide the roving archer so as to keep they within the due distance from this centre , and hinder they from wander beyond the limit which have be fix on a curve that might be draw through certain well - know point , such as the double Oak , the Whispering Stones , and the High Cross . the plan be to take only a preliminary stroll before luncheon , keep the main roving expedition for the more exquisite light of the afternoon . the muster be rapid enough to save every one from dull moment of waiting , and when the group begin to scatter themselves through the light and shadow make here by closely neighbor beech and there by rarer oak , one may suppose that a painter would have be glad to look on . this rove archery be far pretty than the stationary game , but success in shoot at variable mark be less favor by practice , and the hit be distribute among the volunteer archer otherwise than they would have be in target - shooting . from this cause , perhaps , as well as from the twofold distraction of be preoccupy and wish not to betray her preoccupation , Gwendolen do not greatly distinguish herself in these first experiment , unless it be by the lively grace with which she take her comparative failure . she be in white and green as on the day of the former meeting , when it make an epoch for she that she be introduce to Grandcourt ; he be continually by her side now , yet it would have be hard to tell from mere look and manner that their relation to each other have at all change since their first conversation . still there be other ground that make most person conclude they to be , if not engage already , on the eve of be so . and she believe this herself . as they be all return toward Green Arbor in divergent group , not think at all of take aim but merely chattering , word pass which seem really the beginning of that end the beginning of her acceptance . Grandcourt say , " do you know how long it be since I first see you in this dress ? " 

 " the archery meeting be on the 25th , and this be the 13th , " say Gwendolen , laughingly . " I be not good at calculate , but I will venture to say that it must be nearly three week . " 

 a little pause , and then he say , " that be a great loss of time . " 

 " that your know I have cause you ? pray do not   be uncomplimentary ; I do not   like it . " 

 pause again . " it be because of the gain that I feel the loss . " 

 here Gwendolen herself let a pause . she be think , " he be really very ingenious . he never speak stupidly . " her silence be so unusual that it seem the strong of favorable answer , and he continue : 

 " the gain of know you make I feel the time I lose in uncertainty . 
 do you like uncertainty ? " 
 " I think I do , rather , " say Gwendolen , suddenly beam on he with a playful smile . " there be more in it . " 

 Grandcourt meet her laugh eye with a slow , steady look right into they , which seem like vision in the abstract , and then say , " do you mean more torment for I ? " 

 there be something so strange to Gwendolen in this moment that she be quite shake out of her usual self - consciousness . blush and turn away her eye , she say , " no , that would make I sorry . " 

 Grandcourt would have follow up this answer , which the change in her manner make apparently decisive of her favorable intention ; but he be not in any way overcome so as to be unaware that they be now , within sight of everybody , descend the space into Green Arbor , and descend it at an ill - choose point where it begin to be inconveniently steep . this be a reason for offer his hand in the literal sense to help she ; she take it , and they come down in silence , much observe by those already on the level among other by Mrs. Arrowpoint , who happen to be stand with Mrs. Davilow . that lady have now make up her mind that Grandcourt 's merit be not such as would have induce Catherine to accept he , Catherine have so high a standard as to have refuse Lord Slogan . hence she look at the tenant of Diplow with dispassionate eye . 

 " Mr. Grandcourt be not equal as a man to his uncle , Sir Hugo Mallinger too languid . to be sure , Mr. Grandcourt be a much young man , but I should not   wonder if Sir Hugo be to outlive he , notwithstanding the difference of year . it be ill calculate on succession , " conclude Mrs. Arrowpoint , rather too loudly . 

 " it be indeed , " say Mrs. Davilow , able to assent with quiet cheerfulness , for she be so well satisfied with the actual situation of affair that her habitual melancholy in their general unsatisfactoriness be altogether in abeyance . 

 I be not concerned to tell of the food that be eat in that green refectory , or even to dwell on the story of the forest scenery that spread themselves out beyond the level front of the hollow ; be just now bind to tell a story of life at a stage when the blissful beauty of earth and sky enter only by narrow and oblique inlet into the consciousness , which be busy with a small social drama almost as little penetrate by a feeling of wide relation as if it have be a puppet - show . it will be understand that the food and champagne be of the good the talk and laughter too , in the sense of belong to the good society , where no one make an invidious display of anything in particular , and the advantage of the world be take with that high - breed depreciation which follow from be accustomed to they . some of the gentleman stroll a little and indulge in a cigar , there be a sufficient interval before , four o'clock the time for begin to rove again . among these , strange to say , be Grandcourt ; but not Mr. Lush , who seem to be take his pleasure quite generously to - day by make himself particularly serviceable , order everything for everybody , and by this activity become more than ever a blot on the scene to Gwendolen , though he keep himself amiably aloof from she , and never even look at she obviously . when there be a general move to prepare for start , it appear that the bow have all be put under the charge of Lord Brackenshaw 's valet , and Mr. Lush be concern to save lady the trouble of fetch theirs from the carriage where they be prop . he do not intend to bring Gwendolen 's , but she , fearful lest he should do so , hurry to fetch it herself . the valet , see her approach , meet she with it , and in give it into her hand give also a letter address to she . she ask no question about it , perceive at a glance that the address be in a lady 's handwriting   of the delicate kind which use to be esteem feminine before the present uncial period , and move away with her bow in her hand , see Mr. Lush come to fetch other bow . to avoid meet he she turn aside and walk with she back toward the stand of carriage , open the letter . it contain these word 

 if Miss Harleth be in doubt whether she should accept Mr. Grandcourt , let she break from her party after they have pass the Whispering Stones and return to that spot . she will then hear something to decide she ; but she can only hear it by keep this letter a strict secret from every one . if she do not act accord to this letter , she will repent , as the woman who write it have repent . the secrecy Miss Harleth will feel herself bind in honor to guard . 

 Gwendolen feel an inward shock , but her immediate thought be , " it be come in time . " it lie in her youthfulness that she be absorb by the idea of the revelation to be make , and have not even a momentary suspicion of contrivance that could justify she in show the letter . her mind gather itself up at once into the resolution , that she would manage to go unobserved to the Whispering Stones ; and thrust the letter into her pocket she turn back to rejoin the company , with that sense of have something to conceal which to her nature have a brace quality and help she to be mistress of herself . 

 it be a surprise to every one that Grandcourt be not , like the other smoker , on the spot in time to set out rove with the rest . " we shall alight on he by - and - by , " say Lord Brackenshaw ; " he can not   be go far . " at any rate , no man could be wait for . this apparent forgetfulness might be take for the distraction of a lover so absorb in thinking of the beloved object as to forget an appointment which would bring he into her actual presence . and the good - natured Earl give Gwendolen a distant jocose hint to that effect , which she take with suitable quietude . but the thought in her mind be " can he too be start away from a decision ? " it be not exactly a pleasant thought to she ; but it be near the truth . " start away , " however , be not the right expression for the languor of intention that come over Grandcourt , like a fit of diseased numbness , when an end seem within easy reach : to desist then , when all expectation be to the contrary , become another gratification of mere will , sublimely independent of definite motive . at that moment he have begin a second large cigar in a vague , hazy obstinacy which , if Lush or any other mortal who might be insult with impunity have interrupt by overtake he with a request for his return , would have express itself by a slow removal of his cigar , to say in an undertone , " you will be kind enough to go to the devil , will you ? " 

 but he be not interrupt , and the rover set off without any visible depression of spirit , leave behind only a few of the less vigorous lady , include Mrs. Davilow , who prefer a quiet stroll free from obligation to keep up with other . the enjoyment of the day be soon at its high pitch , the archery get more spirited and the change scene of the forest from roofed grove to open glade grow lovelier with the lengthen shadow , and the deeply - feel but undefinable gradation of the mellowing afternoon . it be agree that they be play an extemporize " as you like it ; " and when a pretty compliment have be turn to Gwendolen about she have the part of Rosalind , she feel the more compelled to be surpass in loveliness . this be not very difficult to she , for the effect of what have happen to - day be an excitement which need a vent a sense of adventure rather than alarm , and a straining toward the management of her retreat , so as not to be impede . 

 the roving have be last nearly an hour before the arrival at the Whispering Stones , two tall conical block that lean toward each other like gigantic gray - mantle figure . they be soon survey and pass by with the remark that they would be good ghost on a starlit night . but a soft sunlight be on they now , and Gwendolen feel dare . the stone be near a fine grove of beech , where the archer find plenty of mark . 

 " how far be we from Green Arbor now ? " say Gwendolen , have get in front by the side of the warden . 

 " oh , not more than half a mile , take along the avenue we be go to cross up there : but I shall take round a Couple of mile , by the High Cross . " 

 she be fall back among the rest , when suddenly they seem all to be hurry obliquely forward under the guidance of Mr. Lush , and linger a little where she be , she perceive her opportunity of slip away . soon she be out of sight , and without run she seem to herself to fly along the ground and count the moment nothing till she find herself back again at the Whispering Stones . they turn their blank gray side to she : what be there on the other side ? if there be nothing after all ? that be her only dread now to have to turn back again in mystification ; and walk round the right - hand stone without pause , she find herself in front of some one whose large dark eye meet her at a foot 's distance . in spite of expectation , she be startled and shrank bank , but in do so she could take in the whole figure of this stranger and perceive that she be unmistakably a lady , and one who must have be exceedingly handsome . she perceive , also , that a few yard from she be two child seat on the grass . 

 " Miss Harleth ? " say the lady . 

 " yes . " All Gwendolen 's consciousness be wonder . 

 " have you accept Mr. Grandcourt ? " 

 " no . " 

 " I have promise to tell you something . and you will promise to keep my secret . however you may decide you will not tell Mr. Grandcourt , or any one else , that you have see I ? " 

 " I promise . " 

 " my name be Lydia Glasher . Mr. Grandcourt ought not to marry any one but I . I leave my husband and child for he nine year ago . those two child be his , and we have two other girl who be old . my husband be dead now , and Mr. Grandcourt ought to marry I . he ought to make that boy his heir . " 

 she look at the boy as she speak , and Gwendolen 's eye follow her . the handsome little fellow be puff out his cheek in try to blow a tiny trumpet which remain dumb . his hat hang backward by a string , and his brown curl catch the sun - ray . he be a cherub . 

 the two woman 's eye meet again , and Gwendolen say proudly , " I will not interfere with your wish . " she look as if she be shiver , and her lip be pale . 

 " you be very attractive , Miss Harleth . but when he first know I , I too be young . since then my life have be break up and embitter . it be not fair that he should be happy and I miserable , and my boy thrust out of sight for another . " 

 these word be utter with a biting accent , but with a determined abstinence from anything violent in tone or manner . Gwendolen , watch Mrs. Glasher 's face while she speak , feel a sort of terror : it be as if some ghastly vision have come to she in a dream and say , " I be a woman 's life . " 

 " have you anything more to say to I ? " she ask in a low tone , but still proud and coldly . the revulsion within she be not tend to soften she . everyone seem hateful . 

 " nothing . you know what I wish you to know . you can inquire about I if you like . my husband be Colonel Glasher . " 

 " then I will go , " say Gwendolen , move away with a ceremonious inclination , which be return with equal grace . 

 in a few minute Gwendolen be in the beech grove again but her party have go out of sight and apparently have not send in search of she , for all be solitude till she have reach the avenue point out by the warden . she determine to take this way back to Green Arbor , which she reach quickly ; rapid movement seem to she just now a means of suspend the thought which might prevent she from behave with due calm . she have already make up her mind what step she would take . 

 Mrs. Davilow be of course astonish to see Gwendolen return alone , and be not without some uneasiness which the presence of other lady hinder she from show . in answer to her word of surprise Gwendolen say 

 " oh , I have be rather silly . I linger behind to look at the Whispering Stones , and the rest hurry on after something , so I lose sight of they . I think it well to come home by the short way the avenue that the warden have tell I of . I be not sorry after all . I have have enough walking . " 

 " your party do not meet Mr. Grandcourt , I presume , " say Mrs. 
 Arrowpoint , not without intention . 
 " no , " say Gwendolen , with a little flash of defiance , and a light laugh . " and we do not   see any carving on the tree , either . where can he be ? I should think he have fall into the pool or have an apoplectic fit . " 

 with all Gwendolen 's resolve not to betray any agitation , she could not help it that her tone be unusually high and hard , and her mother feel sure that something unpropitious have happen . 

 Mrs. Arrowpoint think that the self - confident young lady be much pique , and that Mr. Grandcourt be probably see reason to change his mind . 

 " if you have no objection , mamma , I will order the carriage , " say 
 Gwendolen . " I be tired . and every one will be go soon . " 
 Mrs. Davilow assent ; but by the time the carriage be announce as , ready the horse have to be fetch from the stable on the warden 's premise the rove party reappear , and with they Mr. Grandcourt . 

 " ah , there you be ! " say Lord Brackenshaw , go up to Gwendolen , who be arrange her mamma 's shawl for the drive . " we think at first you have alight on Grandcourt and he have take you home . Lush say so . but after that we meet Grandcourt . however , we do not   suppose you could be in any danger . the warden say he have tell you a near way back . " 

 " you be go ? " say Grandcourt , come up with his usual air , as if he do not conceive that there have be any omission on his part . Lord Brackenshaw give place to he and move away . 

 " yes , we be go , " say Gwendolen , look busily at her scarf , which she be arrange across her shoulder Scotch fashion . 

 " may I call at Offendene to - morrow ? " 

 " oh yes , if you like , " say Gwendolen , sweep he from a distance with her eyelash . her voice be light and sharp as the first touch of frost . 

 Mrs. Davilow accept his arm to lead she to the carriage ; but while that be happen , Gwendolen with incredible swiftness have get in advance of they , and have spring into the carriage . 

 " I get in , mamma , because I wish to be on this side , " she say , apologetically . but she have avoid Grandcourt 's touch : he only lift his hat and walk away with the not unsatisfactory impression that she mean to show herself offend by his neglect . 

 the mother and daughter drive for five minute in silence . then Gwendolen say , " I intend to join the Langens at Dover , mamma . I shall pack up immediately on get home , and set off by the early train . I shall be at Dover almost as soon as they be ; we can let they know by telegraph . " 

 " good heaven , child ! what can be your reason for say so ? " 

 " my reason for say it , mamma , be that I mean to do it . " 

 " but why do you mean to do it ? " 

 " I wish to go away . " 

 " be it because you be offend with Mr. Grandcourt 's odd behavior in walk off to - day ? " 

 " it be useless to enter into such question . I be not go in any case to marry Mr. Grandcourt . do not   interest yourself far about it . " 

 " what can I say to your uncle , Gwendolen ? consider the position you place I in . you lead he to believe only last night that you have make up your mind in favor of Mr. Grandcourt . " 

 " I be very sorry to cause you annoyance , mamma , dear , but I can not   help it , " say Gwendolen , with still hard resistance in her tone . " whatever you or my uncle may think or do , I shall not alter my resolve , and I shall not tell my reason . I do not   care what come of it . I do not   care if I never marry any one . there be nothing worth care for . I believe all man be bad , and I hate they . " 

 " but need you set off in this way , Gwendolen , " say Mrs. Davilow , miserable and helpless . 

 " now mamma , do not   interfere with I . if you have ever have any trouble in your own life , remember it and do not   interfere with I . if I be to be miserable , let it be by my own choice . " 

 the mother be reduce to tremble silence . she begin to see that the difficulty would be lessen if Gwendolen go away . 

 and she do go . the packing be all carefully do that evening , and not long after dawn the next day Mrs. Davilow accompany her daughter to the railway station . the sweet dew of morning , the cow and horse look over the hedge without any particular reason , the early traveler on foot with their bundle , seem all very melancholy and purposeless to they both . the dingy torpor of the railway station , before the ticket could be take , be still bad . Gwendolen have certainly harden in the last twenty - four hour : her mother 's trouble evidently count for little in her present state of mind , which do not essentially differ from the mood that make man take to bad conduct when their belief in person or thing be upset . Gwendolen 's uncontrolled reading , though consist chiefly in what be call picture of life , have somehow not prepare she for this encounter with reality . be that surprising ? it be to be believe that attendance at the opťra bouffe in the present day would not leave man 's mind entirely without shock , if the manner observe there with some applause be suddenly to start up in their own family . perspective , as its inventor remark , be a beautiful thing . what horror of damp hut , where human being languish , may not become picturesque through aerial distance ! what hymn of cancerous vice may we not languish over as sublimest art in the safe remoteness of a strange language and artificial phrase ! yet we keep a repugnance to rheumatism and other painful effect when present incur personal experience . 

 Mrs. Davilow feel Gwendolen 's new phase of indifference keenly , and as she drive back alone , the brightening morning be sad to she than before . 

 Mr. Grandcourt call that day at Offendene , but nobody be at home . 

 CHAPTER XV . 

 " Festina lente celerity should be contempere with cunctation . " SIR THOMAS BROWNE . 

 Gwendolen , we have see , pass her time abroad in the new excitement of gambling , and in imagine herself an empress of luck , have bring from her late experience a vague impression that in this confused world it signify nothing what any one do , so that they amuse themselves . we have see , too , that certain person , mysteriously symbolize as Grapnell    Co. , have also think of reign in the realm of luck , and be also bent on amuse themselves , no matter how , have bring about a painful change in her family circumstance ; whence she have return home carry with she , against her inclination , a necklace which she have pawn and some one else have redeem . 

 while she be go back to England , Grandcourt be come to find she ; come , that is , after his own manner not in haste by express straight from Diplow to Leubronn , where she be understand to be ; but so entirely without hurry that he be induce by the presence of some russian acquaintance to linger at Baden - Baden and make various appointment with they , which , however , his desire to be at Leubronn ultimately cause he to break . Grandcourt 's passion be of the intermittent , flicker kind : never flame out strongly . but a great deal of life go on without strong passion : myriad of cravat be carefully tie , dinner attend , even speech make propose the health of august personage without the z arise from a strong desire . and a man may make a good appearance in high social position may be suppose to know the classic , to have his reserve on science , a strong though repress opinion on politic , and all the sentiment of the english gentleman , at a small expense of vital energy . also , he may be obstinate or persistent at the same low rate , and may even show sudden impulse which have a false air of daemonic strength because they seem inexplicable , though perhaps their secret lie merely in the want of regulated channel for the soul to move in good and sufficient duct of habit without which our nature easily turn to mere ooze and mud , and at any pressure yield nothing but a spurt or a puddle . 

 Grandcourt have not be altogether displease by Gwendolen 's run away from the splendid chance he be hold out to she . the act have some piquancy for he . he like to think that it be due to resentment of his careless behavior in Cardell Chase , which , when he come to consider it , do appear rather cool . to have bring she so near a tender admission , and then to have walk headlong away from further opportunity of win the consent which he have make she understand he to be ask for , be enough to provoke a girl of spirit ; and to be worth his mastering it be proper that she should have some spirit . Doubtless she mean he to follow she , and it be what he mean too . but for a whole week he take no measure toward start , and do not even inquire where Miss Harleth be go . Mr. Lush feel a triumph that be mingle with much distrust ; for Grandcourt have say no word to he about she , and look as neutral as an alligator ; there be no telling what might turn up in the slowly - churn chance of his mind . still , to have put off a decision be to have make room for the waste of Grandcourt 's energy . 

 the guest at Diplow feel more curiosity than their host . how be it that nothing more be hear of Miss Harleth ? be it credible that she have refuse Mr. Grandcourt ? Lady Flora Hollis , a lively middle - aged woman , well endow with curiosity , feel a sudden interest in make a round of call with Mrs. Torrington , include the rectory , Offendene , and Quetcham , and thus not only get twice over , but also discuss with the arrowpoint , the information that Miss Harleth be go to Leubronn , with some old friend , the Baron and Baroness von Langen ; for the immediate agitation and disappointment of Mrs. Davilow and the Gascoignes have resolve itself into a wish that Gwendolen 's disappearance should not be interpret as anything eccentric or needful to be keep secret . the rector 's mind , indeed , entertain the possibility that the marriage be only a little defer , for Mrs. Davilow have not dare to tell he of the bitter determination with which Gwendolen have speak . and in spite of his practical ability , some of his experience have petrify into maxim and quotation . amarylli flee desire that her hiding - place should be know ; and that love will find out the way " over the mountain and over the wave " may be say without hyperbole in this age of steam . Gwendolen , he conceive , be an Amaryllis of excellent sense but coquettish daring ; the question be whether she have dare too much . 

 Lady Flora , come back charge with news about Miss Harleth , see no good reason why she should not try whether she could electrify Mr. Grandcourt by mention it to he at the table ; and in do so shoot a few hint of a notion have get abroad that he be a disappointed adorer . Grandcourt hear with quietude , but with attention ; and the next day he order Lush to bring about a decent reason for break up the party at Diplow by the end of another week , as he mean to go yacht to the Baltic or somewhere it be impossible to stay at diplow as if he be a prisoner on parole , with a set of people whom he have never want . Lush need no clear announcement that Grandcourt be go to Leubronn ; but he might go after the manner of a creep billiard - ball and stick on the way . what Mr. Lush intend be to make himself indispensable so that he might go too , and he succeed ; Gwendolen 's repulsion for he be a fact that only amuse his patron , and make he none the less willing to have Lush always at hand . 

 this be how it happen that Grandcourt arrive at the Czarina on the fifth day after Gwendolen have leave Leubronn , and find there his uncle , Sir Hugo Mallinger , with his family , include Deronda . it be not necessarily a pleasure either to the reign power or the heir presumptive when their separate affair a touch of gout , say , in the one , and a touch of willfulness in the other happen to bring they to the same spot . Sir Hugo be an easy - temper man , tolerant both of difference and defect ; but a point of view different from his own concern the settlement of the family estate fret he rather more than if it have concern Church discipline or the ballot , and fault be the less venial for belong to a person whose existence be inconvenient to he . in no case could Grandcourt have be a nephew after his own heart ; but as the presumptive heir to the Mallinger estate he be the sign and embodiment of a chief grievance in the baronet 's life the want of a son to inherit the land , in no portion of which have he himself more than a life - interest . for in the ill - advise settlement which his father , Sir Francis , have choose to make by will , even diplow with its modicum of land have be leave under the same condition as the ancient and wide inheritance of the two Toppings Diplow , where Sir Hugo have live and hunt through many a season in his young year , and where his wife and daughter ought to have be able to retire after his death . 

 this grievance have naturally gather emphasis as the year advance , and Lady Mallinger , after have have three daughter in quick succession , have remain for eight year till now that she be over forty without produce so much as another girl ; while Sir Hugo , almost twenty year old , be at a time of life when , notwithstanding the fashionable retardation of most thing from dinner to marriage , a man 's hopefulness be apt to show sign of wear , until restore by second childhood . 

 in fact , he have begin to despair of a son , and this confirmation of Grandcourt 's interest in the estate certainly tend to make his image and presence the more unwelcome ; but , on the other hand , it carry circumstance which dispose Sir Hugo to take care that the relation between they should be keep as friendly as possible . it lead he to dwell on a plan which have grow up side by side with his disappointment of an heir ; namely , to try and secure diplow as a future residence for Lady Mallinger and her daughter , and keep this pretty bit of the family inheritance for his own offspring in spite of that disappointment . such knowledge as he have of his nephew 's disposition and affair encourage the belief that Grandcourt might consent to a transaction by which he would get a good sum of ready money , as an equivalent for his prospective interest in the domain of Diplow and the moderate amount of land attach to it . if , after all , the unhoped - for son should be bear , the money would have be throw away , and Grandcourt would have be pay for give up interest that have turn out good for nothing ; but Sir Hugo set down this risk as nil , and of late year he have husband his fortune so well by the working of mine and the sale of lease that he be prepare for an outlay . 

 here be an object that make he careful to avoid any quarrel with Grandcourt . some year before , when he be make improvement at the Abbey , and need Grandcourt 's concurrence in his felling an obstructive mass of timber on the demesne , he have congratulate himself on find that there be no active spite against he in his nephew 's peculiar mind ; and nothing have since occur to make they hate each other more than be compatible with perfect politeness , or with any accommodation that could be strictly mutual . 

 Grandcourt , on his side , think his uncle a superfluity and a bore , and feel that the list of thing in general would be improve whenever Sir Hugo come to be expunge . but he have be make aware through Lush , always a useful medium , of the baronet 's inclination concern Diplow , and he be gratified to have the alternative of the money in his mind : even if he have not think it in the least likely that he would choose to accept it , his sense of power would have be flatter by his be able to refuse what Sir Hugo desire . the hint transaction have tell for something among the motif which have make he ask for a year 's tenancy of Diplow , which it have rather annoy Sir Hugo to grant , because the excellent hunting in the neighborhood might decide Grandcourt not to part with his chance of future possession ; a man who have two place , in one of which the hunting be less good , naturally desire a third where it be well . also , Lush have throw out to Sir Hugo the probability that Grandcourt would woo and win Miss Arrowpoint , and in that case ready money might be less of a temptation to he . hence , on this unexpected meeting at Leubronn , the baronet feel much curiosity to know how thing have be go on at Diplow , be bent on be as civil as possible to his nephew , and look forward to some private chat with Lush . 

 between Deronda and Grandcourt there be a more faintly - mark but peculiar relation , depend on circumstance which have yet to be make known . but on no side be there any sign of suppress chagrin on the first meeting at the table d'hűte , an hour after Grandcourt 's arrival ; and when the quartette of gentleman afterward meet on the terrace , without Lady Mallinger , they move off together to saunter through the room , Sir Hugo say as they enter the large saal 

 " do you play much at Baden , Grandcourt ? " 

 " no ; I look on and bet a little with some Russians there . " 

 " have you luck ? " 

 " what do I win , Lush ? " 

 " you bring away about two hundred , " say Lush . 

 " you be not here for the sake of the play , then ? " say Sir Hugo . 

 " no ; I do not   care about play now . it be a confounded strain , " say Grandcourt , whose diamond ring and demeanor , as he move along play slightly with his whisker , be be a good deal star at by rouged foreigner interested in a new milord . 

 " the fact be , somebody should invent a mill to do amusement for you , my dear fellow , " say Sir Hugo , " as the Tartars get their praying do . but I agree with you ; I never care for play . it be monotonous knit the brain up into mesh . and it knock I up to watch it now . I suppose one get poison with the bad air . I never stay here more than ten minute . but where be your gambling beauty , Deronda ? have you see she lately ? " 

 " she be go , " say Deronda , curtly . 

 " an uncommonly fine girl , a perfect Diana , " say Sir Hugo , turn to Grandcourt again . " really worth a little straining to look at she . I see she win , and she take it as coolly as if she have know it all beforehand . the same day Deronda happen to see she lose like wildfire , and she bear it with immense pluck . I suppose she be clean out , or be wise enough to stop in time . how do you know she be go ? " 

 " oh , by the Visitor - list , " say Deronda , with a scarcely perceptible shrug . " Vandernoodt tell I her name be Harleth , and she be with the Baron and Baroness von Langen . I see by the list that Miss Harleth be no long there . " 

 this hold no further information for Lush than that Gwendolen have be gamble . he have already look at the list , and ascertain that Gwendolen have go , but he have no intention of thrust this knowledge on Grandcourt before he ask for it ; and he have not ask , find it enough to believe that the object of search would turn up somewhere or other . 

 but now Grandcourt have hear what be rather piquant , and not a word about Miss Harleth have be miss by he . after a moment 's pause he say to Deronda 

 " do you know those people the Langens ? " 

 " I have talk with they a little since Miss Harleth go away . I know nothing of they before . " 

 " where be she go do you know ? " 

 " she be go home , " say Deronda , coldly , as if he wish to say no more . but then , from a fresh impulse , he turn to look markedly at Grandcourt , and add , " but it be possible you know she . her home be not far from diplow : Offendene , near Winchester . " 

 Deronda , turn to look straight at Grandcourt , who be on his left hand , might have be a subject for those old painter who like contrast of temperament . there be a calm intensity of life and richness of tint in his face that on a sudden gaze from he be rather startling , and often make he seem to have speak , so that servant and official ask he automatically , " what do you say , sir ? " when he have be quite silent . Grandcourt himself feel an irritation , which he do not show except by a slight movement of the eyelid , at Deronda 's turn round on he when he be not ask to do more than speak . but he answer , with his usual drawl , " yes , I know she , " and pause with his shoulder toward Deronda , to look at the gambling . 

 " what of she , eh ? " ask Sir Hugo of Lush , as the three move on a little way . " she must be a new - comer at Offendene . Old Blenny live there after the dowager die . " 

 " a little too much of she , " say Lush , in a low , significant tone ; not sorry to let Sir Hugo know the state of affair . 

 " why ? how ? " say the baronet . they all move out of the salon into an airy promenade . 

 " he have be on the brink of marry she , " Lush go on . " but I hope it be off now . she be a niece of the clergyman Gascoigne at Pennicote . her mother be a widow with a brood of daughter . this girl will have nothing , and be as dangerous as gunpowder . it would be a foolish marriage . but she have take a freak against he , for she run off here without notice , when he have agree to call the next day . the fact be , he be here after she ; but he be in no great hurry , and between his caprice and hers they be likely enough not to get together again . but of course he have lose his chance with the heiress . " 

 Grandcourt join they say , " what a beastly den this be ! a bad hole than Baden . I shall go back to the hotel . " 

 when Sir Hugo and Deronda be alone , the baronet begin 

 " rather a pretty story . that girl have something in she . she must be worth run after have de l'imprťvu . I think her appearance on the scene have better my chance of get Diplow , whether the marriage come off or not . " 

 " I should hope a marriage like that would not come off , " say Deronda , in a tone of disgust . 

 " what ! be you a little touch with the sublime lash ? " say Sir Hugo , put up his glass to help his short sight in look at his companion . " be you inclined to run after she ? " 

 " on the contrary , " say Deronda , " I should rather be incline to run away from she . " 

 " why , you would easily cut out Grandcourt . a girl with her spirit would think you the fine match of the two , " say Sir Hugo , who often try Deronda 's patience by find a joke in impossible advice .   a difference of taste in joke be a great strain on the affection . 

 " I suppose pedigree and land belong to a fine match , " say Deronda , coldly . 

 " the good horse will win in spite of pedigree , my boy . you remember Napoleon 's mot Je suis un ancetre " say Sir Hugo , who habitually undervalue birth , as man after dining well often agree that the good of life be distribute with wonderful equality . 

 " I be not sure that I want to be an ancestor , " say Deronda . " it do not   seem to I the rare sort of origination . " 

 " you will not   run after the pretty gambler , then ? " say Sir Hugo , put down his glass . 

 " decidedly not . " 

 this answer be perfectly truthful ; nevertheless it have pass through Deronda 's mind that under other circumstance he should have give way to the interest this girl have raise in he , and try to know more of she . but his history have give he a strong bias in another direction . he feel himself in no sense free . 

 CHAPTER XVI . 

 man , like planet , have both a visible and an invisible history . the astronomer thread the darkness with strict deduction , account so for every visible arc in the wanderer 's orbit ; and the narrator of human action , if he do his work with the same completeness , would have to thread the hidden pathway of feeling and think which lead up to every moment of action , and to those moment of intense suffering which take the quality of action like the cry of Prometheus , whose chain anguish seem a great energy than the sea and sky he invoke and the deity he defy . 

 Deronda 's circumstance , indeed , have be exceptional . one moment have be burn into his life as its chief epoch a moment full of July sunshine and large pink rose shed their last petal on a grassy court enclose on three side by a gothic cloister . imagine he in such a scene : a boy of thirteen , stretch prone on the grass where it be in shadow , his curly head prop on his arm over a book , while his tutor , also read , sit on a camp - stool under shelter . Deronda 's book be Sismondi 's " history of the italian Republics " ; the lad have a passion for history , eager to know how time have be fill up since the flood , and how thing be carry on in the dull period . suddenly he let down his left arm and look at his tutor , say in pure boyish tone 

 " Mr. Fraser , how be it that the pope and cardinal always have so many nephew ? " 

 the tutor , an able young Scotchman , who act as Sir Hugo Mallinger 's secretary , rouse rather unwillingly from his political economy , answer with the clear - cut emphatic chant which make a truth doubly tell in Scotch utterance 

 " their own child be call nephew . " 

 " why ? " say Deronda . 

 " it be just for the propriety of the thing ; because , as you know very well , priest do not   marry , and the child be illegitimate . " 

 Mr. Fraser , thrust out his low lip and make his chant of the last word the more emphatic for a little impatience at be interrupt , have already turn his eye on his book again , while Deronda , as if something have sting he , start up in a sit attitude with his back to the tutor . 

 he have always call Sir Hugo Mallinger his uncle , and when it once occur to he to ask about his father and mother , the baronet have answer , " you lose your father and mother when you be quite a little one ; that be why I take care of you . " Daniel then strain to discern something in that early twilight , have a dim sense of have be kiss very much , and surround by thin , cloudy , scented drapery , till his finger catch in something hard , which hurt he , and he begin to cry . every other memory he have be of the little world in which he still live . and at that time he do not mind about learn more , for he be too fond of Sir Hugo to be sorry for the loss of unknown parent . life be very delightful to the lad , with an uncle who be always indulgent and cheerful a fine man in the bright noon of life , whom Daniel think absolutely perfect , and whose place be one of the fine in England , at once historical ; romantic , and home - like : a picturesque architectural outgrowth from an abbey , which have still remnant of the old monastic trunk . diplow lie in another county , and be a comparatively landless place which have come into the family from a rich lawyer on the female side who wear the perruque of the restoration ; whereas the Mallingers have the grant of Monk 's topping under Henry the Eighth , and age before have hold the neighbor land of King 's Topping , trace indeed their origin to a certain Hugues le Malingre , who come in with the Conqueror and also apparently with a sickly complexion which have be happily correct in his descendant . two row of these descendant , direct and collateral , female of the male line , and male of the female , look down in the gallery over the cloister on the nephew Daniel as he walk there : man in armor with pointed beard and arch eyebrow , pinch lady in hoop and ruff with no face to speak of ; grave - look man in black velvet and stuff hip , and fair , frighten woman hold little boy by the hand ; smile politician in magnificent perruque , and lady of the prize - animal kind , with rosebud mouth and full eyelid , accord to lely ; then a generation whose face be revise and embellish in the taste of Kneller ; and so on through refined edition of the family type in the time of Reynolds and Romney , till the line end with Sir Hugo and his young brother Henleigh . this last have marry Miss Grandcourt , and take her name along with her estate , thus make a junction between two equally old family , impale the three Saracens ' head proper and three bezant of the one with the tower and falcon argent of the other , and , as it happen , unite their high advantage in the prospect of that Henleigh Mallinger Grandcourt who be at present more of an acquaintance to we than either Sir Hugo or his nephew Daniel Deronda . 

 in Sir Hugo 's youthful portrait with roll collar and high cravat , Sir Thomas Lawrence have do justice to the agreeable alacrity of expression and sanguine temperament still to be see in the original , but have do something more than justice in slightly lengthen the nose , which be in reality short than might have be expect in a Mallinger . happily the appropriate nose of the family reappear in his young brother , and be to be see in all its refined regularity in his nephew Mallinger Grandcourt . but in the nephew Daniel Deronda the family face of various type , see on the wall of the gallery ; find no reflex . still he be handsomer than any of they , and when he be thirteen might have serve as model for any painter who want to image the most memorable of boy : you could hardly have see his face thoroughly meet your without believe that human creature have do nobly in time past , and might do more nobly in time to come . the fine childlike face have this consecrating power , and make we shudder anew at all the grossness and basely - wrought grief of the world , lest they should enter here and defile . 

 but at this moment on the grass among the rose - petal , Daniel Deronda be make a first acquaintance with those grief . a new idea have enter his mind , and be begin to change the aspect of his habitual feeling as happy careless voyager be change with the sky suddenly threaten and the thought of danger arise . he sit perfectly still with his back to the tutor , while his face express rapid inward transition . the deep blush , which have come when he first start up , gradually subside ; but his feature keep that indescribable look of subdue activity which often accompany a new mental survey of familiar fact . he have not live with other boy , and his mind show the same blending of child 's ignorance with surprising knowledge which be oftener see in bright girl . have read Shakespeare as well as a great deal of history , he could have talk with the wisdom of a bookish child about man who be bear out of wedlock and be hold unfortunate in consequence , be under disadvantage which require they to be a sort of hero if they be to work themselves up to an equal standing with their legally bear brother . but he have never bring such knowledge into any association with his own lot , which have be too easy for he ever to think about it until this moment when there have dart into his mind with the magic of quick comparison , the possibility that here be the secret of his own birth , and that the man whom he call uncle be really his father . some child , even young than Daniel , have know the first arrival of care , like an ominous irremovable guest in their tender life , on the discovery that their parent , whom they have imagine able to buy everything , be poor and in hard money trouble . Daniel feel the presence of a new guest who seem to come with an enigmatic veiled face , and to carry dimly - conjecture , dread revelation . the ardor which he have give to the imaginary world in his book suddenly rush toward his own history and spend its pictorial energy there , explain what he know , represent the unknown . the uncle whom he love very dearly take the aspect of a father who hold secret about he who have do he a wrong yes , a wrong : and what have become of his mother , for whom he must have be take away ? secret about which he , Daniel , could never inquire ; for to speak or to be speak to about these new thought seem like fall flake of fire to his imagination . those who have know an impassioned childhood will understand this dread of utterance about any shame connect with their parent . the impetuous advent of new image take possession of he with the force of fact for the first time tell , and leave he no immediate power for the reflection that he might be tremble at a fiction of his own . the terrible sense of collision between a strong rush of feeling and the dread of its betrayal , find relief at length in big slow tear , which fall without restraint until the voice of Mr. Fraser be hear say : 

 " Daniel , do you see that you be sit on the bent page of your book ? " 

 Daniel immediately move the book without turn round , and after hold it before he for an instant , rise with it and walk away into the open ground , where he could dry his tear unobserved . the first shock of suggestion past , he could remember that he have no certainty how thing really have be , and that he have be make conjecture about his own history , as he have often make story about Pericles or Columbus , just to fill up the blank before they become famous . only there come back certain fact which have an obstinate reality , almost like the fragment of a bridge , tell you unmistakably how the arch lie . and again there come a mood in which his conjecture seem like a doubt of religion , to be banish as an offense , and a mean prying after what he be not mean to know ; for there be hardly a delicacy of feel this lad be not capable of . but the summing - up of all his fluctuate experience at this epoch be , that a secret impression have come to he which have give he something like a new sense in relation to all the element of his life . and the idea that other probably know thing concern which they do not choose to mention , set up in he a premature reserve which help to intensify his inward experience . his ear open now to word which before that July day would have pass by he unnote ; and round every trivial incident which imagination could connect with his suspicion , a newly - rouse set of feeling be ready to cluster themselves . 

 one such incident a month later work itself deeply into his life . Daniel have not only one of those thrilling boy voice which seem to bring an idyllic heaven and earth before our eye , but a fine musical instinct , and have early make out accompaniment for himself on the piano , while he sing from memory . since then he have have some teaching , and Sir Hugo , who delight in the boy , use to ask for his music in the presence of guest . one morning after he have be sing " Sweet Echo " before a small party of gentleman whom the rain have keep in the house , the baronet , pass from a smile remark to his next neighbor say : 

 " come here , Dan ! " 

 the boy come forward with unusual reluctance . he wear an embroidered holland blouse which set off the rich coloring of his head and throat , and the resistant gravity about his mouth and eye as he be be smile upon , make their beauty the more impressive . every one be admire he . 

 " what do you say to be a great singer ? should you like to be adore by the world and take the house by storm ; like Mario and Tamberlik ? " 

 Daniel redden instantaneously , but there be a just perceptible interval before he answer with angry decision 

 " no ; I should hate it ! " 

 " well , well , well ! " say Sir Hugo , with surprised kindliness intend to be soothe . but Daniel turn away quickly , leave the room , and go to his own chamber throw himself on the broad window - sill , which be a favorite retreat of his when he have nothing particular to do . here he could see the rain gradually subside with gleam through the parting cloud which light up a great reach of the park , where the old oak stand apart from each other , and the border wood be pierce with a green glade which meet the eastern sky . this be a scene which have always be part of his home part of the dignified ease which have be a matter of course in his life . and his ardent clinging nature have appropriate it all with affection . he know a great deal of what it be to be a gentleman by inheritance , and without think much about himself for he be a boy of active perception and easily forget his own existence in that of Robert Bruce he have never suppose that he could be shut out from such a lot , or have a very different part in the world from that of the uncle who pet he . it be possible   though not greatly believe in at present   to be fond of poverty and take it for a bride , to prefer scoured deal , red quarry and whitewash for one 's private surrounding , to delight in no splendor but what have open door for the whole nation , and to glory in have no privilege except such as nature insist on ; and nobleman have be know to run away from elaborate ease and the option of idleness , that they might bind themselves for small pay to hard - handed labor . but Daniel 's taste be altogether in keep with his nurture : his disposition be one in which everyday scene and habit beget not ennui or rebellion , but delight , affection , aptitude ; and now the lad have be sting to the quick by the idea that his uncle perhaps his father think of a career for he which be totally unlike his own , and which he know very well be not think of among possible destination for the son of english gentleman . he have often stay in London with Sir Hugo , who to indulge the boy 's ear have carry he to the opera to hear the great tenor , so that the image of a singer take the house by storm be very vivid to he ; but now , spite of his musical gift , he set himself bitterly against the notion of be dress up to sing before all those fine people , who would not care about he except as a wonderful toy . that Sir Hugo should have think of he in that position for a moment , seem to Daniel an unmistakable proof that there be something about his birth which throw he out from the class of gentleman to which the baronet belong . would it ever be mention to he ? would the time come when his uncle would tell he everything ? he shrink from the prospect : in his imagination he prefer ignorance . if his father have be wicke Daniel inwardly use strong word , for he be feel the injury do he as a maimed boy feel the crushed limb which for other be merely reckon in an average of accident if his father have do any wrong , he wish it might never be speak of to he : it be already a cutting thought that such knowledge might be in other mind . be it in Mr. Fraser 's ? probably not , else he would not have speak in that way about the pope 's nephew . Daniel fancy , as old people do , that every one else 's consciousness be as active as his own on a matter which be vital to he . do turvey the valet know ? and old Mrs. French the housekeeper ? and bank the bailiff , with whom he have ride about the farm on his pony ? and now there come back the recollection of a day some year before when he be drink Mrs. Banks 's whey , and bank say to his wife with a wink and a cunning laugh , " he feature the mother , eh ? " at that time little Daniel have merely think that bank make a silly face , as the common farming man often do , laugh at what be not laughable ; and he rather resent be wink at and talk of as if he do not understand everything . but now that small incident become information : it be to be reason on . how could he be like his mother and not like his father ? his mother must have be a Mallinger , if Sir Hugo be his uncle . but no ! his father might have be Sir Hugo 's brother and have change his name , as Mr. Henleigh Mallinger do when he marry Miss Grandcourt . but then , why have he never hear Sir Hugo speak of his brother Deronda , as he speak of his brother Grandcourt ? Daniel have never before care about the family tree only about that ancestor who have kill three Saracens in one encounter . but now his mind turn to a cabinet of estate - map in the library , where he have once see an illuminated parchment hang out , that Sir Hugo say be the family tree . the phrase be new and odd to he he be a little fellow then hardly more than half his present age and he give it no precise meaning . he know more now and wish that he could examine that parchment . he imagine that the cabinet be always lock , and long to try it . but here he check himself . he might be see : and he would never bring himself near even a silent admission of the sore that have open in he . 

 it be in such experience of a boy or girlhood , while elder be debate whether most education lie in science or literature , that the main line of character be often lay down . if Daniel have be of a less ardently affectionate nature , the reserve about himself and the supposition that other have something to his disadvantage in their mind , might have turn into a hard , proud antagonism . but inborn lovingness be strong enough to keep itself level with resentment . there be hardly any creature in his habitual world that he be not fond of ; tease they occasionally , of course all except his uncle , or " nunc , " as Sir Hugo have teach he to say ; for the baronet be the reverse of a strait - laced man , and leave his dignity to take care of itself . Him Daniel love in that deep - root filial way which make child always the happy for be in the same room with father or mother , though their occupation may be quite apart . Sir Hugo 's watch - chain and seal , his handwriting , his mode of smoking and of talk to his dog and horse , have all a rightness and charm about they to the boy which go along with the happiness of morning and breakfast time . that Sir Hugo have always be a Whig , make Tories and Radicals equally opponent of the truest and good ; and the book he have write be all see under the same consecration of love belief which difference what be his from what be not his , in spite of general resemblance . those writing be various , from volume of travel in the brilliant style , to article on thing in general , and pamphlet on political crisis ; but to Daniel they be alike in have an unquestionable rightness by which other people 's information could be test . 

 who can not imagine the bitterness of a first suspicion that something in this object of complete love be not quite right ? child demand that their hero should be fleckless , and easily believe they so : perhaps a first discovery to the contrary be hardly a less revolutionary shock to a passionate child than the threaten downfall of habitual belief which make the world seem to totter for we in mature life . 

 but some time after this renewal of Daniel 's agitation it appear that Sir Hugo must have be make a merely playful experiment in his question about the singing . he send for Daniel into the library , and look up from his writing as the boy enter throw himself sideways in his armchair . " ah , Dan ! " he say kindly , draw one of the old embroider stool close to he . " come and sit down here . " 

 Daniel obey , and Sir Hugo put a gentle hand on his shoulder , look at he affectionately . 

 " what be it , my boy ? have you hear anything that have put you out of spirit lately ? " 

 Daniel be determined not to let the tear come , but he could not speak . 

 " all change be painful when people have be happy , you know , " say Sir Hugo , lift his hand from the boy 's shoulder to his dark curl and rub they gently . " you can not   be educate exactly as I wish you to be without our parting . and I think you will find a great deal to like at school . " 

 this be not what Daniel expect , and be so far a relief , which give he spirit to answer 

 " be I to go to school ? " 

 " yes , I mean you to go to Eton . I wish you to have the education of an english gentleman ; and for that it be necessary that you should go to a public school in preparation for the university : Cambridge I mean you to go to ; it be my own university . " 

 Daniel 's color come and go . 

 " what do you say , sirrah ? " say Sir Hugo , smile . 

 " I should like to be a gentleman , " say Daniel , with firm distinctness , " and go to school , if that be what a gentleman 's son must do . " 

 Sir Hugo watch he silently for a few moment , think he understand now why the lad have seem angry at the notion of become a singer . then he say tenderly 

 " and so you will not   mind about leave your old Nunc ? " 

 " yes , I shall , " say Daniel , clasp Sir Hugo 's caress arm with both his hand . " but shall not   I come home and be with you in the holiday ? " 

 " oh yes , generally , " say Sir Hugo . " but now I mean you to go at once to a new tutor , to break the change for you before you go to Eton . " 

 after this interview Daniel 's spirit rise again . he be mean to be a gentleman , and in some unaccountable way it might be that his conjecture be all wrong . the very keenness of the lad teach he to find comfort in his ignorance . while he be busy his mind in the construction of possibility , it become plain to he that there must be possibility of which he know nothing . he leave off brooding , young joy and the spirit of adventure not be easily quench within he , and in the interval before his go away he sing about the house , dance among the old servant , make they part gift , and insist many time to the groom on the care that be to be take of the black pony . 

 " do you think I shall know much less than the other boy , Mr. Fraser ? " say Daniel . it be his bent to think that every stranger would be surprised at his ignorance . 

 " there be dunce to be find everywhere , " say the judicious Fraser . " you will not be the big ; but you have   not the making of a Porson in you , or a Leibnitz either . " 

 " I do not   want to be a Porson or a Leibnitz , " say Daniel . " I would rather be a great leader , like Pericles or Washington . " 

 " ay , ay ; you have   a notion they do with little parsing , and less algebra , " say Fraser . but in reality he think his pupil a remarkable lad , to whom one thing be as easy as another , if he have only a mind to it . 

 thing go on very well with Daniel in his new world , except that a boy with whom he be at once incline to strike up a close friendship talk to he a great deal about his home and parent , and seem to expect a like expansiveness in return . Daniel immediately shrink into reserve , and this experience remain a check on his naturally strong bent toward the formation of intimate friendship . every one , his tutor include , set he down as a reserved boy , though he be so good - humor and unassuming , as well as quick , both at study and sport , that nobody call his reserve disagreeable . certainly his face have a great deal to do with that favorable interpretation ; but in this instance the beauty of the closed lip tell no falsehood . 

 a surprise that come to he before his first vacation strengthen the silent consciousness of a grief within , which might be compare in some way with Byron 's susceptibility about his deformed foot . Sir Hugo write word that he be married to Miss Raymond , a sweet lady , whom Daniel must remember have see . the event would make no difference about his spend the vacation at the Abbey ; he would find Lady Mallinger a new friend whom he would be sure to love and much more to the usual effect when a man , have do something agreeable to himself , be disposed to congratulate other on his own good fortune , and the deducible satisfactoriness of event in general . 

 let Sir Hugo be partly excuse until the ground of his action can be more fully know . the mistake in his behavior to Deronda be due to that dullness toward what may be go on in other mind , especially the mind of child , which be among the commonest deficiency , even in good - natured man like he , when life have be generally easy to themselves , and their energy have be quietly spend in feeling gratify . no one be well aware than he that Daniel be generally suspect to be his own son . but he be pleased with that suspicion ; and his imagination have never once be trouble with the way in which the boy himself might be affect , either then or in the future , by the enigmatic aspect of his circumstance . he be as fond of he as could be , and mean the good by he . and , consider the lightness with which the preparation of young life seem to lie on respectable conscience , Sir Hugo Mallinger can hardly be hold open to exceptional reproach . he have be a bachelor till he be five - and - forty , have always be regard as a fascinating man of elegant taste ; what could be more natural , even accord to the index of language , than that he should have a beautiful boy like the little Deronda to take care of ? the mother might even , perhaps , be in the great world meet with in Sir Hugo 's residence abroad . the only person to feel any objection be the boy himself , who could not have be consult . and the boy 's objection have never be dream of by anybody but himself . 

 by the time Deronda be ready to go to Cambridge , Lady Mallinger have already three daughter charming baby , all three , but whose sex be announce as a melancholy alternative , the offspring desire be a son ; if Sir Hugo have no son the succession must go to his nephew , Mallinger Grandcourt . Daniel no long hold a waver opinion about his own birth . his full knowledge have tend to convince he that Sir Hugo be his father , and he conceive that the baronet , since he never approach a communication on the subject , wish he to have a tacit understanding of the fact , and to accept in silence what would be generally consider more than the due love and nurture . Sir Hugo 's marriage might certainly have be feel as a new ground of resentment by some youth in Deronda 's position , and the timid Lady Mallinger with her fast - come little one might have be image to scowl at , as likely to divert much that be disposable in the feeling and possession of the baronet from one who feel his own claim to be prior . but hatred of innocent human obstacle be a form of moral stupidity not in Deronda 's grain ; even the indignation which have long mingle itself with his affection for Sir Hugo take the quality of pain rather than of temper ; and as his mind ripen to the idea of tolerance toward error , he habitually like the idea with his own silent grievance . 

 the sense of an entail disadvantage the deformed foot doubtfully hide by the shoe , make a restlessly active spiritual yeast , and easily turn a self - center , unlove nature into an Ishmaelite . but in the rare sort , who presently see their own frustrated claim as one among a myriad , the inexorable sorrow take the form of fellowship and make the imagination tender . Deronda 's early - weaken susceptibility , charge at first with ready indignation and resistant pride , have raise in he a premature reflection on certain question of life ; it have give a bias to his conscience , a sympathy with certain ill , and a tension of resolve in certain direction , who mark he off from other youth much more than any talent he possess . 

 one day near the end of the long vacation , when he have be make a tour in the Rhineland with his Eton tutor , and be come for a farewell stay at the Abbey before go to Cambridge , he say to Sir Hugo 

 " what do you intend I to be , sir ? " they be in the library , and it be the fresh morning . Sir Hugo have call he in to read a letter from a Cambridge Don who be to be interested in he ; and since the baronet wear an air at once business - like and leisurely , the moment seem propitious for enter on a grave subject which have never yet be thoroughly discuss . 

 " whatever your inclination lead you to , my boy . I think it right to give you the option of the army , but you shut the door on that , and I be glad . I do not   expect you to choose just yet by - and - by , when you have look about you a little more and try your mettle among old man . the university have a good wide opening into the forum . there be prize to be win , and a bit of good fortune often give the turn to a man 's taste . from what I see and hear , I should think you can take up anything you like . you be in the deep water with your classic than I ever get into , and if you be rather sick of that swimming , Cambridge be the place where you can go into mathematic with a will , and disport yourself on the dry sand as much as you like . I flounder along like a carp . " 

 " I suppose money will make some difference , sir , " say Daniel blushing . 
 " I shall have to keep myself by - and - by . " 
 " not exactly . I recommend you not to be extravagant yes , yes , I know you be not inclined to that ; but you need not take up anything against the grain . you will have a bachelor 's income enough for you to look about with . perhaps I have well tell you that you may consider yourself secure of seven hundred a year . you might make yourself a barrister be a writer take up politic . I confess that be what would please I well . I should like to have you at my elbow and pull with I . " 

 Deronda look embarrassed . he feel that he ought to make some sign of gratitude , but other feeling clog his tongue . a moment be pass by in which a question about his birth be throb within he , and yet it seem more impossible than ever that the question should find vent more impossible than ever that he could hear certain thing from Sir Hugo 's lip . the liberal way in which he be deal with be the more striking because the baronet have of late care particularly for money , and for make the utmost of his life - interest in the estate by way of provide for his daughter ; and as all this flash through Daniel 's mind it be momentarily within his imagination that the provision for he might come in some way from his mother . but such vaporous conjecture pass away as quickly as it come . 

 Sir Hugo appear not to notice anything peculiar in Daniel 's manner , and presently go on with his usual chatty liveliness . 

 " I be glad you have do some good reading outside your classic , and have get a grip of french and German . the truth be , unless a man can get the prestige and income of a Don and write donnish book , it be hardly worth while for he to make a greek and latin machine of himself and be able to spin you out page of the greek dramatist at any verse you will give he as a cue . that be all very fine , but in practical life nobody do give you the cue for page of Greek . in fact , it be a nicety of conversation which I would have you attend to much quotation of any sort , even in English be bad . it tend to choke ordinary remark . one could not   carry on life comfortably without a little blindness to the fact that everything have be say well than we can put it ourselves . but talk of don , I have see don make a capital figure in society ; and occasionally he can shoot you down a cart - load of learn in the right place , which will tell in politic . such man be want ; and if you have any turn for be a Don , I say nothing against it . " 

 " I think there be not much chance of that . Quicksett and Puller be both strong than I be . I hope you will not be much disappointed if I do not   come out with high honor . " 

 " no , no . I should like you to do yourself credit , but for God 's sake do not   come out as a superior expensive kind of idiot , like young Brecon , who get a double first , and have be learn to knit brace ever since . what I wish you to get be a passport in life . I do not   go against our university system : we want a little disinterested culture to make head against cotton and capital , especially in the House . my Greek have all evaporate ; if I have to construe a verse on a sudden , I should get an apoplectic fit . but it form my taste . I dare say my English be the well for it . " 

 on this point Daniel keep a respectful silence . the enthusiastic belief in Sir Hugo 's writing as a standard , and in the whig as the choose race among politician , have gradually vanish along with the seraphic boy 's face . he have not be the hard of worker at Eton . though some kind of study and reading come as easily as boat to he , he be not of the material that usually make the first - rate Eton scholar . there have spring up in he a meditative yearning after wide knowledge which be likely always to abate ardor in the fight for prize acquirement in narrow track . happily he be modest , and take any second - rateness in himself simply as a fact , not as a marvel necessarily to be account for by a superiority . still Mr. Fraser 's high opinion of the lad have not be altogether belie by the youth : Daniel have the stamp of rarity in a subdued fervor of sympathy , an activity of imagination on behalf of other which do not show itself effusively , but be continually see in act of considerateness that strike his companion as moral eccentricity . " Deronda would have be first - rate if he have have more ambition , " be a frequent remark about he . but how could a fellow push his way properly when he object to swop for his own advantage , knock under by choice when he be within an inch of victory , and , unlike the great clive , would rather be the calf than the butcher ? it be a mistake , however , to suppose that Deronda have not his share of ambition . we know he have suffer keenly from the belief that there be a tinge of dishonor in his lot ; but there be some case , and his be one of they , in which the sense of injury breed not the will to inflict injury and climb over they as a ladder , but a hatred of all injury . he have his flash of fierceness and could hit out upon occasion , but the occasion be not always what might have be expect . for in what relate to himself his resentful impulse have be early check by a mastering affectionateness . love have a habit of say " never mind " to angry self , who , sit down for the nonce in the low place , by - and - by get use to it . so it be that as Deronda approach manhood his feeling for Sir Hugo , while it be get more and more mixed with criticism , be gain in that sort of allowance which reconcile criticism with tenderness . the dear old beautiful home and everything within it , Lady Mallinger and her little one include , be consecrate for the youth as they have be for the boy only with a certain difference of light on the object . the altarpiece be no long miraculously perfect , paint under infallible guidance , but the human hand discern in the work be appeal to a reverent tenderness safe from the gust of discovery . certainly Deronda 's ambition , even in his spring - time , lie exceptionally aloof from conspicuous , vulgar triumph , and from other ugly form of boyish energy ; perhaps because he be early impassione by idea , and burn his fire on those height . one may spend a good deal of energy in dislike and resist what other pursue , and a boy who be fond of somebody else 's pencil - case may not be more energetic than another who be fond of give his own pencil - case away . still it be not Deronda 's disposition to escape from ugly scene ; he be more inclined to sit through they and take care of the fellow least able to take care of himself . it have help to make he popular that he be sometimes a little compromise by this apparent comradeship . for a meditative interest in learn how human misery be work as precocious in he as another sort of genius in the poet who write a Queen Mab at nineteen be so infused with kindliness that it easily pass for comradeship . enough . in many of our neighbor ' life there be much not only of error and lapse , but of a certain exquisite goodness which can never be write or even speak only divine by each of we , accord to the inward instruction of our own privacy . 

 the impression he make at Cambridge correspond to his position at Eton . every one interested in he agree that he might have take a high place if his motif have be of a more pushing sort , and if he have not , instead of regard study as instrument of success , hamper himself with the notion that they be to feed motive and opinion a notion which set he criticise method and argue against his freight and harness when he should have be use all his might to pull . in the beginning his work at the university have a new zest for he : indifferent to the continuation of Eton classical drill , he apply himself vigorously to mathematic , for which he have show an early aptitude under Mr. Fraser , and he have the delight of feel his strength in a comparatively fresh exercise of thought . that delight , and the favorable opinion of his tutor , determine he to try for a mathematical scholarship in the Easter of his second year : he wish to gratify Sir Hugo by some achievement , and the study of the high mathematic , have the grow fascination inherent in all thinking which demand intensity , be make he a more exclusive worker than he have be before . 

 but here come the old check which have be grow with his growth . he find the inward bent toward comprehension and thoroughness diverge more and more from the track mark out by the standard of examination : he feel a heightening discontent with the wear futility and enfeeble strain of a demand for excessive retention and dexterity without any insight into the principle which form the vital connection of knowledge .   Deronda 's undergraduateship occur fifteen year ago , when the perfection of our university method be not yet indisputable .   in hour when his dissatisfaction be strong upon he he reproach himself for have be attract by the conventional advantage of belong to an english university , and be tempt toward the project of ask Sir Hugo to let he quit Cambridge and pursue a more independent line of study abroad . the germ of this inclination have be already stir in his boyish love of universal history , which make he want to be at home in foreign country , and follow in imagination the travel student of the middle age . he long now to have the sort of apprenticeship to life which would not shape he too definitely , and rob he of the choice that might come from a free growth . one see that Deronda 's demerit be likely to be on the side of reflective hesitation , and this tendency be encourage by his position ; there be no need for he to get an immediate income , or to fit himself in haste for a profession ; and his sensibility to the half - know fact of his parentage make he an excuse for linger long than other in a state of social neutrality . other man , he inwardly say , have a more definite place and duty . but the project which flatter his inclination might not have go beyond the stage of ineffective brooding , if certain circumstance have not quicken it into action . 

 the circumstance arise out of an enthusiastic friendship which extend into his after - life . of the same year with himself , and occupy small room close to his , be a youth who have come as an exhibitioner from Christ 's Hospital , and have eccentricity enough for a Charles Lamb . only to look at his pinched feature and blonde hair hang over his collar remind one of pale quaint head by early german painter ; and when this faint coloring be light up by a joke , there come sudden crease about the mouth and eye which might have be mould by the soul of an aged humorist . his father , an engraver of some distinction , have be dead eleven year , and his mother have three girl to educate and maintain on a meagre annuity . Hans Meyrick he have be daringly christen after Holbein feel himself the pillar , or rather the knotted and twisted trunk , round which these feeble climbing plant must cling . there be no want of ability or of honest well - mean affection to make the prop trustworthy : the ease and quickness with which he study might serve he to win prize at Cambridge , as he have do among the Blue Coats , in spite of irregularity . the only danger be , that the incalculable tendency in he might be fatally time , and that his good intention might be frustrate by some act which be not due to habit but to capricious , scattered impulse . he could not be say to have any one bad habit ; yet at long or short interval he have fit of impish recklessness , and do thing that would have make the bad habit . 

 han in his right mind , however , be a lovable creature , and in Deronda he have happen to find a friend who be likely to stand by he with the more constancy , from compassion for these brief aberration that might bring a long repentance . han , indeed , share Deronda 's room nearly as much as he use his own : to Deronda he pour himself out on his study , his affair , his hope ; the poverty of his home , and his love for the creature there ; the itching of his finger to draw , and his determination to fight it away for the sake of get some sort of a plum that he might divide with his mother and the girl . he want no confidence in return , but seem to take Deronda as an Olympian who need nothing an egotism in friendship which be common enough with mercurial , expansive nature . Deronda be content , and give Meyrick all the interest he claim , get at last a brotherly anxiety about he , look after he in his erratic moment , and contrive by adroitly delicate device not only to make up for his friend 's lack of penny , but to save he from threaten chance . such friendship easily become tender : the one spread strong shelter wing that delight in spread , the other get the warm protection which be also a delight . Meyrick be go in for a classical scholarship , and his success , in various way momentous , be the more probable from the steady influence of Deronda 's friendship . 

 but an imprudence of Meyrick 's , commit at the beginning of the autumn term , threaten to disappoint his hope . with his usual alternation between unnecessary expense and self - privation , he have give too much money for an old engraving which fascinate he , and to make up for it , have come from London in a third - class carriage with his eye expose to a bitter wind and any irritate particle the wind might drive before it . the consequence be a severe inflammation of the eye , which for some time hang over he the threat of a lasting injury . this crush trouble call out all Deronda 's readiness to devote himself , and he make every other occupation secondary to that of be companion and eye to Hans , work with he and for he at his classic , that if possible his chance of the classical scholarship might be save . han , to keep the knowledge of his suffering from his mother and sister , allege his work as a reason for pass the Christmas at Cambridge , and his friend stay up with he . 

 meanwhile Deronda relax his hold on his mathematic , and Hans , reflect on this , at length say : " old fellow , while you be hoist I you be risk yourself . with your mathematical cram one may be like Moses or Mahomet or somebody of that sort who have to cram , and forget in one day what it have take he forty to learn . " 

 Deronda would not admit that he care about the risk , and he have really be beguile into a little indifference by double sympathy : he be very anxious that Hans should not miss the much - need scholarship , and he feel a revival of interest in the old study . still , when Hans , rather late in the day , get able to use his own eye , Deronda have tenacity enough to try hard and recover his lose ground . he fail , however ; but he have the satisfaction of see Meyrick win . 

 success , as a sort of beginning that urge completion , might have reconcile Deronda to his university course ; but the emptiness of all thing , from politic to pastime , be never so strike to we as when we fail in they . the loss of the personal triumph have no severity for he , but the sense of have spend his time ineffectively in a mode of working which have be against the grain , give he a distaste for any renewal of the process , which turn his imagined project of quit Cambridge into a serious intention . in speak of his intention to Meyrick he make it appear that he be glad of the turn event have take glad to have the balance dip decidedly , and feel freed from his hesitation ; but he observe that he must of course submit to any strong objection on the part of Sir Hugo . 

 Meyrick 's joy and gratitude be disturb by much uneasiness . he believe in Deronda 's alleged preference , but he feel keenly that in serve he Daniel have place himself at a disadvantage in Sir Hugo 's opinion , and he say mournfully , " if you have get the scholarship , Sir Hugo would have think that you ask to leave we with a well grace . you have spoil your luck for my sake , and I can do nothing to amend it . " 

 " yes , you can ; you be to be a first - rate fellow . I call that a first - rate investment of my luck . " 

 " oh , confound it ! you save an ugly mongrel from drown , and expect he to cut a fine figure . the poet have make tragedy enough about sign one 's self over to wickedness for the sake of get something plummy ; I shall write a tragedy of a fellow who sign himself over to be good , and be uncomfortable ever after . " 

 but Hans lose no time in secretly write the history of the affair to Sir Hugo , make it plain that but for Deronda 's generous devotion he could hardly have fail to win the prize he have be work for . 

 the two friend go up to town together : Meyrick to rejoice with his mother and the girl in their little home at Chelsea ; Deronda to carry out the less easy task of open his mind to Sir Hugo . he rely a little on the baronet 's general tolerance of eccentricity , but he expect more opposition than he meet with . he be receive with even warm kindness than usual , the failure be pass over lightly , and when he detail his reason for wish to quit the university and go to study abroad . Sir Hugo sit for some time in a silence which be rather meditative than surprised . at last he say , look at Daniel with examination , " so you do not   want to be an Englishman to the backbone after all ? " 

 " I want to be an Englishman , but I want to understand other point of view . and I want to get rid of a merely english attitude in study . " 

 " I see ; you do not   want to be turn out in the same mould as every other youngster . and I have nothing to say against your doffing some of our national prejudice . I feel the well myself for have spend a good deal of my time abroad . but , for God 's sake , keep an english cut , and do not   become indifferent to bad tobacco ! and , my dear boy , it be good to be unselfish and generous ; but do not   carry that too far . it will not do to give yourself to be melt down for the benefit of the tallow - trade ; you must know where to find yourself . however , I shall put no vote on your going . wait until I can get off Committee , and I will run over with you . " 

 so Deronda go accord to his will . but not before he have spend some hour with Hans Meyrick , and be introduce to the mother and sister in the Chelsea home . the shy girl watch and register every look of their brother 's friend , declare by Hans to have be the salvation of he , a fellow like nobody else , and , in fine , a brick . they so thoroughly accept Deronda as an ideal , that when he be go the young set to work , under the criticism of the two elder girl , to paint he as Prince Camaralzaman . 

 CHAPTER XVII . 

  " this be truth the poet sing , 
  that a sorrow 's crown of sorrow be remember happy thing . " 
  TENNYSON : Locksley Hall . 
 on a fine evening near the end of July , Deronda be row himself on the Thames . it be already a year or more since he have come back to England , with the understanding that his education be finish , and that he be somehow to take his place in english society ; but though , in deference to Sir Hugo 's wish , and to fence off idleness , he have begin to read law , this apparent decision have be without other result than to deepen the root of indecision . his old love of boat have revive with the more force now that he be in town with the Mallingers , because he could nowhere else get the same still seclusion which the river give he . he have a boat of his own at Putney , and whenever Sir Hugo do not want he , it be his chief holiday to row till past sunset and come in again with the star . not that he be in a sentimental stage ; but he be in another sort of contemplative mood perhaps more common in the young man of our day that of question whether it be worth while to take part in the battle of the world : I mean , of course , the young man in whom the unproductive labor of questioning be sustain by three or five per cent , on capital which somebody else have battle for . it puzzle Sir Hugo that one who make a splendid contrast with all that be sickly and pule should be hamper with idea which , since they leave an accomplished Whig like himself unobstructe , could be no well than spectral illusion ; especially as Deronda set himself against authorship a vocation which be understand to turn foolish thinking into fund . 

 row in his dark - blue shirt and skull - cap , his curl closely clip , his mouth beset with abundant soft wave of beard , he bear only disguised trace of the seraphic boy " trail cloud of glory . " still , even one who have never see he since his boyhood might have look at he with slow recognition , due perhaps to the peculiarity of the gaze which Gwendolen choose to call " dreadful , " though it have really a very mild sort of scrutiny . the voice , sometimes audible in subdued snatch of song , have turn out merely a high baritone ; indeed , only to look at his lithe , powerful frame and the firm gravity of his face would have be enough for an experienced guess that he have no rare and ravish tenor such as nature reluctantly make at some sacrifice . look at his hand : they be not small and dimpled , with taper finger that seem to have only a deprecating touch : they be long , flexible , firmly - grasp hand , such as Titian have paint in a picture where he want to show the combination of refinement with force . and there be something of a likeness , too , between the face belong to the hand in both the uniform pale - brown skin , the perpendicular brow , the calmly penetrate eye . not seraphic any long : thoroughly terrestrial and manly ; but still of a kind to raise belief in a human dignity which can afford to recognize poor relation . 

 such type meet we here and there among average condition ; in a workman , for example , whistle over a bit of measurement and lift his eye to answer our question about the road . and often the grand meaning of face as well as of write word may lie chiefly in the impression that happen just now to be of importance in relation to Deronda , row on the Thames in a very ordinary equipment for a young Englishman at leisure , and pass under Kew Bridge with no thought of an adventure in which his appearance be likely to play any part . in fact , he object very strongly to the notion , which other have not allow he to escape , that his appearance be of a kind to draw attention ; and hint of this , intend to be complimentary , find an angry resonance in he , come from mingled experience , to which a clue have already be give . his own face in the glass have during many year associate for he with thought of some one whom he must be like one about whose character and lot he continually wonder , and never dare to ask . 

 in the neighborhood of Kew Bridge , between six and seven o'clock , the river be no solitude . several person be saunter on the towing - path , and here and there a boat be ply . Deronda have be row fast to get over this spot , when , become aware of a great barge advance toward he , he guide his boat aside , and rest on his oar within a couple of yard of the river - brink . he be all the while unconsciously continue the low - toned chant which have haunt his throat all the way up the river the gondolier 's song in the " Otello , " where Rossini have worthily set to music the immortal word of Dante 

  " Nessun maggior dolore 
  Che ricordarsi del tempo felice 
  Nella miseria " : 
  Footnote : Dante 's word be well render by our own poet in the line 
 at the head of the chapter . 
 and , as he rest on his oar , the pianissimo fall of the melodic wail " nella miseria " be distinctly audible on the brink of the water . three or four person have pause at various spot to watch the barge pass the bridge , and doubtless include in their notice the young gentleman in the boat ; but probably it be only to one ear that the low vocal sound come with more significance than if they have be an insect - murmur amidst the sum of current noise . Deronda , await the barge , now turn his head to the river - side , and see at a few yard ' distant from he a figure which might have be an impersonation of the misery he be unconsciously give voice to : a girl hardly more than eighteen , of low slim figure , with most delicate little face , her dark curl push behind her ear under a large black hat , a long woolen cloak over her shoulder . her hand be hang down clasp before she , and her eye be fix on the river with a look of immovable , statue - like despair . this strong arrest of his attention make he cease singing : apparently his voice have enter her inner world without she take any note of whence it come , for when it suddenly cease she change her attitude slightly , and , look round with a frightened glance , meet Deronda 's face . it be but a couple of moment , but that seem a long while for two people to look straight at each other . her look be something like that of a fawn or other gentle animal before it turn to run away : no blush , no special alarm , but only some timidity which yet could not hinder she from a long look before she turn . in fact , it seem to Deronda that she be only half conscious of her surrounding : be she hungry , or be there some other cause of bewilderment ? he feel an outleap of interest and compassion toward she ; but the next instant she have turn and walk away to a neighboring bench under a tree . he have no right to linger and watch she : poorly - dress , melancholy woman be common sight ; it be only the delicate beauty , picturesque line and color of the image that be exceptional , and these condition make it more markedly impossible that he should obtrude his interest upon she . he begin to row away and be soon far up the river ; but no other thought be busy enough quite to expel that pale image of unhappy girlhood . he fall again and again to speculate on the probable romance that lie behind that loneliness and look of desolation ; then to smile at his own share in the prejudice that interesting face must have interesting adventure ; then to justify himself for feel that sorrow be the more tragic when it befell delicate , childlike beauty . 

 " I should not have forget the look of misery if she have be ugly and vulgar , " he say to himself . but there be no deny that the attractiveness of the image make it likeli to last . it be clear to he as an onyx cameo ; the brown - black drapery , the white face with small , small feature and dark , long - lash eye . his mind glance over the girl - tragedy that be go on in the world , hide , unheeded , as if they be but tragedy of the copse or hedgerow , where the helpless drag wound wing forsakenly , and streak the shadowed moss with the red moment - hand of their own death . Deronda of late , in his solitary excursion , have be occupy chiefly with uncertainty about his own course ; but those uncertainty , be much at their leisure , be will not to have such wide - sweep connection with all life and history that the new image of helpless sorrow easily blent itself with what seem to he the strong array of reason why he should shrink from get into that routine of the world which make man apologize for all its wrong - doing , and take opinion as mere professional equipment why he should not draw strongly at any thread in the hopelessly - entangled scheme of thing . 

 he use his oar little , satisfied to go with the tide and be take back by it . it be his habit to indulge himself in that solemn passivity which easily come with the lengthen shadow and mellow light , when think and desiring melt together imperceptibly , and what in other hour may have seem argument take the quality of passionate vision . by the time he have come back again with the tide past Richmond Bridge the sun be near set : and the approach of his favorite hour with its deepening stillness and darken mass of tree and building between the double glow of the sky and the river dispose he to linger as if they have be an unfinished strain of music . he look out for a perfectly solitary spot where he could lodge his boat against the bank , and , throw himself on his back with his head prop on the cushion , could watch out the light of sunset and the opening of that bead - roll which some oriental poet describe as God 's call to the little star , who each answer , " here be I. " he choose a spot in the bend of the river just opposite Kew Gardens , where he have a great breadth of water before he reflect the glory of the sky , while he himself be in shadow . he lie with his hand behind his head , prop on a level with the boat 's edge , so that he could see all round he , but could not be see by any one at a few yard ' distance ; and for a long while he never turn his eye from the view right in front of he . he be forget everything else in a half - speculative , half - involuntary identification of himself with the object he be look at , think how far it might be possible habitually to shift his centre till his own personality would be no less outside he than the landscape when the sense of something move on the bank opposite he where it be border by a line of willow bush , make he turn his glance thitherward . in the first moment he have a dart presentiment about the move figure ; and now he could see the small face with the strange die sunlight upon it . he fear to frighten she by a sudden movement , and watch she with motionless attention . she look round , but seem only to gather security from the apparent solitude , hide her hat among the willow , and immediately take off her woolen cloak . presently she seat herself and deliberately dip the cloak in the water , hold it there a little while , then take it out with effort , rise from her seat as she do so . by this time Deronda feel sure that she mean to wrap the wet cloak round she as a drown shroud ; there be no long time to hesitate about frighten she . he rise and seize his oar to ply across ; happily her position lie a little below he . the poor thing , overcome with terror at this sign of discovery from the opposite bank , sink down on the brink again , hold her cloak half out of the water . she crouch and cover her face as if she keep a faint hope that she have not be see , and that the boatman be accidentally come toward she . but soon he be within brief space of she , steady his boat against the bank , and speak , but very gently 

 " do not   be afraid . you be unhappy . pray , trust I . tell I what I can do to help you . " 

 she raise her head and look up at he . his face now be toward the light , and she know it again . but she do not speak for a few moment which be a renewal of their former gaze at each other . at last she say in a low sweet voice , with an accent so distinct that it suggest foreignness and yet be not foreign , " I see you before , " and then add dreamily , after a like pause , " nella miseria . " 

 Deronda , not understand the connection of her thought , suppose that her mind be weaken by distress and hunger . 

 " it be you , sing ? " she go on , hesitatingly " Nessun maggior dolore . " the mere word themselves utter in her sweet undertone seem to give the melody to Deronda 's ear . 

 " ah , yes , " he say , understand now , " I be often sing they . but I fear you will injure yourself stay here . pray let I take you in my boat to some place of safety . and that wet cloak let I take it . " 

 he would not attempt to take it without her leave , dread lest he should scare she . even at his word , he fancy that she shrink and clutch the cloak more tenaciously . but her eye be fix on he with a question in they as she say , " you look good . perhaps it be God 's command . " 

 " do trust I . let I help you . I will die before I will let any harm come to you . " 

 she rise from her sit posture , first drag the saturate cloak and then let it fall on the ground it be too heavy for her tired arm . her little woman 's figure as she lay her delicate chill hand together one over the other against her waist , and go a step backward while she lean her head forward as if not to lose sight of his face , be unspeakably touching . 

 " Great God ! " the word escape Deronda in a tone so low and solemn that they seem like a prayer become unconsciously vocal . the agitate impression this forsake girl be make on he stir a fibre that lie close to his deep interest in the fate of woman " perhaps my mother be like this one . " the old thought have come now with a new impetus of mingle feeling , and urge that exclamation in which both East and West have for age concentrate their awe in the presence of inexorable calamity . 

 the low - tone word seem to have some reassurance in they for the hearer : she step forward close to the boat 's side , and Deronda put out his hand , hop now that she would let he help she in . she have already put her tiny hand into his which close around it , when some new thought strike she , and draw back she say 

 " I have nowhere to go nobody belong to I in all this land . " 

 " I will take you to a lady who have daughter , " say Deronda , immediately . he feel a sort of relief in gather that the wretched home and cruel friend he imagine she to be flee from be not in the near background . still she hesitate , and say more timidly than ever 

 " do you belong to the theatre ? " 

 " no ; I have nothing to do with the theatre , " say Deronda , in a decided tone . then beseechingly , " I will put you in perfect safety at once ; with a lady , a good woman ; I be sure she will be kind . let we lose no time : you will make yourself ill . life may still become sweet to you . there be good people there be good woman who will take care of you . " 

 she draw backward no more , but step in easily , as if she be use to such action , and sit down on the cushion . 

 " you have a covering for your head , " say Deronda . 

 " my hat ? "   she lift up her hand to her head .   " it be quite hide in the bush . " 

 " I will find it , " say Deronda , put out his hand deprecatingly as she attempt to rise . " the boat be fix . " 

 he jump out , find the hat , and lift up the saturate cloak , wring it and throw it into the bottom of the boat . 

 " we must carry the cloak away , to prevent any one who may have notice you from think you have be drown , " he say , cheerfully , as he get in again and present the old hat to she . " I wish I have any other garment than my coat to offer you . but shall you mind throw it over your shoulder while we be on the water ? it be quite an ordinary thing to do , when people return late and be not enough provide with wrap . " he hold out the coat toward she with a smile , and there come a faint melancholy smile in answer , as she take it and put it on very cleverly . 

 " I have some biscuit should you like they ? " say Deronda . 

 " no ; I can not eat . I have still some money leave to buy bread . " 

 he begin to ply his oar without further remark , and they go along swiftly for many minute without speak . she do not look at he , but be watch the oar , lean forward in an attitude of repose , as if she be begin to feel the comfort of return warmth and the prospect of life instead of death . the twilight be deepen ; the red flush be all go and the little star be give their answer one after another . the moon be rise , but be still entangle among the tree and building . the light be not such that he could distinctly discern the expression of her feature or her glance , but they be distinctly before he nevertheless feature and a glance which seem to have give a fuller meaning for he to the human face . among his anxiety one be dominant : his first impression about she , that her mind might be disorder , have not be quite dissipate : the project of suicide be unmistakable , and give a deep color to every other suspicious sign . he long to begin a conversation , but abstain , wish to encourage the confidence that might induce she to speak first . at last she do speak . 

 " I like to listen to the oar . " 

 " so do I. " 

 " if you have not come , I should have be dead now . " 

 " I can not bear you to speak of that . I hope you will never be sorry that I come . " 

 " I can not see how I shall be glad to live . the maggior dolore and the miseria have last long than the tempo felice . " she pause and then go on dreamily , " dolore miseria I think those word be alive . " 

 Deronda be mute : to question she seem an unwarrantable freedom ; he shrink from appear to claim the authority of a benefactor , or to treat she with the less reverence because she be in distress . she go on musingly 

 " I think it be not wicked . death and life be one before the Eternal . I know our father slew their child and then slay themselves , to keep their soul pure . I mean it so . but now I be command to live . I can not see how I shall live . " 

 " you will find friend . I will find they for you . " 

 she shake her head and say mournfully , " not my mother and brother . I can not find they . " 

 " you be english ? you must be speak English so perfectly . " 

 she do not answer immediately , but look at Deronda again , strain to see he in the double light . until now she have be watch the oar . it seem as if she be half rouse , and wonder which part of her impression be dream and which wake . sorrowful isolation have benumb her sense of reality , and the power of distinguish outward and inward be continually slip away from she . her look be full of wonder timidity such as the forsaken one in the desert might have lift to the angelic vision before she know whether his message be in anger or in pity . 

 " you want to know if I be english ? " she say at last , while Deronda be redden nervously under a gaze which he feel more fully than he see . 

 " I want to know nothing except what you like to tell I , " he say , still uneasy in the fear that her mind be wander . " perhaps it be not good for you to talk . " 

 " yes , I will tell you . I be English - bear . but I be a Jewess . " 

 Deronda be silent , inwardly wonder that he have not say this to himself before , though any one who have see delicate - face spanish girl might simply have guess she to be spanish . 

 " do you despise I for it ? " she say presently in low tone , which have a sadness that pierce like a cry from a small dumb creature in fear . 

 " why should I ? " say Deronda . " I be not so foolish . " 

 " I know many Jews be bad . " 

 " so be many Christians . but I should not think it fair for you to despise I because of that . " 

 " my mother and brother be good . but I shall never find they . I be come a long way from abroad . I run away ; but I can not tell you I can not speak of it . I think I might find my mother again God would guide I . but then I despair . this morning when the light come , I feel as if one word keep sound within I never ! never ! but now I begin to think " her word be break by rise sob " I be command to live perhaps we be go to she . " 

 with an outburst of weep she bury her head on her knee . he hop that this passionate weeping might relieve her excitement . meanwhile he be inwardly picture in much embarrassment how he should present himself with she in Park Lane the course which he have at first unreflectingly determined on . no one kind and more gentle than Lady Mallinger ; but it be hardly probable that she would be at home ; and he have a shudder sense of a lackey star at this delicate , sorrowful image of womanhood of glare light and fine staircase , and perhaps chill suspicious manner from lady 's maid and housekeeper , that might scare the mind already in a state of dangerous susceptibility . but to take she to any other shelter than a home already know to he be not to be contemplate : he be full of fear about the issue of the adventure which have bring on he a responsibility all the heavy for the strong and agitate impression this childlike creature have make on he . but another resource come to mind : he could venture to take she to Mrs. Meyrick 's to the small house at Chelsea where he have be often enough since his return from abroad to feel sure that he could appeal there to generous heart , which have a romantic readiness to believe in innocent need and to help it . Hans Meyrick be safe away in Italy , and Deronda feel the comfort of present himself with his charge at a house where he would be meet by a motherly figure of quakerish neatness , and three girl who hardly know of any evil close to they than what lie in history - book , and drama , and would at once associate a lovely Jewess with Rebecca in " Ivanhoe , " besides think that everything they do at Deronda 's request would be do for their idol , Hans . the vision of the Chelsea home once raise , Deronda no long hesitate . 

 the rumble thither in the cab after the stillness of the water seem long . happily his charge have be quiet since her fit of weeping , and submit like a tired child . when they be in the cab , she lay down her hat and try to rest her head , but the jolting movement would not let it rest . still she doze , and her sweet head hang helpless , first on one side , then on the other . 

 " they be too good to have any fear about take she in , " think Deronda . her person , her voice , her exquisite utterance , be one strong appeal to belief and tenderness . yet what have be the history which have bring she to this desolation ? he be go on a strange errand to ask shelter for this waif . then there occur to he the beautiful story Plutarch somewhere tell of the delphic woman : how when the maenad , outwear with their torch - light wandering , lie down to sleep in the market - place , the matron come and stand silently round they to keep guard over their slumber ; then , when they wake , minister to they tenderly and see they safely to their own border . he could trust the woman he be go to for have heart as good . 

 Deronda feel himself grow old this evening and enter on a new phase in find a life to which his own have come perhaps as a rescue ; but how to make sure that snatch from death be rescue ? the moment of find a fellow - creature be often as full of mingled doubt and exultation as the moment of find an idea . 

 CHAPTER XVIII . 

  Life be a various mother : now she don 
  her plume and brilliant , climb the marble stair 
  with head aloft , nor ever turn her eye 
  on lackey who attend she ; now she dwell 
  grim - clad , up darksome allyes , breathe hot gin , 
  and scream in pauper riot . 
  but to these 
  she come a frugal matron , neat and deft , 
  with cheerful morning thought and quick device 
  to find the much in little . 
 Mrs. Meyrick 's house be not noisy : the front parlor look on the river , and the back on garden , so that though she be read aloud to her daughter , the window could be leave open to freshen the air of the small double room where a lamp and two candle be burn . the candle be on a table apart for Kate , who be draw illustration for a publisher ; the lamp be not only for the reader but for Amy and Mab , who be embroider satin cushion for " the great world . " 

 outside , the house look very narrow and shabby , the bright light through the holland blind show the heavy old - fashioned window - frame ; but it be pleasant to know that many such grim - walled slice of space in our foggy London have be and still be the home of a culture the more spotlessly free from vulgarity , because poverty have render everything like display an impersonal question , and all the grand show of the world simply a spectacle which rouse petty rivalry or vain effort after possession . 

 the Meyricks ' be a home of that kind : and they all cling to this particular house in a row because its interior be fill with object always in the same place , which , for the mother hold memory of her marriage time , and for the young one seem as necessary and uncriticise a part of their world as the star of the Great Bear see from the back window . Mrs. Meyrick have bear much stint of other matter that she might be able to keep some engraving specially cherish by her husband ; and the narrow space of wall hold a world history in scene and head which the child have early learn by heart . the chair and table be also old friend prefer to new . but in these two little parlor with no furniture that a broker would have care to cheapen except the print and piano , there be space and apparatus for a wide - glance , nicely - select life , open to the high thing in music , painting and poetry . I be not sure that in the time of great scarcity , before Kate could get pay - work , these lady have always have a servant to light their fire and sweep their room ; yet they be fastidious in some point , and could not believe that the manner of lady in the fashionable world be so full of coarse selfishness , petty quarreling , and slang as they be represent to be in what be call literary photograph . the Meyricks have their little oddity , streak of eccentricity from the mother 's blood as well as the father 's , their mind be like mediaval house with unexpected recess and opening from this into that , flight of step and sudden outlook . 

 but mother and daughter be all unite by a triple bond family love ; admiration for the fine work , the good action ; and habitual industry . Hans ' desire to spend some of his money in make their life more luxurious have be resist by all of they , and both they and he have be thus save from regret at the threaten triumph of his yearning for art over the attraction of secured income a triumph that would by - and - by oblige he to give up his fellowship . they could all afford to laugh at his Gavarni - caricature and to hold he blameless in follow a natural bent which their unselfishness and independence have leave without obstacle . it be enough for they to go on in their old way , only have a grand treat of opera - go   to the gallery   when Hans come home on a visit . 

 see the group they make this evening , one could hardly wish they to change their way of life . they be all alike small , and so in due proportion to their miniature room . Mrs. Meyrick be read aloud from a french book ; she be a lively little woman , half french , half Scotch , with a pretty articulateness of speech that seem to make daylight in her hearer 's understanding . though she be not yet fifty , her ripple hair , cover by a quakerish net cap , be chiefly gray , but her eyebrow be brown as the bright eye below they ; her black dress , almost like a priest 's cassock with its row of button , suit a neat figure hardly five foot high . the daughter be to match the mother , except that Mab have Hans ' light hair and complexion , with a bossy , irregular brow , and other quaintness that remind one of he . everything about they be compact , from the firm coil of their hair , fasten back a la Chinoise , to their gray skirt in Puritan nonconformity with the fashion , which at that time would have demand that four feminine circumference should fill all the free space in the front parlor . all four , if they have be wax - work , might have be pack easily in a fashionable lady 's travel trunk . their face seem full of speech , as if their mind have be shell , after the manner of horse - chestnut , and become brightly visible . the only large thing of its kind in the room be Hafiz , the persian cat , comfortably poise on the brown leather back of a chair , and open his large eye now and then to see that the low animal be not in any mischief . 

 the book Mrs. Meyrick have before she be Erckmann - Chatrian 's Historie d'un Conscrit . she have just finish read it aloud , and Mab , who have let her work fall on the ground while she stretch her head forward and fix her eye on the reader , exclaim 

 " I think that be the fine story in the world . " 

 " of course , Mab ! " say Amy , " it be the last you have hear . everything that please you be the good in its turn . " 

 " it be hardly to be call a story , " say Kate . " it be a bit of history bring near we with a strong telescope . we can see the soldier ' face : no , it be more than that we can hear everything we can almost hear their heart beat . " 

 " I do not   care what you call it , " say Mab , flirt away her thimble . " call it a chapter in Revelations . it make I want to do something good , something grand . it make I so sorry for everybody . it make I like Schiller I want to take the world in my arm and kiss it . I must kiss you instead , little mother ? " she throw her arm round her mother 's neck . 

 " whenever you be in that mood , Mab , down go your work , " say Amy . " it would be do something good to finish your cushion without soil it . " 

 " oh oh oh ! " groan Mab , as she stoop to pick up her work and thimble . " I wish I have three wound conscript to take care of . " 

 " you would spill their beef - tea while you be talk , " say Amy . 

 " Poor Mab ! do not   be hard on she , " say the mother . " give I the embroidery now , child . you go on with your enthusiasm , and I will go on with the pink and white poppy . " 

 " well , ma , I think you be more caustic than Amy , " say Kate , while she draw her head back to look at her drawing . 

 " oh oh oh ! " cry Mab again , rise and stretch her arm . " I wish something wonderful would happen . I feel like the deluge . the water of the great deep be break up , and the window of heaven be open . I must sit down and play the scale . " 

 Mab be open the piano while the other be laugh at this climax , when a cab stop before the house , and there forthwith come a quick rap of the knocker . 

 " dear I ! " say Mrs. Meyrick , start up , " it be after ten , and Phoebe be go to bed . " she hasten out , leave the parlor door open . 

 " Mr. Deronda ! " the girl could hear this exclamation from their mamma . Mab clasp her hand , say in a loud whisper , " there now ! something be go to happen . " Kate and Amy give up their work in amazement . but Deronda 's tone in reply be so low that they could not hear his word , and Mrs. Meyrick immediately close the parlor door . 

 " I know I be trust to your goodness in a most extraordinary way , " Deronda go on , after give his brief narrative ; " but you can imagine how helpless I feel with a young creature like this on my hand . I could not go with she among stranger , and in her nervous state I should dread take she into a house full of servant . I have trust to your mercy . I hope you will not think my act unwarrantable . " 

 " on the contrary . you have honor I by trust I . I see your difficulty . pray bring she in . I will go and prepare the girl . " 

 while Deronda go back to the cab , Mrs. Meyrick turn into the parlor again and say : " here be somebody to take care of instead of your wound conscript , Mab : a poor girl who be go to drown herself in despair . Mr. Deronda find she only just in time to save she . he bring she along in his boat , and do not know what else it would be safe to do with she , so he have trust we and bring she here . it seem she be a Jewess , but quite refine , he say know italian and music . " 

 the three girl , wonder and expectant , come forward and stand near each other in mute confidence that they be all feel alike under this appeal to their compassion . Mab look rather awe - stricken , as if this answer to her wish be something preternatural . 

 meanwhile Deronda go to the door of the cab where the pale face be now gaze out with roused observation , say , " I have bring you to some of the kind people in the world : there be daughter like you . it be a happy home . will you let I take you to they ? " 

 she step out obediently , put her hand in his and forget her hat ; and when Deronda lead she into the full light of the parlor where the four little woman stand await she , she make a picture that would have stir much dull sensibility than theirs . at first she be a little daze by the sudden light , and before she have concentrate her glance he have put her hand into the mother 's . he be inwardly rejoice that the Meyricks be so small : the dark - curl head be the high among they . the poor wanderer could not be afraid of these gentle face so near her : and now she be look at each of they in turn while the mother say , " you must be weary , poor child . " 

 " we will take care of you we will comfort you we will love you , " cry Mab , no long able to restrain herself , and take the small right hand caressingly between both her own . this gentle welcome warmth be penetrate the bewildered one : she hang back just enough to see well the four face in front of she , whose good will be be reflect in her , not in any smile , but in that undefinable change which tell we that anxiety be pass in contentment . for an instant she look up at Deronda , as if she be refer all this mercy to he , and then again turn to Mrs. Meyrick , say with more collectedness in her sweet tone than he have hear before 

 " I be a stranger . I be a Jewess . you might have think I be wicked . " 

 " no , we be sure you be good , " burst out Mab . 

 " we think no evil of you , poor child . you shall be safe with we , " say Mrs. Meyrick . " come now and sit down . you must have some food , and then you must go to rest . " 

 the stranger look up again at Deronda , who say 

 " you will have no more fear with these friend ? you will rest to - night ? " 

 " oh , I should not fear . I should rest . I think these be the minister angel . " 

 Mrs. Meyrick want to lead she to seat , but again hang back gently , the poor weary thing speak as if with a scruple at be receive without a further account of herself . 

 " my name be Mirah Lapidoth . I be come a long way , all the way from Prague by myself . I make my escape . I run away from dreadful thing . I come to find my mother and brother in London . I have be take from my mother when I be little , but I think I could find she again . I have trouble the house be all go I could not find she . it have be a long while , and I have not much money . that be why I be in distress . " 

 " our mother will be good to you , " cry Mab . " see what a nice little mother she be ! " 

 " do sit down now , " say Kate , move a chair forward , while Amy run to get some tea . 

 Mirah resist no long , but seat herself with perfect grace , cross her little foot , lay her hand one over the other on her lap , and look at her friend with placid reverence ; whereupon Hafiz , who have be watch the scene restlessly come forward with tail erect and rub himself against her ankle . Deronda feel it time to go . 

 " will you allow I to come again and inquire perhaps at five to - morrow ? " he say to Mrs. Meyrick . 

 " yes , pray ; we shall have have time to make acquaintance then . " 

 " good - bye , " say Deronda , look down at Mirah , and put out his hand . she rise as she take it , and the moment bring back to they both strongly the other moment when she have first take that outstretche hand . she lift her eye to his and say with reverential fervor , " the God of our father bless you and deliver you from all evil as you have deliver I . I do not believe there be any man so good . none before have think I worthy of the good . you find I poor and miserable , yet you have give I the good . " 

 Deronda could not speak , but with silent adieux to the Meyricks , hurry away . 

 BOOK III maidens choosing . 

 CHAPTER XIX . 

 " I pity the man who can travel from Dan to Beersheba , and say , ' tis all barren ' : and so it be : and so be all the world to he who will not cultivate the fruit it offer . " STERNE : Sentimental Journey . 

 to say that Deronda be romantic would be to misrepresent he ; but under his calm and somewhat self - repress exterior there be a fervor which make he easily find poetry and romance among the event of every - day life . and perhaps poetry and romance be as plentiful as ever in the world except for those phlegmatic nature who I suspect would in any age have regard they as a dull form of erroneous thinking . they exist very easily in the same room with the microscope and even in railway carriage : what banish they in the vacuum in gentleman and lady passenger . how should all the apparatus of heaven and earth , from the farth firmament to the tender bosom of the mother who nourish we , make poetry for a mind that have no movement of awe and tenderness , no sense of fellowship which thrill from the near to the distant , and back again from the distant to the near ? 

 to Deronda this event of find Mirah be as heart - stir as anything that befell Orestes or Rinaldo . he sit up half the night , live again through the moment since he have first discern Mirah on the river - brink , with the fresh and fresh vividness which belong to emotive memory . when he take up a book to try and dull this urgency of inward vision , the print word be no more than a network through which he see and hear everything as clearly as before see not only the actual event of two hour , but possibility of what have be and what might be which those event be enough to feed with the warm blood of passionate hope and fear . something in his own experience cause Mirah 's search after her mother to lay hold with peculiar force on his imagination . the first prompting of sympathy be to aid she in her search : if give person be extant in London there be way of find they , as subtle as scientific experiment , the right machinery be set at work . but here the mixed feeling which belong to Deronda 's kindre experience naturally transfuse themselves into his anxiety on behalf of Mirah . 

 the desire to know his own mother , or to know about she , be constantly haunt with dread ; and in imagine what might befall Mirah it quickly occur to he that find the mother and brother from whom she have be part when she be a little one might turn out to be a calamity . when she be in the boat she say that her mother and brother be good ; but the goodness might have be chiefly in her own ignorant innocence and yearn memory , and the ten or twelve year since the parting have be time enough for much worsening . spite of his strong tendency to side with the object of prejudice , and in general with those who get the bad of it , his interest have never be practically draw toward exist Jews , and the fact he know about they , whether they walk conspicuous in fine apparel or lurk in by - street , be chiefly of a sort most repugnant to he . of learn and accomplish Jews he take it for grant that they have drop their religion , and wish to be merge in the people of their native land . Scorn fling at a Jew as such would have rouse all his sympathy in grief of inheritance ; but the indiscriminate scorn of a race will often strike a speciman who have well earn it on his own account , and might fairly be gibbet as a rascally son of Adam . it appear that the Caribs , who know little of theology , regard thieving as a practice peculiarly connect with christian tenet , and probably they could allege experimental ground for this opinion . Deronda could not escape   who can ?   know ugly story of jewish characteristic and occupation ; and though one of his favorite protest be against the severance of past and present history , he be like other who share his protest , in never have care to reach any more special conclusion about actual Jews than that they retain the virtue and vice of a long - oppress race . but now that Mirah 's longing rouse his mind to a close survey of detail , very disagreeable image urge themselves of what it might be to find out this middle - aged Jewess and her son . to be sure , there be the exquisite refinement and charm of the creature herself to make a presumption in favor of her immediate kindred , but he must wait to know more : perhaps through Mrs. Meyrick he might gather some guide hint from Mirah 's own lip . her voice , her accent , her look all the sweet purity that clothe she as with a consecrating garment make he shrink the more from give she , either ideally or practically , an association with what be hateful or contaminate . but these fine word with which we fumigate and becloud unpleasant fact be not the language in which we think . Deronda 's thinking go on in rapid image of what might be : he see himself guide by some official scout into a dingy street ; he enter through a dim doorway , and see a hawk - eyed woman , rough - headed , and unwashed , cheapen a hungry girl 's last bit of finery ; or in some quarter only the more hideous for be smart , he find himself under the breath of a young Jew talkative and familiar , willing to show his acquaintance with gentleman 's taste , and not fastidious in any transaction with which they would favor he and so on through the brief chapter of his experience in this kind . excuse he : his mind be not apt to run spontaneously into insult idea , or to practice a form of wit which identify Moses with the advertisement sheet ; but he be just now govern by dread , and if Mirah 's parent have be Christian , the chief difference would have be that his foreboding would have be feed with wide knowledge . it be the habit of his mind to connect dread with unknown parentage , and in this case as well as his own there be enough to make the connection reasonable . 

 but what be to be do with Mirah ? she need shelter and protection in the full sense , and all his chivalrous sentiment rouse itself to insist that the soon and the more fully he could engage for she the interest of other besides himself , the well he should fulfill her claim on he . he have no right to provide for she entirely , though he might be able to do so ; the very depth of the impression she have produce make he desire that she should understand herself to be entirely independent of he ; and vague vision of the future which he try to dispel as fantastic leave their influence in an anxiety strong than any motive he could give for it , that those who see his action closely should be acquaint from the first with the history of his relation to Mirah . he have learn to hate secrecy about the grand tie and obligation of his life to hate it the more because a strong spell of interwoven sensibility hinder he from break such secrecy . Deronda have make a vow to himself that since the truth which disgrace mortal be not all of their own make the truth should never be make a disgrace to another by his act . he be not without terror lest he should break this vow , and fall into the apologetic philosophy which explain the world into contain nothing well than one 's own conduct . 

 at one moment he resolve to tell the whole of his adventure to Sir Hugo and Lady Mallinger the next morning at breakfast , but the possibility that something quite new might reveal itself on his next visit to Mrs. Meyrick 's check this impulse , and he finally go to sleep on the conclusion that he would wait until that visit have be make . 

 CHAPTER XX . 

 " it will hardly be deny that even in this frail and corrupted world , we sometimes meet person who , in their very mien and aspect , as well as in the whole habit of life , manifest such a signature and stamp of virtue , as to make our judgment of they a matter of intuition rather than the result of continued examination . " ALEXANDER KNOX : quote in Southey 's Life of Wesley . 

 Mirah say that she have sleep well that night ; and when she come down in Mab 's black dress , her dark hair curl in fresh fibril as it gradually dry from its plenteous bath , she look like one who be begin to take comfort after the long sorrow and watch which have pal her cheek and make blue semicircle under her eye . it be Mab who carry her breakfast and usher she down with some pride in the effect produce by a pair of tiny feel slipper which she have rush out to buy because there be no shoe in the house small enough for Mirah , whose borrow dress cease about her ankle and display the cheap clothing that , mould itself on her foot , seem an adornment as choice as the sheath of bud . the farthe buckle be bijoux . 

 " oh , if you please , mamma ? " cry Mab , clasp her hand and stoop toward Mirah 's foot , as she enter the parlor ; " look at the slipper , how beautiful they fit ! I declare she be like the Queen Budoor ' two delicate foot , the work of the protecting and all - recompense creator , support she ; and I wonder how they can sustain what be above they . ' " 

 Mirah look down at her own foot in a childlike way and then smile at Mrs. Meyrick , who be say inwardly , " one could hardly imagine this creature have an evil thought . but wise people would tell I to be cautious . " she return Mirah 's smile and say , " I fear the foot have have to sustain their burden a little too often lately . but to - day she will rest and be my companion . " 

 " and she will tell you so many thing and I shall not hear they , " grumble Mab , who feel herself in the first volume of a delightful romance and oblige to miss some chapter because she have to go to pupil . 

 Kate be already go to make sketch along the river , and Amy be away on business errand . it be what the mother wish , to be alone with this stranger , whose story must be a sorrowful one , yet be needful to be tell . 

 the small front parlor be as good as a temple that morning . the sunlight be on the river and soft air come in through the open window ; the wall show a glorious silent cloud of witness the Virgin soar amid her cherubic escort ; grand Melancholia with her solemn universe ; the prophet and Sibyls ; the School of Athens ; the last supper ; mystic group where far - off age make one moment ; grave Holbein and Rembrandt head ; the Tragic Muse ; last - century child at their musing or their play ; italian poet all be there through the medium of a little black and white . the neat mother who have weather her trouble , and come out of they with a face still cheerful , be sort colored wool for her embroidery . Hafiz purr on the window - ledge , the clock on the mantle - piece tick without hurry , and the occasional sound of wheel seem to lie outside the more massive central quiet . Mrs. Meyrick think that this quiet might be the good invitation to speech on the part of her companion , and choose not to disturb it by remark . Mirah sit opposite in her former attitude , her hand clasp on her lap , her ankle cross , her eye at first travel slowly over the object around she , but finally rest with a sort of placid reverence on Mrs. Meyrick . at length she begin to speak softly . 

 " I remember my mother 's face well than anything ; yet I be not seven when I be take away , and I be nineteen now . " 

 " I can understand that , " say Mrs. Meyrick . " there be some early thing that last the long . " 

 " oh , yes , it be the early . I think my life begin with wake up and love my mother 's face : it be so near to I , and her arm be round I , and she sing to I . one hymn she sing so often , so often : and then she teach I to sing it with she : it be the first I ever sing . they be always hebrew hymn she sing ; and because I never know the meaning of the word they seem full of nothing but our love and happiness . when I lay in my little bed and it be all white above I , she use to bend over I , between I and the white , and sing in a sweet , low voice . I can dream myself back into that time when I be awake , and it often come back to I in my sleep my hand be very little , I put it up to her face and she kiss it . sometimes in my dream I begin to tremble and think that we be both dead ; but then I wake up and my hand lie like this , and for a moment I hardly know myself . but if I could see my mother again I should know she . " 

 " you must expect some change after twelve year , " say Mrs. Meyrick , gently . " see my grey hair : ten year ago it be bright brown . the day and month pace over we like restless little bird , and leave the mark of their foot backward and forward ; especially when they be like bird with heavy heart - then they tread heavily . " 

 " ah , I be sure her heart have be heavy for want of I . but to feel her joy if we could meet again , and I could make she know I love she and give her deep comfort after all her mourning ! if that could be , I should mind nothing ; I should be glad that I have live through my trouble . I do despair . the world seem miserable and wicked ; none help I so that I could bear their look and word ; I feel that my mother be dead , and death be the only way to she . but then in the last moment yesterday , when I long for the water to close over I and I think that death be the good image of mercy then goodness come to I live , and I feel trust in the living . and it be strange but I begin to hope that she be live too . and now I with you here this morning , peace and hope have come into I like a flood . I want nothing ; I can wait ; because I hope and believe and be grateful oh , so grateful ! you have not think evil of I you have not despise I . " 

 Mirah speak with low - toned fervor , and sit as still as a picture all the while . 

 " many other would have feel as we do , my dear , " say Mrs. Meyrick , feel a mist come over her eye as she look at her work . 

 " but I do not meet they they do not come to I . " 

 " how be it that you be take from your mother ? " 

 " ah , I be a long while come to that . it be dreadful to speak of , yet I must tell you I must tell you everything . my father it be he that take I away . I think we be only go on a little journey ; and I be pleased . there be a box with all my little thing in . but we go on board a ship , and get far and far away from the land . then I be ill ; and I think it would never end it be the first misery , and it seem endless . but at last we land . I know nothing then , and believe what my father say . he comfort I , and tell I I should go back to my mother . but it be America we have reach , and it be long year before we come back to Europe . at first I often ask my father when we be go back ; and I try to learn write fast , because I want to write to my mother ; but one day when he find I try to write a letter , he take I on his knee and tell I that my mother and brother be dead ; that be why we do not go back . I remember my brother a little ; he carry I once ; but he be not always at home . I believe my father when he say that they be dead . I see they under the earth when he say they be there , with their eye forever close . I never think of its not be true ; and I use to cry every night in my bed for a long while . then when she come so often to I , in my sleep , I think she must be live about I though I could not always see she , and that comfort I . I be never afraid in the dark , because of that ; and very often in the day I use to shut my eye and bury my face and try to see she and to hear her singing . I come to do that at last without shut my eye . " 

 Mirah pause with a sweet content in her face , as if she be have her happy vision , while she look out toward the river . 

 " still your father be not unkind to you , I hope , " say Mrs. Meyrick , after a minute , anxious to recall she . 

 " no ; he pet I , and take pain to teach I . he be an actor ; and I find out , after , that the ' Coburg ' I use to hear of his go to at home be a theatre . but he have more to do with the theatre than act . he have not always be an actor ; he have be a teacher , and know many language . his acting be not very good ; I think , but he manage the stage , and write and translate play . an italian lady , a singer , live with we a long time . they both teach I , and I have a master besides , who make I learn by heart and recite . I work quite hard , though I be so little ; and I be not nine when I first go on the stage . I could easily learn thing , and I be not afraid . but then and ever since I hat our way of life . my father have money , and we have finery about we in a disorderly way ; always there be man and woman come and go ; there be loud laugh and disputing , strut , snap of finger , jeering , face I do not like to look at though many pet and caress I . but then I remember my mother . even at first when I understand nothing , I shrink away from all those thing outside I into companionship with thought that be not like they ; and I gather thought very fast , because I read many thing play and poetry , Shakespeare and Schiller , and learn evil and good . my father begin to believe that I might be a great singer : my voice be consider wonderful for a child ; and he have the good teaching for I . but it be painful that he boast of I , and set I to sing for show at any minute , as if I have be a musical box . once when I be nine year old , I play the part of a little girl who have be forsake and do not know it , and sit singing to herself while she play with flower . I do it without any trouble ; but the clapping and all the sound of the theatre be hateful to I ; and I never like the praise I have , because it all seem very hard and unloving : I miss the love and trust I have be bear into . I make a life in my own thought quite different from everything about I : I choose what seem to I beautiful out of the play and everything , and make my world out of it ; and it be like a sharp knife always graze I that we have two sort of life which jar so with each other woman look good and gentle on the stage , and say good thing as if they feel they , and directly after I see they with coarse , ugly manner . my father sometimes notice my shrink way ; and Signora say one day , when I have be rehearse , ' she will never be an artist : she have no notion of be anybody but herself . that do very well now , but by - and - by you will see she will have no more face and action than a singing - bird . ' my father be angry , and they quarrel . I sit alone and cry , because what she have say be like a long unhappy future unroll before I . I do not want to be an artist ; but this be what my father expect of I . after a while Signora leave we , and a governess use to come and give I lesson in different thing , because my father begin to be afraid of my singing too much ; but I still act from time to time . rebellious feeling grow strong in I , and I wish to get away from this life ; but I could not tell where to go , and I dread the world . besides , I feel it would be wrong to leave my father : I dread do wrong , for I think I might get wicked and hateful to myself , in the same way that many other seem hateful to I . for so long , so long I have never feel my outside world happy ; and if I get wicked I should lose my world of happy thought where my mother live with I . that be my childish notion all through those year . oh how long they be ! " 

 Mirah fall to muse again . 

 " have you no teaching about what be your duty ? " say Mrs. Meyrick . she do not like to say " religion " find herself on inspection rather dim as to what the Hebrew religion might have turn into at this date . 

 " no only that I ought to do what my father wish . he do not follow our religion at New York , and I think he want I not to know much about it . but because my mother use to take I to the synagogue , and I remember sit on her knee and look through the railing and hear the chanting and singing , I long to go . one day when I be quite small I slip out and try to find the synagogue , but I lose myself a long while till a peddler question I and take I home . my father , miss I , have be much in fear , and be very angry . I too have be so frightened at lose myself that it be long before I think of venture out again . but after Signora leave we we go to room where our landlady be a Jewess and observe her religion . I ask she to take I with she to the synagogue ; and I read in her prayer - book and Bible , and when I have money enough I ask she to buy I book of my own , for these book seem a close companionship with my mother : I know that she must have look at the very word and say they . in that way I have come to know a little of our religion , and the history of our people , besides piece together what I read in play and other book about Jews and jewess ; because I be sure my mother obey her religion . I have leave off ask my father about she . it be very dreadful to say it , but I begin to disbelieve he . I have find that he do not always tell the truth , and make promise without meaning to keep they ; and that raise my suspicion that my mother and brother be still alive though he have tell I they be dead . for in go over the past again as I get old and know more , I feel sure that my mother have be deceive , and have expect to see we back again after a very little while ; and my father take I on his knee and tell I that my mother and brother be both dead seem to I now but a bit of acting , to set my mind at rest . the cruelty of that falsehood sink into I , and I hat all untruth because of it . I write to my mother secretly : I know the street , Colman Street , where we live , and that it be not Blackfriars Bridge and the Coburg , and that our name be Cohen then , though my father call we Lapidoth , because , he say , it be a name of his forefather in Poland . I send my letter secretly ; but no answer come , and I think there be no hope for I . our life in America do not last much long . my father suddenly tell I we be to pack up and go to Hamburg , and I be rather glad . I hop we might get among a different sort of people , and I know German quite well some german play almost all by heart . my father speak it well than he speak English . I be thirteen then , and I seem to myself quite old I know so much , and yet so little . I think other child can not feel as I do . I have often wish that I have be drown when I be go away from my mother . but I set myself to obey and suffer : what else could I do ? one day when we be on our voyage , a new thought come into my mind . I be not very ill that time , and I keep on deck a good deal . my father act and sing and joke to amuse people on board , and I use often to hear remark about he . one day , when I be look at the sea and nobody take notice of I , I overhear a gentleman say , ' oh , he be one of those clever Jews a rascal , I should not   wonder . there be no race like they for cunning in the man and beauty in the woman . I wonder what market he mean that daughter for . ' when I hear this it dart into my mind that the unhappiness in my life come from my be a Jewess , and that always to the end the world would think slightly of I and that I must bear it , for I should be judge by that name ; and it comfort I to believe that my suffering be part of the affliction of my people , my part in the long song of mourning that have be go on through age and age . for if many of our race be wicked and make merry in their wickedness what be that but part of the affliction bear by the just among they , who be despise for the sin of their brother ? but you have not reject I . " 

 Mirah have change her tone in this last sentence , have suddenly reflect that at this moment she have reason not for complaint but for gratitude . 

 " and we will try to save you from be judge unjustly by other , my poor child , " say Mrs. Meyrick , who have now give up all attempt at go on with her work , and sit listen with fold hand and a face hardly less eager than Mab 's would have be . " go on , go on : tell I all . " 

 " after that we live in different town Hamburg and Vienna , the long . I begin to study singing again : and my father always get money about the theatre . I think he bring a good deal of money from America , I never know why we leave . for some time he be in great spirit about my singing , and he make I rehearse part and act continually . he look forward to my come out in the opera . but by - and - by it seem that my voice would never be strong enough it do not fulfill its promise . my master at Vienna say , ' do not   strain it far : it will never do for the public : it be gold , but a thread of gold dust . ' my father be bitterly disappointed : we be not so well off at that time . I think I have not quite tell you what I feel about my father . I know he be fond of I and mean to indulge I , and that make I afraid of hurt he ; but he always mistook what would please I and give I happiness . it be his nature to take everything lightly ; and I soon leave off ask he any question about thing that I care for much , because he always turn they off with a joke . he would even ridicule our own people ; and once when he have be imitate their movement and their tone in pray , only to make other laugh , I could not restrain myself for I always have an anger in my heart about my mother and when we be alone , I say , ' Father , you ought not to mimic our own people before Christians who mock they : would it not be bad if I mimic you , that they might mock you ? ' but he only shrug his shoulder and laugh and pinch my chin , and say , ' you could not   do it , my dear . " it be this way of turn off everything , that make a great wall between I and my father , and whatever I feel most I take the most care to hide from he . for there be some thing when they be laugh at I could not bear it : the world seem like a hell to I . be this world and all the life upon it only like a farce or a vaudeville , where you find no great meaning ? why then be there tragedy and grand opera , where man do difficult thing and choose to suffer ? I think it be silly to speak of all thing as a joke . and I see that his wish I to sing the great music , and part in grand opera , be only wish for what would fetch the great price . that hem in my gratitude for his affectionateness , and the tender feeling I have toward he be pity . yes , I do sometimes pity he . he have age and change . now he be no long so lively . I think he seem bad less good to other than to I . every now and then in the latter year his gaiety go away suddenly , and he would sit at home silent and gloomy ; or he would come in and fle himself down and sob , just as I have do myself when I have be in trouble . if I put my hand on his knee and say , ' what be the matter , father ? ' he would make no answer , but would draw my arm round his neck and put his arm round I and go on cry . there never come any confidence between we ; but oh , I be sorry for he . at those moment I know he must feel his life bitter , and I press my cheek against his head and pray . those moment be what most bind I to he ; and I use to think how much my mother once love he , else she would not have marry he . 

 " but soon there come the dreadful time . we have be at Pesth and we come back to Vienna . in spite of what my master Leo have say , my father get I an engagement , not at the opera , but to take singing part at a suburb theatre in Vienna . he have nothing to do with the theatre then ; I do not understand what he do , but I think he be continually at a gambling house , though he be careful always about take I to the theatre . I be very miserable . the play I act in be detestable to I . man come about we and want to talk to I : woman and man seem to look at I with a sneer smile ; it be no well than a fiery furnace . perhaps I make it bad than it be you do not   know that life : but the glare and the face , and my have to go on and act and sing what I hat , and then see people who come to stare at I behind the scene it be all so much bad than when I be a little girl . I go through with it ; I do it ; I have set my mind to obey my father and work , for I see nothing well that I could do . but I feel that my voice be get weak , and I know that my acting be not good except when it be not really act , but the part be one that I could be myself in , and some feeling within I carry I along . that be seldom . 

 " then , in the midst of all this , the news come to I one morning that my father have be take to prison , and he have send for I . he do not tell I the reason why he be there , but he order I to go to an address he give I , to see a Count who would be able to get he release . the address be to some public room where I be to ask for the Count , and beg he to come to my father . I find he , and recognize he as a gentleman whom I have see the other night for the first time behind the scene . that agitate I , for I remember his way of look at I and kiss my hand I think it be in mockery . but I deliver my errand , and he promise to go immediately to my father , who come home again that very evening , bring the Count with he . I now begin to feel a horrible dread of this man , for he worry I with his attention , his eye be always on I : I feel sure that whatever else there might be in his mind toward I , below it all there be scorn for the Jewess and the actress . and when he come to I the next day in the theatre and would put my shawl around I , a terror take hold of I ; I see that my father want I to look pleased . the Count be neither very young nor very old ; his hair and eye be pale ; he be tall and walk heavily , and his face be heavy and grave except when he look at I . he smile at I , and his smile go through I with horror : I could not tell why he be so much bad to I than other man . some feeling be like our hearing : they come as sound do , before we know their reason . my father talk to I about he when we be alone , and praise he say what a good friend he have be . I say nothing , because I suppose he have get my father out of prison . when the Count come again , my father leave the room . he ask I if I like be on the stage . I say no , I only act in obedience to my father . he always speak French , and call I ' petite ange ' and such thing , which I feel insulting . I know he mean to make love to I , and I have it firmly in my mind that a nobleman and one who be not a Jew could have no love for I that be not half contempt . but then he tell I that I need not act any long ; he wish I to visit he at his beautiful place , where I might be queen of everything . it be difficult to I to speak , I feel so shake with anger : I could only say , ' I would rather stay on the stage forever , ' and I leave he there . hurry out of the room I see my father saunter in the passage . my heart be crush . I go past he and lock myself up . it have sink into I that my father be in a conspiracy with that man against I . but the next day he persuade I to come out : he say that I have mistake everything , and he would explain : if I do not come out and act and fulfill my engagement , we should be ruin and he must starve . so I go on acting , and for a week or more the Count never come near I . my father change our lodging , and keep at home except when he go to the theatre with I . he begin one day to speak discouragingly of my acting , and say , I could never go on singing in public I should lose my voice I ought to think of my future , and not put my nonsensical feeling between I and my fortune . he say , ' what will you do ? you will be bring down to sing and beg at people 's door . you have have a splendid offer and ought to accept it . ' I could not speak : a horror take possession of I when I think of my mother and of he . I feel for the first time that I should not do wrong to leave he . but the next day he tell I that he have put an end to my engagement at the theatre , and that we be to go to Prague . I be get suspicious of everything , and my will be harden to act against he . it take we two day to pack and get ready ; and I have it in my mind that I might be oblige to run away from my father , and then I would come to London and try if it be possible to find my mother . I have a little money , and I sell some thing to get more . I pack a few clothe in a little bag that I could carry with I , and I keep my mind on the watch . my father 's silence his letting drop that subject of the Count 's offer make I feel sure that there be a plan against I . I feel as if it have be a plan to take I to a madhouse . I once see a picture of a madhouse , that I could never forget ; it seem to I very much like some of the life I have see the people strut , quarrel , leer the face with cunning and malice in they . it be my will to keep myself from wickedness ; and I pray for help . I have see what despise woman be : and my heart turn against my father , for I see always behind he that man who make I shudder . you will think I have not enough reason for my suspicion , and perhaps I have not , outside my own feeling ; but it seem to I that my mind have be light up , and all that might be stand out clear and sharp . if I sleep , it be only to see the same sort of thing , and I could hardly sleep at all . through our journey I be everywhere on the watch . I do not   know why , but it come before I like a real event , that my father would suddenly leave I and I should find myself with the Count where I could not get away from he . I think God be warn I : my mother 's voice be in my soul . it be dark when we reach Prague , and though the strange bunch of lamp be light it be difficult to distinguish face as we drive along the street . my father choose to sit outside he be always smoke now and I watch everything in spite of the darkness . I do believe I could see well then than I ever do before : the strange clearness within seem to have get outside I . it be not my habit to notice face and figure much in the street ; but this night I see every one ; and when we pass before a great hotel I catch sight only of a back that be pass in the light of the great bunch of lamp a good way off fall on it . I know it before the face be turn , as it fall into shadow , I know who it be . help come to I . I feel sure help come . I do not sleep that night . I put on my plainest thing the cloak and hat I have wear ever since ; and I sit watch for the light and the sound of the door be unbarred . some one rise early at four o'clock , to go to the railway . that give I courage . I slip out , with my little bag under my cloak , and none notice I . I have be a long while attend to the railway guide that I might learn the way to England ; and before the sun have rise I be in the train for Dresden . then I cry for joy . I do not know whether my money would last out , but I trust . I could sell the thing in my bag , and the little ring in my ear , and I could live on bread only . my only terror be lest my father should follow I . but I never pause . I come on , and on , and on , only eat bread now and then . when I get to Brussels I see that I should not have enough money , and I sell all that I could sell ; but here a strange thing happen . put my hand into the pocket of my cloak , I find a half - napoleon . wonder and wonder how it come there , I remember that on the way from Cologne there be a young workman sit against I . I be frightened at every one , and do not like to be speak to . at first he try to talk , but when he see that I do not like it , he leave off . it be a long journey ; I eat nothing but a bit of bread , and he once offer I some of the food he bring in , but I refuse it . I do believe it be he who put that bit of gold in my pocket . without it I could hardly have get to Dover , and I do walk a good deal of the way from Dover to London . I know I should look like a miserable beggar - girl . I want not to look very miserable , because if I find my mother it would grieve she to see I so . but oh , how vain my hope be that she would be there to see I come ! as soon as I set foot in London , I begin to ask for Lambeth and Blackfriars Bridge , but they be a long way off , and I go wrong . at last I get to Blackfriars Bridge and ask for Colman Street . People shake their head . none know it . I see it in my mind our doorstep , and the white tile hang in the window , and the large brick building opposite with wide door . but there be nothing like it . at last when I ask a tradesman where the Coburg Theatre and Colman Street be , he say , ' oh , my little woman , that be all do away with . the old street have be pull down ; everything be new . ' I turn away and feel as if death have lay a hand on I . he say : ' stop , stop ! young woman ; what be it you be want with Colman Street , eh ? ' mean well , perhaps . but his tone be what I could not bear ; and how could I tell he what I want ? I feel blinded and bewilder with a sudden shock . I suddenly feel that I be very weak and weary , and yet where could I go ? for I look so poor and dusty , and have nothing with I I look like a street - beggar . and I be afraid of all place where I could enter . I lose my trust . I think I be forsake . it seem that I have be in a fever of hope deliriou all the way from Prague : I think that I be help , and I do nothing but strain my mind forward and think of find my mother ; and now there I stand in a strange world . all who see I would think ill of I , and I must herd with beggar . I stand on the bridge and look along the river . People be go on to a steamboat . many of they seem poor , and I feel as if it would be a refuge to get away from the street ; perhaps the boat would take I where I could soon get into a solitude . I have still some penny leave , and I buy a loaf when I go on the boat . I want to have a little time and strength to think of life and death . how could I live ? and now again it seem that if ever I be to find my mother again , death be the way to she . I eat , that I might have strength to think . the boat set I down at a place along the river I do not   know where and it be late in the evening . I find some large tree apart from the road , and I sit down under they that I might rest through the night . sleep must have soon come to I , and when I awake it be morning . the bird be sing , and the dew be white about I , I feel chill and oh , so lonely ! I get up and walk and follow the river a long way and then turn back again . there be no reason why I should go anywhere . the world about I seem like a vision that be hurry by while I stand still with my pain . my thought be strong than I be ; they rush in and force I to see all my life from the beginning ; ever since I be carry away from my mother I have feel myself a lost child take up and use by stranger , who do not care what my life be to I , but only what I could do for they . it seem all a weary wandering and heart - loneliness as if I have be force to go to merrymaking without the expectation of joy . and now it be bad . I be lose again , and I dread lest any stranger should notice I and speak to I . I have a terror of the world . none know I ; all would mistake I . I have see so many in my life who make themselves glad with scorning , and laugh at another 's shame . what could I do ? this life seem to be close in upon I with a wall of fire everywhere there be scorch that make I shrink . the high sunlight make I shrink . and I begin to think that my despair be the voice of God tell I to die . but it would take I long to die of hunger . then I think of my people , how they have be drive from land to land and be afflict , and multitude have die of misery in their wandering be I the first ? and in the war and trouble when Christians be cruel , our father have sometimes slay their child and afterward themselves : it be to save they from be false apostate . that seem to make it right for I to put an end to my life ; for calamity have close I in too , and I see no pathway but to evil . but my mind get into war with itself , for there be contrary thing in it . I know that some have hold it wrong to hasten their own death , though they be in the midst of flame ; and while I have some strength leave it be a longing to bear if I ought to bear else where be the good of all my life ? it have not be happy since the first year : when the light come every morning I use to think , ' I will bear it . ' but always before I have some hope ; now it be go . with these thought I wander and wander , inwardly cry to the most High , from whom I should not flee in death more than in life though I have no strong faith that he care for I . the strength seem depart from my soul ; deep below all my cry be the feeling that I be alone and forsake . the more I think the weary I get , till it seem I be not think at all , but only the sky and the river and the eternal God be in my soul . and what be it whether I die or live ? if I lie down to die in the river , be it more than lie down to sleep ? for there too I commit my soul I give myself up . I could not bear memory any more ; I could only feel what be present in I it be all one longing to cease from my weary life , which seem only a pain outside the great peace that I might enter into . that be how it be . when the evening come and the sun be go , it seem as if that be all I have to wait for . and a new strength come into I to will what I would do . you know what I do . I be go to die . you know what happen do he not tell you ? faith come to I again ; I be not forsake . he tell you how he find I ? " 

 Mrs. Meyrick give no audible answer , but press her lip against 
 Mirah 's forehead . 
         

 " she be just a pearl ; the mud have only wash she , " be the fervid little woman 's closing commentary when , tete - a - tete with Deronda in the back parlor that evening , she have convey Mirah 's story to he with much vividness . 

 " what be your feeling about a search for this mother ? " say Deronda . 
 " have you no fear ? I have , I confess . " 
 " oh , I believe the mother 's good , " say Mrs. Meyrick , with rapid decisiveness ; " or be good . she may be dead that be my fear . a good woman , you may depend : you may know it by the scoundrel the father be . where do the child get her goodness from ? wheaten flour have to be account for . " 

 Deronda be rather disappointed at this answer ; he have want a confirmation of his own judgment , and he begin to put in demurrer . the argument about the mother would not apply to the brother ; and Mrs. Meyrick admit that the brother might be an ugly likeness of the father . then , as to advertising , if the name be Cohen , you might as well advertise for two undescribed terrier ; and here Mrs. Meyrick help he , for the idea of an advertisement , already mention to Mirah , have rouse the poor child 's terror ; she be convince that her father would see it he see everything in the paper . certainly there be safe mean than advertising ; man might be set to work whose business it be to find missing person ; but Deronda wish Mrs. Meyrick to feel with he that it would be wise to wait , before seek a dubious perhaps a deplorable result ; especially as he be engage to go abroad the next week for a couple of month . if a search be make , he would like to be at hand , so that Mrs. Meyrick might not be unaide in meet any consequence suppose that she would generously continue to watch over Mirah . 

 " we should be very jealous of any one who take the task from we , " say Mrs. Meyrick . " she will stay under my roof ; there be Hans 's old room for she . " 

 " will she be content to wait ? " say Deronda , anxiously . 

 " no trouble there . it be not her nature to run into planning and devising : only to submit . see how she submit to that father ! it be a wonder to herself how she find the will and contrivance to run away from he . about find her mother , her only notion now be to trust ; since you be send to save she and we be good to she , she trust that her mother will be find in the same unsought way . and when she be talk I catch her feeling like a child . " 

 Mrs. Meyrick hop that the sum Deronda put into her hand as a provision for Mirah 's want be more than would be need ; after a little while Mirah would perhaps like to occupy herself as the other girl do , and make herself independent . Deronda plead that she must need a long rest . " oh , yes ; we will hurry nothing , " say Mrs. Meyrick . 

 " rely upon it , she shall be take tender care of . if you like to give I your address abroad , I will write to let you know how we get on . it be not fair that we should have all the pleasure of her salvation to ourselves . and besides , I want to make believe that I be do something for you as well as for Mirah . " 

 " that be no make - believe . what should I have do without you last night ? everything would have go wrong . I shall tell Hans that the good of have he for a friend be , know his mother . " 

 after that they join the girl in the other room , where Mirah be seat placidly , while the other be tell she what they know about Mr. Deronda his goodness to Hans , and all the virtue that Hans have report of he . 

 " Kate burn a pastille before his portrait every day , " say Mab . " and I carry his signature in a little black - silk bag round my neck to keep off the cramp . and Amy say the multiplication - table in his name . we must all do something extra in honor of he , now he have bring you to we . " 

 " I suppose he be too great a person to want anything , " say Mirah , smile at Mab , and appeal to the graver Amy . " he be perhaps very high in the world ? " 

 " he be very much above we in rank , " say Amy . " he be relate to grand people . I dare say he lean on some of the satin cushion we prick our finger over . " 

 " I be glad he be of high rank , " say Mirah , with her usual quietness . 

 " now , why be you glad of that ? " say Amy , rather suspicious of this sentiment , and on the watch for jewish peculiarity which have not appear . 

 " because I have always dislike man of high rank before . " 

 " oh , Mr. Deronda be not so very high , " say Kate , " he need not hinder we from think ill of the whole peerage and baronetage if we like . " 

 when he enter , Mirah rise with the same look of grateful reverence that she have lift to he the evening before : impossible to see a creature free at once from embarrassment and boldness . her theatrical training have leave no recognizable trace ; probably her manner have not much change since she play the forsaken child at nine year of age ; and she have grow up in her simplicity and truthfulness like a little flower - seed that absorb the chance confusion of its surrounding into its own definite mould of beauty . Deronda feel that he be make acquaintance with something quite new to he in the form of womanhood . for Mirah be not childlike from ignorance : her experience of evil and trouble be deep and strange than his own . he feel inclined to watch she and listen to she as if she have come from a far off shore inhabit by a race different from our own . 

 but for that very reason he make his visit brief with his usual activity of imagination as to how his conduct might affect other , he shrink from what might seem like curiosity or the assumption of a right to know as much as he please of one to whom he have do a service . for example , he would have like to hear her sing , but he would have feel the expression of such a wish to be rudeness in he since she could not refuse , and he would all the while have a sense that she be be treat like one whose accomplishment be to be ready on demand . and whatever reverence could be show to woman , he be bent on show to this girl . why ? he give himself several good reason ; but whatever one do with a strong unhesitating outflow of will have a store of motive that it would be hard to put into word . some deed seem little more than interjection which give vent to the long passion of a life . 

 so Deronda soon take his farewell for the two month during which he expect to be absent from London , and in a few day he be on his way with Sir Hugo and Lady Mallinger to Leubronn . 

 he have fulfil his intention of tell they about Mirah . the baronet be decidedly of opinion that the search for the mother and brother have well be let alone . Lady Mallinger be much interested in the poor girl , observe that there be a society for the conversion of the Jews , and that it be to be hop Mirah would embrace Christianity ; but perceive that Sir Hugo look at she with amusement , she conclude that she have say something foolish . Lady Mallinger feel apologetically about herself as a woman who have produce nothing but daughter in a case where son be require , and hence regard the apparent contradiction of the world as probably due to the weakness of her own understanding . but when she be much puzzle , it be her habit to say to herself , " I will ask Daniel . " Deronda be altogether a convenience in the family ; and Sir Hugo too , after intend to do the good for he , have begin to feel that the pleasant result would be to have this substitute for a son always ready at his elbow . 

 this be the history of Deronda , so far as he know it , up to the time of that visit to Leubronn in which he see Gwendolen Harleth at the gaming - table . 

 CHAPTER XXI . 

 it be a common sentence that Knowledge be power ; but who hath duly consider or set forth the power of ignorance ? Knowledge slowly build up what ignorance in an hour pull down . Knowledge , through patient and frugal century , enlarge discovery and make record of it ; ignorance , want its day 's dinner , light a fire with the record , and give a flavor to its one roast with the burn soul of many generation . Knowledge , instruct the sense , refining and multiplying need , transform itself into skill and make life various with a new six day ' work ; come Ignorance drunk on the seventh , with a firkin of oil and a match and an easy " let there not be , " and the many - color creation be shrivel up in blackness . of a truth , Knowledge be power , but it be a power rein by scruple , have a conscience of what must be and what may be ; whereas ignorance be a blind giant who , let he but wax unbound , would make it a sport to seize the pillar that hold up the long - wrought fabric of human good , and turn all the place of joy dark as a bury Babylon . and look at life parcel - wise , in the growth of a single lot , who have a practiced vision may not see that ignorance of the true bond between event , and false conceit of means whereby sequence may be compel like that falsity of eyesight which overlook the gradation of distance , see that which be afar off as if it be within a step or a grasp precipitate the mistaken soul on destruction ? 

 it be half - past ten in the morning when Gwendolen Harleth , after her gloomy journey from Leubronn , arrive at the station from which she must drive to Offendene . no carriage or friend be await she , for in the telegram she have send from Dover she have mention a later train , and in her impatience of linger at a London station she have set off without picture what it would be to arrive unannounced at half an hour 's drive from home at one of those station which have be fix on not as near anywhere , but as equidistant from everywhere . deposit as a femme sole with her large trunk , and have to wait while a vehicle be be get from the large - sized lantern call the Railway Inn , Gwendolen feel that the dirty paint in the waiting - room , the dusty decanter of flat water , and the text in large letter call on she to repent and be convert , be part of the dreary prospect open by her family trouble ; and she hurry away to the outer door look toward the lane and field . but here the very gleam of sunshine seem melancholy , for the autumnal leaf and grass be shiver , and the wind be turn up the feather of a cock and two croaking hen which have doubtless part with their grow - up offspring and do not know what to do with themselves . the railway official also seem without resource , and his innocent demeanor in observe Gwendolen and her trunk be render intolerable by the cast in his eye ; especially since , be a new man , he do not know she , and must conclude that she be not very high in the world . the vehicle a dirty old barouche be within sight , and be be slowly prepare by an elderly laborer . contemptible detail these , to make part of a history ; yet the turn of most life be hardly to be account for without they . they be continually enter with cumulative force into a mood until it get the mass and momentum of a theory or a motive . even philosophy be not quite free from such determine influence ; and to be drop solitary at an ugly , irrelevant - looking spot , with a sense of no income on the mind , might well prompt a man to discourage speculation on the origin of thing and the reason of a world where a subtle thinker find himself so badly off . how much more might such trifle tell on a young lady equip for society with a fastidious taste , an indian shawl over her arm , some twenty cubic foot of trunk by her side , and a mortal dislike to the new consciousness of poverty which be stimulate her imagination of disagreeable ? at any rate they tell heavily on poor Gwendolen , and help to quell her resistant spirit . what be the good of live in the midst of hardship , ugliness , and humiliation ? this be the beginning of be at home again , and it be a sample of what she have to expect . 

 here be the theme on which her discontent ring its sad change during her slow drive in the uneasy barouche , with one great trunk squeeze the meek driver , and the other fasten with a rope on the seat in front of she . her rule vision all the way from Leubronn have be that the family would go abroad again ; for of course there must be some little income leave her mamma do not mean that they would have literally nothing . to go to a dull place abroad and live poorly , be the dismal future that threaten she : she have see plenty of poor english people abroad and imagine herself plunge in the despise dullness of their ill - plenishe life , with Alice , Bertha , Fanny and Isabel all grow up in tediousness around she , while she advance toward thirty and her mamma get more and more melancholy . but she do not mean to submit , and let misfortune do what it would with she : she have not yet quite believe in the misfortune ; but weariness and disgust with this wretched arrival have begin to affect she like an uncomfortable waking , bad than the uneasy dream which have go before . the self - delight with which she have kiss her image in the glass have fade before the sense of futility in be anything whatever charming , clever , resolute what be the good of it all ? event might turn out anyhow , and man be hateful . yes , man be hateful . but in these last hour , a certain change have come over their meaning . it be one thing to hate steal good , and another thing to hate they the more because their be steal hinder we from make use of they . Gwendolen have begin to be angry with Grandcourt for be what have hinder she from marry he , angry with he as the cause of her present dreary lot . 

 but the slow drive be nearly at an end , and the lumber vehicle come up the avenue be within sight of the window . a figure appear under the portico bring a rush of new and less selfish feeling in Gwendolen , and when spring from the carriage she see the dear beautiful face with fresh line of sadness in it , she throw her arm round her mother 's neck , and for the moment feel all sorrow only in relation to her mother 's feeling about they . 

 behind , of course , be the sad face of the four superfluous girl , each , poor thing like those other many thousand sister of we all have her peculiar world which be of no importance to any one else , but all of they feel Gwendolen 's presence to be somehow a relenting of misfortune : where Gwendolen be , something interesting would happen ; even her hurried submission to their kiss , and " now go away , girl , " carry the sort of comfort which all weakness find in decision and authoritativeness . good Miss Merry , whose air of meek depression , hitherto hold unaccountable in a governess affectionately attach to the family , be now at the general level of circumstance , do not expect any greeting , but busy herself with the trunk and the coachman 's pay ; while Mrs. Davilow and Gwendolen hasten up - stair and shut themselves in the black and yellow bedroom . 

 " never mind , mamma dear , " say Gwendolen , tenderly press her handkerchief against the tear that be roll down Mrs. Davilow 's cheek . " never mind . I do not   mind . I will do something . I will be something . thing will come right . it seem bad because I be away . come now ! you must be glad because I be here . " 

 Gwendolen feel every word of that speech . a rush of compassionate tenderness stir all her capability of generous resolution ; and the self - confident project which have vaguely glance before she during her journey spring instantaneously into new definiteness . suddenly she seem to perceive how she could be ' something . " it be one of her good moment , and the fond mother , forget everything below that tide mark , look at she with a sort of adoration . she say 

 " bless you , my good , good darling ! I can be happy , if you can ! " 

 but later in the day there be an ebb ; the old slippery rock , the old weedy place reappear . naturally , there be a shrinking of courage as misfortune cease to be a mere announcement , and begin to disclose itself as a grievous tyrannical inmate . at first that ugly drive at an end it be still Offendene that Gwendolen have come home to , and all surrounding of immediate consequence to she be still there to secure her personal ease ; the roomy stillness of the large solid house while she rest ; all the luxury of her toilet care for without trouble to she ; and a little tray with her favorite food bring to she in private . for she have say , " keep they all away from we to - day , mamma . let you and I be alone together . " 

 when Gwendolen come down into the drawing - room , fresh as a newly - dip swan , and sit lean against the cushion of the settee beside her mamma , their misfortune have not yet turn its face and breath upon she . she feel prepared to hear everything , and begin in a tone of deliberate intention 

 " what have you think of do , exactly , mamma ? " 

 " oh , my dear , the next thing to be do be to move away from this house . Mr. Haynes most fortunately be as glad to have it now as he would have be when we take it . Lord Brackenshaw 's agent be to arrange everything with he to the good advantage for we : Bazley , you know ; not at all an ill - natured man . " 

 " I can not help think that Lord Brackenshaw would let you stay here rent - free , mamma , " say Gwendolen , whose talent have not be apply to business so much as to discernment of the admiration excite by her charm . 

 " my dear child , Lord Brackenshaw be in Scotland , and know nothing about we . neither your uncle nor I would choose to apply to he . besides , what could we do in this house without servant , and without money to warm it ? the soon we be out the well . we have nothing to carry but our clothe , you know ? " 

 " I suppose you mean to go abroad , then ? " say Gwendolen . after all , this be what she have familiarize her mind with . 

 " oh , no , dear , no . how could we travel ? you never do learn anything about income and expense , " say Mrs. Davilow , try to smile , and put her hand on Gwendolen 's as she add , mournfully , " that make it so much hard for you , my pet . " 

 " but where be we to go ? " say Gwendolen , with a trace of sharpness in her tone . she feel a new current of fear pass through she . 

 " it be all decide . a little furniture be to be get in from the rectory all that can be spar . " Mrs. Davilow hesitate . she dread the reality for herself less than the shock she must give to Gwendolen , who look at she with tense expectancy , but be silent . 

 " it be Sawyer 's cottage we be to go to . " 

 at first , Gwendolen remain silent , pal with anger justifiable anger , in her opinion . then she say with haughtiness 

 " that be impossible . something else than that ought to have be think of . my uncle ought not to allow that . I will not submit to it . " 

 " my sweet child , what else could have be think of ? your uncle , I be sure , be as kind as he can be : but he be suffer himself ; he have his family to bring up . and do you quite understand ? you must remember we have nothing . we shall have absolutely nothing except what he and my sister give we . they have be as wise and active a possible , and we must try to earn something . I and the girl be go to work a table - cloth border for the Ladies ' charity at Winchester , and a communion cloth that the parishioner be to present to Pennicote Church . " 

 Mrs. Davilow go into these detail timidly : but how else be she to bring the fact of their position home to this poor child who , alas ! must submit at present , whatever might be in the background for she ? and she herself have a superstition that there must be something well in the background . 

 " but surely somewhere else than Sawyer 's cottage might have be find , " Gwendolen persist take hold of   as if in a nightmare   by the image of this house where an exciseman have live . 

 " no , indeed , dear . you know house be scarce , and we may be thankful to get anything so private . it be not so very bad . there be two little parlor and four bedroom . you shall sit alone whenever you like . " 

 the ebb of sympathetic care for her mamma have go so low just now , that Gwendolen take no notice of these deprecatory word . 

 " I can not conceive that all your property be go at once , mamma . how can you be sure in so short a time ? it be not a week since you write to I . " 

 " the first news come much early , dear . but I would not spoil your pleasure till it be quite necessary . " 

 " oh , how vexatious ! " say Gwendolen , color with fresh anger . " if I have know , I could have bring home the money I have win : and for want of know , I stay and lose it . I have nearly two hundred pound , and it would have do for we to live on a little while , till I could carry out some plan . " she pause an instant and then add more impetuously , " everything have go against I . People have come near I only to blight I . " 

 among the " people " she be include Deronda . if he have not interfere in her life she would have go to the gaming - table again with a few napoleon , and might have win back her loss . 

 " we must resign ourselves to the will of Providence , my child , " say poor Mrs. Davilow , startle by this revelation of the gambling , but not dare to say more . she feel sure that " people " mean Grandcourt , about whom her lip be seal . and Gwendolen answer immediately 

 " but I do not   resign myself . I shall do what I can against it . what be the good of call the people 's wickedness providence ? you say in your letter it be Mr. Lassman 's fault we have lose our money . have he run away with it all ? " 

 " no , dear , you do not   understand . there be great speculation : he mean to gain . it be all about mine and thing of that sort . he risk too much . " 

 " I do not   call that providence : it be his improvidence with our money , and he ought to be punish . can not   we go to law and recover our fortune ? my uncle ought to take measure , and not sit down by such wrong . we ought to go to law . " 

 " my dear child , law can never bring back money lose in that way . your uncle say it be milk spill upon the ground . besides , one must have a fortune to get any law : there be no law for people who be ruin . and our money have only go along with other 's people 's . we be not the only sufferer : other have to resign themselves besides we . " 

 " but I do not   resign myself to live at Sawyer 's cottage and see you work for sixpence and shilling because of that . I shall not do it . I shall do what be more befit our rank and education . " 

 " I be sure your uncle and all of we will approve of that , dear , and admire you the more for it , " say Mrs. Davilow , glad of an unexpected opening for speak on a difficult subject . " I do not   mean that you should resign yourself to bad when anything well offer itself . both your uncle and aunt have feel that your ability and education be a fortune for you , and they have already hear of something within your reach . " 

 " what be that , mamma ? " some of Gwendolen 's anger give way to interest , and she be not without romantic conjecture . 

 " there be two situation that offer themselves . one be in a bishop 's family , where there be three daughter , and the other be in quite a high class of school ; and in both , your french , and music , and dancing and then your manner and habit as a lady , be exactly what be want . each be a hundred a year and just for the present , " Mrs. Davilow have become frightened and hesitating , " to save you from the petty , common way of live that we must go to you would perhaps accept one of the two . " 

 " what ! be like Miss Graves at Madame Meunier 's ? no . " 

 " I think , myself , that Dr. Monpert 's would be more suitable . there could be no hardship in a bishop 's family . " 

 " excuse I , mamma . there be hardship everywhere for a governess . and I do not   see that it would be pleasanter to be look down on in a bishop 's family than in any other . besides , you know very well I hate teach . Fancy I shut up with three awkward girl something like Alice ! I would rather emigrate than be a governess . " 

 what it precisely be to emigrate , Gwendolen be not call on to explain . Mrs. Davilow be mute , see no outlet , and think with dread of the collision that might happen when Gwendolen have to meet her uncle and aunt . there be an air of reticence in Gwendolen 's haughty , resistant speech which imply that she have a definite plan in reserve ; and her practical ignorance continually exhibit , could not nullify the mother 's belief in the effectiveness of that forcible will and daring which have hold mastery over herself . 

 " I have some ornament , mamma , and I could sell they , " say Gwendolen . " they would make a sum : I want a little sum just to go on with . I dare say Marshall , at Wanchester , would take they : I know he show I some bracelet once that he say he have buy from a lady . Jocosa might go and ask he . Jocosa be go to leave we , of course . but she might do that first . " 

 " she would do anything she could , poor , dear soul . I have not tell you yet she want I to take all her saving her three hundred pound . I tell she to set up a little school . it will be hard for she to go into a new family now she have be so long with we . " 

 " oh , recommend she for the bishop 's daughter 's , " say Gwendolen , with a sudden gleam of laughter in her face . " I be sure she will do well than I should . " 

 " do take care not to say such thing to your uncle , " say Mrs. Davilow . 
 " he will be hurt at your despise what he have exert himself about . 
 but I dare say you have something else in your mind that he might not 
 disapprove , if you consult he . " 
 " there be some one else I want to consult first . be the Arrowpoint 's at Quetcham still , and be Herr Klesmer there ? but I daresay you know nothing about it , poor , dear mamma . can jeffrie go on horseback with a note ? " 

 " oh , my dear , Jefferies be not here , and the dealer have take the horse . but some one could go for we from Leek 's farm . the Arrowpoints be at Quetcham , I know . Miss Arrowpoint leave her card the other day : I could not see she . but I do not   know about Herr Klesmer . do you want to send before to - morrow ? " 

 " yes , as soon as possible . I will write a note , " say Gwendolen , rise . 

 " what can you be think of , Gwen ? " say Mrs. Davilow , relieve in the midst of her wonderment by sign of alacrity and well humor . 

 " do not   mind what , there be a dear , good mamma , " say Gwendolen , reseat herself a moment to give atoning caress . " I mean to do something . never mind what until it be all settle . and then you shall be comfort . the dear face ! it be ten year old in these three week . now , now , now ! do not   cry " Gwendolen , hold her mamma 's head with both hand , kiss the trembling eyelid . " but mind you do not   contradict I or put hindrance in my way . I must decide for myself . I can not be dictate to by my uncle or any one else . my life be my own affair . and I think " here her tone take an edge of scorn " I think I can do well for you than let you live in Sawyer 's cottage . " 

 in utter this last sentence Gwendolen again rise , and go to a desk where she write the follow note to Klesmer : 

 Miss Harleth present her compliment to Herr Klesmer , and venture to request of he the very great favor that he will call upon she , if possible , to - morrow . her reason for presume so far on his kindness be of a very serious nature . unfortunate family circumstance have oblige she to take a course in which she can only turn for advice to the great knowledge and judgment of Herr Klesmer . 

 " pray get this send to Quetcham at once , mamma , " say Gwendolen , as she address the letter . " the man must be tell to wait for an answer . let no time be lose . " 

 for the moment , the absorbing purpose be to get the letter dispatch ; but when she have be assure on this point , another anxiety arise and keep she in a state of uneasy excitement . if Klesmer happen not to be at Quetcham , what could she do next ? Gwendolen 's belief in her star , so to speak , have have some bruise . thing have go against she . a splendid marriage which present itself within reach have show a hideous flaw . the chance of roulette have not adjust themselves to her claim ; and a man of whom she know nothing have thrust himself between she and her intention . the conduct of those unintereste people who manage the business of the world have be culpable just in the point most injurious to she in particular . Gwendolen Harleth , with all her beauty and conscious force , feel the close threat of humiliation : for the first time the condition of this world seem to she like a hurrying roar crowd in which she have get astray , no more cared for and protect than a myriad of other girl , in spite of its be a peculiar hardship to she . if Klesmer be not at Quetcham that would be all of a piece with the rest : the unwelcome negative urge itself as a probability , and set her brain work at desperate alternative which might deliver she from Sawyer 's Cottage or the ultimate necessity of " take a situation , " a phrase that sum up for she the disagreeable most wound to her pride , most irksome to her taste ; at least so far as her experience enable she to imagine disagreeable . 

 still Klesmer might be there , and Gwendolen think of the result in that case with a hopefulness which even cast a satisfactory light over her peculiar trouble , as what might well enter into the biography of celebrity and remarkable person . and if she have hear her immediate acquaintance cross - examine as to whether they think her remarkable , the first who say " no " would have surprise she . 

 CHAPTER XXII . 

  we please our fancy with ideal webs 
  of innovation , but our life meanwhile 
  be in the loom , where busy passion ply 
  the shuttle to and fro , and give our deed 
  the accustomed pattern . 
 Gwendolen 's note , come " pat betwixt too early and too late , " be put into Klesmer 's hand just when he be leave Quetcham , and in order to meet her appeal to his kindness he , with some inconvenience to himself spend the night at Wanchester . there be reason why he would not remain at Quetcham . 

 that magnificent mansion , fit with regard to the great expense , have in fact become too hot for he , its owner have , like some great politician , be astonish at an insurrection against the establish order of thing , which we plain people after the event can perceive to have be prepare under their very nose . 

 there be as usual many guest in the house , and among they one in whom Miss Arrowpoint foresee a new pretender to her hand : a political man of good family who confidently expect a peerage , and feel on public ground that he require a large fortune to support the title properly . heiress vary , and person interested in one of they beforehand be prepared to find that she be too yellow or too red , tall and topple or short and square , violent and capricious or moony and insipid ; but in every case it be take for grant that she will consider herself an appendage to her fortune , and marry where other think her fortune ought to go . nature , however , not only accommodate herself ill to our favorite practice by make " only child " daughter , but also now and then endow the misplaced daughter with a clear head and a strong will . the Arrowpoints have already feel some anxiety owe to these endowment of their Catherine . she would not accept the view of her social duty which require she to marry a needy nobleman or a commoner on the ladder toward nobility ; and they be not without uneasiness concern her persistence in decline suitable offer . as to the possibility of she be in love with Klesmer they be not at all uneasy a very common sort of blindness . for in general mortal have a great power of be astonish at the presence of an effect toward which they have do everything , and at the absence of an effect toward which they have do nothing but desire it . parent be astonish at the ignorance of their son , though they have use the most time - honor and expensive mean of secure it ; husband and wife be mutually astonish at the loss of affection which they have take no pain to keep ; and all of we in our turn be apt to be astonish that our neighbor do not admire we . in this way it happen that the truth seem highly improbable . the truth be something different from the habitual lazy combination beget by our wish . the arrowpoint ' hour of astonishment be come . 

 when there be a passion between an heiress and a proud independent - spirited man , it be difficult for they to come to an understanding ; but the difficulty be likely to be overcome unless the proud man secure himself by a constant alibi . brief meeting after studied absence be potent in disclosure : but more potent still be frequent companionship , with full sympathy in taste and admirable quality on both side ; especially where the one be in the position of teacher and the other be delightedly conscious of receptive ability which also give the teacher delight . the situation be famous in history , and have no less charm now than it have in the day of Abelard . 

 but this kind of comparison have not occur to the Arrowpoints when they first engage Klesmer to come down to Quetcham . to have a first - rate musician in your house be a privilege of wealth ; Catherine 's musical talent demand every advantage ; and she particularly desire to use her quieter time in the country for more thorough study . Klesmer be not yet a Liszt , understand to be adore by lady of all european country with the exception of Lapland : and even with that understanding it do not follow that he would make proposal to an heiress . no musician of honor would do so . still less be it conceivable that Catherine would give he the slight pretext for such daring . the large check that Mr. Arrowpoint be to draw in Klesmer 's name seem to make he as safe an inmate as a footman . where marriage be inconceivable , a girl 's sentiment be safe . 

 Klesmer be eminently a man of honor , but marriage rarely begin with formal proposal , and moreover , Catherine 's limit of the conceivable do not exactly correspond with her mother 's . 

 outsider might have be more apt to think that Klesmer 's position be dangerous for himself if Miss Arrowpoint have be an acknowledge beauty ; not take into account that the most powerful of all beauty be that which reveal itself after sympathy and not before it . there be a charm of eye and lip which come with every little phrase that certify delicate perception or fine judgment , with every unostentatious word or smile that show a heart awake to other ; and no sweep of garment or turn of figure be more satisfying than that which enter as a restoration of confidence that one person be present on whom no intention will be lose . what dignity of meaning go on gather in frown and laugh which be never observe in the wrong place ; what suffuse adorableness in a human frame where there be a mind that can flash out comprehension and hand that can execute finely ! the more obvious beauty , also adorable sometimes one may say it without blasphemy begin by be an apology for folly , and end like other apology in become tiresome by iteration ; and that Klesmer , though very susceptible to it , should have a passionate attachment to Miss Arrowpoint , be no more a paradox than any other triumph of a manifold sympathy over a monotonous attraction . we object less to be tax with the enslave excess of our passion than with our deficiency in wide passion ; but if the truth be know , our reputed intensity be often the dullness of not know what else to do with ourselves . Tannhšuser , one suspect , be a knight of ill - furnish imagination , hardly of large discourse than a heavy guardsman ; Merlin have certainly see his good day , and be merely repeat himself , when he fall into that hopeless captivity ; and we know that Ulysses feel so manifest an ennui under similar circumstance that Calypso herself further his departure . there be indeed a report that he afterward leave Penelope ; but since she be habitually absorb in worsted work , and it be probably from she that Telemachus get his mean , pettifog disposition , always anxious about the property and the daily consumption of meat , no inference can be draw from this already dubious scandal as to the relation between companionship and constancy . 

 Klesmer be as versatile and fascinating as a young Ulysses on a sufficient acquaintance one whom nature seem to have first make generously and then to have add music as a dominant power use all the abundant rest , and , as in Mendelssohn , find expression for itself not only in the high finish of execution , but in that fervor of creative work and theoretic belief which pierce devoted purpose . his foible of arrogance and vanity do not exceed such as may be find in the good english family ; and Catherine Arrowpoint have no corresponding restlessness to clash with his : notwithstanding her native kindliness she be perhaps too coolly firm and self - sustain . but she be one of those satisfactory creature whose intercourse have the charm of discovery ; whose integrity of faculty and expression beget a wish to know what they will say on all subject or how they will perform whatever they undertake ; so that they end by raise not only a continual expectation but a continual sense of fulfillment the systole and diastole of blissful companionship . in such case the outward presentment easily become what the image be to the worshipper . it be not long before the two become aware that each be interesting to the other ; but the " how far " remain a matter of doubt . Klesmer do not conceive that Miss Arrowpoint be likely to think of he as a possible lover , and she be not accustomed to think of herself as likely to stir more than a friendly regard , or to fear the expression of more from any man who be not enamored of her fortune . each be content to suffer some unshared sense of denial for the sake of love the other 's society a little too well ; and under these condition no need have be feel to restrict Klesmer 's visit for the last year either in country or in town . he know very well that if Miss Arrowpoint have be poor he would have make ardent love to she instead of send a storm through the piano , or fold his arm and pour out a hyperbolical tirade about something as impersonal as the north pole ; and she be not less aware that if it have be possible for Klesmer to wish for her hand she would have find overmaster reason for give it to he . here be the safety of full cup , which be as secure from overflow as the half - empty , always suppose no disturbance . naturally , silent feeling have not remain at the same point any more than the stealthly dial - hand , and in the present visit to Quetcham , Klesmer have begin to think that he would not come again ; while Catherine be more sensitive to his frequent brusquerie , which she rather resent as a needless effort to assert his footing of superior in every sense except the conventional . 

 meanwhile enter the expectant peer , Mr. Bult , an esteemed party man who , rather neutral in private life , have strong opinion concern the district of the Niger , be much at home also in Brazils , speak with decision of affair in the South Seas , be studious of his parliamentary and itinerant speech , and have the general solidity and suffusive pinkness of a healthy Briton on the central table - land of life . Catherine , aware of a tacit understanding that he be an undeniable husband for an heiress , have nothing to say against he but that he be thoroughly tiresome to she . Mr. Bult be amiably confident , and have no idea that his insensibility to counterpoint could ever be reckon against he . Klesmer he hardly regard in the light of a serious human being who ought to have a vote ; and he do not mind Miss Arrowpoint 's addiction to music any more than her probable expense in antique lace . he be consequently a little amazed at an after - dinner outburst of Klesmer 's on the lack of idealism in english politic , which leave all mutuality between distant race to be determine simply by the need of a market ; the crusade , to his mind , have at least this excuse , that they have a banner of sentiment round which generous feeling could rally : of course , the scoundrel rally too , but what then ? they rally in equal force round your advertisement van of " buy cheap , sell dear . " on this theme Klesmer 's eloquence , gesticulatory and other , go on for a little while like stray firework accidentally ignite , and then sink into immovable silence . Mr. Bult be not surprised that Klesmer 's opinion should be flighty , but be astonish at his command of english idiom and his ability to put a point in a way that would have tell at a constituent ' dinner to be account for probably by his be a Pole , or a Czech , or something of that ferment sort , in a state of political refugeeism which have oblige he to make a profession of his music ; and that evening in the drawing - room he for the first time go up to Klesmer at the piano , Miss Arrowpoint be near , and say 

 " I have no idea before that you be a political man . " 

 Klesmer 's only answer be to fold his arm , put out his nether lip , and stare at Mr. Bult . 

 " you must have be use to public speaking . you speak uncommonly well , though I do not   agree with you . from what you say about sentiment , I fancy you be a Panslavist . " 

 " no ; my name be Elijah . I be the Wandering Jew , " say Klesmer , flash a smile at Miss Arrowpoint , and suddenly make a mysterious , wind - like rush backward and forward on the piano . Mr. Bult feel this buffoonery rather offensive and polish , but Miss Arrowpoint be there do not like to move away . 

 " Herr Klesmer have cosmopolitan idea , " say Miss Arrowpoint , try to make the good of the situation . " he look forward to a fusion of race . " 

 " with all my heart , " say Mr. Bult , willing to be gracious . " I be sure he have too much talent to be a mere musician . " 

 " ah , sir , you be under some mistake there , " say Klesmer , fire up . " no man have too much talent to be a musician . Most man have too little . a creative artist be no more a mere musician than a great statesman be a mere politician . we be not ingenious puppet , sir , who live in a box and look out on the world only when it be gap for amusement . we help to rule the nation and make the age as much as any other public man . we count ourselves on level bench with legislator . and a man who speak effectively through music be compel to something more difficult than parliamentary eloquence . " 

 with the last word Klesmer wheel from the piano and walk away . 

 Miss Arrowpoint color , and Mr. Bult observe , with his usual phlegmatic stolidity , " your pianist do not think small beer of himself . " 

 " Herr Klesmer be something more than a pianist , " say Miss Arrowpoint , apologetically . " he be a great musician in the full sense of the word . he will rank with Schubert and Mendelssohn . " 

 " ah , you lady understand these thing , " say Mr. Bult , none the less convinced that these thing be frivolous because Klesmer have show himself a coxcomb . 

 Catherine , always sorry when Klesmer give himself air , find an opportunity the next day in the music - room to say , " why be you so heated last night with Mr. Bult ? he mean no harm . " 

 " you wish I to be complaisant to he ? " say Klesmer , rather fiercely . 

 " I think it be hardly worth your while to be other than civil . " 

 " you find no difficulty in tolerate he , then ? you have a respect for a political platitudinarian as insensible as an ox to everything he can not   turn into political capital . you think his monumental obtuseness suit to the dignity of the english gentleman . " 

 " I do not say that . " 

 " you mean that I act without dignity , and you be offend with I . " 

 " now you be slightly near the truth , " say Catherine , smile . 

 " then I have well put my burial - clothe in my portmanteau and set off at once . " 

 " I do not   see that . if I have to bear your criticism of my operetta , you should not mind my criticism of your impatience . " 

 " but I do mind it . you would have wish I to take his ignorant impertinence about a ' mere musician ' without let he know his place . I be to hear my god blaspheme as well as myself insult . but I beg pardon . it be impossible you should see the matter as I do . even you can not   understand the wrath of the artist : he be of another caste for you . " 

 " that be true , " say Catherine , with some betrayal of feel . " he be of a caste to which I look up a caste above mine . " 

 Klesmer , who have be seat at a table look over score , start up and walk to a little distance , from which he say 

 " that be finely feel I be grateful . but I have well go , all the same . I have make up my mind to go , for good and all . you can get on exceedingly well without I : your operetta be on wheel it will go of itself . and your Mr. Bull 's company fit I ' wie die Faust in Auge . ' I be neglect my engagement . I must go off to St. Petersburg . " 

 there be no answer . 

 " you agree with I that I have well go ? " say Klesmer , with some irritation . 

 " certainly ; if that be what your business and feel prompt . I have only to wonder that you have consent to give we so much of your time in the last year . there must be treble the interest to you anywhere else . I have never think of you consent to come here as anything else than a sacrifice . " 

 " why should I make the sacrifice ? " say Klesmer , go to seat himself at the piano , and touch the key so as to give with the delicacy of an echo in the far distance a melody which he have set to Heine 's " Ich hab ' dich geliebet und liebe dich noch . " 

 " that be the mystery , " say Catherine , not want to affect anything , but from mere agitation . from the same cause she be tear a piece of paper into minute morsel , as if at a task of utmost multiplication impose by a cruel fairy . 

 " you can conceive no motive ? " say Klesmer , fold his arm . 

 " none that seem in the least probable . " 

 " then I shall tell you . it be because you be to I the chief woman in the world the throne lady whose color I carry between my heart and my armor . " 

 Catherine 's hand tremble so much that she could no long tear the paper : still less could her lip utter a word . Klesmer go on 

 " this would be the last impertinence in I , if I mean to found anything upon it . that be out of the question . I mean no such thing . but you once say it be your doom to suspect every man who court you of be an adventurer , and what make you angriest be man 's impute to you the folly of believe that they court you for your own sake . do you not say so ? " 

 " very likely , " be the answer , in a low murmur . 

 " it be a bitter word . well , at least one man who have see woman as plenty as flower in May have linger about you for your own sake . and since he be one whom you can never marry , you will believe he . there be an argument in favor of some other man . but do not   give yourself for a meal to a minotaur like Bult . I shall go now and pack . I shall make my excuse to Mrs. Arrowpoint . " Klesmer rise as he end , and walk quickly toward the door . 

 " you must take this heap of manuscript , " then say Catherine , suddenly make a desperate effort . she have rise to fetch the heap from another table . Klesmer come back , and they have the length of the folio sheet between they . 

 " why should I not marry the man who love I , if I love he ? " say Catherine . to she the effort be something like the leap of a woman from the deck into the lifeboat . 

 " it would be too hard impossible you could not carry it through . I be not worth what you would have to encounter . I will not accept the sacrifice . it would be think a mťsalliance for you and I should be liable to the bad accusation . " 

 " be it the accusation you be afraid of ? I be afraid of nothing but that we should miss the passing of our life together . " 

 the decisive word have be speak : there be no doubt concern the end will by each : there only remain the way of arrive at it , and Catherine determine to take the straight possible . she go to her father and mother in the library , and tell they that she have promise to marry Klesmer . 

 Mrs. Arrowpoint 's state of mind be pitiable . Imagine Jean Jacques , after his essay on the corrupting influence of the art , wake up among child of nature who have no idea of grill the raw bone they offer he for breakfast with the primitive flint knife ; or Saint Just , after fervidly denounce all recognition of pre - eminence , receive a vote of thank for the unbroken mediocrity of his speech , which warrant the dull patriot in deliver themselves at equal length . something of the same sort befell the authoress of " Tasso , " when what she have safely demand of the dead Leonora be enact by her own Catherine . it be hard for we to live up to our own eloquence , and keep pace with our wing word , while we be tread the solid earth and be liable to heavy dining . besides , it have long be understand that the propriety of literature be not those of practical life . Mrs. Arrowpoint naturally wish for the good of everything . she not only like to feel herself at a high level of literary sentiment than the lady with whom she associate ; she wish not to be behind they in any point of social consideration . while Klesmer be see in the light of a patronize musician , his peculiarity be picturesque and acceptable : but to see he by a sudden flash in the light of her son - in - law give she a burn sense of what the world would say . and the poor lady have be use to represent her Catherine as a model of excellence . 

 under the first shock she forget everything but her anger , and snatch at any phrase that would serve as a weapon . 

 " if Klesmer have presume to offer himself to you , your father shall horsewhip he off the premise . pray , speak , Mr. Arrowpoint . " 

 the father take his cigar from his mouth , and rise to the occasion by say , " this will never do , Cath . " 

 " do ! " cry Mrs. Arrowpoint ; " who in their sens ever think it would do ? you might as well say poisoning and strangling will not do . it be a comedy you have get up , Catherine . else you be mad . " 

 " I be quite sane and serious , mamma , and Herr Klesmer be not to blame . he never think of my marry he . I find out that he love I , and love he , I tell he I would marry he . " 

 " leave that unsaid , Catherine , " say Mrs. Arrowpoint , bitterly . " every one else will say that for you . you will be a public fable . every one will say that you must have make an offer to a man who have be pay to come to the house who be nobody know what a gypsy , a Jew , a mere bubble of the earth . " 

 " never mind , mamma , " say Catherine , indignant in her turn . " we all know he be a genius as Tasso be . " 

 " those time be not these , nor be Klesmer Tasso , " say Mrs. Arrowpoint , get more heated . " there be no sting in that sarcasm , except the sting of undutifulness . " 

 " I be sorry to hurt you , mamma . but I will not give up the happiness of my life to idea that I do not   believe in and custom I have no respect for . " 

 " you have lose all sense of duty , then ? you have forget that you be our only child that it lie with you to place a great property in the right hand ? " 

 " what be the right hand ? my grandfather gain the property in trade . " 

 " Mr. Arrowpoint , will you sit by and hear this without speak ? " 

 " I be a gentleman , Cath . we expect you to marry a gentleman , " say the father , exert himself . 

 " and a man connect with the institution of this country , " say the mother . " a woman in your position have serious duty . where duty and inclination clash , she must follow duty . " 

 " I do not   deny that , " say Catherine , get cold in proportion to her mother 's heat . " but one may say very true thing and apply they falsely . People can easily take the sacred word duty as a name for what they desire any one else to do . " 

 " your parent 's desire make no duty for you , then ? " 

 " yes , within reason . but before I give up the happiness of my life " 

 " Catherine , Catherine , it will not be your happiness , " say Mrs. 
 Arrowpoint , in her most raven - like tone . 
 " well , what seem to I my happiness before I give it up , I must see some well reason than the wish that I should marry a nobleman , or a man who vote with a party that he may be turn into a nobleman . I feel at liberty to marry the man I love and think worthy , unless some high duty forbid . " 

 " and so it do , Catherine , though you be blind and can not see it . 
 it be a woman 's duty not to lower herself . you be lower yourself . 
 Mr. Arrowpoint , will you tell your daughter what be her duty ? " 
 " you must see , Catherine , that Klesmer be not the man for you , " say Mr. Arrowpoint . " he will not   do at the head of estate . he have a deuced foreign look be an unpractical man . " 

 " I really can not   see what that have to do with it , papa . the land of England have often pass into the hand of foreigner dutch soldier , son of foreign woman of bad character : if our land be sell to - morrow it would very likely pass into the hand of some foreign merchant on ' Change . it be in everybody 's mouth that successful swindler may buy up half the land in the country . how can I stem that tide ? " 

 " it will never do to argue about marriage , Cath , " say Mr. Arrowpoint . " it be no use get up the subject like a parliamentary question . we must do as other people do . we must think of the nation and the public good . " 

 " I can not   see any public good concern here , papa , " say Catherine . " why be it to be expect of any heiress that she should carry the property gain in trade into the hand of a certain class ? that seem to be a ridiculous mishmash of superannuated custom and false ambition . I should call it a public evil . People have well make a new sort of public good by change their ambition . " 

 " that be mere sophistry , Catherine , " say Mrs. Arrowpoint . " because you do not   wish to marry a nobleman , you be not oblige to marry a mountebank or a charlatan . " 

 " I can not understand the application of such word , mamma . " 

 " no , I dare say not , " rejoin Mrs. Arrowpoint , with significant scorn . " you have get to a pitch at which we be not likely to understand each other . " 

 " it can not   be do , Cath , " say Mr. Arrowpoint , wish to substitute a well - humor reasoning for his wife 's impetuosity . " a man like Klesmer can not   marry such a property as your . it can not   be do . " 

 " it certainly will not be do , " say Mrs. Arrowpoint , imperiously . 
 " where be the man ? let he be fetch . " 
 " I can not fetch he to be insult , " say Catherine . " nothing will be achieve by that . " 

 " I suppose you would wish he to know that in marry you he will not marry your fortune , " say Mrs. Arrowpoint . 

 " certainly ; if it be so , I should wish he to know it . " 

 " then you have well fetch he . " 

 Catherine only go into the music - room and say , " come . " she feel no need to prepare Klesmer . 

 " Herr Klesmer , " say Mrs. Arrowpoint , with a rather contemptuous stateliness , " it be unnecessary to repeat what have pass between we and our daughter . Mr. Arrowpoint will tell you our resolution . " 

 " your marrying be out of the question , " say Mr. Arrowpoint , rather too heavily weight with his task , and stand in an embarrassment unrelieve by a cigar . " it be a wild scheme altogether . a man have be call out for less . " 

 " you have take a base advantage of our confidence , " burst in Mrs. Arrowpoint , unable to carry out her purpose and leave the burden of speech to her husband . 

 Klesmer make a low bow in silent irony . 

 " the pretension be ridiculous . you have well give it up and leave the house at once , " continue Mr. Arrowpoint . he wish to do without mention the money . 

 " I can give up nothing without reference to your daughter 's wish , " say 
 Klesmer . " my engagement be to she . " 
 " it be useless to discuss the question , " say Mrs. Arrowpoint . " we shall never consent to the marriage . if Catherine disobey we we shall disinherit she . you will not marry her fortune . it be right you should know that . " 

 " Madam , her fortune have be the only thing I have have to regret about she . but I must ask she if she will not think the sacrifice great than I be worthy of . " 

 " it be no sacrifice to I , " say Catherine , " except that I be sorry to hurt my father and mother . I have always feel my fortune to be a wretched fatality of my life . " 

 " you mean to defy we , then ? " say Mrs. Arrowpoint . 

 " I mean to marry Herr Klesmer , " say Catherine , firmly . 

 " he have well not count on our relenting , " say Mrs. Arrowpoint , whose manner suffer from that impunity in insult which have be reckon among the privilege of woman . 

 " Madam , " say Klesmer , " certain reason forbid I to retort . but understand that I consider it out of the power either of you , or of your fortune , to confer on I anything that I value . my rank as an artist be of my own winning , and I would not exchange it for any other . I be able to maintain your daughter , and I ask for no change in my life but her companionship . " 

 " you will leave the house , however , " say Mrs. Arrowpoint . 

 " I go at once , " say Klesmer , bow and quit the room . 

 " let there be no misunderstanding , mamma , " say Catherine ; " I consider myself engage to Herr Klesmer , and I intend to marry he . " 

 the mother turn her head away and wave her hand in sign of dismissal . 

 " it be all very fine , " say Mr. Arrowpoint , when Catherine be go ; " but what the deuce be we to do with the property ? " 

 " there be Harry Brendall . he can take the name . " 

 " Harry Brendall will get through it all in no time , " say Mr. 
 Arrowpoint , relighte his cigar . 
 and thus , with nothing settle but the determination of the lover , 
 Klesmer have leave Quetcham . 
 CHAPTER XXIII . 

 among the heir of Art , as be the division of the promise land , each have to win his portion by hard fighting : the bestowal be after the manner of prophecy , and be a title without possession . to carry the map of an ungotten estate in your pocket be a poor sort of copyhold . and in fancy to cast his shoe over Eden be little warrant that a man shall ever set the sole of his foot on an acre of his own there . 

 the most obstinate belief that mortal entertain about themselves be such as they have no evidence for beyond a constant , spontaneous pulsing of their self - satisfaction as it be a hidden seed of madness , a confidence that they can move the world without precise notion of stand - place or lever . 

 " pray go to church , mamma , " say Gwendolen the next morning . " I prefer see Herr Klesmer alone . "   he have write in reply to her note that he would be with she at eleven . 

 " that be hardly correct , I think , " say Mrs. Davilow , anxiously . 

 " our affair be too serious for we to think of such nonsensical rule , " say Gwendolen , contemptuously . " they be insult as well as ridiculous . " 

 " you would not mind Isabel sit with you ? she would be read in a corner . " 

 " no ; she could not : she would bite her nail and stare . it would be too irritate . trust my judgment , mamma , I must be alone , take they all to church . " 

 Gwendolen have her way , of course ; only that Miss Merry and two of the girl stay at home , to give the house a look of habitation by sit at the dining - room window . 

 it be a delicious Sunday morning . the melancholy wan sunshine of autumn rest on the half - strown grass and come mildly through the window in slant band of brightness over the old furniture , and the glass panel that reflect the furniture ; over the tapestrie chair with their fade flower - wreath , the dark enigmatic picture , the superannuate organ at which Gwendolen have please herself with act Saint Cecelia on her first joyous arrival , the crowd of pallid , dusty knicknack see through the open door of the antechamber where she have achieve the wearing of her greek dress as Hermione . this last memory be just now very busy in she ; for have not Klesmer then be strike with admiration of her pose and expression ? whatever he have say , whatever she imagine he to have think , be at this moment point with keenest interest for she : perhaps she have never before in her life feel so inwardly dependent , so consciously in need of another person 's opinion . there be a new fluttering of spirit within she , a new element of deliberation in her self - estimate which have hitherto be a blissful gift of intuition . still it be the recurrent burden of her inward soliloquy that Klesmer have see but little of she , and any unfavorable conclusion of his must have too narrow a foundation . she really feel clever enough for anything . 

 to fill up the time she collect her volume and piece of music , and lay they on the top of the piano , set herself to classify they . then catch the reflection of her movement in the glass panel , she be divert to the contemplation of the image there and walk toward it . dress in black , without a single ornament , and with the warm whiteness of her skin set off between her light - brown coronet of hair and her square - cut bodice , she might have tempt an artist to try again the roman trick of a statue in black , white , and tawny marble . see her image slowly advance , she think " I be beautiful " not exultingly , but with grave decision . be beautiful be after all the condition on which she most need external testimony . if any one object to the turn of her nose or the form of her neck and chin , she have not the sense that she could presently show her power of attainment in these branch of feminine perfection . 

 there be not much time to fill up in this way before the sound of wheel , the loud ring , and the opening door assure she that she be not by any accident to be disappoint . this slightly increase her inward flutter . in spite of her self - confidence , she dread Klesmer as part of that unmanageable world which be independent of she wish something vitriolic that would not cease to burn because you smile or frown at it . poor thing ! she be at a high crisis of her woman 's fate than in her last experience with Grandcourt . the questioning then , be whether she should take a particular man as a husband . the inmost fold of her questioning now be whether she need take a husband at all whether she could not achieve substantially for herself and know gratified ambition without bondage . 

 Klesmer make his most deferential bow in the wide doorway of the antechamber show also the deference of the fine gray kerseymere trouser and perfect glove   the ' master of those who know ' be happily altogether human . Gwendolen meet he with unusual gravity , and hold out her hand say , " it be most kind of you to come , Herr Klesmer . I hope you have not think I presumptuous . " 

 " I take your wish as a command that do I honor , " say Klesmer , with answer gravity . he be really put by his own affair in order to give his utmost attention to what Gwendolen might have to say ; but his temperament be still in a state of excitation from the event of yesterday , likely enough to give his expression a more than usually bite edge . 

 Gwendolen for once be under too great a strain of feeling to remember formality . she continue stand near the piano , and Klesmer take his stand near the other end of it with his back to the light and his terribly omniscient eye upon she . no affectation be of use , and she begin without delay . 

 " I wish to consult you , Herr Klesmer . we have lose all our fortune ; we have nothing . I must get my own bread , and I desire to provide for my mamma , so as to save she from any hardship . the only way I can think of and I should like it well than anything be to be an actress to go on the stage . but , of course , I should like to take a high position , and I think if you think I could " here Gwendolen become a little more nervous " it would be well for I to be a singer to study singing also . " 

 Klesmer put down his hat upon the piano , and fold his arm as if to concentrate himself . 

 " I know , " Gwendolen resume , turn from pale to pink and back again " I know that my method of singing be very defective ; but I have be ill taught . I could be well teach ; I could study . and you will understand my wish : to sing and act too , like Grisi , be a much high position . naturally , I should wish to take as high rank as I can . and I can rely on your judgment . I be sure you will tell I the truth . " 

 Gwendolen somehow have the conviction that now she make this serious appeal the truth would be favorable . 

 still Klesmer do not speak . he draw off his glove quickly , toss they into his hat , rest his hand on his hip , and walk to the other end of the room . he be fill with compassion for this girl : he want to put a guard on his speech . when he turn again , he look at she with a mild frown of inquiry , and say with gentle though quick utterance , " you have never see anything , I think , of artist and their life ? I mean of musician , actor , artist of that kind ? " 

 " oh , no , " say Gwendolen , not perturb by a reference to this obvious fact in the history of a young lady hitherto well provide for . 

 " you be pardon I , " say Klesmer , again pause near the piano " in come to a conclusion on such a matter as this , everything must be take into consideration you be perhaps twenty ? " 

 " I be twenty - one , " say Gwendolen , a slight fear rise in she . " do you think I be too old ? " 

 Klesmer pout his under lip and shake his long finger upward in a manner totally enigmatic . 

 " many person begin later than other , " say Gwendolen , betray by her habitual consciousness of have valuable information to bestow . 

 Klesmer take no notice , but say with more study gentleness than ever , " you have probably not think of an artistic career until now : you do not entertain the notion , the longing what shall I say ? you do not wish yourself an actress , or anything of that sort , till the present trouble ? " 

 " not exactly : but I be fond of act . I have act ; you see I , if you remember you see I here in charade , and as Hermione , " say Gwendolen , really fear that Klesmer have forget . 

 " yes , yes , " he answer quickly , " I remember I remember perfectly , " and again walk to the other end of the room , it be difficult for he to refrain from this kind of movement when he be in any argument either audible or silent . 

 Gwendolen feel that she be be weigh . the delay be unpleasant . but she do not yet conceive that the scale could dip on the wrong side , and it seem to she only graceful to say , " I shall be very much oblige to you for take the trouble to give I your advice , whatever it maybe . " 

 " Miss Harleth , " say Klesmer , turn toward she and speak with a slight increase of accent , " I will veil nothing from you in this matter . I should reckon myself guilty if I put a false visage on thing make they too black or too white . the god have a curse for he who willingly tell another the wrong road . and if I mislead one who be so young , so beautiful who , I trust , will find her happiness along the right road , I should regard myself as a BŲsewicht . " in the last word Klesmer 's voice have drop to a loud whisper . 

 Gwendolen feel a sinking of heart under this unexpected solemnity , and keep a sort of fascinated gaze on Klesmer 's face , as he go on . 

 " you be a beautiful young lady you have be bring up in ease you have do what you would you have not say to yourself , ' I must know this exactly , ' ' I must understand this exactly , ' ' I must do this exactly , ' " in utter these three terrible must , Klesmer lift up three long finger in succession . " in sum , you have not be call upon to be anything but a charming young lady , whom it be an impoliteness to find fault with . " 

 he pause an instant ; then rest his finger on his hip again , and thrust out his powerful chin , he say 

 " well , then , with that preparation , you wish to try the life of an artist ; you wish to try a life of arduous , uncease work , and uncertain praise . your praise would have to be earn , like your bread ; and both would come slowly , scantily what do I say ? they may hardly come at all . " 

 this tone of discouragement , which Klesmer have hop might suffice without anything more unpleasant , rouse some resistance in Gwendolen . with a slight turn of her head away from he , and an air of pique , she say 

 " I think that you , be an artist , would consider the life one of the most honorable and delightful . and if I can do nothing well ? I suppose I can put up with the same risk as other people do . " 

 " do nothing well ? " say Klesmer , a little fire . " no , my dear Miss Harleth , you could do nothing well neither man nor woman could do anything well if you could do what be best or good of its kind . I be not decry the life of the true artist . I be exalt it . I say , it be out of the reach of any but choice organization nature frame to love perfection and to labor for it ; ready , like all true lover , to endure , to wait , to say , I be not yet worthy , but she Art , my mistress be worthy , and I will live to merit she . an honorable life ? yes . but the honor come from the inward vocation and the hard - won achievement : there be no honor in don the life as a livery . " 

 some excitement of yesterday have revive in Klesmer and hurry he into speech a little aloof from his immediate friendly purpose . he have wish as delicately as possible to rouse in Gwendolen a sense of her unfitness for a perilous , difficult course ; but it be his will not to be angry with the pretension of incompetence , and he be in danger of get chafe . conscious of this , he pause suddenly . but Gwendolen 's chief impression be that he have not yet deny she the power of do what would be good of its kind . Klesmer 's fervor seem to be a sort of glamor such as he be prone to throw over thing in general ; and what she desire to assure he of be that she be not afraid of some preliminary hardship . the belief that to present herself in public on the stage must produce an effect such as she have be use to feel certain of in private life ; be like a bit of her flesh it be not to be peel off readily , but must come with blood and pain . she say , in a tone of some insistance 

 " I be quite prepared to bear hardship at first . of course no one can become celebrate all at once . and it be not necessary that every one should be first - rate either actress or singer . if you would be so kind as to tell I what step I should take , I shall have the courage to take they . I do not   mind go up hill . it will be easy than the dead level of be a governess . I will take any step you recommend . " 

 Klesmer be convince now that he must speak plainly . 

 " I will tell you the step , not that I recommend , but that will be force upon you . it be all one , so far , what your goal will be excellence , celebrity , second , third rateness it be all one . you must go to town under the protection of your mother . you must put yourself under training musical , dramatic , theatrical : whatever you desire to do you have to learn " here Gwendolen look as if she be go to speak , but Klesmer lift up his hand and say , decisively , " I know . you have exercise your talent you recite you sing from the drawing - room standpunkt . my dear Fršulein , you must unlearn all that . you have not yet conceive what excellence be : you must unlearn your mistaken admiration . you must know what you have to strive for , and then you must subdue your mind and body to unbroken discipline . your mind , I say . for you must not be think of celebrity : put that candle out of your eye , and look only at excellence . you would of course earn nothing you could get no engagement for a long while . you would need money for yourself and your family . but that , " here Klesmer frown and shake his finger as if to dismiss a triviality , " that could perhaps be find . " 

 Gwendolen turn pink and pale during this speech . her pride have feel a terrible knife - edge , and the last sentence only make the smart keener . she be conscious of appear move , and try to escape from her weakness by suddenly walk to a seat and point out a chair to Klesmer . he do not take it , but turn a little in order to face she and lean against the piano . at that moment she wish that she have not send for he : this first experience of be take on some other ground than that of her social rank and her beauty be become bitter to she . Klesmer , preoccupy with a serious purpose , go on without change of tone . 

 " now , what sort of issue might be fairly expect from all this self - denial ? you would ask that . it be right that your eye should be open to it . I will tell you truthfully . this issue would be uncertain , and , most probably , would not be worth much . " 

 at these relentless word Klesmer put out his lip and look through his spectacle with the air of a monster impenetrable by beauty . 

 Gwendolen 's eye begin to burn , but the dread of show weakness urge she to add self - control . she compel herself to say , in a hard tone 

 " you think I want talent , or be too old to begin . " 

 Klesmer make a sort of hum , and then descend on an emphatic " yes ! the desire and the training should have begin seven year ago or a good deal early . a mountebank 's child who help her father to earn shilling when she be six year old a child that inherit a singing throat from a long line of chorister and learn to sing as it learn to talk , have a likeli beginning . any great achievement in act or in music grow with the growth . whenever an artist have be able to say , ' I come , I see , I conquer , ' it have be at the end of patient practice . genius at first be little more than a great capacity for receive discipline . singing and acting , like the fine dexterity of the juggler with his cup and ball , require a shaping of the organ toward a fine and fine certainty of effect . your muscle your whole frame must go like a watch , true , true to a hair . that be the work of spring - time , before habit have be determine . " 

 " I do not pretend to genius , " say Gwendolen , still feel that she might somehow do what Klesmer want to represent as impossible . " I only suppose that I might have a little talent enough to improve . " 

 " I do not   deny that , " say Klesmer . " if you have be put in the right track some year ago and have work well you might now have make a public singer , though I do not   think your voice would have count for much in public . for the stage your personal charm and intelligence might then have tell without the present drawback of inexperience lack of discipline lack of instruction . " 

 certainly Klesmer seem cruel , but his feeling be the reverse of cruel . our speech , even when we be most single - minded , can never take its line absolutely from one impulse ; but Klesmer 's be , as far as possible , direct by compassion for poor Gwendolen 's ignorant eagerness to enter on a course of which he see all the miserable detail with a definiteness which he could not if he would have convey to her mind . 

 Gwendolen , however , be not convince . her self - opinion rally , and since the counselor whom she have call in give a decision of such severe peremptoriness , she be tempt to think that his judgment be not only fallible but biased . it occur to she that a simple and wise step for she to have take would have be to send a letter through the post to the manager of a London theatre , ask he to make an appointment . she would make no further reference to her singing ; Klesmer , she see , have set himself against her singing . but she feel equal to argue with he about she go on the stage , and she answer in a resistant tone 

 " I understand , of course , that no one can be a finished actress at once . it may be impossible to tell beforehand whether I should succeed ; but that seem to I a reason why I should try . I should have think that I might have take an engagement at a theatre meanwhile , so as to earn money and study at the same time . " 

 " can not   be do , my dear Miss Harleth I speak plainly it can not   be do . I must clear your mind of these notion which have no more resemblance to reality than a pantomime . lady and gentleman think that when they have make their toilet and draw on their glove they be as presentable on the stage as in a drawing - room . no manager think that . with all your grace and charm , if you be to present yourself as an aspirant to the stage , a manager would either require you to pay as an amateur for be allow to perform or he would tell you to go and be teach train to bear yourself on the stage , as a horse , however beautiful , must be train for the circus ; to say nothing of that study which would enable you to personate a character consistently , and animate it with the natural language of face , gesture , and tone . for you to get an engagement fit for you straight away be out of the question . " 

 " I really can not understand that , " say Gwendolen , rather haughtily then , check herself , she add in another tone " I shall be oblige to you if you will explain how it be that such poor actress get engage . I have be to the theatre several time , and I be sure there be actress who seem to I to act not at all well and who be quite plain . " 

 " ah , my dear Miss Harleth , that be the easy criticism of the buyer . we who buy slipper toss away this pair and the other as clumsy ; but there go an apprenticeship to the making of they . excuse I ; you could not at present teach one of those actress ; but there be certainly much that she could teach you . for example , she can pitch her voice so as to be hear : ten to one you could not do it till after many trial . merely to stand and move on the stage be an art require practice . it be understand that we be not now talk of a comparse in a petty theatre who earn the wage of a needle - woman . that be out of the question for you . " 

 " of course I must earn more than that , " say Gwendolen , with a sense of wince rather than of be refute , " but I think I could soon learn to do tolerably well all those little thing you have mention . I be not so very stupid . and even in Paris , I be sure , I see two actress play important lady ' part who be not at all lady and quite ugly . I suppose I have no particular talent , but I must think it be an advantage , even on the stage , to be a lady and not a perfect fright . " 

 " ah , let we understand each other , " say Klesmer , with a flash of new meaning . " I be speak of what you would have to go through if you aim at become a real artist if you take music and the drama as a high vocation in which you would strive after excellence . on that head , what I have say stand fast . you would find after your education in do thing slackly for one - and - twenty year great difficulty in study ; you would find mortification in the treatment you would get when you present yourself on the footing of skill . you would be subject to test ; people would no long feign not to see your blunder . you would at first only be accept on trial . you would have to bear what I may call a glare insignificance : any success must be win by the utmost patience . you would have to keep your place in a crowd , and after all it be likely you would lose it and get out of sight . if you determine to face these hardship and still try , you will have the dignity of a high purpose , even though you may have choose unfortunately . you will have some merit , though you may win no prize . you have ask my judgment on your chance of win . I do not   pretend to speak absolutely ; but measure probability , my judgment be : you will hardly achieve more than mediocrity . " 

 Klesmer have deliver himself with emphatic rapidity , and now pause a moment . Gwendolen be motionless , look at her hand , which lie over each other on her lap , till the deep - tone , long - draw " but , " with which he resume , have a startling effect , and make she look at he again . 

 " but there be certainly other idea , other disposition with which a young lady may take up an art that will bring she before the public . she may rely on the unquestioned power of her beauty as a passport . she may desire to exhibit herself to an admiration which dispense with skill . this go a certain way on the stage : not in music : but on the stage , beauty be take when there be nothing more commanding to be have . not without some drilling , however : as I have say before , technicality have in any case to be master . but these excepted , we have here nothing to do with art . the woman who take up this career be not an artist : she be usually one who think of enter on a luxurious life by a short and easy road perhaps by marriage that be her most brilliant chance , and the rare . still , her career will not be luxurious to begin with : she can hardly earn her own poor bread independently at once , and the indignity she will be liable to are such as I will not speak of . " 

 " I desire to be independent , " say Gwendolen , deeply sting and confusedly apprehend some scorn for herself in Klesmer 's word . " that be my reason for ask whether I could not get an immediate engagement . of course I can not know how thing go on about theatre . but I think that I could have make myself independent . I have no money , and I will not accept help from any one . " 

 her wounded pride could not rest without make this disclaimer . it be intolerable to she that Klesmer should imagine she to have expect other help from he than advice . 

 " that be a hard saying for your friend , " say Klesmer , recover the gentleness of tone with which he have begin the conversation . " I have give you pain . that be inevitable . I be bind to put the truth , the unvarnished truth , before you . I have not say I will not say you will do wrong to choose the hard , climb path of an endeavoring artist . you have to compare its difficulty with those of any less hazardous any more private course which open itself to you . if you take that more courageous resolve I will ask leave to shake hand with you on the strength of our freemasonry , where we be all vow to the service of art , and to serve she by help every fellow - servant . " 

 Gwendolen be silent , again look at her hand . she feel herself very far away from take the resolve that would enforce acceptance ; and after wait an instant or two , Klesmer go on with deepen seriousness . 

 " where there be the duty of service there must be the duty of accept it . the question be not one of personal obligation . and in relation to practical matter immediately affect your future excuse my permit myself to mention in confidence an affair of my own . I be expect an event which would make it easy for I to exert myself on your behalf in further your opportunity of instruction and residence in London under the care , that be , of your family without need for anxiety on your part . if you resolve to take art as a bread - study , you need only undertake the study at first ; the bread will be find without trouble . the event I mean be my marriage in fact you will receive this as a matter of confidence my marriage with Miss Arrowpoint , which will more than double such right as I have to be trust by you as a friend . your friendship will have greatly rise in value for she by your have adopt that generous labor . " 

 Gwendolen 's face have begin to burn . that Klesmer be about to marry Miss Arrowpoint cause she no surprise , and at another moment she would have amuse herself in quickly imagine the scene that must have occur at Quetcham . but what engross her feeling , what fill her imagination now , be the panorama of her own immediate future that Klesmer 's word seem to have unfold . the suggestion of Miss Arrowpoint as a patroness be only another detail add to its repulsiveness : Klesmer 's proposal to help she seem an additional irritation after the humiliating judgment he have pass on her capability . his word have really bite into her self - confidence and turn it into the pain of a bleed wound ; and the idea of present herself before other judge be now poison with the dread that they also might be harsh ; they also would not recognize the talent she be conscious of . but she control herself , and rise from her seat before she make any answer . it seem natural that she should pause . she go to the piano and look absently at leaf of music , pinch up the corner . at last she turn toward Klesmer and say , with almost her usual air of proud equality , which in this interview have not be hitherto perceptible . 

 " I congratulate you sincerely , Herr Klesmer . I think I never see any one so admirable as Miss Arrowpoint . and I have to thank you for every sort of kindness this morning . but I can not   decide now . if I make the resolve you have speak of , I will use your permission I will let you know . but I fear the obstacle be too great . in any case , I be deeply obliged to you . it be very bold of I to ask you to take this trouble . " 

 Klesmer 's inward remark be , " she will never let I know . " but with the most thorough respect in his manner , he say , " command I at any time . there be an address on this card which will always find I with little delay . " 

 when he have take up his hat and be go to make his bow , Gwendolen 's well self , conscious of an ingratitude which the clear - see Klesmer must have penetrate , make a desperate effort to find its way above the stifle layer of egoistic disappointment and irritation . look at he with a glance of the old gayety , she put out her hand , and say with a smile , " if I take the wrong road , it will not be because of your flattery . " 

 " God forbid that you should take any road but one where you will find and give happiness ! " say Klesmer , fervently . then , in foreign fashion , he touch her finger lightly with his lip , and in another minute she hear the sound of his depart wheel get more distant on the gravel . 

 Gwendolen have never in her life feel so miserable . no sob come , no passion of tear , to relieve she . her eye be burn ; and the noonday only bring into more dreary clearness the absence of interest from her life . all memory , all object , the piece of music display , the open piano the very reflection of herself in the glass seem no well than the pack - up show of a depart fair . for the first time since her consciousness begin , she be have a vision of herself on the common level , and have lose the innate sense that there be reason why she should not be slight , elbow , jostled treat like a passenger with a third - class ticket , in spite of private objection on her own part . she do not move about ; the prospect beget by disappointment be too oppressively preoccupying ; she throw herself into the shady corner of a settee , and press her finger over her burn eyelid . every word that Klesmer have say seem to have be brand into her memory , as most word be which bring with they a new set of impression and make an epoch for we . only a few hour before , the dawn smile of self - contentment rest on her lip as she vaguely imagine a future suit to her wish : it seem but the affair of a year or so for she to become the most approve Juliet of the time : or , if Klesmer encourage her idea of be a singer , to proceed by more gradual step to her place in the opera , while she win money and applause by occasional performance . why not ? at home , at school , among acquaintance , she have be use to have her conscious superiority admit ; and she have move in a society where everything , from low arithmetic to high art , be of the amateur kind , politely suppose to fall short of perfection only because gentleman and lady be not oblige to do more than they like otherwise they would probably give forth abler writing , and show themselves more commanding artist than any the world be at present oblige to put up with . the self - confident vision that have beguile she be not of a highly exceptional kind ; and she have at least show some rationality in consult the person who know the most and have flatter she the least . in ask Klesmer 's advice , however , she have rather be bear up by a belief in his latent admiration than bent on know anything more unfavorable that might have lain behind his slight objection to her singing ; and the truth she have ask for , with an expectation that it would be agreeable , have come like a lacerate thong . 

 " too old should have begin seven year ago you will not , at well , achieve more than mediocrity hard , incessant work , uncertain praise bread come slowly , scantily , perhaps not at all mortification , people no long feign not to see your blunder glare insignificance " all these phrase rankle in she ; and even more galling be the hint that she could only be accept on the stage as a beauty who hop to get a husband . the " indignity " that she might be visit with have no very definite form for she , but the mere association of anything call " indignity " with herself , rouse a resentful alarm . and along with the vaguer image which be raise by those bite word , come the precise conception of disagreeable which her experience enable she to imagine . how could she take her mamma and the four sister to London ? if it be not possible for she to earn money at once ? and as for submit to be a protťgť , and ask her mamma to submit with she to the humiliation of be support by Miss Arrowpoint that be as bad as be a governess ; nay , bad ; for suppose the end of all her study to be as worthless as Klesmer clearly expect it to be , the sense of favor receive and never repay , would embitter the misery of disappointment . Klesmer doubtless have magnificent idea about help artist ; but how could he know the feeling of lady in such matter ? it be all over : she have entertain a mistaken hope ; and there be an end of it . 

 " an end of it ! " say Gwendolen , aloud , start from her seat as she hear the step and voice of her mamma and sister come in from church . she hurry to the piano and begin gather together her piece of music with assume diligence , while the expression on her pale face and in her burn eye be what would have suit a woman endure a wrong which she might not resent , but would probably revenge . 

 " well , my darling , " say gentle Mrs. Davilow , enter , " I see by the wheel - mark that Klesmer have be here . have you be satisfied with the interview ? " she have some guess as to its object , but feel timid about imply they . 

 " satisfied , mamma ? oh , yes , " say Gwendolen , in a high , hard tone , for which she must be excuse , because she dread a scene of emotion . if she do not set herself resolutely to feign proud indifference , she feel that she must fall into a passionate outburst of despair , which would cut her mamma more deeply than all the rest of their calamity . 

 " your uncle and aunt be disappoint at not see you , " say Mrs. Davilow , come near the piano , and watch Gwendolen 's movement . " I only say that you want rest . " 

 " quite right , mamma , " say Gwendolen , in the same tone , turn to put away some music . 

 " be I not to know anything now , Gwendolen ? be I always to be in the dark ? " say Mrs. Davilow , too keenly sensitive to her daughter 's manner and expression not to fear that something painful have occur . 

 " there be really nothing to tell now , mamma , " say Gwendolen , in a still high voice . " I have a mistaken idea about something I could do . Herr Klesmer have undeceive I . that be all . " 

 " do not   look and speak in that way , my dear child : I can not bear it , " say Mrs. Davilow , break down . she feel an undefinable terror . 

 Gwendolen look at she a moment in silence , bite her inner lip ; then she go up to she , and put her hand on her mamma 's shoulder , say , with a drop in her voice to the low undertone , " Mamma , do not   speak to I now . it be useless to cry and waste our strength over what can not   be alter . you will live at Sawyer 's cottage , and I be go to the bishop 's daughter . there be no more to be say . thing can not be alter , and who care ? it make no difference to any one else what we do . we must try not to care ourselves . we must not give way . I dread give way . help I to be quiet . " 

 Mrs. Davilow be like a frightened child under her daughter 's face and voice ; her tear be arrest and she go away in silence . 

 CHAPTER XXIV . 

  " I question thing but do not find 
  one that will answer to my mind : 
  and all the world appear unkind . " 
  WORDSWORTH . 
 Gwendolen be glad that she have get through her interview with Klesmer before meet her uncle and aunt . she have make up her mind now that there be only disagreeable before she , and she feel able to maintain a dogged calm in the face of any humiliation that might be propose . 

 the meeting do not happen until the Monday , when Gwendolen go to the rectory with her mamma . they have call at Sawyer 's Cottage by the way , and have see every cranny of the narrow room in a mid - day light , unsoftene by blind and curtain ; for the furnishing to be do by gleaning from the rectory have not yet begin . 

 " how shall you endure it , mamma ? " say Gwendolen , as they walk away . she have not open her lip while they be look round at the bare wall and floor , and the little garden with the cabbage - stalk , and the yew arbor all dust and cobwebs within . " you and the four girl all in that closet of a room , with the green and yellow paper press on your eye ? and without I ? " 

 " it will be some comfort that you have not to bear it too , dear . " 

 " if it be not that I must get some money , I would rather be there than go to be a governess . " 

 " do not   set yourself against it beforehand , Gwendolen . if you go to the palace you will have every luxury about you . and you know how much you have always care for that . you will not find it so hard as go up and down those steep narrow stair , and hear the crockery rattle through the house , and the dear girl talk . " 

 " it be like a bad dream , " say Gwendolen , impetuously . " I can not believe that my uncle will let you go to such a place . he ought to have take some other step . " 

 " do not   be unreasonable , dear child . what could he have do ? " 

 " that be for he to find out . it seem to I a very extraordinary world if people in our position must sink in this way all at once , " say Gwendolen , the other world with which she be conversant be construct with a sense of fitness that arrange her own future agreeably . 

 it be her temper that frame her sentence under this entirely new pressure of evil : she could have speak more suitably on the vicissitude in other people 's life , though it be never her aspiration to express herself virtuously so much as cleverly a point to be remember in extenuation of her word , which be usually bad than she be . 

 and , notwithstanding the keen sense of her own bruise , she be capable of some compunction when her uncle and aunt receive she with a more affectionate kindness than they have ever show before . she could not but be strike by the dignified cheerfulness with which they talk of the necessary economy in their way of living , and in the education of the boy . Mr. Gascoigne 's worth of character , a little obscure by worldly opportunity as the poetic beauty of woman be obscure by the demand of fashionable dressing show itself to great advantage under this sudden reduction of fortune . prompt and methodical , he have set himself not only to put down his carriage , but to reconsider his worn suit of clothe , to leave off meat for breakfast , to do without periodical , to get Edwy from school and arrange hour of study for all the boy under himself , and to order the whole establishment on the spare foot possible . for all healthy people economy have its pleasure ; and the rector 's spirit have spread through the household . Mrs. Gascoigne and Anna , who always make papa their model , really do not miss anything they care about for themselves , and in all sincerity feel that the sad part of the family loss be the change for Mrs. Davilow and her child . 

 Anna for the first time could merge her resentment on behalf of Rex in her sympathy with Gwendolen ; and Mrs. Gascoigne be disposed to hope that trouble would have a salutary effect on her niece , without think it her duty to add any bitter by way of increase the salutariness . they have both be busy devise how to get blind and curtain for the cottage out of the household store ; but with delicate feeling they leave these matter in the back - ground , and talk at first of Gwendolen 's journey , and the comfort it be to her mamma to have she at home again . 

 in fact there be nothing for Gwendolen to take as a justification for extend her discontent with event to the person immediately around she , and she feel shake into a more alert attention , as if by a call to drill that everybody else be obey , when her uncle begin in a voice of firm kindness to talk to she of the effort he have be make to get she a situation which would offer she as many advantage as possible . Mr. Gascoigne have not forget Grandcourt , but the possibility of further advance from that quarter be something too vague for a man of his good sense to be determine by it : uncertainty of that kind must not now slacken his action in do the good he could for his niece under actual condition . 

 " I feel that there be no time to be lose , Gwendolen ; for a position in a good family where you will have some consideration be not to be have at a moment 's notice . and however long we wait we could hardly find one where you would be well off than at Bishop Mompert 's . I be know to both he and Mrs. Mompert , and that of course be an advantage to you . our correspondence have go on favorably ; but I can not be surprised that Mrs. Mompert wish to see you before make an absolute engagement . she think of arrange for you to meet she at Wanchester when she be on her way to town . I dare say you will feel the interview rather try for you , my dear ; but you will have a little time to prepare your mind . " 

 " do you know why she want to see I , uncle ? " say Gwendolen , whose mind have quickly go over various reason that an imaginary Mrs. Mompert with three daughter might be suppose to entertain , reason all of a disagreeable kind to the person present herself for inspection . 

 the rector smile . " do not   be alarm , my dear . she would like to have a more precise idea of you than my report can give . and a mother be naturally scrupulous about a companion for her daughter . I have tell she you be very young . but she herself exercise a close supervision over her daughter ' education , and that make she less anxious as to age . she be a woman of taste and also of strict principle , and object to have a french person in the house . I feel sure that she will think your manner and accomplishment as good as she be likely to find ; and over the religious and moral tone of the education she , and indeed the bishop himself , will preside . " 

 Gwendolen dare not answer , but the repression of she decide dislike to the whole prospect send an unusually deep flush over her face and neck , subside as quickly as it come . Anna , full of tender fear , put she little hand into her cousin 's , and Mr. Gascoigne be too kind a man not to conceive something of the trial which this sudden change must be for a girl like Gwendolen . bent on give a cheerful view of thing , he go on , in an easy tone of remark , not as if answer suppose objection 

 " I think so highly of the position , that I should have be tempt to try and get it for Anna , if she have be at all likely to meet Mrs. Mompert 's want . it be really a home , with a continuance of education in the high sense : ' governess ' be a misnomer . the bishop 's view be of a more decidedly low Church color than my own he be a close friend of Lord Grampian 's ; but , though privately strict , he be not by any mean narrow in public matter . indeed , he have create as little dislike in his diocese as any bishop on the bench . he have always remain friendly to I , though before his promotion , when he be an incumbent of this diocese , we have a little controversy about the Bible Society . " 

 the rector 's word be too pregnant with satisfactory meaning to himself for he to imagine the effect they produce in the mind of his niece . " Continuance of education " " bishop 's view " " privately strict " " Bible Society , " it be as if he have introduce a few snake at large for the instruction of lady who regard they as all alike furnish with poison - bag , and , bite or stinging , accord to convenience . to Gwendolen , already shrink from the prospect open to she , such phrase come like the grow heat of a burn glass not at all as the link of persuasive reflection which they form for the good uncle . she begin , desperately , to seek an alternative . 

 " there be another situation , I think , mamma speak of ? " she say , with determined self - mastery . 

 ' " yes , " say the rector , in rather a depreciatory tone ; " but that be in a school . I should not have the same satisfaction in your taking that . it would be much hard work , you be aware , and not so good in any other respect . besides , you have not an equal chance of get it . " 

 " oh dear no , " say Mrs. Gascoigne , " it would be much less appropriate , you might not have a bedroom to yourself . " and Gwendolen 's memory of school suggest other particular which force she to admit to herself that this alternative would be no relief . she turn to her uncle again and say , apparently in acceptance of his idea 

 " when be Mrs. Mompert likely to send for I ? " 

 " that be rather uncertain , but she have promise not to entertain any other proposal till she have see you . she have enter with much feeling into your position . it will be within the next fortnight , probably . but I must be off now . I be go to let part of my glebe uncommonly well . " 

 the rector end very cheerfully , leave the room with the satisfactory conviction that Gwendolen be go to adapt herself to circumstance like a girl of good sense . have speak appropriately , he naturally suppose that the effect would be appropriate ; be accustom , as a household and parish authority , to be ask to ' speak to " refractory person , with the understanding that the measure be morally coercive . 

 " what a stay Henry be to we all ? " say Mrs. Gascoigne , when her husband have leave the room . 

 " he be indeed , " say Mrs. Davilow , cordially . " I think cheerfulness be a fortune in itself . I wish I have it . " 

 " and Rex be just like he , " say Mrs. Gascoigne . " I must tell you the comfort we have have in a letter from he . I must read you a little bit , " she add , take the letter from her pocket , while Anna look rather frightened she do not know why , except that it have be a rule with she not to mention Rex before Gwendolen . 

 the proud mother run her eye over the letter , seek for sentence to read aloud . but apparently she have find it sow with what might seem to be close allusion than she desire to the recent past , for she look up , fold the letter , and say 

 " however , he tell we that our trouble have make a man of he ; he see a reason for any amount of work : he mean to get a fellowship , to take pupil , to set one of his brother go , to be everything that be most remarkable . the letter be full of fun just like he . he say , ' tell mother she have put out an advertisement for a jolly good hard - work son , in time to hinder I from take ship ; and I offer myself for the place . ' the letter come on Friday . I never see my husband so much move by anything since Rex be bear . it seem a gain to balance our loss . " 

 this letter , in fact , be what have help both Mrs. Gascoigne and Anna to show Gwendolen an unmixed kindliness ; and she herself feel very amiably about it , smile at Anna , and pinch her chin , as much as to say , " nothing be wrong with you now , be it ? " she have no gratuitously ill - natured feeling , or egoistic pleasure in make man miserable . she only have an intense objection to their make her miserable . 

 but when the talk turn on furniture for the cottage Gwendolen be not rouse to show even a languid interest . she think that she have do as much as could be expect of she this morning , and indeed feel at an heroic pitch in keep to herself the struggle that be go on within she . the recoil of her mind from the only definite prospect allow she , be strong than even she have imagine beforehand . the idea of present herself before Mrs. Mompert in the first instance , to be approve or disapprove , come as pressure on an already painful bruise ; even as a governess , it appear she be to be test and be liable to rejection . after she have do herself the violence to accept the bishop and his wife , they be still to consider whether they would accept she ; it be at her peril that she be to look , speak , or be silent . and even when she have enter on her dismal task of self - constraint in the society of three girl whom she be bind incessantly to edify , the same process of inspection be to go on : there be always to be Mrs. Mompert 's supervision ; always something or other would be expect of she to which she have not the slight inclination ; and perhaps the bishop would examine she on serious topic . Gwendolen , lately use to the social success of a handsome girl , whose lively venturesomeness of talk have the effect of wit , and who six week before would have pity the dullness of the bishop rather than have be embarrass by he , see the life before she as an entrance into a penitentiary . wild thought of run away to be an actress , in spite of Klesmer , come to she with the lure of freedom ; but his word still hang heavily on her soul ; they have alarm her pride and even her maidenly dignity : dimly she conceive herself get amongst vulgar people who would treat she with rude familiarity odious man , whose grin and smirk would not be see through the strong grating of polite society . Gwendolen 's daring be not in the least that of the adventuress ; the demand to be hold a lady be in her very marrow ; and when she have dream that she might be the heroine of the gaming - table , it be with the understanding that no one should treat she with the less consideration , or presume to look at she with irony as Deronda have do . to be protect and pet , and to have her susceptibility consult in every detail , have go along with her food and clothing as matter of course in her life : even without any such warning as Klesmer 's she could not have think it an attractive freedom to be throw in solitary dependence on the doubtful civility of stranger . the endurance of the episcopal penitentiary be less repulsive than that ; though here too she would certainly never be pet or have her susceptibility consult . her rebellion against this hard necessity which have come just to she of all people in the world to she whom all circumstance have concur in prepare for something quite different be exaggerate instead of diminish as one hour follow another , with the imagination of what she might have expect in her lot and what it be actually to be . the family trouble , she think , be easy for every one than for she even for poor dear mamma , because she have always use herself to not enjoy . as to hop that if she go to the Momperts ' and be patient a little while , thing might get well it would be stupid to entertain hope for herself after all that have happen : her talent , it appear , would never be recognize as anything remarkable , and there be not a single direction in which probability seem to flatter her wish . some beautiful girl who , like she , have read romance where even plain governess be centre of attraction and be seek in marriage , might have solace themselves a little by transport such picture into their own future ; but even if Gwendolen 's experience have lead she to dwell on love - making and marriage as her elysium , her heart be too much oppress by what be near to she , in both the past and the future , for she to project her anticipation very far off . she have a world - nausea upon she , and see no reason all through her life why she should wish to live . no religious view of trouble help she : her trouble have in her opinion all be cause by other people 's disagreeable or wicked conduct ; and there be really nothing pleasant to be count on in the world : that be her feeling ; everything else she have hear say about trouble be mere phrase - make not attractive enough for she to have catch it up and repeat it . as to the sweetness of labor and fulfilled claim ; the interest of inward and outward activity ; the impersonal delight of life as a perpetual discovery ; the due of courage , fortitude , industry , which it be mere baseness not to pay toward the common burden ; the supreme worth of the teacher 's vocation ; these , even if they have be eloquently preach to she , could have be no more than faintly apprehend doctrine : the fact which work upon she be her invariable observation that for a lady to become a governess to " take a situation " be to descend in life and to be treat at well with a compassionate patronage . and poor Gwendolen have never dissociate happiness from personal pre - eminence and ťclat . that where these threaten to forsake she , she should take life to be hardly worth the having , can not make she so unlike the rest of we , man or woman , that we should cast she out of our compassion ; our moment of temptation to a mean opinion of thing in general be usually dependent on some susceptibility about ourselves and some dullness to subject which every one else would consider more important . surely a young creature be pitiable who have the labyrinth of life before she and no clue to whom distrust in herself and her good fortune have come as a sudden shock , like a rent across the path that she be treading carelessly . 

 in spite of her healthy frame , her irreconcilable repugnance affect she even physically ; she feel a sort of numbness and could set about nothing ; the least urgency , even that she should take her meal , be an irritation to she ; the speech of other on any subject seem unreasonable , because it do not include she feeling and be an ignorant claim on she . it be not in her nature to busy herself with the fancy of suicide to which disappoint young people be prone : what occupy and exasperate she be the sense that there be nothing for she but to live in a way she hat . she avoid go to the rectory again : it be too intolerable to have to look and talk as if she be compliant ; and she could not exert herself to show interest about the furniture of that horrible cottage . Miss Merry be stay on purpose to help , and such people as Jocosa like that sort of thing . her mother have to make excuse for she not appear , even when Anna come to see she . for that calm which Gwendolen have promise herself to maintain have change into sick motivelessness : she think , " I suppose I shall begin to pretend by - and - by , but why should I do it now ? " 

 her mother watch she with silent distress ; and , lapse into the habit of indulgent tenderness , she begin to think what she imagine that Gwendolen be think , and to wish that everything should give way to the possibility of make she darling less miserable . 

 one day when she be in the black and yellow bedroom and her mother be linger there under the pretext of consider and arrange Gwendolen 's article of dress , she suddenly rouse herself to fetch the casket which contain the ornament . 

 " Mamma , " she begin , glance over the upper layer , " I have forget these thing . why do not   you remind I of they ? do see about get they sell . you will not mind about part with they . you give they all to I long ago . " 

 she lift the upper tray and look below . 

 " if we can do without they , darling , I would rather keep they for you , " say Mrs. Davilow , seat herself beside Gwendolen with a feeling of relief that she be begin to talk about something . the usual relation between they have become reversed . it be now the mother who try to cheer the daughter . " why , how come you to put that pocket handkerchief in here ? " 

 it be the handkerchief with the corner tear off which Gwendolen have thrust in with the turquoise necklace . 

 " it happen to be with the necklace I be in a hurry . " say 
 Gwendolen , take the handkerchief away and put it in her pocket . 
 " do not   sell the necklace , mamma , " she add , a new feeling have come 
 over she about that rescue of it which have formerly be so offensive . 
 " no , dear , no ; it be make out of your dear father 's chain . and I should prefer not sell the other thing . none of they be of any great value . all my good ornament be take from I long ago . " 

 Mrs. Davilow color . she usually avoid any reference to such fact about Gwendolen 's step - father as that he have carry off his wife 's jewelry and dispose of it . after a moment 's pause she go on 

 " and these thing have not be reckon on for any expense . carry they with you . " 

 " that would be quite useless , mamma , " say Gwendolen , coldly . " governess do not   wear ornament . you have well get I a gray frieze livery and a straw poke , such as my aunt 's charity child wear . " 

 " no , dear , no ; do not   take that view of it . I feel sure the Momperts will like you the well for be graceful and elegant . " 

 " I be not at all sure what the Momperts will like I to be . it be enough that I be expect to be what they like , " say Gwendolen bitterly . 

 " if there be anything you would object to less anything that could be do instead of your go to the bishop 's , do say so , Gwendolen . tell I what be in your heart . I will try for anything you wish , " say the mother , beseechingly . " do not   keep thing away from I . let we bear they together . " 

 " oh , mamma , there be nothing to tell . I can not   do anything well . I must think myself fortunate if they will have I . I shall get some money for you . that be the only thing I have to think of . I shall not spend any money this year : you will have all the eighty pound . I do not   know how far that will go in housekeeping ; but you need not stitch your poor finger to the bone , and stare away all the sight that the tear have leave in your dear eye . " 

 Gwendolen do not give any caress with her word as she have be use to do . she do not even look at her mother , but be look at the turquoise necklace as she turn it over her finger . 

 " bless you for your tenderness , my good darling ! " say Mrs. Davilow , with tear in her eye . " do not   despair because there be cloud now . you be so young . there may be great happiness in store for you yet . " 

 " I do not   see any reason for expect it , mamma , " say Gwendolen , in a hard tone ; and Mrs. Davilow be silent , think as she have often think before " what do happen between she and Mr. Grandcourt ? " 

 " I will keep this necklace , mamma , " say Gwendolen , lay it apart and then close the casket . " but do get the other thing sell , even if they will not bring much . ask my uncle what to do with they . I shall certainly not use they again . I be go to take the veil . I wonder if all the poor wretch who have ever take it feel as I do . " 

 " do not   exaggerate evil , dear . " 

 " how can any one know that I exaggerate , when I be speak of my own feeling ? I do not say what any one else feel . " 

 she take out the torn handkerchief from her pocket again , and wrap it deliberately round the necklace . Mrs. Davilow observe the action with some surprise , but the tone of her last word discourage she from ask any question . 

 the " feel " Gwendolen speak of with an air of tragedy be not to be explain by the mere fact that she be go to be a governess : she be possess by a spirit of general disappointment . it be not simply that she have a distaste for what she be call on to do : the distaste spread itself over the world outside her penitentiary , since she see nothing very pleasant in it that seem attainable by she even if she be free . naturally her grievance do not seem to her small than some of her male contemporary hold theirs to be when they feel a profession too narrow for their power , and have an a priori conviction that it be not worth while to put forth their latent ability . because her education have be less expensive than theirs , it do not follow that she should have wide emotion or a keener intellectual vision . her grief be feminine ; but to she as a woman they be not the less hard to bear , and she feel an equal right to the Promethean tone . 

 but the movement of mind which lead she to keep the necklace , to fold it up in the handkerchief , and rise to put it in her nťcessaire , where she have first place it when it have be return to she , be more peculiar , and what would be call less reasonable . it come from that streak of superstition in she which attach itself both to her confidence and her terror a superstition which linger in an intense personality even in spite of theory and science ; any dread or hope for self be strong than all reason for or against it . why she should suddenly determine not to part with the necklace be not much clear to she than why she should sometimes have be frightened to find herself in the field alone : she have a confused state of emotion about Deronda be it wound pride and resentment , or a certain awe and exceptional trust ? it be something vague and yet mastering , which impel she to this action about the necklace . there be a great deal of unmapped country within we which would have to be take into account in an explanation of our gust and storm . 

 CHAPTER XXV . 

 how trace the why and wherefore in a mind reduce to the barrenness of a fastidious egoism , in which all direct desire be dull , and have dwindle from motif into a vacillating expectation of motif : a mind make up of mood , where a fitful impulse spring here and there conspicuously rank amid the general weediness ? ' tis a condition apt to befall a life too much at large , unmoulde by the pressure of obligation . nam deteriore omne sumus licentiae , or , as a more familiar tongue might deliver it , " as you like " be a bad finger - post . 

 potentate make know their intention and affect the fund at a small expense of word . so when Grandcourt , after learn that Gwendolen have leave Leubronn , incidentally pronounce that resort of fashion a beastly hole , bad than Baden , the remark be conclusive to Mr. Lush that his patron intend straightway to return to Diplow . the execution be sure to be slow than the intention , and , in fact , Grandcourt do loiter through the next day without give any distinct order about departure perhaps because he discern that Lush be expect they : he linger over his toilet , and certainly come down with a fade aspect of perfect distinction which make fresh complexion and hand with the blood in they , seem sign of raw vulgarity ; he linger on the terrace , in the gambling - room , in the reading - room , occupy himself in be indifferent to everybody and everything around he . when he meet Lady Mallinger , however , he take some trouble raise his hat , pause , and prove that he listen to her recommendation of the water by reply , " yes ; I hear somebody say how providential it be that there always happen to be spring at gambling place . " 

 " oh , that be a joke , " say innocent Lady Mallinger , mislead by Grandcourt 's languid seriousness , " in imitation of the old one about the town and the river , you know . " 

 " ah , perhaps , " say Grandcourt , without change of expression . Lady 
 Mallinger think this worth tell to Sir Hugo , who say , " oh , my 
 dear , he be not a fool . you must not suppose that he can not   see a joke . 
 he can play his card as well as most of we . " 
 " he have never seem to I a very sensible man , " say Lady Mallinger , in excuse of herself . she have a secret objection to meet Grandcourt , who be little else to she than a large living sign of what she feel to be her failure as a wife the not have present Sir Hugo with a son . her constant reflection be that her husband might fairly regret his choice , and if he have not be very good might have treat she with some roughness in consequence , gentleman naturally dislike to be disappoint . 

 Deronda , too , have a recognition from Grandcourt , for which he be not grateful , though he take care to return it with perfect civility . no reasoning as to the foundation of custom could do away with the early - rooted feeling that his birth have be attend with injury for which his father be to blame ; and see that but for this injury Grandcourt 's prospect might have be his , he be proudly resolute not to behave in any way that might be interpret into irritation on that score . he see a very easy descent into mean unreasone rancor and triumph in other ' frustration ; and be determine not to go down that ugly pit , he turn his back on it , cling to the kindly affection within he as a possession . Pride certainly help he well the pride of not recognize a disadvantage for one 's self which vulgar mind be dispose to exaggerate , such as the shabby equipage of poverty : he would not have a man like Grandcourt suppose himself envy by he . but there be no guarding against interpretation . Grandcourt do believe that Deronda , poor devil , who he have no doubt be his cousin by the father 's side , inwardly wince under their mutual position ; wherefore the presence of that less lucky person be more agreeable to he than it would otherwise have be . an imaginary envy , the idea that other feel their comparative deficiency , be the ordinary cortege of egoism ; and his pet dog be not the only being that Grandcourt like to feel his power over in make they jealous . hence he be civil enough to exchange several word with Deronda on the terrace about the hunting round diplow , and even say , " you have well come over for a run or two when the season begin . " 

 Lush , not displeased with delay , amuse himself very well , partly in gossip with Sir Hugo and in answer his question about Grandcourt 's affair so far as they might affect his willingness to part with his interest in Diplow . also about Grandcourt 's personal entanglement , the baronet know enough already for Lush to feel release from silence on a sunny autumn day , when there be nothing more agreeable to do in lounge promenade than to speak freely of a tyrannous patron behind his back . Sir Hugo willingly incline his ear to a little good - humor scandal , which he be fond of call trait de moeur ; but he be strict in keep such communication from hearer who might take they too seriously . whatever knowledge he have of his nephew 's secret , he have never speak of it to Deronda , who consider Grandcourt a pale - blooded mortal , but be far from wish to hear how the red corpuscle have be wash out of he . it be Lush 's policy and inclination to gratify everybody when he have no reason to the contrary ; and the baronet always treat he well , as one of those easy - handle personage who , frequent the society of gentleman , without be exactly gentleman themselves , can be the more serviceable , like the second - good article of our wardrobe , which we use with a comfortable freedom from anxiety . 

 " well , you will let I know the turn of event , " say Sir Hugo , " if this marriage seem likely to come off after all , or if anything else happen to make the want of money press . my plan would be much well for he than burden ryeland . " 

 " that be true , " say Lush , " only it must not be urge on he just place in his way that the scent may tickle he . Grandcourt be not a man to be always lead by what make for his own interest ; especially if you let he see that it make for your interest too . I be attach to he , of course . I have   give up everything else for the sake of keep by he , and it have last a good fifteen year now . he would not easily get any one else to fill my place . he be a peculiar character , be Henleigh Grandcourt , and it have be grow on he of late year . however , I be of a constant disposition , and I have   be a sort of guardian to he since he be twenty ; an uncommonly fascinating fellow he be then , to be sure and could be now , if he like . I be attach to he ; and it would be a good deal bad for he if he miss I at his elbow . " 

 Sir Hugo do not think it needful to express his sympathy or even assent , and perhaps Lush himself do not expect this sketch of his motif to be take as exact . but how can a man avoid himself as a subject in conversation ? and he must make some sort of decent toilet in word , as in cloth and linen . Lush 's listener be not severe : a member of Parliament could allow for the necessity of verbal toilet ; and the dialogue go on without any change of mutual estimate . 

 however , Lush 's easy prospect of indefinite procrastination be cut off the next morning by Grandcourt 's salute he with the question 

 " be you make all the arrangement for our starting by the Paris train ? " 

 " I do not   know you mean to start , " say Lush , not exactly take by surprise . 

 " you might have know , " say Grandcourt , look at the burn length of his cigar , and speak in that lower tone which be usual with he when he mean to express disgust and be peremptory . " just see to everything , will you ? and mind no brute get into the same carriage with we . and leave my P. P. C. at the mallinger . " 

 in consequence they be at Paris the next day ; but here Lush be gratify by the proposal or command that he should go straight on to Diplow and see that everything be right , while Grandcourt and the valet remain behind ; and it be not until several day later that Lush receive the telegram order the carriage to the Wanchester station . 

 he have use the interim actively , not only in carry out Grandcourt 's order about the stud and household , but in learn all he could of Gwendolen , and how thing be go on at Offendene . what be the probable effect that the news of the family misfortune would have on Grandcourt 's fitful obstinacy he feel to be quite incalculable . so far as the girl 's poverty might be an argument that she would accept an offer from he now in spite of any previous coyness , it might remove that bitter objection to risk a repulse which Lush divine to be one of Grandcourt 's deter motif ; on the other hand , the certainty of acceptance be just " the sort of thing " to make he lapse hither and thither with no more apparent will than a moth . Lush have have his patron under close observation for many year , and know he perhaps well than he know any other subject ; but to know Grandcourt be to doubt what he would do in any particular case . it might happen that he would behave with an apparent magnanimity , like the hero of a modern french drama , whose sudden start into moral splendor after much lying and meanness , leave you little confidence as to any part of his career that may follow the fall of the curtain . indeed , what attitude would have be more honorable for a final scene than that of decline to seek an heiress for her money , and determine to marry the attractive girl who have none ? but Lush have some general certainty about Grandcourt , and one be that of all inward movement those of generosity be least likely to occur in he . of what use , however , be a general certainty that an insect will not walk with his head hindmost , when what you need to know be the play of inward stimulus that send he hither and thither in a network of possible path ? thus Lush be much at fault as to the probable issue between Grandcourt and Gwendolen , when what he desire be a perfect confidence that they would never be marry . he would have consent willingly that Grandcourt should marry an heiress , or that he should marry Mrs. Glasher : in the one match there would have be the immediate abundance that prospective heirship could not supply , in the other there would have be the security of the wife 's gratitude , for Lush have always be Mrs. Glasher 's friend ; and that the future Mrs. Grandcourt should not be socially receive could not affect his private comfort . he would not have mind , either , that there should be no marriage in question at all ; but he feel himself justify in do his utmost to hinder a marriage with a girl who be likely to bring nothing but trouble to her husband not to speak of annoyance if not ultimate injury to her husband 's old companion , whose future Mr. Lush earnestly wish to make as easy as possible , consider that he have well deserve such compensation for lead a dog 's life , though that of a dog who enjoy many taste undisturbed , and who profit by a large establishment . he wish for himself what he feel to be good , and be not conscious of wish harm to any one else ; unless perhaps it be just now a little harm to the inconvenient and impertinent Gwendolen . but the easiest - humor of luxury and music , the toad - eater the least liable to nausea , must be expect to have his susceptibility . and Mr. Lush be accustom to be treat by the world in general as an apt , agreeable fellow : he have not make up his mind to be insult by more than one person . 

 with this imperfect preparation of a war policy , Lush be await Grandcourt 's arrival , do little more than wonder how the campaign would begin . the first day Grandcourt be much occupy with the stable , and amongst other thing he order a groom to put a side - saddle on Criterion and let he review the horse 's pace . this marked indication of purpose set Lush on consider over again whether he should incur the ticklish consequence of speak first , while he be still sure that no compromise step have be take ; and he rise the next morning almost resolve that if Grandcourt seem in as good a humor as yesterday and enter at all into talk , he would let drop the interesting fact about Gwendolen and her family , just to see how they would work , and to get some guidance . but Grandcourt do not enter into talk , and in answer to a question even about his own convenience , no fish could have maintain a more unwinking silence . after he have read his letter he give various order to be execute or transmit by Lush , and then thrust his shoulder toward that useful person , who accordingly rise to leave the room . but before he be out of the door Grandcourt turn his head slightly and give a break , languid " oh . " 

 " what be it ? " say Lush , who , it must have be observe , do not take his dusty pudding with a respectful air . 

 " shut the door , will you ? I can not   speak into the corridor . " 

 Lush close the door , come forward , and choose to sit down . 

 after a little pause Grandcourt say , " be Miss Harleth at Offendene ? " he be quite certain that Lush have make it his business to inquire about she , and he have some pleasure in think that Lush do not want he to inquire . 

 " well , I hardly know , " say Lush , carelessly . " the family 's utterly do up . they and the Gascoignes too have lose all their money . it be owe to some rascally banking business . the poor mother have not   a sou , it seem . she and the girl have to huddle themselves into a little cottage like a laborer 's . " 

 " do not   lie to I , if you please , " say Grandcourt , in his low audible tone . " it be not amusing , and it answer no other purpose . " 

 " what do you mean ? " say Lush , more nettled than be common with he the prospect before he be more than commonly disturbing . 

 " just tell I the truth , will you ? " 

 " it be no invention of mine . I have hear the story from several Bazley , Brackenshaw 's man , for one . he be get a new tenant for Offendene . " 

 " I do not   mean that . be Miss Harleth there , or be she not ? " say 
 Grandcourt , in his former tone . 
 " upon my soul , I can not   tell , " say Lush , rather sulkily . " she may have leave yesterday . I hear she have take a situation as governess ; she may be go to it for what I know . but if you want to see she no doubt the mother would send for her back . " this sneer slip off his tongue without strict intention . 

 " send hutchin to inquire whether she will be there tomorrow . " Lush do not move . like many person who have think over beforehand what they shall say in give case , he be impel by an unexpected irritation to say some of those prearrange thing before the case be give . Grandcourt , in fact , be likely to get into a scrape so tremendous that it be impossible to let he take the first step toward it without remonstrance . Lush retain enough caution to use a tone of rational friendliness , still he feel his own value to his patron , and be prepared to be dare . 

 " it would be as well for you to remember , Grandcourt , that you be come under close fire now . there can be none of the ordinary flirting do , which may mean everything or nothing . you must make up your mind whether you wish to be accept ; and more than that , how you would like be refuse . either one or the other . you can not   be philander after she again for six week . " 

 Grandcourt say nothing , but press the newspaper down on his knee and begin to light another cigar . Lush take this as a sign that he be willing to listen , and be the more bent on use the opportunity ; he want , if possible , to find out which would be the more potent cause of hesitation probable acceptance or probable refusal . 

 " everything have a more serious look now than it have before . there be her family to be provide for . you could not let your wife 's mother live in beggary . it will be a confoundedly hamper affair . marriage will pin you down in a way you have not   be use to ; and in point of money you have not too much elbow - room . and after all , what will you get by it ? you be master over your estate , present or future , as far as choose your heir go ; it be a pity to go on encumber they for a mere whim , which you may repent of in a twelvemonth . I should be sorry to see you make a mess of your life in that way . if there be anything solid to be gain by the marriage , that would be a different affair . " 

 Lush 's tone have gradually become more and more unctuous in its friendliness of remonstrance , and he be almost in danger of forget that he be merely gamble in argument . when he leave off , Grandcourt take his cigar out of his mouth , and look steadily at the moist end while he adjust the leaf with his delicate finger - tip , say 

 " I know before that you have an objection to my marry Miss Harleth . " here he make a little pause before he continue . " but I never consider that a reason against it . " 

 " I never suppose you do , " answer Lush , not unctuously but dryly . " it be not that I urge as a reason . I should have think it might have be a reason against it , after all your experience , that you would be act like the hero of a ballad , and make yourself absurd and all for what ? you know you could not   make up your mind before . it be impossible you can care much about she . and as for the trick she be likely to play , you may judge of that from what you hear at Leubronn . however , what I wish to point out to you be , that there can be no shilly - shally now . " 

 " perfectly , " say Grandcourt , look round at Lush and fix he with narrow eye ; " I do not   intend that there should be . I dare say it be disagreeable to you . but if you suppose I care a damn for that you be most stupendously mistaken . " 

 " oh , well , " say Lush , rise with his hand in his pocket , and feel some latent venom still within he , " if you have make up your mind ! only there be another aspect of the affair . I have be speak on the supposition that it be absolutely certain she would accept you , and that destitution would have no choice . but I be not so sure that the young lady be to be count on . she be kittle cattle to shoe , I think . and she have her reason for run away before . " Lush have move a step or two till he stand nearly in front of Grandcourt , though at some distance from he . he do not feel himself much restrain by consequence , be aware that the only strong hold he have on his present position be his serviceableness ; and even after a quarrel the want of he be likely soon or later to recur . he foresee that Gwendolen would cause he to be oust for a time , and his temper at this moment urge he to risk a quarrel . 

 " she have her reason , " he repeat more significantly . 

 " I have come to that conclusion before , " say Grandcourt , with contemptuous irony . 

 " yes , but I hardly think you know what her reason be . " 

 " you do , apparently , " say Grandcourt , not betray by so much as an eyelash that he care for the reason . 

 " yes , and you have well know too , that you may judge of the influence you have over she if she swallow her reason and accept you . for my own part I would take odd against it . she see Lydia in Cardell Chase and hear the whole story . " 

 Grandcourt make no immediate answer , and only go on smoking . he be so long before he speak that Lush move about and look out of the window , unwilling to go away without see some effect of his daring move . he have expect that Grandcourt would tax he with have contrive the affair , since Mrs. Glasher be then live at Gadsmere , a hundred mile off , and he be prepared to admit the fact : what he care about be that Grandcourt should be stagger by the sense that his intended advance must be make to a girl who have that knowledge in her mind and have be scar by it . at length Grandcourt , see Lush turn toward he , look at he again and say , contemptuously , " what follow ? " 

 here certainly be a " mate " in answer to Lush 's " check : " and though his exasperation with Grandcourt be perhaps strong than it have ever be before , it would have be idiocy to act as if any further move could be useful . he give a slight shrug with one shoulder , and be go to walk away , when Grandcourt , turn on his seat toward the table , say , as quietly as if nothing have occur , " Oblige I by push that pen and paper here , will you ? " 

 no thunderous , bully superior could have exercise the imperious spell that Grandcourt do . why , instead of be obey , he have never be tell to go to a warm place , be perhaps a mystery to those who find themselves obey he . the pen and paper be push to he , and as he take they he say , " just wait for this letter . " 

 he scrawl with ease , and the brief note be quickly address . " let hutchin go with it at once , will you ? " say Grandcourt , push the letter away from he . 

 as Lush have expect , it be address to Miss Harleth , Offendene . when his irritation have cool down he be glad there have be no explosive quarrel ; but he feel sure that there be a notch make against he , and that somehow or other he be intend to pay . it be also clear to he that the immediate effect of his revelation have be to harden Grandcourt 's previous determination . but as to the particular movement that make this process in his baffling mind , Lush could only toss up his chin in despair of a theory . 

 CHAPTER XXVI . 

  he bring white ass laden with the freight 
  of tyrian vessel , purple , gold and balm , 
  to bribe my will : I will bid they chase he forth , 
  nor let he breathe the taint of his surmise 
  on my secure resolve . 
  ay , ' tis secure : 
  and therefore let he come to spread his freight . 
  for firmness hath its appetite and crave 
  the strong lure , more strongly to resist ; 
  would know the touch of gold to fle it off ; 
  scent wine to feel its lip the soberer ; 
  behold soft byssus , ivory , and plume 
  to say , " they be fair , but I will none of they , " 
  and flout enticement in the very face . 
 Mr. Gascoigne one day come to Offendene with what he feel to be the satisfactory news that Mrs. Mompert have fix Tuesday in the following week for her interview with Gwendolen at Wanchester . he say nothing of his have incidentally hear that Mr. Grandcourt have return to diplow ; know no more than she do that Leubronn have be the goal of her admirer 's journeying , and feel that it would be unkind uselessly to revive the memory of a brilliant prospect under the present revers . in his secret soul he think of his niece 's unintelligible caprice with regret , but he vindicate she to himself by consider that Grandcourt have be the first to behave oddly , in suddenly walk away when there have the good opportunity for crown his marked attention . the rector 's practical judgment tell he that his chief duty to his niece now be to encourage she resolutely to face the change in her lot , since there be no manifest promise of any event that would avert it . 

 " you will find an interest in varied experience , my dear , and I have no doubt you will be a more valuable woman for have sustain such a part as you be call to . " 

 " I can not pretend to believe that I shall like it , " say Gwendolen , for the first time show her uncle some petulance . " but I be quite aware that I be oblige to bear it . " 

 she remember have submit to his admonition on a different occasion when she be expect to like a very different prospect . 

 " and your good sense will teach you to behave suitably under it , " say Mr. Gascoigne , with a shade more gravity . " I feel sure that Mrs. Mompert will be pleased with you . you will know how to conduct yourself to a woman who hold in all sens the relation of a superior to you . this trouble have come on you young , but that make it in some respect easy , and there be a benefit in all chastisement if we adjust our mind to it . " 

 this be precisely what Gwendolen be unable to do ; and after her uncle be go , the bitter tear , which have rarely come during the late trouble , rise and fall slowly as she sit alone . her heart deny that the trouble be easy because she be young . when be she to have any happiness , if it do not come while she be young ? not that her vision of possible happiness for herself be as unmixe with necessary evil as they use to be not that she could still imagine herself pluck the fruit of life without suspicion of their core . but this general disenchantment with the world nay , with herself , since it appear that she be not make for easy pre - eminence only intensify her sense of forlornness ; it be a visibly sterile distance enclose the dreary path at her foot , in which she have no courage to tread . she be in that first crisis of passionate youthful rebellion against what be not fitly call pain , but rather the absence of joy that first rage of disappointment in life 's morning , which we whom the year have subdue be apt to remember but dimly as part of our own experience , and so to be intolerant of its self - enclose unreasonableness and impiety . what passion seem more absurd , when we have get outside it and look at calamity as a collective risk , than this amazed anguish that I and not Thou , he or she , should be just the smite one ? yet perhaps some who have afterward make themselves a willing fence before the breast of another , and have carry their own heart - wound in heroic silence some who have make their deed great , nevertheless begin with this angry amazement at their own smart , and on the mere denial of their fantastic desire rag as if under the sting of wasp which reduce the universe for they to an unjust infliction of pain . this be nearly poor Gwendolen 's condition . what though such a reverse as hers have often happen to other girl ? the one point she have be all her life learn to care for be , that it have happen to she : it be what she feel under Klesmer 's demonstration that she be not remarkable enough to command fortune by force of will and merit ; it be what she would feel under the rigor of Mrs. Mompert 's constant expectation , under the dull demand that she should be cheerful with three Miss Momperts , under the necessity of show herself entirely submissive , and keep her thought to herself . to be a queen disthrone be not so hard as some other down - step : imagine one who have be make to believe in his own divinity find all homage withdraw , and himself unable to perform a miracle that would recall the homage and restore his own confidence . something akin to this illusion and this helplessness have befall the poor spoiled child , with the lovely lip and eye and the majestic figure which seem now to have no magic in they . 

 she rise from the low ottoman where she have be sit purposeless , and walk up and down the drawing - room , rest her elbow on one palm while she lean down her cheek on the other , and a slow tear fall . she think , " I have always , ever since I be little , feel that mamma be not a happy woman ; and now I dare say I shall be more unhappy than she have be . " 

 her mind dwelt for a few moment on the picture of herself lose her youth and cease to enjoy not mind whether she do this or that : but such picturing inevitably bring back the image of her mother . 

 " poor mamma ! it will be still bad for she now . I can get a little money for she that be all I shall care about now . " and then with an entirely new movement of her imagination , she see her mother get quite old and white , and herself no long young but fade , and their two face meet still with memory and love , and she know what be in her mother 's mind " Poor Gwen too be sad and fade now " and then , for the first time , she sob , not in anger , but with a sort of tender misery . 

 her face be toward the door , and she see her mother enter . she barely see that ; for her eye be large with tear , and she press her handkerchief against they hurriedly . before she take it away she feel her mother 's arm round she , and this sensation , which seem a prolongation of her inward vision , overcome her will to be reticent ; she sob anew in spite of herself , as they press their cheek together . 

 Mrs. Davilow have bring something in her hand which have already cause she an agitate anxiety , and she dare not speak until her darling have become calm . but Gwendolen , with whom weeping have always be a painful manifestation to be resist , if possible , again press her handkerchief against her eye , and , with a deep breath , draw her head backward and look at her mother , who be pale and tremulous . 

 " it be nothing , mamma , " say Gwendolen , think that her mother have be move in this way simply by find she in distress . " it be all over now . " 

 but Mrs. Davilow have withdraw her arm , and Gwendolen perceive a letter in her hand . 

 " what be that letter ? bad news still ? " she ask , with a touch of bitterness . 

 " I do not   know what you will think it , dear , " say Mrs. Davilow , keep the letter in her hand . " you will hardly guess where it come from . " 

 " do not   ask I to guess anything , " say Gwendolen , rather impatiently , as if a bruise be be press . 

 " it be address to you , dear . " 

 Gwendolen give the slight perceptible toss of the head . 

 " it come from diplow , " say Mrs. Davilow , give she the letter . 

 she know Grandcourt 's indistinct handwriting , and her mother be not surprised to see her blush deeply ; but watch she as she read , and wonder much what be the purport of the letter , she see the color die out . Gwendolen 's lip even be pale as she turn the open note toward her mother . the word be few and formal : 

 Mr. Grandcourt present his compliment to Miss Harleth , and beg to know whether he may be permit to call at Offendene tomorrow after two and to see she alone . Mr. Grandcourt have just return from Leubronn , where he have hop to find Miss Harleth . 

 Mrs. Davilow read , and then look at her daughter inquiringly , leave the note in her hand . Gwendolen let it fall to the floor , and turn away . 

 " it must be answer , darling , " say Mrs. Davilow , timidly . " the man wait . " 

 Gwendolen sink on the settee , clasp her hand , and look straight before she , not at her mother . she have the expression of one who have be startle by a sound and be listen to know what would come of it . the sudden change of the situation be bewilder . a few minute before she be look along an inescapable path of repulsive monotony , with hopeless inward rebellion against the imperious lot which leave she no choice : and lo , now , a moment of choice be come . yet be it triumph she feel most or terror ? impossible for Gwendolen not to feel some triumph in a tribute to her power at a time when she be first taste the bitterness of insignificance : again she seem to be get a sort of empire over her own life . but how to use it ? here come the terror . quick , quick , like picture in a book beat open with a sense of hurry , come back vividly , yet in fragment , all that she have go through in relation to Grandcourt the allurement , the vacillation , the resolve to accede , the final repulsion ; the incisive face of that dark - eyed lady with the lovely boy : her own pledge   be it a pledge not to marry he ?   the new disbelief in the worth of man and thing for which that scene of disclosure have become a symbol . that unalterable experience make a vision at which in the first agitated moment , before temper reflection could suggest themselves , her native terror shrank . 

 where be the good of choice come again ? what do she wish ? anything different ? no ! and yet in the dark seed - growth of consciousness a new wish be form itself " I wish I have never know it ! " something , anything she wish for that would have save she from the dread to let Grandcourt come . 

 it be no long while yet it seem long to Mrs. Davilow , before she think it well to say , gently 

 " it will be necessary for you to write , dear . or shall I write an answer for you which you will dictate ? " 

 " no , mamma , " say Gwendolen , draw a deep breath . " but please lay I out the pen and paper . " 

 that be gain time . be she to decline Grandcourt 's visit close the shutter not even look out on what would happen ? though with the assurance that she should remain just where she be ? the young activity within she make a warm current through her terror and stir toward something that would be an event toward an opportunity in which she could look and speak with the former effectiveness . the interest of the morrow be no long at a deadlock . 

 " there be really no reason on earth why you should be so alarmed at the man 's wait a few minute , mamma , " say Gwendolen , remonstrantly , as Mrs. Davilow , have prepare the writing material , look toward her expectantly . " servant expect nothing else than to wait . it be not to be suppose that I must write on the instant . " 

 " no , dear , " say Mrs. Davilow , in the tone of one correct , turn to sit down and take up a bit of work that lie at hand ; " he can wait another quarter of an hour , if you like . " 

 if be very simple speech and action on her part , but it be what might have be subtly calculate . Gwendolen feel a contradictory desire to be hasten : hurry would save she from deliberate choice . 

 " I do not mean he to wait long enough for that needlework to be finish , " she say , lift her hand to stroke the backward curve of her hair , while she rise from her seat and stand still . 

 " but if you do not   feel able to decide ? " say Mrs. Davilow , sympathizingly . 

 " I must decide , " say Gwendolen , walk to the writing - table and seat herself . all the while there be a busy undercurrent in she , like the thought of a man who keep up a dialogue while he be consider how he can slip away . why should she not let he come ? it bind she to nothing . he have be to Leubronn after she : of course he mean a direct unmistakable renewal of the suit which before have be only imply . what then ? she could reject he . why be she to deny herself the freedom of do this which she would like to do ? 

 " if Mr. Grandcourt have only just return from Leubronn , " say Mrs. Davilow , observe that Gwendolen lean back in her chair after take the pen in her hand " I wonder whether he have hear of our misfortune ? " 

 " that could make no difference to a man in his position , " say 
 Gwendolen , rather contemptuously , 
 " it would to some man , " say Mrs. Davilow . " they would not like to take a wife from a family in a state of beggary almost , as we be . here we be at Offendene with a great shell over we , as usual . but just imagine his find we at Sawyer 's cottage . Most man be afraid of be bore or tax by a wife 's family . if Mr. Grandcourt do know , I think it a strong proof of his attachment to you . " 

 Mrs. Davilow speak with unusual emphasis : it be the first time she have venture to say anything about Grandcourt which would necessarily seem intend as an argument in favor of he , her habitual impression be that such argument would certainly be useless and might be bad . the effect of her word now be strong than she could imagine . they raise a new set of possibility in Gwendolen 's mind a vision of what Grandcourt might do for her mother if she , Gwendolen , do what she be not go to do . she be so move by a new rush of idea that , like one conscious of be urgently call away , she feel that the immediate task must be hasten : the letter must be write , else it might be endlessly defer . after all , she act in a hurry , as she have wish to do . to act in a hurry be to have a reason for keep away from an absolute decision , and to leave open as many issue as possible . 

 she write : " Miss Harleth present her compliment to Mr. Grandcourt . 
 she will be at home after two o'clock to - morrow . " 
 before address the note she say , " pray ring the bell , mamma , if there be any one to answer it . " she really do not know who do the work of the house . 

 it be not till after the letter have be take away and Gwendolen have rise again , stretch out one arm and then rest it on her head , with a low moan which have a sound of relief in it , that Mrs. Davilow venture to ask 

 " what do you say , Gwen ? " 

 " I say that I should be at home , " answer Gwendolen , rather loftily . then after a pause , " you must not expect , because Mr. Grandcourt be come , that anything be go to happen , mamma . " 

 " I do not   allow myself to expect anything , dear . I desire you to follow your own feeling . you have never tell I what that be . " 

 " what be the use of telling ? " say Gwendolen , hear a reproach in that true statement . " when I have anything pleasant to tell , you may be sure I will tell you . " 

 " but Mr. Grandcourt will consider that you have already accept he , in allow he to come . his note tell you plainly enough that he be come to make you an offer . " 

 " very well ; and I wish to have the pleasure of refuse he . " 

 Mrs. Davilow look up in wonderment , but Gwendolen imply her wish not to be question far by say 

 " put down that detestable needle - work , and let we walk in the avenue . I be stifle . " 

 CHAPTER XXVII . 

  Desire have trim the sail , and Circumstance 
  Brings but the breeze to fill they . 
 while Grandcourt on his beautiful black Yarico , the groom behind he on 
 Criterion , be take the pleasant ride from Diplow to Offendene , 
 Gwendolen be seat before the mirror while her mother gather up the 
 lengthy mass of light - brown hair which she have be carefully brush . 
 " only gather it up easily and make a coil , mamma , " say Gwendolen . 

 " let I bring you some ear - ring , Gwen , " say Mrs. Davilow , when the hair be adjust , and they be both look at the reflection in the glass . it be impossible for they not to notice that the eye look bright than they have do of late , that there seem to be a shadow lift from the face , leave all the line once more in their placid youthfulness . the mother draw some inference that make her voice rather cheerful . " you do want your earring ? " 

 " no , mamma ; I shall not wear any ornament , and I shall put on my black silk . Black be the only wear when one be go to refuse an offer , " say Gwendolen , with one of her old smile at her mother , while she rise to throw off her dressing - gown . 

 " suppose the offer be not make after all , " say Mrs. Davilow , not without a sly intention . 

 " then that will be because I refuse it beforehand , " say Gwendolen . " it come to the same thing . " 

 there be a proud little toss of the head as she say this ; and when she walk down - stair in her long black robe , there be just that firm poise of head and elasticity of form which have lately be miss , as in a parch plant . her mother think , " she be quite herself again . it must be pleasure in his coming . can her mind be really make up against he ? " 

 Gwendolen would have be rather angry if that think have be utter ; perhaps all the more because through the last twenty hour , with a brief interruption of sleep , she have be so occupy with perpetually alternate image and argument for and against the possibility of her marry Grandcourt , that the conclusion which she have determine on beforehand cease to have any hold on her consciousness : the alternate dip of counterbalance thought begotten of counterbalance desire have bring she into a state in which no conclusion could look fix to she . she would have express her resolve as before ; but it be a form out of which the blood have be suck no more a part of quiver life than the " God 's will be do " of one who be eagerly watch chance . she do not mean to accept Grandcourt ; from the first moment of receive his letter she have mean to refuse he ; still , that could not but prompt she to look the unwelcome reason full in the face until she have a little less awe of they , could not hinder her imagination from fill out her knowledge in various way , some of which seem to change the aspect of what she know . by dint of look at a dubious object with a constructive imagination , who can give it twenty different shape . her indistinct ground of hesitation before the interview at the Whispering Stones , at present count for nothing ; they be all merge in the final repulsion . if it have not be for that day in Cardell Chase , she say to herself now , there would have be no obstacle to her marry Grandcourt . on that day and after it , she have not reason and balanced ; she have act with a force of impulse against which all question be no more than a voice against a torrent . the impulse have come not only from her maidenly pride and jealousy , not only from the shock of another woman 's calamity thrust close on her vision , but from her dread of wrong - doing , which be vague , it be true , and aloof from the daily detail of her life , but not the less strong . whatever be accept as consistent with be a lady she have no scruple about ; but from the dim region of what be call disgraceful , wrong , guilty , she shrink with mingled pride and terror ; and even apart from shame , her feeling would have make her place any deliberate injury of another in the region of guilt . 

 but now do she know exactly what be the state of the case with regard to Mrs. Glasher and her child ? she have give a sort of promise have say , " I will not interfere with your wish . " but would another woman who marry Grandcourt be in fact the decisive obstacle to her wish , or be do she and her boy any real injury ? might it not be just as well , nay well , that Grandcourt should marry ? for what could not a woman do when she be marry , if she know how to assert herself ? here all be constructive imagination . Gwendolen have about as accurate a conception of marriage that be to say , of the mutual influence , demand , duty of man and woman in the state of matrimony as she have of magnetic current and the law of storm . 

 " Mamma manage baldly , " be her way of sum up what she have see of her mother 's experience : she herself would manage quite differently . and the trial of matrimony be the last theme into which Mrs. Davilow could choose to enter fully with this daughter . 

 " I wonder what mamma and my uncle would say if they know about Mrs. Glasher ! " think Gwendolen in her inward debating ; not that she could imagine herself tell they , even if she have not feel bind to silence . " I wonder what anybody would say ; or what they would say to Mr. Grandcourt 's marry some one else and have other child ! " to consider what " anybody " would say , be to be release from the difficulty of judge where everything be obscure to she when feeling have cease to be decisive . she have only to collect her memory , which prove to she that " anybody " regard the illegitimate child as more rightfully to be look shy on and deprive of social advantage than illegitimate father . the verdict of " anybody " seem to be that she have no reason to concern herself greatly on behalf of Mrs. Glasher and her child . 

 but there be another way in which they have cause her concern . what other might think , could not do away with a feeling which in the first instance would hardly be too strongly describe as indignation and loathing that she should have be expect to unite herself with an outworn life , full of backward secret which must have be more keenly feel than any association with she . true , the question of love on her own part have occupy she scarcely at all in relation to Grandcourt . the desirability of marriage for she have always seem due to other feeling than love ; and to be enamor be the part of the man , on whom the advance depend . Gwendolen have find no objection to Grandcourt 's way of be enamor before she have have that glimpse of his past , which she resent as if it have be a deliberate offense against she . his advance to she be deliberate , and she feel a retrospective disgust for they . perhaps other man 's life be of the same kind full of secret which make the ignorant supposition of the woman they want to marry a farce at which they be laugh in their sleeve . 

 these feeling of disgust and indignation have sink deep ; and though other troublous experience in the last week have dull they from passion into remembrance , it be chiefly their reverberate activity which keep she firm to the understanding with herself , that she be not go to accept Grandcourt . she have never mean to form a new determination ; she have only be consider what might be think or say . if anything could have induce she to change , it would have be the prospect of make all thing easy for " poor mamma : " that , she admit , be a temptation . but no ! she be go to refuse he . meanwhile , the thought that he be come to be refuse be inspirit : she have the white rein in her hand again ; there be a new current in her frame , revive she from the beat - down consciousness in which she have be leave by the interview with Klesmer . she be not now go to crave an opinion of her capability ; she be go to exercise her power . 

 be this what make her heart palpitate annoyingly when she hear the horse 's footstep on the gravel ? when Miss Merry , who open the door to Grandcourt , come to tell she that he be in the drawing - room ? the hour of preparation and the triumph of the situation be apparently of no use : she might as well have see Grandcourt come suddenly on she in the midst of her despondency . while walk into the drawing - room , she have to concentrate all her energy in that self - control , which make she appear gravely gracious as she give her hand to he , and answer his hope that she be quite well in a voice as low and languid as his own . a moment afterward , when they be both of they seat on two of the wreath - paint chair Gwendolen upright with downcast eyelid , Grandcourt about two yard distant , lean one arm over the back of his chair and look at she , while he hold his hat in his left hand any one see they as a picture would have conclude that they be in some stage of love - make suspense . and certainly the love - making have begin : she already feel herself be woo by this silent man seat at an agreeable distance , with the subtle atmosphere of attar of rose and an attention bent wholly on she . and he also consider himself to be woo : he be not a man to suppose that his presence carry no consequence ; and he be exactly the man to feel the utmost piquancy in a girl whom he have not find quite calculable . 

 " I be disappoint not to find you at Leubronn , " he begin , his usual broken drawl have just a shade of amorous languor in it . " the place be intolerable without you . a mere kennel of a place . do not   you think so ? " 

 " I can not   judge what it would be without myself , " say Gwendolen , turn her eye on he , with some recover sense of mischief . " with myself I like it well enough to have stay long , if I could . but I be oblige to come home on account of family trouble . " 

 " it be very cruel of you to go to Leubronn , " say Grandcourt , take no notice of the trouble , on which Gwendolen she hardly know why wish that there should be a clear understanding at once . " you must have know that it would spoil everything : you know you be the heart and soul of everything that go on . be you quite reckless about I ? " 

 it would be impossible to say " yes " in a tone that would be take seriously ; equally impossible to say " no ; " but what else could she say ? in her difficulty , she turn down her eyelid again and blush over face and neck . Grandcourt see she in a new phase , and believe that she be show her inclination . but he be determined that she should show it more decidedly . 

 " perhaps there be some deep interest ? some attraction some engagement which it would have be only fair to make I aware of ? be there any man who stand between we ? " 

 inwardly the answer frame itself . " no ; but there be a woman . " yet how could she utter this ? even if she have not promise that woman to be silent , it would have be impossible for she to enter on the subject with Grandcourt . but how could she arrest his wooing by begin to make a formal speech " I perceive your intention it be most flattering , etc . " ? a fish honestly invite to come and be eat have a clear course in decline , but how if it find itself swim against a net ? and apart from the network , would she have dare at once to say anything decisive ? Gwendolen have not time to be clear on that point . as it be , she feel compel to silence , and after a pause , Grandcourt say 

 " be I to understand that some one else be prefer ? " 

 Gwendolen , now impatient of her own embarrassment , determine to rush at the difficulty and free herself . she raise her eye again and say with something of her former clearness and defiance , " no " wish he to understand , " what then ? I may not be ready to take you . " there be nothing that Grandcourt could not understand which he perceive likely to affect his amour propre . 

 " the last thing I would do , be to importune you . I should not hope to win you by make myself a bore . if there be no hope for I , I would ask you to tell I so at once , that I might just ride away to no matter where . " 

 almost to her own astonishment , Gwendolen feel a sudden alarm at the image of Grandcourt finally rid away . what would be leave she then ? nothing but the former dreariness . she like he to be there . she snatch at the subject that would defer any decisive answer . 

 " I fear you be not aware of what have happen to we . I have lately have to think so much of my mamma 's trouble , that other subject have be quite throw into the background . she have lose all her fortune , and we be go to leave this place . I must ask you to excuse my seeming preoccupy . " 

 in elude a direct appeal Gwendolen recover some of her self - possession . she speak with dignity and look straight at Grandcourt , whose long , narrow , impenetrable eye meet her , and mysteriously arrest they : mysteriously ; for the subtly - varied drama between man and woman be often such as can hardly be render in word put together like domino , accord to obvious fix mark . the word of all work , Love , will no more express the myriad mode of mutual attraction , than the word Thought can inform you what be pass through your neighbor 's mind . it would be hard to tell on which side Gwendolen 's or Grandcourt 's the influence be more mixed . at that moment his strong wish be to be completely master of this creature this piquant combination of maidenliness and mischief : that she know thing which have make she start away from he , spur he to triumph over that repugnance ; and he be believe that he should triumph . and she ah , piteous equality in the need to dominate ! she be overcome like the thirsty one who be draw toward the seem water in the desert , overcome by the suffused sense that here in this man 's homage to she lie the rescue from helpless subjection to an oppressive lot . 

 all the while they be look at each other ; and Grandcourt say , slowly and languidly , as if it be of no importance , other thing have be settle 

 " you will tell I now , I hope , that Mrs. Davilow 's loss of fortune will not trouble you far . you will trust I to prevent it from weigh upon she . you will give I the claim to provide against that . " 

 the little pause and refine drawling with which this speech be utter , give time for Gwendolen to go through the dream of a life . as the word penetrate she , they have the effect of a draught of wine , which suddenly make all thing easy , desirable thing not so wrong , and people in general less disagreeable . she have a momentary phantasmal love for this man who choose his word so well , and who be a mere incarnation of delicate homage . Repugnance , dread , scruple these be dim as remember pain , while she be already taste relief under the immediate pain of hopelessness . she imagine herself already spring to her mother , and be playful again . yet when Grandcourt have cease to speak , there be an instant in which she be conscious of be at the turning of the way . 

 " you be very generous , " she say , not move her eye , and speak with a gentle intonation . 

 " you accept what will make such thing a matter of course ? " say 
 Grandcourt , without any new eagerness . " you consent to become my wife ? " 
 this time Gwendolen remain quite pale . something make her rise from her seat in spite of herself and walk to a little distance . then she turn and with her hand fold before she stand in silence . 

 Grandcourt immediately rise too , rest his hat on the chair , but still keep hold of it . the evident hesitation of this destitute girl to take his splendid offer sting he into a keenness of interest such as he have not know for year . none the less because he attribute her hesitation entirely to her knowledge about Mrs. Glasher . in that attitude of preparation , he say 

 " do you command I to go ? " no familiar spirit could have suggest to he more effective word . 

 " no , " say Gwendolen . she could not let he go : that negative be a clutch . she seem to herself to be , after all , only drift toward the tremendous decision but drifting depend on something besides the current when the sail have be set beforehand . 

 " you accept my devotion ? " say Grandcourt , hold his hat by his side and look straight into her eye , without other movement . their eye meet in that way seem to allow any length of pause : but wait as long as she would , how could she contradict herself ! what have she detain he for ? he have shut out any explanation . 

 " yes , " come as gravely from Gwendolen 's lip as if she have be answer to her name in a court of justice . he receive it gravely , and they still look at each other in the same attitude . be there ever such a way before of accept the bliss - give " yes " ? Grandcourt like well to be at that distance from she , and to feel under a ceremony impose by an indefinable prohibition that breathe from Gwendolen 's bearing . 

 but he do at length lie down his hat and advance to take her hand , just press his lip upon it and let it go again . she think his behavior perfect , and gain a sense of freedom which make she almost ready to be mischievous . her " yes " entail so little at this moment that there be nothing to screen the reversal of her gloomy prospect ; her vision be fill by her own release from the Momperts , and her mother 's release from Sawyer 's cottage . with a happy curl of the lip , she say 

 " will you not see mamma ? I will fetch she . " 

 " let we wait a little , " say Grandcourt , in his favorite attitude , have his left forefinger and thumb in his waist - coat pocket , and with his right hand caress his whisker , while he stand near Gwendolen and look at she not unlike a gentleman who have a felicitous introduction at an evening party . 

 " have you anything else to say to I , " say Gwendolen , playfully . 

 " yes I know have thing say to you be a great bore , " say 
 Grandcourt , rather sympathetically . 
 " not when they be thing I like to hear . " 

 " will it bother you to be ask how soon we can be marry ? " 

 " I think it will , to - day , " say Gwendolen , put up her chin saucily . 

 " not to - day , then , but to - morrow . think of it before I come to - morrow . 
 in a fortnight or three week as soon as possible . " 
 " ah , you think you will be tired of my company , " say Gwendolen . " I notice when people be marry the husband be not so much with his wife as when they be engage . but perhaps I shall like that well , too . " 

 she laugh charmingly . 

 " you shall have whatever you like , " say Grandcourt . 

 " and nothing that I do not   like ? please say that ; because I think I dislike what I do not   like more than I like what I like , " say Gwendolen , find herself in the woman 's paradise , where all her nonsense be adorable . 

 Grandcourt pause ; these be subtiltie in which he have much experience of his own . " I do not   know this be such a brute of a world , thing be always turn up that one do not   like . I can not   always hinder your be bore . if you like to ride Criterion , I can not   hinder his come down by some chance or other . " 

 " ah , my friend Criterion , how be he ? " 

 " he be outside : I make the groom ride he , that you might see he . he have the side - saddle on for an hour or two yesterday . come to the window and look at he . " 

 they could see the two horse be take slowly round the sweep , and the beautiful creature , in their fine grooming , send a thrill of exultation through Gwendolen . they be the symbol of command and luxury , in delightful contrast with the ugliness of poverty and humiliation at which she have lately be look close . 

 " will you ride Criterion to - morrow ? " say Grandcourt . " if you will , everything shall be arrange . " 

 " I should like it of all thing , " say Gwendolen . " I want to lose myself in a gallop again . but now I must go and fetch mamma . " 

 " take my arm to the door , then , " say Grandcourt , and she accept . their face be very near each other , be almost on a level , and he be look at she . she think his manner as a lover more agreeable than any she have see describe . she have no alarm lest he mean to kiss she , and be so much at her ease , that she suddenly pause in the middle of the room and say half archly , half earnestly 

 " oh , while I think of it there be something I dislike that you can save I from . I do not like Mr. Lush 's company . " 

 " you shall not have it . I will get rid of he . " 

 " you be not fond of he yourself ? " 

 " not in the least . I let he hang on I because he have always be a poor devil , " say Grandcourt , in an adagio of utter indifference . " they get he to travel with I when I be a lad . he be always that coarse - haired kind of brute sort of cross between a hog and a dilettante . " 

 Gwendolen laugh . all that seem kind and natural enough : Grandcourt 's fastidiousness enhance the kindness . and when they reach the door , his way of open it for she be the perfection of easy homage . really , she think , he be likely to be the least disagreeable of husband . 

 Mrs. Davilow be wait anxiously in her bed - room when Gwendolen enter , step toward she quickly , and kiss she on both cheek say in a low tone , " come down , mamma , and see Mr. Grandcourt . I be engaged to he . " 

 " my darling child , " say Mrs. Davilow , with a surprise that be rather solemn than glad . 

 " yes , " say Gwendolen , in the same tone , and with a quickness which imply that it be needless to ask question . " everything be settle . you be not go to Sawyer 's cottage , I be not go to be inspect by Mrs. Mompert , and everything be to be as I like . so come down with I immediately . " 

 BOOK IV GWENDOLEN get she choice . 

 CHAPTER XXVIII . 

 " il est plus aisť de conno tre l'homme en gťnťral que de conno tre un homme en particulier . LA ROCHEFOUCAULD . " 

 an hour after Grandcourt have leave , the important news of Gwendolen 's engagement be know at the rectory , and Mr. and Mrs. Gascoigne , with Anna , spend the evening at Offendene . 

 " my dear , let I congratulate you on have create a strong attachment , " say the rector . " you look serious , and I do not   wonder at it : a lifelong union be a solemn thing . but from the way Mr. Grandcourt have act and speak I think we may already see some good arise out of our adversity . it have give you an opportunity of observe your future husband 's delicate liberality . " 

 Mr. Gascoigne refer to Grandcourt 's mode of imply that he would provide for Mrs. Davilow a part of the love - making which Gwendolen have remember to cite to her mother with perfect accuracy . 

 " but I have no doubt that Mr. Grandcourt would have behave quite as handsomely if you have not go away to Germany , Gwendolen , and have be engage to he , as you no doubt might have be , more than a month ago , " say Mrs. Gascoigne , feel that she have to discharge a duty on this occasion . " but now there be no more room for caprice ; indeed , I trust you have no inclination to any . a woman have a great debt of gratitude to a man who persevere in make she such an offer . but no doubt you feel properly . " 

 " I be not at all sure that I do , aunt , " say Gwendolen , with saucy gravity . " I do not   know everything it be proper to feel on be engage . " 

 the rector pat her shoulder and smile as at a bit of innocent naughtiness , and his wife take his behavior as an indication that she be not to be displeased . as for Anna , she kiss Gwendolen and say , " I do hope you will be happy , " but then sink into the background and try to keep the tear back too . in the late day she have be imagine a little romance about Rex how if he still long for Gwendolen her heart might be soften by trouble into love , so that they could by - and - by be marry . and the romance have turn to a prayer that she , Anna , might be able to rejoice like a good sister , and only think of be useful in work for Gwendolen , as long as Rex be not rich . but now she want grace to rejoice in something else . Miss Merry and the four girl , Alice with the high shoulder , Bertha and Fanny the whisperer , and Isabel the listener , be all present on this family occasion , when everything seem appropriately turn to the honor and glory of Gwendolen , and real life be as interesting as " Sir Charles Grandison . " the evening pass chiefly in decisive remark from the rector , in answer to conjecture from the two elder lady . accord to he , the case be not one in which he could think it his duty to mention settlement : everything must , and doubtless would safely be leave to Mr. Grandcourt . 

 " I should like to know exactly what sort of place Ryelands and 
 Gadsmere be , " say Mrs. Davilow . 
 " Gadsmere , I believe , be a secondary place , " say Mr. Gascoigne ; " but ryeland I know to be one of our fine seat . the park be extensive and the wood of a very valuable order . the house be build by Inigo Jones , and the ceiling be paint in the italian style . the estate be say to be worth twelve thousand a year , and there be two living , one a rectory , in the gift of the Grandcourts . there may be some burden on the land . still , Mr. Grandcourt be an only child . " 

 " it would be most remarkable , " say Mrs. Gascoigne , " if he be to become Lord Stannery in addition to everything else . only think : there be the Grandcourt estate , the Mallinger estate , and the baronetcy , and the peerage , " she be mark off the item on her finger , and pause on the fourth while she add , " but they say there will be no land come to he with the peerage . " it seem a pity there be nothing for the fifth finger . 

 " the peerage , " say the rector , judiciously , " must be regard as a remote chance . there be two cousin between the present peer and Mr. Grandcourt . it be certainly a serious reflection how death and other cause do sometimes concentrate inheritance on one man . but an excess of that kind be to be deprecate . to be Sir Mallinger Grandcourt Mallinger I suppose that will be his style with corresponding property , be a valuable talent enough for any man to have commit to he . let we hope it will be well use . " 

 " and what a position for the wife , Gwendolen ! " say Mrs. Gascoigne ; " a great responsibility indeed . but you must lose no time in write to Mrs. Mompert , Henry . it be a good thing that you have an engagement of marriage to offer as an excuse , else she might feel offended . she be rather a high woman . " 

 " I be rid of that horror , " think Gwendolen , to whom the name of Mompert have become a sort of Mumbo - jumbo . she be very silent through the evening , and that night could hardly sleep at all in her little white bed . it be a rarity in her strong youth to be wakeful : and perhaps a still great rarity for she to be careful that her mother should not know of her restlessness . but her state of mind be altogether new : she who have be use to feel sure of herself , and ready to manage other , have just take a decisive step which she have beforehand think that she would not take nay , perhaps , be bind not to take . she could not go backward now ; she like a great deal of what lie before she ; and there be nothing for she to like if she go back . but her resolution be dog by the shadow of that previous resolve which have at first come as the undoubting movement of her whole being . while she lie on her pillow with wide - open eye , " look on darkness which the blind do see , " she be appal by the idea that she be go to do what she have once start away from with repugnance . it be new to she that a question of right or wrong in her conduct should rouse her terror ; she have know no compunction that atone caress and present could not lay to rest . but here have come a moment when something like a new consciousness be awake . she seem on the edge of adopt deliberately , as a notion for all the rest of her life , what she have rashly say in her bitterness , when her discovery have drive she away to Leubronn : that it do not signify what she do ; she have only to amuse herself as well she could . that lawlessness , that cast away of all care for justification , suddenly frighten she : it come to she with the shadowy array of possible calamity behind it calamity which have cease to be a mere name for she ; and all the infiltrate influence of disregarded religious teaching , as well as the deep impression of something awful and inexorable envelop she , seem to concentrate themselves in the vague conception of avenge power . the brilliant position she have long for , the imagined freedom she would create for herself in marriage , the deliverance from the dull insignificance of her girlhood all immediately before she ; and yet they have come to her hunger like food with the taint of sacrilege upon it , which she must snatch with terror . in the darkness and loneliness of her little bed , her more resistant self could not act against the first onslaught of dread after her irrevocable decision . that unhappy - face woman and her child Grandcourt and his relation with her keep repeat themselves in her imagination like the cling memory of a disgrace , and gradually obliterate all other thought , leave only the consciousness that she have take those scene into her life . her long wakefulness seem a delirium ; a faint , faint light penetrate beside the window - curtain ; the chillness increase . she could bear it no long , and cry " Mamma ! " 

 " yes , dear , " say Mrs. Davilow , immediately , in a wakeful voice . 

 " let I come to you . " 

 she soon go to sleep on her mother 's shoulder , and sleep on till late , when , dream of a light - up ball - room , she open her eye on her mother stand by the bedside with a small packet in her hand . 

 " I be sorry to wake you , darling , but I think it well to give you this at once . the groom have bring Criterion ; he have come on another horse , and say he be to stay here . " 

 Gwendolen sit up in bed and open the packet . it be a delicate enamel casket , and inside be a splendid diamond ring with a letter which contain a fold bit of colored paper and these word : 

 pray wear this ring when I come at twelve in sign of our betrothal . I enclose a check draw in the name of Mr. Gascoigne , for immediate expense . of course Mrs. Davilow will remain at Offendene , at least for some time . I hope , when I come , you will have grant I an early day , when you may begin to command I at a short distance . 

 your devotedly , 

 H. M. GRANDCOURT . 

 the check be for five hundred pound , and Gwendolen turn it toward her mother , with the letter . 

 " how very kind and delicate ! " say Mrs. Davilow , with much feeling . " but I really should like well not to be dependent on a son - in - law . I and the girl could get along very well . " 

 " Mamma , if you say that again , I will not marry he , " say Gwendolen , angrily . 

 " my dear child , I trust you be not go to marry only for my sake , " say Mrs. Davilow , depreciatingly . 

 Gwendolen toss her head on the pillow away from her mother , and let the ring lie . she be irritated at this attempt to take away a motive . perhaps the deep cause of her irritation be the consciousness that she be not go to marry solely for her mamma 's sake that she be draw toward the marriage in way against which strong reason than her mother 's renunciation be yet not strong enough to hinder she . she have wake up to the sign that she be irrevocably engage , and all the ugly vision , the alarm , the argument of the night , must be meet by daylight , in which probably they would show themselves weak . " what I long for be your happiness , dear , " continue Mrs. Davilow , pleadingly . " I will not say anything to vex you . will you not put on the ring ? " 

 for a few moment Gwendolen do not answer , but her thought be active . at last she raise herself with a determination to do as she would do if she have start on horseback , and go on with spirit , whatever idea might be run in her head . 

 " I think the lover always put on the betrothal ring himself , " she say laughingly , slip the ring on her finger , and look at it with a charming movement of her head . " I know why he have send it , " she add , nod at her mamma . 

 " why ? " 

 " he would rather make I put it on than ask I to let he do it . aha ! he be very proud . but so be I. we shall match each other . I should hate a man who go down on his knee , and come fawn on I . he really be not disgusting . " 

 " that be very moderate praise , Gwen . " 

 " no , it be not , for a man , " say Gwendolen gaily . " but now I must get up and dress . will you come and do my hair , mamma , dear , " she go on , draw down her mamma 's face to caress it with her own cheek , " and not be so naughty any more as to talk of live in poverty ? you must bear to be make comfortable , even if you do not   like it . and Mr. Grandcourt behave perfectly , now , do he not ? " 

 " certainly he do , " say Mrs. Davilow , encourage , and persuade that after all Gwendolen be fond of she betrothed . she herself think he a man whose attention be likely to tell on a girl 's feeling . suitor must often be judge as word be , by the standing and the figure they make in polite society : it be difficult to know much else of they . and all the mother 's anxiety turn not on Grandcourt 's character , but on Gwendolen 's mood in accept he . 

 the mood be necessarily pass through a new phase this morning . even in the hour of make her toilet , she have draw on all the knowledge she have for ground to justify her marriage . and what she most dwelt on be the determination , that when she be Grandcourt 's wife , she would urge he to the most liberal conduct toward Mrs. Glasher 's child . 

 " of what use would it be to she that I should not marry he ? he could have marry she if he like ; but he do not like . perhaps she be to blame for that . there must be a great deal about she that I know nothing of . and he must have be good to she in many way , else she would not have want to marry he . " 

 but that last argument at once begin to appear doubtful . Mrs. Glasher naturally wish to exclude other child who would stand between Grandcourt and her own : and Gwendolen 's comprehension of this feeling prompt another way of reconcile claim . 

 " perhaps we shall have no child . I hope we shall not . and he might 
 leave the estate to the pretty little boy . my uncle say that Mr. 
 Grandcourt could do as he like with the estate . only when Sir Hugo 
 Mallinger die there will be enough for two . " 
 this make Mrs. Glasher appear quite unreasonable in demand that her boy should be sole heir ; and the double property be a security that Grandcourt 's marriage would do she no wrong , when the wife be Gwendolen Harleth with all her proud resolution not to be fairly accuse . this maiden have be accustom to think herself blameless ; other person only be faulty . 

 it be strike , that in the hold which this argument of she do no wrong to Mrs. Glasher have take on her mind , her repugnance to the idea of Grandcourt 's past have sink into a subordinate feeling . the terror she have feel in the night - watch at overstep the border of wickedness by do what she have at first feel to be wrong , have dull any emotion about his conduct . she be think of he , whatever he might be , as a man over whom she be go to have indefinite power ; and her love he have never be a question with she , any agreeableness he have be so much gain . Poor Gwendolen have no awe of unmanageable force in the state of matrimony , but regard it as altogether a matter of management , in which she would know how to act . in relation to Grandcourt 's past she encourage new doubt whether he be likely to have differ much from other man ; and she devise little scheme for learn what be expect of man in general . 

 but whatever else might be true in the world , her hair be dress suitably for riding , and she go down in her riding - habit , to avoid delay before get on horseback . she want to have her blood stir once more with the intoxication of youth , and to recover the daring with which she have be use to think of her course in life . already a load be lift off she ; for in daylight and activity it be less oppressive to have doubt about her choice , than to feel that she have no choice but to endure insignificance and servitude . 

 " go back and make yourself look like a duchess , mamma , " she say , turn suddenly as she be go down - stair . " put your point - lace over your head . I must have you look like a duchess . you must not take thing humbly . " 

 when Grandcourt raise her left hand gently and look at the ring , she say gravely , " it be very good of you to think of everything and send I that packet . " 

 " you will tell I if there be anything I forget ? " he say , keep the hand softly within his own . " I will do anything you wish . " 

 " but I be very unreasonable in my wish , " say Gwendolen , smile . 

 " yes , I expect that . woman always be . " 

 " then I will not be unreasonable , " say Gwendolen , take away her hand and toss her head saucily . " I will not be tell that I be what woman always be . " 

 " I do not say that , " say Grandcourt , look at she with his usual gravity . " you be what no other woman be . " 

 " and what be that , pray ? " say Gwendolen , move to a distance with a little air of menace . 

 Grandcourt make his pause before he answer . " you be the woman I love . " 

 " oh , what nice speech ! " say Gwendolen , laugh . the sense of that love which he must once have give to another woman under strange circumstance be get familiar . 

 " give I a nice speech in return . say when we be to be marry . " 

 " not yet . not till we have have a gallop over the down . I be so thirsty for that , I can think of nothing else . I wish the hunting have begin . Sunday the twentieth , twenty - seventh , Monday , Tuesday . " Gwendolen be count on her finger with the prettiest nod while she look at Grandcourt , and at last sweep one palm over the other while she say triumphantly , " it will begin in ten day ! " 

 " let we be marry in ten day , then , " say Grandcourt , " and we shall not be bore about the stable . " 

 " what do woman always say in answer to that ? " say Gwendolen , mischievously . 

 " they agree to it , " say the lover , rather off his guard . 

 " then I will not ! " say Gwendolen , take up her gauntlet and put they on , while she keep her eye on he with gather fun in they . 

 the scene be pleasant on both side . a cruder lover would have lose the view of her pretty way and attitude , and spoil all by stupid attempt at caress , utterly destructive of drama . Grandcourt prefer the drama ; and Gwendolen , leave at ease , find her spirit rise continually as she play at reign . perhaps if Klesmer have see more of she in this unconscious kind of act , instead of when she be try to be theatrical , he might have rat her chance higher . 

 when they have have a glorious gallop , however , she be in a state of exhilaration that dispose she to think well of hasten the marriage which would make her life all of apiece with this splendid kind of enjoyment . she would not debate any more about an act to which she have commit herself ; and she consent to fix the wedding on that day three week , notwithstanding the difficulty of fulfil the customary law of the trousseau . 

 Lush , of course , be make aware of the engagement by abundant sign , without be formally tell . but he expect some communication as a consequence of it , and after a few day he become rather impatient under Grandcourt 's silence , feel sure that the change would affect his personal prospect , and wish to know exactly how . his tactic no long include any opposition which he do not love for its own sake . he might easily cause Grandcourt a great deal of annoyance , but it would be to his own injury , and to create annoyance be not a motive with he . Miss Gwendolen he would certainly not have be sorry to frustrate a little , but after all there be no knowing what would come . it be nothing new that Grandcourt should show a perverse wilfulness ; yet in his freak about this girl he strike Lush rather newly as something like a man who be fey lead on by an ominous fatality ; and that one bear to his fortune should make a bad business of his life than be necessary , seem really pitiable . have protest against the marriage , Lush have a second - sight for its evil consequence . Grandcourt have be take the pain to write letter and give order himself instead of employ Lush , and appear to be ignore his usefulness , even choose , against the habit of year , to breakfast alone in his dressing - room . but a tete - a - tete be not to be avoid in a house empty of guest ; and Lush hasten to use an opportunity of say it be one day after dinner , for there be difficulty in Grandcourt 's dining at Offendene 

 " and when be the marriage to take place ? " 

 Grandcourt , who drink little wine , have leave the table and be lounge , while he smoke , in an easy chair near the hearth , where a fire of oak bough be gap to its glowing depth , and edge they with a delicate tint of ash delightful to behold . the chair of red - brown velvet brocade be a become back - ground for his pale - tint , well - cut feature and exquisite long hand . omit the cigar , you might have imagine he a portrait by Moroni , who would have render wonderfully the impenetrable gaze and air of distinction ; and a portrait by that great master would have be quite as lively a companion as Grandcourt be dispose to be . but he answer without unusual delay . 

 " on the tenth . " 

 " I suppose you intend to remain here . " 

 " we shall go to Ryelands for a little while ; but we shall return here for the sake of the hunting . " 

 after this word there be the languid inarticulate sound frequent with Grandcourt when he mean to continue speak , and Lush wait for something more . nothing come , and he be go to put another question , when the inarticulate sound begin again and introduce the mildly utter suggestion 

 " you have well make some new arrangement for yourself . " 

 " what ! I be to cut and run ? " say Lush , prepare to be good - temper on the occasion . 

 " something of that kind . " 

 " the bride object to I . I hope she will make up to you for the want of my service . " 

 " I can not   help your be so damnably disagreeable to woman , " say 
 Grandcourt , in soothe apology . 
 " to one woman , if you please . " 

 " it make no difference since she be the one in question . " 

 " I suppose I be not to be turn adrift after fifteen year without some provision . " 

 " you must have save something out of I . " 

 " deuce little . I have often save something for you . " 

 " you can have three hundred a year . but you must live in town and be ready to look after thing when I want you . I shall be rather hard up . " 

 " if you be not go to be at ryeland this winter , I might run down there and let you know how Swinton go on . " 

 " if you like . I do not   care a toss where you be , so that you keep out of sight . " 

 " much oblige , " say Lush , able to take the affair more easily than he have expect . he be support by the secret belief that he should by - and - by be want as much as ever . 

 " perhaps you will not object to pack up as soon as possible , " say Grandcourt . " the Torringtons be come , and Miss Harleth will be rid over here . " 

 " with all my heart . can not   I be of use in go to Gadsmere . " 

 " no . I be go myself . " 

 " about your be rather hard up . have you think of that plan " 

 " just leave I alone , will you ? " say Grandcourt , in his low audible tone , toss his cigar into the fire , and rise to walk away . 

 he spend the evening in the solitude of the small drawing - room , where , with various new publication on the table of the kind a gentleman may like to have on hand without touch , he employ himself   as a philosopher might have do   in sit meditatively on the sofa and abstain from literature political , comic , cynical , or romantic . in this way hour may pass surprisingly soon , without the arduous invisible chase of philosophy ; not from love of thought , but from hatred of effort from a state of the inward world , something like premature age , where the need for action lapse into a mere image of what have be , be , and may or might be ; where impulse be bear and die in a phantasmal world , pause in rejection of even a shadowy fulfillment . that be a condition which often come with whiten hair ; and sometimes , too , an intense obstinacy and tenacity of rule , like the main trunk of an exorbitant egoism , conspicuous in proportion as the varied susceptibility of young year be strip away . 

 but Grandcourt 's hair , though he have not much of it , be of a fine , sunny blonde , and his mood be not entirely to be explain as ebb energy . we mortal have a strange spiritual chemistry go on within we , so that a lazy stagnation or even a cottony milkiness may be prepare one know not what biting or explosive material . the navvy wake from sleep and without malice heave a stone to crush the life out of his still sleep comrade , be understand to lack the train motive which make a character fairly calculable in its action ; but by a roundabout course even a gentleman may make of himself a chancy personage , raise an uncertainty as to what he may do next , that sadly spoil companionship . 

 Grandcourt 's thought this evening be like the circlet one see in a dark pool , continually die out and continually start again by some impulse from below the surface . the deep central impulse come from the image of Gwendolen ; but the thought it stir would be imperfectly illustrate by a reference to the amatory poet of all age . it be characteristic that he get none of his satisfaction from the belief that Gwendolen be in love with he ; and that love have overcome the jealous resentment which have make she run away from he . on the contrary , he believe that this girl be rather exceptional in the fact that , in spite of his assiduous attention to she , she be not in love with he ; and it seem to he very likely that if it have not be for the sudden poverty which have come over her family , she would not have accept he . from the very first there have be an exasperating fascination in the tricksiness with which she have not meet his advance , but wheel away from they . she have be bring to accept he in spite of everything bring to kneel down like a horse under training for the arena , though she might have an objection to it all the while . on the whole , Grandcourt get more pleasure out of this notion than he could have do out of win a girl of whom he be sure that she have a strong inclination for he personally . and yet this pleasure in mastering reluctance flourish along with the habitual persuasion that no woman whom he favor could be quite indifferent to his personal influence ; and it seem to he not unlikely that by - and - by Gwendolen might be more enamored of he than he of she . in any case , she would have to submit ; and he enjoy think of she as his future wife , whose pride and spirit be suit to command every one but himself . he have no taste for a woman who be all tenderness to he , full of petition solicitude and willing obedience . he mean to be master of a woman who would have like to master he , and who perhaps would have be capable of master another man . 

 Lush , have fail in his attempt reminder to Grandcourt , think it well to communicate with Sir Hugo , in whom , as a man have perhaps interest enough to command the bestowal of some place where the work be light , gentlemanly , and not ill - pay , he be anxious to cultivate a sense of friendly obligation , not feel at all secure against the future need of such a place . he write the follow letter , and address it to Park Lane , whither he know the family have return from Leubronn : 

 MY dear SIR HUGO since we come home the marriage have be absolutely decide on , and be to take place in less than three week . it be so far the bad for he that her mother have lately lose all her fortune , and he will have to find supply . Grandcourt , I know , be feel the want of cash ; and unless some other plan be resort to , he will be raise money in a foolish way . I be go to leave Diplow immediately , and I shall not be able to start the topic . what I should advise be , that Mr. Deronda , who I know have your confidence , should propose to come and pay a short visit here , accord to invitation   there be go to be other people in the house , and that you should put he fully in possession of your wish and the possible extent of your offer . then , that he should introduce the subject to Grandcourt so as not to imply that you suspect any particular want of money on his part , but only that there be a strong wish on your , what I have formerly say to he have be in the way of a conjecture that you might be willing to give a good sum for his chance of diplow ; but if Mr. Deronda come armed with a definite offer , that would take another sort of hold . ten to one he will not close for some time to come ; but the proposal will have get a strong lodgment in his mind ; and though at present he have a great notion of the hunting here , I see a likelihood , under the circumstance , that he will get a distaste for the neighborhood , and there will be the notion of the money stick by he without be urge . I would bet on your ultimate success . as I be not to be exile to Siberia , but be to be within call , it be possible that , by and by , I may be of more service to you . but at present I can think of no medium so good as Mr. Deronda . nothing put Grandcourt in bad humor than have the lawyer thrust their paper under his nose uninvited . 

 trust that your visit to Leubronn have put you in excellent condition for the winter , I remain , my dear Sir Hugo , 

 your very faithfully , 

 THOMAS CRANMER LUSH . 

 Sir Hugo , have receive this letter at breakfast , hand it to Deronda , who , though he have chamber in town , be somehow hardly ever in they , Sir Hugo not be content without he . the chatty baronet would have like a young companion even if there have be no peculiar reason for attachment between they : one with a fine harmonious unspoiled face fit to keep up a cheerful view of posterity and inheritance generally , notwithstanding particular disappointment ; and his affection for Deronda be not diminish by the deep - lie though not obtrusive difference in their notion and taste . perhaps it be all the strong ; act as the same sort of difference do between a man and a woman in give a piquancy to the attachment which subsist in spite of it . Sir Hugo do not think unapprovingly of himself ; but he look at man and society from a liberal - menagerie point of view , and he have a certain pride in Deronda 's differing from he , which , if it have find voice , might have say " you see this fine young fellow not such as you see every day , be he ? he belong to I in a sort of way . I bring he up from a child ; but you would not ticket he off easily , he have notion of his own , and he be as far as the pole asunder from what I be at his age . " this state of feeling be keep up by the mental balance in Deronda , who be move by an affectionateness such as we be apt to call feminine , dispose he to yield in ordinary detail , while he have a certain inflexibility of judgment , and independence of opinion , hold to be rightfully masculine . 

 when he have read the letter , he return it without speak , inwardly wince under Lush 's mode of attribute a neutral usefulness to he in the family affair . 

 " what do you say , Dan ? it would be pleasant enough for you . you have not see the place for a good many year now , and you might have a famous run with the harrier if you go down next week , " say Sir Hugo . 

 " I should not go on that account , " say Deronda , butter his bread attentively . he have an objection to this transparent kind of persuasiveness , which all intelligent animal be see to treat with indifference . if he go to Diplow he should be do something disagreeable to oblige Sir Hugo . 

 " I think Lush 's notion be a good one . and it would be a pity to lose the occasion . " 

 " that be a different matter if you think my going of importance to your object , " say Deronda , still with that aloofness of manner which imply some suppression . he know that the baronet have set his heart on the affair . 

 " why , you will see the fair gambler , the Leubronn Diana , I should not   wonder , " say Sir Hugo , gaily . " we shall have to invite she to the Abbey , when they be marry , " he add , turn to Lady Mallinger , as if she too have read the letter . 

 " I can not conceive whom you mean , " say Lady Mallinger , who in fact have not be listen , her mind have be take up with her first sip of coffee , the objectionable cuff of her sleeve , and the necessity of carry Theresa to the dentist innocent and partly laudable preoccupation , as the gentle lady 's usually be . should her appearance be inquire after , let it be say that she have reddish blonde hair   the hair of the period , a small roman nose , rather prominent blue eye and delicate eyelid , with a figure which her thin friend call fat , her hand show curve and dimple like a magnify baby 's . 

 " I mean that Grandcourt be go to marry the girl you see at Leubronn do not   you remember she the Miss Harleth who use to play at roulette . " 

 " dear I ! be that a good match for he ? " 

 " that depend on the sort of goodness he want , " say Sir Hugo , smile . " however , she and her friend have nothing , and she will bring he expense . it be a good match for my purpose , because if I be willing to fork out a sum of money , he may be willing to give up his chance of Diplow , so that we shall have it out and out , and when I die you will have the consolation of go to the place you would like to go to wherever I may go . " 

 " I wish you would not talk of die in that light way , dear . " 

 " it be rather a heavy way , Lou , for I shall have to pay a heavy sum forty thousand , at least . " 

 " but why be we to invite they to the Abbey ? " say Lady Mallinger . " I do not like woman who gamble , like Lady Cragstone . " 

 " oh , you will not mind she for a week . besides , she be not like Lady Cragstone because she gamble a little , any more than I be like a broker because I be a Whig . I want to keep Grandcourt in good humor , and to let he see plenty of this place , that he may think the less of Diplow . I do not   know yet whether I shall get he to meet I in this matter . and if Dan be to go over on a visit there , he might hold out the bait to he . it would be do I a great service . " this be mean for Deronda . 

 " Daniel be not fond of Mr. Grandcourt , I think , be he ? " say Lady 
 Mallinger , look at Deronda inquiringly . 
 " there be no avoid everybody one do not   happen to be fond of , " say Deronda . " I will go to Diplow I do not   know that I have anything well to do since Sir Hugo wish it . " 

 " that be a trump ! " say Sir Hugo , well please . " and if you do not   find it very pleasant , it be so much experience . nothing use to come amiss to I when I be young . you must see man and manner . " 

 " yes ; but I have see that man , and something of his manner too , " say 
 Deronda . 
 " not nice manner , I think , " say Lady Mallinger . 

 " well , you see they succeed with your sex , " say Sir Hugo , provokingly . " and he be an uncommonly good - look fellow when he be two or three and twenty like his father . he do not   take after his father in marry the heiress , though . if he have get Miss Arrowpoint and my land too , confound he , he would have have a fine principality . " 

 Deronda , in anticipate the project visit , feel less disinclination than when consent to it . the story of that girl 's marriage do interest he : what he have hear through Lush of she have run away from the suit of the man she be now go to take as a husband , have throw a new sort of light on her gambling ; and it be probably the transition from that fevere worldliness into poverty which have urge her acceptance where she must in some way have feel repulsion . all this imply a nature liable to difficulty and struggle element of life which have a predominant attraction for his sympathy , due perhaps to his early pain in dwelling on the conjecture story of his own existence . person attract he , as Hans Meyrick have do , in proportion to the possibility of his defend they , rescue they , tell upon their life with some sort of redeem influence ; and he have to resist an inclination , easily account for , to withdraw coldly from the fortunate . but in the movement which have lead he to repurchase Gwendolen 's necklace for she , and which be at work in he still , there be something beyond his habitual compassionate fervor something due to the fascination of her womanhood . he be very open to that sort of charm , and mingle it with the consciously utopian picture of his own future ; yet any one able to trace the fold of his character might have conceive that he would be more likely than many less passionate man to love a woman without tell she of it . sprinkle food before a delicate - eared bird : there be nothing he would more willingly take , yet he keep aloof , because of his sensibility to check which to you be imperceptible . and one man differ from another , as we all differ from the Bosjesman , in a sensibility to check , that come from variety of need , spiritual or other . it seem to foreshadow that capability of reticence in Deronda that his imagination be much occupy with two woman , to neither of whom would he have hold it possible that he should ever make love . Hans Meyrick have laugh at he for have something of the knight - errant in his disposition ; and he would have find his proof if he have know what be just now go on in Deronda 's mind about Mirah and Gwendolen . 

 Deronda write without delay to announce his visit to diplow , and receive in reply a polite assurance that his come would give great pleasure . that be not altogether untrue . Grandcourt think it probable that the visit be prompt by Sir Hugo 's desire to court he for a purpose which he do not make up his mind to resist ; and it be not a disagreeable idea to he that this fine fellow , whom he believe to be his cousin under the rose , would witness , perhaps with some jealousy , Henleigh Mallinger Grandcourt play the command part of betrothed lover to a splendid girl whom the cousin have already look at with admiration . 

 Grandcourt himself be not jealous of anything unless it threaten his mastery which he do not think himself likely to lose . 

 CHAPTER XXIX . 

  " surely whoever speak to I in the right voice , 
  he or she I shall follow . 
  as the water follow the moon , silently , 
  with fluid step anywhere around the globe . " 
  WALT WHITMAN . 
 " now my cousin be at diplow , " say Grandcourt , " will you go there ? to - morrow ? the carriage shall come for Mrs. Davilow . you can tell I what you would like do in the room . thing must be put in decent order while we be away at ryeland . and to - morrow be the only day . " 

 he be sit sideways on a sofa in the drawing - room at Offendene , one hand and elbow rest on the back , and the other hand thrust between his crossed knee in the attitude of a man who be much interested in watch the person next to he . Gwendolen , who have always dislike needlework , have take to it with apparent zeal since her engagement , and now hold a piece of white embroidery which , on examination , would have show many false stitch . during the last eight or nine day their hour have be chiefly spend on horseback , but some margin have always be leave for this more difficult sort of companionship , which , however , Gwendolen have not find disagreeable . she be very well satisfied with Grandcourt . his answer to her lively question about what he have see and do in his life , bore drawling very well . from the first she have notice that he know what to say ; and she be constantly feel not only that he have nothing of the fool in his composition , but that by some subtle mean he communicate to she the impression that all the folly lie with other people , who do what he do not care to do . a man who seem to have be able to command the good , have a sovereign power of depreciation . then Grandcourt 's behavior as a lover have hardly at all pass the limit of an amorous homage which be inobtrusive as a wafted odor of rose , and spend all its effect in a gratified vanity . one day , indeed , he have kiss not her cheek but her neck a little below her ear ; and Gwendolen , take by surprise , have start up with a marked agitation which make he rise too and say , " I beg your pardon do I annoy you ? " " oh , it be nothing , " say Gwendolen , rather afraid of herself , " only I can not bear to be kiss under my ear . " she sit down again with a little playful laugh , but all the while she feel her heart beat with a vague fear : she be no long at liberty to flout he as she have flout poor Rex . her agitation seem not uncomplimentary , and he have be content not to transgress again . 

 to - day a slight rain hinder riding ; but to compensate , a package have come from London , and Mrs. Davilow have just leave the room after bring in for admiration the beautiful thing   of Grandcourt 's ordering   which lie scatter about on the table . Gwendolen be just then enjoy the scenery of her life . she let her hand fall on her lap , and say with a pretty air of perversity 

 " why be to - morrow the only day ? " 

 " because the next day be the first with the hound , " say Grandcourt . 

 " and after that ? " 

 " after that I must go away for a couple of day it be a bore but I shall go one day and come back the next . " Grandcourt notice a change in her face , and release his hand from under his knee , he lay it on her , and say , " you object to my go away ? " 

 " it be no use object , " say Gwendolen , coldly . she be resist to the utmost her temptation to tell he that she suspect to whom he be go the temptation to make a clean breast , speak without restraint . 

 " yes it be , " say Grandcourt , enfold her hand . " I will put off go . and I will travel at night , so as only to be away one day . " he think that he know the reason of what he inwardly call this bit of temper , and she be particularly fascinating to he at this moment . 

 " then do not   put off go , but travel at night , " say Gwendolen , feel that she could command he , and find in this peremptoriness a small outlet for her irritation . 

 " then you will go to diplow to - morrow ? " 

 " oh , yes , if you wish it , " say Gwendolen , in a high tone of careless assent . her concentration in other feeling have really hinder she from take notice that her hand be be hold . 

 " how you treat we poor devil of man ! " say Grandcourt , lower his tone . " we be always get the bad of it . " 

 " be you ? " say Gwendolen , in a tone of inquiry , look at he more naively than usual . she long to believe this commonplace badinage as the serious truth about her lover : in that case , she too be justify . if she know everything , Mrs. Glasher would appear more blamable than Grandcourt . " be you always get the bad ? " 

 " yes . be you as kind to I as I be to you ? " say Grandcourt , look into her eye with his narrow gaze . 

 Gwendolen feel herself stricken . she be conscious of have receive so much , that her sense of command be check , and sink away in the perception that , look around she as she might , she could not turn back : it be as if she have consent to mount a chariot where another hold the rein ; and it be not in her nature to leap out in the eye of the world . she have not consent in ignorance , and all she could say now would be a confession that she have not be ignorant . her right to explanation be go . all she have to do now be to adjust herself , so that the spike of that unwilling penance which conscience impose should not gall she . with a sort of mental shiver , she resolutely change her mental attitude . there have be a little pause , during which she have not turn away her eye ; and with a sudden break into a smile , she say 

 " if I be as kind to you as you be to I , that would spoil your generosity : it would no long be as great as it could be and it be that now . " 

 " then I be not to ask for one kiss , " say Grandcourt , content to pay a large price for this new kind of love - making , which introduce marriage by the fine contrast . 

 " not one ? " say Gwendolen , get saucy , and nod at he defiantly . 

 he lift she little left hand to his lip , and then release it respectfully . clearly it be faint praise to say of he that he be not disgusting : he be almost charming ; and she feel at this moment that it be not likely she could ever have love another man well than this one . his reticence give she some inexplicable , delightful consciousness . 

 " Apropos , " she say , take up her work again , " be there any one besides Captain and Mrs. Torrington at diplow ? or do you leave they tete - a - tete ? I suppose he converse in cigar , and she answer with her chignon . " 

 " she have a sister with she , " say Grandcourt , with his shadow of a smile , " and there be two man besides one of they you know , I believe . " 

 " ah , then , I have a poor opinion of he , " say Gwendolen , shake her head . 

 " you see he at Leubronn young Deronda a young fellow with the 
 Mallingers . " 
 Gwendolen feel as if her heart be make a sudden gambol , and her finger , which try to keep a firm hold on her work , get cold . 

 " I never speak to he , " she say , dread any discernible change in herself . " be he not disagreeable ? " 

 " no , not particularly , " say Grandcourt , in his most languid way . " he think a little too much of himself . I think he have be introduce to you . " 

 " no . some one tell I his name the evening before I come away . that be all . what be he ? " 

 " a sort of ward of Sir Hugo Mallinger 's . nothing of any consequence . " 

 " oh , poor creature ! how very unpleasant for he ! " say Gwendolen , speak from the lip , and not mean any sarcasm . " I wonder if it have leave off rain ! " she add , rise and go to look out of the window . 

 happily it do not rain the next day , and Gwendolen ride to Diplow on Criterion as she have do on that former day when she return with her mother in the carriage . she always feel the more daring for be in her riding - dress ; besides have the agreeable belief that she look as well as possible in it a sustain consciousness in any meeting which seem formidable . her anger toward Deronda have change into a superstitious dread due , perhaps , to the coercion he have exercise over her thought lest the first interference of his in her life might foreshadow some future influence . it be of such stuff that superstition be commonly make : an intense feeling about ourselves which make the evening star shine at we with a threat , and the blessing of a beggar encourage we . and superstition carry consequence which often verify their hope or their foreboding . 

 the time before luncheon be take up for Gwendolen by go over the room with Mrs. Torrington and Mrs. Davilow ; and she think it likely that if she see Deronda , there would hardly be need for more than a bow between they . she mean to notice he as little as possible . 

 and after all she find herself under an inward compulsion too strong for her pride . from the first moment of their be in the room together , she seem to herself to be do nothing but notice he ; everything else be automatic performance of an habitual part . 

 when he take his place at lunch , Grandcourt have say , " Deronda , Miss 
 Harleth tell I you be not introduce to she at Leubronn ? " 
 " Miss Harleth hardly remember I , I imagine , " say Deronda , look at she quite simply , as they bow . " she be intensely occupy when I see she . " 

 now , do he suppose that she have not suspect he of be the person who redeem her necklace ? 

 " on the contrary . I remember you very well , " say Gwendolen , feel rather nervous , but govern herself and look at he in return with new examination . " you do not approve of my playing at roulette . " 

 " how do you come to that conclusion ? " say Deronda , gravely . 

 " oh , you cast an evil eye on my play , " say Gwendolen , with a turn of her head and a smile . " I begin to lose as soon as you come to look on . I have always be win till then . " 

 " Roulette in such a kennel as Leubronn be a horrid bore , " say 
 Grandcourt . 
 " I find it a bore when I begin to lose , " say Gwendolen . her face be turn toward Grandcourt as she smile and speak , but she give a sidelong glance at Deronda , and see his eye fix on she with a look so gravely penetrate that it have a keener edge for she than his ironical smile at her loss a keener edge than Klesmer 's judgment . she wheel her neck round as if she want to listen to what be be say by the rest , while she be only think of Deronda . his face have that disturbing kind of form and expression which threaten to affect opinion as if one 's standard be somehow wrong .   who have not see man with face of this corrective power till they frustrate it by speech or action ?   his voice , hear now for the first time , be to Grandcourt 's toneless drawl , which have be in her ear every day , as the deep note of a violoncello to the broken discourse of poultry and other lazy gentry in the afternoon sunshine . Grandcourt , she inwardly conjecture , be perhaps right in say that Deronda think too much of himself : a favorite way of explain a superiority that humiliate . however the talk turn on the rinderpest and Jamaica , and no more be say about roulette . Grandcourt hold that the Jamaica negro be a beastly sort of baptist caliban ; Deronda say he have always feel a little with Caliban , who naturally have his own point of view and could sing a good song ; Mrs. Davilow observe that her father have an estate in barbadoe , but that she herself have never be in the West Indies ; Mrs. Torrington be sure she should never sleep in her bed if she live among black ; her husband correct she by say that the black would be manageable enough if it be not for the half - breed ; and Deronda remark that the white have to thank themselves for the half - breed . 

 while this polite pea - shooting be go on , Gwendolen trifle with her jelly , and look at every speaker in turn that she might feel at ease in look at Deronda . 

 " I wonder what he think of I , really ? he must have feel interested in I , else he would not have send I my necklace . I wonder what he think of my marriage ? what notion have he to make he so grave about thing ? why be he come to diplow ? " 

 these question run in her mind as the voice of an uneasy longing to be judge by Deronda with unmixed admiration a longing which have have its seed in her first resentment at his critical glance . why do she care so much about the opinion of this man who be " nothing of any consequence " ? she have no time to find the reason she be too much engage in care . in the drawing - room , when something have call Grandcourt away , she go quite unpremeditatedly up to Deronda , who be stand at a table apart , turn over some print , and say to he 

 " shall you hunt to - morrow , Mr. Deronda ? " 

 " yes , I believe so . " 

 " you do not   object to hunting , then ? " 

 " I find excuse for it . it be a sin I be inclined to when I can not   get boat or cricket . " 

 " do you object to my hunting ? " say Gwendolen , with a saucy movement of the chin . 

 " I have no right to object to anything you choose to do . " 

 " you think you have a right to object to my gambling , " persist 
 Gwendolen . 
 " I be sorry for it . I be not aware that I tell you of my objection , " say Deronda , with his usual directness of gaze a large - eyed gravity , innocent of any intention . his eye have a peculiarity which have draw many man into trouble ; they be of a dark yet mild intensity which seem to express a special interest in every one on whom he fix they , and might easily help to bring on he those claim which ardently sympathetic people be often create in the mind of those who need help . in mendicant fashion we make the goodness of other a reason for exorbitant demand on they . that sort of effect be penetrate Gwendolen . 

 " you hinder I from gamble again , " she answer . but she have no soon speak than she blush over face and neck ; and Deronda blush , too , conscious that in the little affair of the necklace he have take a questionable freedom . 

 it be impossible to speak far ; and she turn away to a window , feel that she have stupidly say what she have not mean to say , and yet be rather happy that she have plunge into this mutual understanding . Deronda also do not like it . Gwendolen seem more decidedly attractive than before ; and certainly there have be change go on within she since that time at Leubronn : the struggle of mind attend a conscious error have waken something like a new soul , which have well , but also bad , possibility than her former poise of crude self - confidence : among the force she have come to dread be something within she that troubled satisfaction . 

 that evening Mrs. Davilow say , " be it really so , or only a joke of your , about Mr. Deronda 's spoil your play , Gwen ? " 

 her curiosity have be excite , and she could venture to ask a question that do not concern Mr. Grandcourt . 

 " oh , it merely happen that he be look on when I begin to lose , " say Gwendolen , carelessly . " I notice he . " 

 " I do not   wonder at that : he be a striking young man . he put I in mind of italian painting . one would guess , without be tell , that there be foreign blood in his vein . " 

 " be there ? " say Gwendolen . 

 " Mrs. Torrington say so . I ask particularly who he be , and she tell I that his mother be some foreigner of high rank . " 

 " his mother ? " say Gwendolen , rather sharply . " then who be his father ? " 

 " well every one say he be the son of Sir Hugo Mallinger , who bring he up ; though he pass for a ward . she say , if Sir Hugo Mallinger could have do as he like with his estate , he would have leave they to this Mr. Deronda , since he have no legitimate son . " 

 Gwendolen be silent ; but her mother observe so mark an effect in her face that she be angry with herself for have repeat Mrs. Torrington 's gossip . it seem , on reflection , unsuited to the ear of her daughter , for whom Mrs. Davilow dislike what be call knowledge of the world ; and indeed she wish that she herself have not have any of it thrust upon she . 

 an image which have immediately arise in Gwendolen 's mind be that of the unknown mother no doubt a dark - eyed woman probably sad . hardly any face could be less like Deronda 's than that represent as Sir Hugo 's in a crayon portrait at diplow . a dark - eyed woman , no long young , have become ' stuff o ' the conscience " to Gwendolen . 

 that night when she have get into her little bed , and only a dim light be burn , she say 

 " Mamma , have man generally child before they be marry ? " 

 " no , dear , no , " say Mrs. Davilow . " why do you ask such a question ? " 
  but she begin to think that she see the why . 
 " if it be so , I ought to know , " say Gwendolen , with some indignation . 

 " you be think of what I say about Mr. Deronda and Sir Hugo 
 Mallinger . that be a very unusual case , dear . " 
 " do Lady Mallinger know ? " 

 " she know enough to satisfy she . that be quite clear , because Mr. 
 Deronda have live with they . " 
 " and people think no bad of he ? " 

 " well , of course he be under some disadvantage : it be not as if he be Lady Mallinger 's son . he do not inherit the property , and he be not of any consequence in the world . but people be not oblige to know anything about his birth ; you see , he be very well receive . " 

 " I wonder whether he know about it ; and whether he be angry with his father ? " 

 " my dear child , why should you think of that ? " 

 " why ? " say Gwendolen , impetuously , sit up in her bed . " have not   child reason to be angry with their parent ? how can they help their parent marry or not marry ? " 

 but a consciousness rush upon she , which make she fall back again on her pillow . it be not only what she would have feel month before that she might seem to be reproach her mother for that second marriage of her ; what she chiefly feel now be , that she have be lead on to a condemnation which seem to make her own marriage a forbid thing . 

 there be no further talk , and till sleep come over her Gwendolen lie struggle with the reason against that marriage reason which press upon she newly now that they be unexpectedly mirror in the story of a man whose slight relation with she have , by some hide affinity , bite themselves into the most permanent layer of feeling . it be characteristic that , with all her debating , she be never trouble by the question whether the indefensibleness of her marriage do not include the fact that she have accept Grandcourt solely as a man whom it be convenient for she to marry , not in the least as one to whom she would be bind herself in duty . Gwendolen 's idea be pitiably crude ; but many grand difficulty of life be apt to force themselves on we in our crudity . and to judge wisely , I suppose we must know how thing appear to the unwise ; that kind of appearance make the large part of the world 's history . 

 in the morning there be a double excitement for she . she be go to hunt , from which scruple about propriety have threaten to hinder she , until it be find that Mrs. Torrington be horsewoman enough to accompany she go to hunt for the first time since her escapade with Rex ; and she be go again to see Deronda , in whom , since last night , her interest have so gather that she expect , as people do about reveal celebrity , to see something in his appearance which she have miss before . 

 what be he go to be ? what sort of life have he before he he be nothing of any consequence ? and with only a little difference in event he might have be as important as Grandcourt , nay her imagination inevitably go into that direction might have hold the very estate which Grandcourt be to have . but now , Deronda would probably some day see her mistress of the Abbey at topping , see she bear the title which would have be his own wife 's . these obvious , futile thought of what might have be , make a new epoch for Gwendolen . she , whose unquestionable habit it have be to take the good that come to she for less than her own claim , have now to see the position which tempt she in a new light , as a hard , unfair exclusion of other . what she have now hear about Deronda seem to her imagination to throw he into one group with Mrs. Glasher and her child ; before whom she feel herself in an attitude of apology she who have hitherto be surround by a group that in her opinion have need be apologetic to she . perhaps Deronda himself be think of these thing . could he know of Mrs. Glasher ? if he know that she know , he would despise she ; but he could have no such knowledge . would he , without that , despise she for marry Grandcourt ? his possible judgment of her action be tell on she as importunately as Klesmer 's judgment of her power ; but she find large room for resistance to a disapproval of her marriage , because it be easy to make our conduct seem justifiable to ourselves than to make our ability strike other . " how can I help it ? " be not our favorite apology for incompetency . but Gwendolen feel some strength in say 

 " how can I help what other people have do ? thing would not come right if I be to turn round now and declare that I would not marry Mr. Grandcourt . " and such turning round be out of the question . the horse in the chariot she have mount be go at full speed . 

 this mood of youthful , elated desperation have a tidal recurrence . she could dare anything that lie before she soon than she could choose to go backward , into humiliation ; and it be even soothing to think that there would now be as much ill - doing in the one as in the other . but the immediate delightful fact be the hunt , where she would see Deronda , and where he would see she ; for always lurk ready to obtrude before other thought about he be the impression that he be very much interested in she . but to - day she be resolve not to repeat her folly of yesterday , as if she be anxious to say anything to he . indeed , the hunt would be too absorbing . 

 and so it be for a long while . Deronda be there , and within her sight very often ; but this only add to the stimulus of a pleasure which Gwendolen have only once before taste , and which seem likely always to give a delight independent of any cross , except such as take away the chance of rid . no accident happen to throw they together ; the run take they within convenient reach of home , and the agreeable sombreness of the gray November afternoon , with a long stratum of yellow light in the west , Gwendolen be return with the company from Diplow , who be attend she on the way to Offendene . now the sense of glorious excitement be over and go , she be get irritably disappoint that she have have no opportunity of speak to Deronda , whom she would not see again , since he be to go away in a couple of day . what be she go to say ? that be not quite certain . she want to speak to he . Grandcourt be by her side ; Mrs. Torrington , her husband , and another gentleman in advance ; and Deronda 's horse she could hear behind . the wish to speak to he and have he speak to she be become imperious ; and there be no chance of it unless she simply assert her will and defy everything . where the order of thing could give way to Miss Gwendolen , it must be make to do so . they have lately emerge from a wood of pine and beech , where the twilight stillness have a repressing effect , which increase her impatience . the horse - hoof again hear behind at some little distance be a grow irritation . she rein in her horse and look behind she ; Grandcourt after a few pace , also pause ; but she , wave her whip and nodding sideways with playful imperiousness , say , " go on ! I want to speak to Mr. Deronda . " 

 Grandcourt hesitate ; but that he would have do after any proposition . it be an awkward situation for he . no gentleman , before marriage ; could give the emphasis of refusal to a command deliver in this playful way . he ride on slowly , and she wait till Deronda come up . he look at she with tacit inquiry , and she say at once , let her horse go alongside of his 

 " Mr. Deronda , you must enlighten my ignorance . I want to know why you think it wrong for I to gamble . be it because I be a woman ? " 

 " not altogether ; but I regret it the more because you be a woman , " say Deronda , with an irrepressible smile . apparently it must be understand between they now that it be he who send the necklace . " I think it would be well for man not to gamble . it be a besotting kind of taste , likely to turn into a disease . and , besides , there be something revolt to I in rake a heap of money together , and internally chuckle over it , when other be feel the loss of it . I should even call it base , if it be more than an exceptional lapse . there be enough inevitable turn of fortune which force we to see that our gain be another 's loss : that be one of the ugly aspect of life . one would like to reduce it as much as one could , not get amusement out of exaggerate it . " Deronda 's voice have gather some indignation while he be speak . 

 " but you do admit that we can not   help thing , " say Gwendolen , with a drop in her tone . the answer have not be anything like what she have expect . " I mean that thing be so in spite of we ; we can not   always help it that our gain be another 's loss . " 

 " clearly . because of that , we should help it where we can . " 

 Gwendolen , bite her lip inside , pause a moment , and then force herself to speak with an air of playfulness again , say 

 " but why should you regret it more because I be a woman ? " 

 " perhaps because we need that you should be well than we be . " 

 " but suppose we need that man should be well than we be , " say 
 Gwendolen with a little air of " check ! " 
 " that be rather a difficulty , " say Deronda , smile . " I suppose I should have say , we each of we think it would be well for the other to be good . " 

 " you see , I need you to be well than I be and you think so , " say Gwendolen , nodding and laugh , while she put her horse forward and join Grandcourt , who make no observation . 

 " do not   you want to know what I have to say to Mr. Deronda ? " say 
 Gwendolen , whose own pride require she to account for her conduct . 
 " a no , " say Grandcourt , coldly . 

 " now that be the first impolite word you have speak that you do not   wish to hear what I have to say , " say Gwendolen , play at a pout . 

 " I wish to hear what you say to I not to other man , " say Grandcourt . 

 " then you wish to hear this . I want to make he tell I why he object to my gambling , and he give I a little sermon . " 

 " yes but excuse I the sermon . " if Gwendolen imagine that Grandcourt care about she speak to Deronda , he wish she to understand that she be mistaken . but he be not fond of be tell to ride on . she see he be pique , but do not mind . she have accomplish her object of speak again to Deronda before he raise his hat and turn with the rest toward diplow , while her lover attend she to Offendene , where he be to bid farewell before a whole day 's absence on the unspecified journey . Grandcourt have speak truth in call the journey a bore : he be go by train to Gadsmere . 

 CHAPTER XXX . 

  no penitence and no confessional , 
  no priest ordain it , yet they be force to sit 
  amid deep ash of their vanish year . 
 imagine a rambling , patchy house , the good part build of gray stone , and red - tile , a round tower jut at one of the corner , the mellow darkness of its conical roof surmount by a weather - cock make an agreeable object either amidst the gleam and greenth of summer or the low - hang cloud and snowy branch of winter : the ground shady with spread tree : a great tree flourish on one side , backward some Scotch fir on a broken bank where the root hang naked , and beyond , a rookery : on the other side a pool overhang with bush , where the water - fowl flutter and scream : all around , a vast meadow which might be call a park , border by an old plantation and guard by stone ledge which look like little prison . outside the gate the country , once entirely rural and lovely , now black with coal mine , be chiefly people by man and brother with candle stick in their hat , and with a diabolic complexion which lay they peculiarly open to suspicion in the eye of the child at Gadsmere Mrs. Glasher 's four beautiful child , who have dwell there for about three year . now , in November , when the flower - bed be empty , the tree leafless , and the pool blackly shivering , one might have say that the place be sombrely in keep with the black road and black mound which seem to put the district in mourning ; except when the child be play on the gravel with the dog for their companion . but Mrs. Glasher , under her present circumstance , like Gadsmere as well as she would have like any other abode . the complete seclusion of the place , which the unattractiveness of the country secure , be exactly to her taste . when she drive her two pony with a waggonet full of child , there be no gentry in carriage to be meet , only man of business in gig ; at church there be no eye she care to avoid , for the curate 's wife and the curate himself be either ignorant of anything to her disadvantage , or ignore it : to they she be simply a widow lady , the tenant of Gadsmere ; and the name of Grandcourt be of little interest in that district compare with the name of Fletcher and Gawcome , the lessee of the colliery . 

 it be full ten year since the elopement of an irish officer 's beautiful wife with young Grandcourt , and a consequent duel where the bullet wound the air only , have make some little noise . Most of those who remember the affair now wonder what have become of that Mrs. Glasher , whose beauty and brilliancy have make she rather conspicuous to they in foreign place , where she be know to be live with young Grandcourt . 

 that he should have disentangle himself from that connection seem only natural and desirable . as to she , it be think that a woman who be understand to have forsake her child along with her husband have probably sink lower . Grandcourt have of course get weary of she . he be much give to the pursuit of woman : but a man in his position would by this time desire to make a suitable marriage with the fair young daughter of a noble house . no one talk of Mrs. Glasher now , any more than they talk of the victim in a trial for manslaughter ten year before : she be a lost vessel after whom nobody would send out an expedition of search ; but Grandcourt be see in harbor with his color fly , register as seaworthy as ever . 

 yet , in fact , Grandcourt have never disentangle himself from Mrs. Glasher . his passion for she have be the strong and most lasting he have ever know ; and though it be now as dead as the music of a crack flute , it have leave a certain dull disposedness , which , on the death of her husband three year before , have prompt in he a vacillating notion of marry she , in accordance with the understanding often express between they during the day of his first ardor . at that early time Grandcourt would willingly have pay for the freedom to be win by a divorce ; but the husband would not oblige he , not want to be marry again himself , and not wish to have his domestic habit print in evidence . 

 the altered poise which the year have bring in Mrs. Glasher be just the reverse . at first she be comparatively careless about the possibility of marriage . it be enough that she have escape from a disagreeable husband and find a sort of bliss with a lover who have completely fascinate her young , handsome , amorous , and live in the good style , with equipage and conversation of the kind to be expect in young man of fortune who have see everything . she be an impassione , vivacious woman , fond of adoration , exasperate by five year of marital rudeness ; and the sense of release be so strong upon she that it still anxiety for more than she actually enjoy . an equivocal position be of no importance to she then ; she have no envy for the honor of a dull , disregarded wife : the one spot which spoil her vision of her new pleasant world , be the sense that she leave her three - year - old boy , who die two year afterward , and whose first tone say " mamma " retain a difference from those of the child that come after . but now the year have bring many change besides those in the contour of her cheek and throat ; and that Grandcourt should marry she have become her dominant desire . the equivocal position which she have not mind about for herself be now tell upon she through her child , whom she love with a devotion charge with the add passion of atonement . she have no repentance except in this direction . if Grandcourt marry she , the child would be none the bad off for what have pass : they would see their mother in a dignified position , and they would be at no disadvantage with the world : her son could be make his father 's heir . it be the yearning for this result which give the supreme importance to Grandcourt 's feeling for she ; her love for he have long resolve itself into anxiety that he should give she the unique , permanent claim of a wife , and she expect no other happiness in marriage than the satisfaction of her maternal love and pride include her pride for herself in the presence of her child . for the sake of that result she be prepare even with a tragic firmness to endure anything quietly in marriage ; and she have acuteness enough to cherish Grandcourt 's flickering purpose negatively , by not molest he with passionate appeal and with scene - making . in she , as in every one else who want anything of he , his incalculable turn , and his tendency to harden under beseech , have create a reasonable dread : a slow discovery , of which no presentiment have be give in the bearing of a youthful lover with a fine line of face and the soft manner . but reticence have necessarily cost something to this impassioned woman , and she be the bitterer for it . there be no quailing even that force on the helpless and injure which have not an ugly obverse : the withhold sting be gather venom . she be absolutely dependent on Grandcourt ; for though he have be always liberal in expense for she , he have keep everything voluntary on his part ; and with the goal of marriage before she , she would ask for nothing less . he have say that he would never settle anything except by will ; and when she be think of alternative for the future it often occur to she that , even if she do not become Grandcourt 's wife , he might never have a son who would have a legitimate claim on he , and the end might be that her son would be make heir to the good part of his estate . no son at that early age could promise to have more of his father 's physique . but she become Grandcourt 's wife be so far from be an extravagant notion of possibility , that even Lush have entertain it , and have say that he would as soon bet on it as on any other likelihood with regard to his familiar companion . Lush , indeed , on infer that Grandcourt have a preconception of use his residence at diplow in order to win Miss Arrowpoint , have think it well to fan that project , take it as a tacit renunciation of the marriage with Mrs. Glasher , which have long be a mark for the hovering and wheeling of Grandcourt 's caprice . but both prospect have be negative by Gwendolen 's appearance on the scene ; and it be natural enough for Mrs. Glasher to enter with eagerness into Lush 's plan of hinder that new danger by set up a barrier in the mind of the girl who be be seek as a bride . she enter into it with an eagerness which have passion in it as well as purpose , some of the store - up venom deliver itself in that way . 

 after that , she have hear from Lush of Gwendolen 's departure , and the probability that all danger from she be get rid of ; but there have be no letter to tell she that the danger have return and have become a certainty . she have since then write to Grandcourt , as she do habitually , and he have be long than usual in answer . she be infer that he might intend come to Gadsmere at the time when he be actually on the way ; and she be not without hope what construction of another 's mind be not strong wish equal to ? that a certain sickening from that frustrated courtship might dispose he to slip the more easily into the old track of intention . 

 Grandcourt have two grave purpose in come to Gadsmere : to convey the news of his approach marriage in person , in order to make this first difficulty final ; and to get from Lydia his mother 's diamond , which long ago he have confide to she and wish she to wear . her person suit diamond , and make they look as if they be worth some of the money give for they . these particular diamond be not mountain of light they be mere pea and haricot for the ear , neck and hair ; but they be worth some thousand , and Grandcourt necessarily wish to have they for his wife . formerly when he have ask Lydia to put they into his keeping again , simply on the ground that they would be safe and ought to be deposit at the bank , she have quietly but absolutely refuse , declare that they be quite safe ; and at last have say , " if you ever marry another woman I will give they up to she : be you go to marry another woman ? " at that time Grandcourt have no motive which urge he to persist , and he have this grace in he , that the disposition to exercise power either by cowing or disappointing other or exciting in they a rage which they dare not express a disposition which be active in he as other propensity become languid have always be in abeyance before Lydia . a severe interpreter might say that the mere fact of their relation to each other , the melancholy position of this woman who depend on his will , make a standing banquet for his delight in dominating . but there be something else than this in his forbearance toward she : there be the surviving though metamorphose effect of the power she have have over he ; and it be this effect , the fitful dull lapse toward solicitation that once have the z now miss from life , which have again and again incline he to espouse a familiar past rather than rouse himself to the expectation of novelty . but now novelty have take hold of he and urge he to make the most of it . 

 Mrs. Glasher be seat in the pleasant room where she habitually pass her morning with her child round she . it have a square project window and look on broad gravel and grass , slop toward a little brook that enter the pool . the top of a low , black cabinet , the old oak table , the chair in tawny leather , be litter with the child 's toy , book and garden garment , at which a maternal lady in pastel look down from the wall with smile indulgence . the child be all there . the three girl , seat round their mother near the widow , be miniature portrait of her dark - eye , delicate - feature brunette with a rich bloom on their cheek , their little nostril and eyebrow singularly finish as if they be tiny woman , the eld be barely nine . the boy be seat on the carpet at some distance , bend his blonde head over the animal from a Noah 's ark , admonish they separately in a voice of threaten command , and occasionally lick the spot one to see if the color would hold . Josephine , the eld , be have her french lesson ; and the other , with their doll on their lap , sit demurely enough for image of the Madonna . Mrs. Glasher 's toilet have be make very carefully each day now she say to herself that Grandcourt might come in . her head , which , spite of emaciation , have an ineffaceable beauty in the fine profile , crisp curve of hair , and clearly - mark eyebrow , rise impressively above her bronze - color silk and velvet , and the gold necklace which Grandcourt have first clasp round her neck year ago . not that she have any pleasure in her toilet ; her chief thought of herself see in the glass be , " how change ! " but such good in life as remain to she she would keep . if her chief wish be fulfil , she could imagine herself get the comeliness of a matron fit for the high rank . the little face beside she , almost exact reduction of her own , seem to tell of the bloom curve which have once be where now be sink pallor . but the child kiss the pale cheek and never find they deficient . that love be now the one end of her life . 

 suddenly Mrs. Glasher turn away her head from Josephine 's book and listen . " hush , dear ! I think some one be come . " 

 Henleigh the boy jump up and say , " Mamma , be it the miller with my donkey ? " 

 he get no answer , and go up to his mamma 's knee repeat his question in an insistent tone . but the door open , and the servant announce Mr. Grandcourt . Mrs. Glasher rise in some agitation . henleigh frown at he in disgust at his not be the miller , and the three little girl lift up their dark eye to he timidly . they have none of they any particular liking for this friend of mamma 's in fact , when he have take Mrs. Glasher 's hand and then turn to put his other hand on Henleigh 's head , that energetic scion begin to beat the friend 's arm away with his fist . the little girl submit bashfully to be pat under the chin and kiss , but on the whole it seem well to send they into the garden , where they be presently dance and chat with the dog on the gravel . 

 " how far be you come ? " say Mrs. Glasher , as Grandcourt put away his hat and overcoat . 

 " from Diplow , " he answer slowly , seat himself opposite she and look at she with an unnoting gaze which she note . 

 " you be tired , then . " 

 " no , I rest at the Junction a hideous hole . these railway journey be always a confounded bore . but I have coffee and smoke . " 

 Grandcourt draw out his handkerchief , rub his face , and in return the handkerchief to his pocket look at his crossed knee and blameless boot , as if any stranger be opposite to he , instead of a woman quiver with a suspense which every word and look of his be to incline toward hope or dread . but he be really occupy with their interview and what it be likely to include . imagine the difference in rate of emotion between this woman whom the year have wear to a more conscious dependence and sharp eagerness , and this man whom they be dull into a more neutral obstinacy . 

 " I expect to see you it be so long since I have hear from you . I suppose the week seem long at Gadsmere than they do at diplow , " say Mrs. Glasher . she have a quick , incisive way of speak that seem to go with her feature , as the tone and timbre of a violin go with its form . 

 " yes , " drawl Grandcourt . " but you find the money pay into the bank . " 

 " oh , yes , " say Mrs. Glasher , curtly , tingle with impatience . always before at least she fancy so Grandcourt have take more notice of she and the child than he do to - day . 

 " yes , " he resume , play with his whisker , and at first not look at she , " the time have go on at rather a rattle pace with I ; generally it be slow enough . but there have be a good deal happen , as you know " here he turn his eye upon she . 

 " what do I know ? " say she , sharply . 

 he leave a pause before he say , without change of manner , " that I be think of marry . you see Miss Harleth ? " 

 " she tell you that ? " 

 the pale cheek look even pale , perhaps from the fierce brightness in the eye above they . 

 " no . Lush tell I , " be the slow answer . it be as if the thumb - screw and the iron boot be be place by creep hand within sight of the expectant victim . 

 " Good God ! say at once that you be go to marry she , " she burst out , passionately , her knee shake and her hand tightly clasp . 

 " of course , this kind of thing must happen some time or other , Lydia , " say he ; really , now the thumb - screw be on , not wish to make the pain bad . 

 " you do not   always see the necessity . " 

 " perhaps not . I see it now . " 

 in those few under - tone word of Grandcourt 's she feel as absolute a resistance as if her thin finger have be push at a fast shut iron door . she know her helplessness , and shrink from test it by any appeal shrank from cry in a dead ear and cling to dead knee , only to see the immovable face and feel the rigid limb . she do not weep nor speak ; she be too hard press by the sudden certainty which have as much of chill sickness in it as of thought and emotion . the defeated clutch of struggle hope give she in these first moment a horrible sensation . at last she rise , with a spasmodic effort , and , unconscious of every thing but her wretchedness , press her forehead against the hard , cold glass of the window . the child , play on the gravel , take this as a sign that she want they , and , run forward , stand in front of she with their sweet face upturned expectantly . this rouse she : she shake her head at they , wave they off , and overcome with this painful exertion , sink back in the near chair . 

 Grandcourt have rise too . he be doubly annoyed at the scene itself , and at the sense that no imperiousness of his could save he from it ; but the task have to be go through , and there be the administrative necessity of arrange thing so that there should be as little annoyance as possible in the future . he be lean against the corner of the fire - place . she look up at he and say , bitterly 

 " all this be of no consequence to you . I and the child be importunate creature . you wish to get away again and be with Miss Harleth . " 

 " do not   make the affair more disagreeable than it need be . Lydia . it be of no use to harp on thing that can not   be alter . of course , its deucedly disagreeable to I to see you make yourself miserable . I have   take this journey to tell you what you must make up your mind to you and the child will be provide for as usual and there be an end of it . " 

 Silence . she dare not answer . this woman with the intense , eager look have have the iron of the mother 's anguish in her soul , and it have make she sometimes capable of a repression hard than shriek and struggle . but underneath the silence there be an outlash of hatred and vindictiveness : she wish that the marriage might make two other wretche , besides herself . presently he go on 

 " it will be well for you . you may go on live here . but I think of by - and - by settle a good sum on you and the child , and you can live where you like . there will be nothing for you to complain of then . whatever happen , you will feel secure . nothing could be do beforehand . every thing have go on in a hurry . " 

 Grandcourt cease his slow delivery of sentence . he do not expect she to thank he , but he consider that she might reasonably be content ; if it be possible for Lydia to be content . she show no change , and after a minute he say 

 " you have never have any reason to fear that I should be illiberal . I do not   care a curse about the money . " 

 " if you do care about it , I suppose you would not give it we , " say 
 Lydia . the sarcasm be irrepressible . 
 " that be a devilishly unfair thing to say , " Grandcourt reply , in a low tone ; " and I advise you not to say that sort of thing again . " 

 " should you punish I by leave the child in beggary ? " in spite of herself , the one outlet of venom have bring the other . 

 " there be no question about leave the child in beggary , " say Grandcourt , still in his low voice . " I advise you not to say thing that you will repent of . " 

 " I be use to repent , " say she , bitterly . " perhaps you will repent . 
 you have already repent of love I . " 
 " all this will only make it uncommonly difficult for we to meet again . 
 what friend have you besides I ? " 
 " quite true . " 

 the word come like a low moan . at the same moment there flash through her the wish that after promise himself a well happiness than that he have have with she , he might feel a misery and loneliness which would drive he back to she to find some memory of a time when he be young , glad , and hopeful . but no ! he would go scathless ; it be she that have to suffer . 

 with this the scorch word be end . Grandcourt have mean to stay till evening ; he wish to curtail his visit , but there be no suitable train early than the one he have arrange to go by , and he have still to speak to Lydia on the second object of his visit , which like a second surgical operation seem to require an interval . the hour have to go by ; there be eat to be do ; the child come in all this mechanism of life have to be go through with the dreary sense of constraint which be often feel in domestic quarrel of a commoner kind . to Lydia it be some slight relief for her stifle fury to have the child present : she feel a savage glory in their loveliness , as if it would taunt Grandcourt with his indifference to she and they a secret darting of venom which be strongly imaginative . he acquit himself with all the advantage of a man whose grace of bearing have long be mould on an experience of boredom nurse the little Antonia , who sit with her hand cross and eye upturned to his bald head , which strike she as worthy of observation and propitiate Henleigh by promise he a beautiful saddle and bridle . it be only the two eld girl who have know he as a continual presence ; and the intervene year have overlay their infantine memory with a bashfulness which Grandcourt 's bearing be not likely to dissipate . he and Lydia occasionally , in the presence of the servant , make a conventional remark ; otherwise they never speak ; and the stagnant thought in Grandcourt 's mind all the while be of his own infatuation in have give she those diamond , which oblige he to incur the nuisance of speak about they . he have an ingrain care for what he hold to belong to his caste , and about property he like to be lordly ; also he have a consciousness of indignity to himself in have to ask for anything in the world . but however he might assert his independence of Mrs. Glasher 's past , he have make a past for himself which be a strong yoke than any he could impose . he must ask for the diamond which he have promise to Gwendolen . 

 at last they be alone again , with the candle above they , face to face with each other . Grandcourt look at his watch , and then say , in an apparently indifferent drawl , " there be one thing I have to mention , Lydia . my diamond you have they . " 

 " yes , I have they , " she answer promptly , rise and stand with her arm thrust down and her finger thread , while Grandcourt sit still . she have expect the topic , and make her resolve about it . but she mean to carry out her resolve , if possible , without exasperate he . during the hour of silence she have long to recall the word which have only widen the breach between they . 

 " they be in this house , I suppose ? " 

 " no ; not in this house . " 

 " I think you say you keep they by you . " 

 " when I say so it be true . they be in the bank at Dudley . " 

 " get they away , will you ? I must make an arrangement for your deliver they to some one . " 

 " make no arrangement . they shall be deliver to the person you intend they for . I will make the arrangement . " 

 " what do you mean ? " 

 " what I say . I have always tell you that I would give they up to your wife . I shall keep my word . she be not your wife yet . " 

 " this be foolery , " say Grandcourt , with undertoned disgust . it be too irritate that this indulgence of Lydia have give she a sort of mastery over he in spite of dependent condition . 

 she do not speak . he also rise now , but stand lean against the mantle - piece with his side - face toward she . 

 " the diamond must be deliver to I before my marriage , " he begin again . 

 " what be your wedding - day ? " 

 " the tenth . there be no time to be lose . " 

 " and where do you go after the marriage ? " 

 he do not reply except by look more sullen . presently he say , " you must appoint a day before then , to get they from the bank and meet I or somebody else I will commission ; it be a great nuisance , Mention a day . " 

 " no ; I shall not do that . they shall be deliver to she safely . I shall keep my word . " 

 " do you mean to say , " say Grandcourt , just audibly , turn to face she , " that you will not do as I tell you ? " 

 " yes , I mean that , " be the answer that leap out , while her eye flash close to he . the poor creature be immediately conscious that if her word have any effect on her own lot , the effect must be mischievous , and might nullify all the remain advantage of her long patience . but the word have be speak . 

 he be in a position the most irritate to he . he could not shake she nor touch she hostilely ; and if he could , the process would not bring his mother 's diamond . he shrink from the only sort of threat that would frighten she if she believe it . and in general , there be nothing he hat more than to be force into anything like violence even in word : his will must impose itself without trouble . after look at she for a moment , he turn his side - face toward she again , lean as before , and say 

 " infernal idiot that woman be ! " 

 " why will you not tell I where you be go after the marriage ? I could be at the wedding if I like , and learn in that way , " say Lydia , not shrink from the one suicidal form of threat within her power . 

 " of course , if you like , you can play the mad woman , " say Grandcourt , with sotto voce scorn . " it be not to be suppose that you will wait to think what good will come of it or what you owe to I . " 

 he be in a state of disgust and embitterment quite new in the history of their relation to each other . it be undeniable that this woman , whose life he have allow to send such deep sucker into his , have a terrible power of annoyance in she ; and the rash hurry of his proceeding have leave her opportunity open . his pride see very ugly possibility threaten it , and he stand for several minute in silence review the situation consider how he could act upon she . unlike himself she be of a direct nature , with certain simple strongly - color tendency , and there be one often - experience effect which he think he could count upon now . as Sir Hugo have say of he , Grandcourt know how to play his card upon occasion . 

 he do not speak again , but look at his watch , rang the bell , and order the vehicle to be bring round immediately . then he remove far from she , walk as if in expectation of a summon , and remain silent without turn his eye upon she . 

 she be suffer the horrible conflict of self - reproach and tenacity . she see beforehand Grandcourt leave she without even look at she again herself leave behind in lonely uncertainty hear nothing from he not know whether she have do her child harm feeling that she have perhaps make he hate she ; all the wretchedness of a creature who have defeat her own motif . and yet she could not bear to give up a purpose which be a sweet morsel to her vindictiveness . if she have not be a mother she would willingly have sacrifice herself to her revenge to what she feel to be the justice of hinder another from get happiness by willingly give she over to misery . the two dominant passion be at struggle . she must satisfy they both . 

 " do not   let we part in anger , Henleigh , " she begin , without change her voice or attitude : " it be a very little thing I ask . if I be refuse to give anything up that you call yours it would be different : that would be a reason for treat I as if you hat I . but I ask such a little thing . if you will tell I where you be go on the wedding - day I will take care that the diamond shall be deliver to she without scandal . without scandal , " she repeat entreatingly . 

 " such preposterous whim make a woman odious , " say Grandcourt , not give way in look or movement . " what be the use of talk to mad people ? " 

 " yes , I be foolish loneliness have make I foolish indulge I . " Sobs rise as she speak . " if you will indulge I in this one folly I will be very meek I will never trouble you . " she burst into hysterical crying , and say again almost with a scream " I will be very meek after that . " 

 there be a strange mixture of acting and reality in this passion . she keep hold of her purpose as a child might tighten its hand over a small steal thing , cry and deny all the while . even Grandcourt be work upon by surprise : this capricious wish , this childish violence , be as unlike Lydia 's bearing as it be incongruous with her person . both have always have a stamp of dignity on they . yet she seem more manageable in this state than in her former attitude of defiance . he come close up to she again , and say , in his low imperious tone , " be quiet , and hear what I tell you , I will never forgive you if you present yourself again and make a scene . " 

 she press her handkerchief against her face , and when she could speak firmly say , in the muffled voice that follow sob , " I will not if you will let I have my way I promise you not to thrust myself forward again . I have never break my word to you how many have you break to I ? when you give I the diamond to wear you be not think of have another wife . and I now give they up I do not   reproach you I only ask you to let I give they up in my own way . have I not borne it well ? everything be to be take away from I , and when I ask for a straw , a chip you deny it I . " she have speak rapidly , but after a little pause she say more slowly , her voice free from its muffled tone : " I will not bear to have it deny I . " 

 Grandcourt have a baffling sense that he have to deal with something like madness ; he could only govern by give way . the servant come to say the fly be ready . when the door be shut again Grandcourt say sullenly , " we be go to ryeland then . " 

 " they shall be deliver to she there , " say Lydia , with decision . 

 " very well , I be go . " he feel no inclination even to take her hand : she have annoy he too sorely . but now that she have gain her point , she be prepared to humble herself that she might propitiate he . 

 " forgive I ; I will never vex you again , " she say , with beseech look . her inward voice say distinctly " it be only I who have to forgive . " yet she be oblige to ask forgiveness . 

 " you have well keep that promise . you have make I feel uncommonly ill with your folly , " say Grandcourt , apparently choose this statement as the strong possible use of language . 

 " poor thing ! " cry Lydia , with a faint smile ; be he aware of the minor fact that he make she feel ill this morning ? 

 but with the quick transition natural to she , she be now ready to coax he if he would let she , that they might part in some degree reconcile . she venture to lay her hand on his shoulder , and he do not move away from she : she have so far succeed in alarm he , that he be not sorry for these proof of return subjection . 

 " light a cigar , " she say , soothingly , take the case from his breast - pocket and open it . 

 amidst such caressing sign of mutual fear they part . the effect that clung and gnaw within Grandcourt be a sense of imperfect mastery . 

 CHAPTER XXXI . 

  " a wild dedication of yourself 
  to unpath'd water , undreame shore . " 
  SHAKESPEARE . 
 on the day when Gwendolen Harleth be married and become Mrs. Grandcourt , the morning be clear and bright , and while the sun be low a slight frost crisp the leaf . the bridal party be worth see , and half Pennicote turn out to see it , line the pathway up to the church . an old friend of the rector 's perform the marriage ceremony , the rector himself act as father , to the great advantage of the procession . only two face , it be remark , show sign of sadness Mrs. Davilow 's and Anna 's . the mother 's delicate eyelid be pink , as if she have be cry half the night ; and no one be surprised that , splendid as the match be , she should feel the parting from a daughter who be the flower of her child and of her own life . it be less understand why Anna should be trouble when she be be so well set off by the bridesmaid 's dress . every one else seem to reflect the brilliancy of the occasion the bride most of all . of she it be agree that as to figure and carriage she be worthy to be a " lady o ' title " : as to face , perhaps it might be think that a title require something more rosy ; but the bridegroom himself not be fresh - colored being indeed , as the miller 's wife observe , very much of her own husband 's complexion the match be the more complete . anyhow he must be very fond of she ; and it be to be hop that he would never cast it up to she that she have be go out to service as a governess , and her mother to live at Sawyer 's cottage vicissitude which have be much speak of in the village . the miller 's daughter of fourteen could not believe that high gentry behave badly to their wife , but her mother instruct she " oh , child , man 's man : gentle or simple , they be much of a muchness . I have   hear my mother say Squire Pelton use to take his dog and a long whip into his wife 's room , and flog them there to frighten she ; and my mother be lady's - maid there at the very time . " 

 " that be unlucky talk for a wedding , Mrs. Girdle , " say the tailor . " a quarrel may end wi ' the whip , but it begin wi ' the tongue , and it be the woman have get the most o ' that . " 

 " the Lord give it them to use , I suppose , " say Mrs. Girdle . " he never mean you to have it all your own way . " 

 " by what I can make out from the gentleman as attend to the grooming at Offendene , " say the tailor , " this Mr. Grandcourt have wonderful little tongue . everything must be do dummy - like without his ordering . " 

 " then he be the more whip , I doubt , " say Mrs. Girdle . " she be get tongue enough , I warrant she . see , there they come out together ! " 

 " what wonderful long corner she be get to her eye ! " say the tailor . 
 " she make you feel comical when she look at you . " 
 Gwendolen , in fact , never show more elasticity in her bearing , more lustre in her long brown glance : she have the brilliancy of strong excitement , which will sometimes come even from pain . it be not pain , however , that she be feel : she have work herself up to much the same condition as that in which she stand at the gambling - table when Deronda be look at she , and she begin to lose . there be an enjoyment in it : whatever uneasiness a grow conscience have create be disregard as an ailment might have be , amidst the gratification of that ambitious vanity and desire for luxury within she which it would take a great deal of slow poisoning to kill . this morning she could not have say truly that she repent her acceptance of Grandcourt , or that any fear in hazy perspective could hinder the glow effect of the immediate scene in which she be the central object . that she be do something wrong that a punishment might be hang over she that the woman to whom she have give a promise and break it , be think of she in bitterness and misery with a just reproach that Deronda with his way of look into thing very likely despise she for marry Grandcourt , as he have despise she for gambling above all , that the cord which unite she with this lover and which she have heretofore hold by the hand , be now be fling over her neck , all this yeasty mingling of dimly understand fact with vague but deep impression , and with image half real , half fantastic , have be disturb she during the week of her engagement . be that agitate experience nullify this morning ? no : it be surmount and thrust down with a sort of exult defiance as she feel herself stand at the game of life with many eye upon she , dare everything to win much or if to lose , still with ťclat and a sense of importance . but this morning a lose destiny for herself do not press upon she as a fear : she think that she be enter on a full power of manage circumstance with all the official strength of marriage , which some woman make so poor a use of . that intoxication of youthful egoism out of which she have be shake by trouble , humiliation , and a new sense of culpability , have return upon she under a newly - feed strength of the old fume . she do not in the least present the ideal of the tearful , tremulous bride . Poor Gwendolen , whom some have judge much too forward and instruct in the world 's way ! with her erect head and elastic footstep she be walk among illusion ; and yet , too , there be an under - consciousness of she that she be a little intoxicated . 

 " thank God you bear it so well , my darling ! " say Mrs. Davilow , when she have help Gwendolen to doff her bridal white and put on her travel dress . all the trembling have be do by the poor mother , and her agitation urge Gwendolen doubly to take the morning as if it be a triumph . 

 " why , you might have say that , if I have be go to Mrs. Mompert 's , you dear , sad , incorrigible mamma ! " say Gwendolen just put her hand to her mother 's cheek with laugh tenderness then retreat a little and spread out her arm as if to exhibit herself : " here be I Mrs. Grandcourt ! what else would you have I , but what I be sure to be ? you know you be ready to die with vexation when you think that I would not be Mrs. Grandcourt . " 

 " hush , hush , my child , for heaven 's sake ! " say Mrs. Davilow , almost in a whisper . " how can I help feel it when I be part from you . but I can bear anything gladly if you be happy . " 

 " not gladly , mamma , no ! " say Gwendolen , shake her head , with a bright smile . " willingly you would bear it , but always sorrowfully . sorrow be your sauce ; you can take nothing without it . " then , clasp her mother 's shoulder and rain kiss first on one cheek and then on the other between her word , she say , gaily , " and you shall sorrow over my have everything at my beck -and enjoy everything glorious splendid house and horse and diamond , I shall have diamond and go to court and be Lady certainly and Lady Perhaps and grand here and tantivy there and always love you well than anybody else in the world . " 

 " my sweet child ! but I shall not be jealous if you love your husband well ; and he will expect to be first . " 

 Gwendolen thrust out her lip and chin with a pretty grimace , say , " rather a ridiculous expectation . however , I do not   mean to treat he ill , unless he deserve it . " 

 then the two fall into a cling embrace , and Gwendolen could not hinder a rise sob when she say , " I wish you be go with I , mamma . " 

 but the slight dew on her long eyelash only make she the more charming when she give her hand to Grandcourt to be lead to the carriage . 

 the rector look in on she to give a final " good - bye ; God bless you ; we shall see you again before long , " and then return to Mrs. Davilow , say half cheerfully , half solemnly 

 " let we be thankful , Fanny . she be in a position well suit to she , and beyond what I should have dare to hope for . and few woman can have be choose more entirely for their own sake . you should feel yourself a happy mother . " 

         

 there be a railway journey of some fifty mile before the new husband and wife reach the station near ryeland . the sky have veil itself since the morning , and it be hardly more than twilight when they enter the park - gate , but still Gwendolen , look out of the carriage - window as they drive rapidly along , could see the grand outline and the nearer beauty of the scene the long wind drive border with evergreen back by huge gray stem : then the opening of wide grassy space and undulation stud with dark clump ; till at last come a wide level where the white house could be see , with a hang wood for a back - ground , and the rise and sink balustrade of a terrace in front . 

 Gwendolen have be at her lively during the journey , chat incessantly , ignore any change in their mutual position since yesterday ; and Grandcourt have be rather ecstatically quiescent , while she turn his gentle seizure of her hand into a grasp of his hand by both her , with an increase vivacity as of a kitten that will not sit quiet to be pet . she be really get somewhat febrile in her excitement ; and now in this drive through the park her usual susceptibility to change of light and scenery help to make her heart palpitate newly . be it at the novelty simply , or the almost incredible fulfilment about to be give to her girlish dream of be ' somebody " walk through her own furlong of corridor and under her own ceiling of an out - of - sight loftiness , where her own paint Spring be shed paint flower , and her own fore - shorten zephyr be blow their trumpet over she ; while her own servant , lackey in clothing but man in bulk and shape , be as nought in her presence , and revere the propriety of her insolence to they : be in short the heroine of an admired play without the pain of art ? be it alone the closeness of this fulfilment which make her heart flutter ? or be it some dim forecast , the insistent penetration of suppress experience , mix the expectation of a triumph with the dread of a crisis ? Hers be one of the nature in which exultation inevitably carry an infusion of dread ready to curdle and declare itself . 

 she fall silent in spite of herself as they approach the gate , and when her husband say , " here we be at home ! " and for the first time kiss she on the lip , she hardly know of it : it be no more than the passive acceptance of a greeting in the midst of an absorbing show . be not all her hurry life of the last three month a show , in which her consciousness be a wonder spectator ? after the half - willful excitement of the day , a numbness have come over her personality . 

 but there be a brilliant light in the hall warmth , matting , carpet , full - length portrait , olympian statue , assiduous servant . not many servant , however : only a few from diplow in addition to those constantly in charge of the house ; and Gwendolen 's new maid , who have come with she , be take under guidance by the housekeeper . Gwendolen feel herself be lead by Grandcourt along a subtly - scented corridor , into an ante - room where she see an open doorway send out a rich glow of light and color . 

 " these be our den , " say Grandcourt . " you will like to be quiet here till dinner . we shall dine early . " 

 he press her hand to his lip and move away , more in love than he have ever expect to be . 

 Gwendolen , yield up her hat and mantle , throw herself into a chair by the glow hearth , and see herself repeat in glass panel with all her faint - green satin surrounding . the housekeeper have pass into this boudoir from the adjoining dressing - room and seem disposed to linger , Gwendolen think , in order to look at the new mistress of ryeland , who , however , be impatient for solitude say to she , " will you tell Hudson when she have put out my dress to leave everything ? I shall not want she again , unless I ring . " 

 the housekeeper , come forward , say , " here be a packet , madam , which I be order to give into nobody 's hand but your , when you be alone . the person who bring it say it be a present particularly order by Mr. Grandcourt ; but he be not to know of its arrival till he see you wear it . excuse I , madam ; I feel it right to obey order . " 

 Gwendolen take the packet and let it lie on her lap till she hear the door close . it come into her mind that the packet might contain the diamond which Grandcourt have speak of as be deposit somewhere and to be give to she on her marriage . in this moment of confused feeling and creep luxurious languor she be glad of this diversion glad of such an event as have her own diamond to try on . 

 within all the sealed paper covering be a box , but within the box there be a jewel - case ; and now she feel no doubt that she have the diamond . but on open the case , in the same instant that she see they gleam she see a letter lie above they . she know the handwriting of the address . it be as if an adder have lain on they . her heart give a leap which seem to have spend all her strength ; and as she open the bit of thin paper , it shake with the trembling of her hand . but it be legible as print , and thrust its word upon she . 

 these diamond , which be once give with ardent love to Lydia Glasher , she pass on to you . you have break your word to she , that you might possess what be her . perhaps you think of be happy , as she once be , and of have beautiful child such as her , who will thrust hers aside . God be too just for that . the man you have marry have a withered heart . his good young love be mine : you could not take that from I when you take the rest . it be dead : but I be the grave in which your chance of happiness be bury as well as mine . you have your warning . you have choose to injure I and my child . he have mean to marry I . he would have marry I at last , if you have not break your word . you will have your punishment . I desire it with all my soul . 

 will you give he this letter to set he against I and ruin we more I and my child ? shall you like to stand before your husband with these diamond on you , and these word of mine in his thought and your ? will he think you have any right to complain when he have make you miserable ? you take he with your eye open . the willing wrong you have do I will be your curse . 

 it seem at first as if Gwendolen 's eye be spell - bind in read the horrible word of the letter over and over again as a doom of penance ; but suddenly a new spasm of terror make she lean forward and stretch out the paper toward the fire , lest accusation and proof at once should meet all eye . it fly like a feather from her trembling finger and be catch up in a great draught of flame . in her movement the casket fall on the floor and the diamond roll out . she take no notice , but fall back in her chair again helpless . she could not see the reflection of herself then ; they be like so many woman petrify white ; but come near herself you might have see the tremor in her lip and hand . she sit so for a long while , know little more than that she be feel ill , and that those write word keep repeat themselves to she . 

 truly here be poison gem , and the poison have enter into this poor young creature . 

 after that long while , there be a tap at the door and Grandcourt enter , dress for dinner . the sight of he bring a new nervous shock , and Gwendolen scream again and again with hysterical violence . he have expect to see she dressed and smile , ready to be lead down . he see her pallid , shriek as it seem with terror , the jewel scatter around she on the floor . be it a fit of madness ? 

 in some form or other the fury have cross his threshold . 

 CHAPTER XXXII . 

 in all age it hath be a favorite text that a potent love hath the nature of an isolated fatality , whereto the mind 's opinion and wonte resolve be altogether alien ; as , for example , Daphnis his frenzy , wherein it have little avail he to have be convince of Heraclitus his doctrine ; or the philtre - breed passion of Tristan , who , though he have be as deep as Duns Scotus , would have have his reasoning mar by that cup too much ; or Romeo in his sudden taking for Juliet , wherein any objection he might have hold against Ptolemy have make little difference to his discourse under the balcony . yet all love be not such , even though potent ; nay , this passion hath as large scope as any for ally itself with every operation of the soul : so that it shall acknowledge an effect from the imagine light of unproven firmament , and have its scale set to the grander orbit of what hath be and shall be . 

 Deronda , on his return to town , could assure Sir Hugo of his have lodge in Grandcourt 's mind a distinct understanding that he could get fifty thousand pound by give up a prospect which be probably distant , and not absolutely certain ; but he have no further sign of Grandcourt 's disposition in the matter than that he be evidently inclined to keep up friendly communication . 

 " and what do you think of the future bride on a nearer survey ? " say 
 Sir Hugo . 
 " I think well of she than I do in Leubronn . Roulette be not a good setting for she ; it bring out something of the demon . at Diplow she seem much more womanly and attractive less hard and self - possess . I think her mouth and eye have quite a different expression . " 

 " do not   flirt with she too much , Dan , " say Sir Hugo , mean to be agreeably playful . " if you make Grandcourt savage when they come to the Abbey at Christmas , it will interfere with my affair . " 

 " I can stay in town , sir . " 

 " no , no . Lady Mallinger and the child can not   do without you at Christmas . only do not   make mischief unless you can get up a duel , and manage to shoot Grandcourt , which might be worth a little inconvenience . " 

 " I do not   think you ever see I flirt , " say Deronda , not amuse . 

 " oh , have not   I , though ? " say Sir Hugo , provokingly . " you be always 
 look tenderly at the woman , and talk to they in a Jesuitical way . 
 you be a dangerous young fellow a kind of Lovelace who will make the 
 Clarissas run after you instead of you run after they . " 
 what be the use of be exasperate at a tasteless joke ? only the exasperation come before the reflection on utility . few friendly remark be more annoying than the information that we be always seem to do what we never mean to do . Sir Hugo 's notion of flirt , it be to be hop , be rather peculiar ; for his own part , Deronda be sure that he have never flirt . but he be glad that the baronet have no knowledge about the repurchase of Gwendolen 's necklace to feed his taste for this kind of rallying . 

 he would be on his guard in future ; for example , in his behavior at Mrs. Meyrick 's , where he be about to pay his first visit since his arrival from Leubronn . for Mirah be certainly a creature in whom it be difficult not to show a tender kind of interest both by look and speech . 

 Mrs. Meyrick have not fail to send Deronda a report of Mirah 's well - being in her family . " we be get fonder of she every day , " she have write . " at breakfast - time we all look toward the door with expectation to see she come in ; and we watch she and listen to she as if she be a native from a new country . I have not hear a word from her lip that give I a doubt about she . she be quite contented and full of gratitude . my daughter be learn from she , and they hope to get her other pupil ; for she be anxious not to eat the bread of idleness , but to work , like my girl . Mab say our life have become like a fairy tale , and all she be afraid of be that Mirah will turn into a nightingale again and fly away from we . her voice be just perfect : not loud and strong , but search and melt , like the thought of what have be . that be the way old people like I feel a beautiful voice . " 

 but Mrs. Meyrick do not enter into particular which would have require she to say that Amy and Mab , who have accompany Mirah to the synagogue , find the jewish faith less reconcilable with their wish in her case than in that of Scott 's Rebecca . they keep silence out of delicacy to Mirah , with whom her religion be too tender a subject to be touch lightly ; but after a while Amy , who be much of a practical reformer , could not restrain a question . 

 " excuse I , Mirah , but do it seem quite right to you that the woman should sit behind rail in a gallery apart ? " 

 " yes , I never think of anything else , " say Mirah , with mild surprise . 

 " and you like well to see the man with their hat on ? " say Mab , cautiously propose the small item of difference . 

 " oh , yes . I like what I have always see there , because it bring back to I the same feeling the feeling I would not part with for anything else in the world . " 

 after this , any criticism , whether of doctrine or practice , would have seem to these generous little people an inhospitable cruelty . Mirah 's religion be of one fibre with her affection , and have never present itself to she as a set of proposition . 

 " she say herself she be a very bad jewess , and do not half know her people 's religion , " say Amy , when Mirah be go to bed . " perhaps it would gradually melt away from she , and she would pass into Christianity like the rest of the world , if she get to love we very much , and never find her mother . it be so strange to be of the Jews ' religion now . " 

 " oh , oh , oh ! " cry Mab . " I wish I be not such a hideous Christian . how can an ugly Christian , who be always drop her work , convert a beautiful Jewess , who have not a fault ? " 

 " it may be wicked of I , " say shrewd Kate , " but I can not help wish that her mother may not be find . there might be something unpleasant . " 

 " I do not   think it , my dear , " say Mrs. Meyrick . " I believe Mirah be cut out after the pattern of her mother . and what a joy it would be to she to have such a daughter bring back again ! but a mother 's feeling be not worth reckon , I suppose "   she shoot a mischievous glance at her own daughter , " and a dead mother be worth more that a live one ? " 

 " well , and so she may be , little mother , " say Kate ; " but we would rather hold you cheap , and have you alive . " 

 not only the Meyricks , whose various knowledge have be acquire by the irregular foraging to which clever girl have usually be reduce , but Deronda himself , with all his masculine instruction , have be rouse by this apparition of Mirah to the consciousness of know hardly anything about modern Judaism or the inner jewish history . the Chosen People have be commonly treat as a people choose for the sake of somebody else ; and their thinking as something   no matter exactly what   that ought to have be entirely otherwise ; and Deronda , like his neighbor , have regard Judaism as a sort of eccentric fossilize form which an accomplished man might dispense with study , and leave to specialist . but Mirah , with her terrified flight from one parent , and her yearn after the other , have flash on he the hitherto neglect reality that Judaism be something still throb in human life , still make for they the only conceivable vesture of the world ; and in the idle excursion on which he immediately afterward set out with Sir Hugo he begin to look for the outside of synagogue , and the title of book about the Jews . this awakening of a new interest this pass from the supposition that we hold the right opinion on a subject we be careless about , to a sudden care for it , and a sense that our opinion be ignorance be an effectual remedy for ennui , which , unhappily , can not be secure on a physician 's prescription ; but Deronda have carry it with he , and endure his week of lounge all the well . it be on this journey that he first enter a jewish synagogue at Frankfort where his party rest on a Friday . in explore the Juden - gasse , which he have see long before , he remember well enough its picturesque old house ; what his eye chiefly dwelt on now be the human type there ; and his thought , busily connect they with the past phase of their race , stir that fibre of historic sympathy which have help to determine in he certain trait worth mention for those who be interested in his future . true , when a young man have a fine person , no eccentricity of manner , the education of a gentleman , and a present income , it be not customary to feel a pry curiosity about his way of thinking , or his peculiar taste . he may very well be settle in life as an agreeable clever young fellow without pass a special examination on those head . later , when he be get rather slovenly and portly , his peculiarity be more distinctly discern , and it be take as a mercy if they be not highly objectionable . but any one wish to understand the effect of after - event on Deronda should know a little more of what he be at five - and - twenty than be evident in ordinary intercourse . 

 it happen that the very vividness of his impression have often make he the more enigmatic to his friend , and have contribute to an apparent indefiniteness in his sentiment . his early - waken sensibility and reflectiveness have develop into a many - sided sympathy , which threaten to hinder any persistent course of action : as soon as he take up any antagonism , though only in thought , he seem to himself like the Sabine warrior in the memorable story with nothing to meet his spear but flesh of his flesh , and object that he love . his imagination have so work itself to the habit of see thing as they probably appear to other , that a strong partisanship , unless it be against an immediate oppression , have become an insincerity for he . his plenteous , flexible sympathy have end by fall into one current with that reflective analysis which tend to neutralize sympathy . few man be able to keep themselves clear of vice than he ; yet he hat vice mildly , be use to think of they less in the abstract than as a part of mixed human nature have an individual history , which it be the bent of his mind to trace with understanding and pity . with the same innate balance he be fervidly democratic in his feeling for the multitude , and yet , through his affection and imagination , intensely conservative ; voracious of speculation on government and religion , yet loth to part with long - sanction form which , for he , be quick with memory and sentiment that no argument could lay dead . we fall on the lean side ; and Deronda suspect himself of love too well the lose cause of the world . martyrdom change side , and he be in danger of change with it , have a strong repugnance to take up that clue of success which the order of the world often force upon we and make it treason against the common weal to reject . and yet his fear of fall into an unreasone narrow hatred make a check for he : he apologize for the heir of privilege ; he shrink with dislike from the loser 's bitterness and the denunciatory tone of the unaccepted innovator . a too reflective and diffusive sympathy be in danger of paralyze in he that indignation against wrong and that selectness of fellowship which be the condition of moral force ; and in the last few year of confirm manhood he have become so keenly aware of this that what he most long for be either some external event , or some inward light , that would urge he into a definite line of action , and compress his wandering energy . he be cease to care for knowledge he have no ambition for practice unless they could both be gather up into one current with his emotion ; and he dread , as if it be a dwelling - place of lose soul , that dead anatomy of culture which turn the universe into a mere ceaseless answer to query , and know , not everything , but everything else about everything as if one should be ignorant of nothing concern the scent of violet except the scent itself for which one have no nostril . but how and whence be the needed event to come ? the influence that would justify partiality , and make he what he long to be , yet be unable to make himself an organic part of social life , instead of roam in it like a yearn disembody spirit , stir with a vague social passion , but without fix local habitation to render fellowship real ? to make a little difference for the well be what he be not content to live without ; but how to make it ? it be one thing to see your road , another to cut it . he find some of the fault in his birth and the way he have be bring up , which have lay no special demand on he and have give he no fixed relationship except one of a doubtful kind ; but he do not attempt to hide from himself that he have fall into a meditative numbness , and be glide far and far from that life of practically energetic sentiment which he would have proclaim   if he have be incline to proclaim anything   to be the good of all life , and for himself the only way worth live . he want some way of keep emotion and its progeny of sentiment which make the savor of life substantial and strong in the face of a reflectiveness that threaten to nullify all difference . to pound the object of sentiment into small dust , yet keep sentiment alive and active , be something like the famous recipe for make cannon to first take a round hole and then enclose it with iron ; whatever you do keep fast hold of your round hole . yet how distinguish what our will may wisely save in its completeness , from the heaping of cat - mummy and the expensive cult of enshrined putrefaction ? 

 something like this be the common under - current in Deronda 's mind while he be read law or imperfectly attend to polite conversation . meanwhile he have not set about one function in particular with zeal and steadiness . not an admirable experience , to be propose as an ideal ; but a form of struggle before break of day which some young man since the patriarch have have to pass through , with more or less of bruise if not lam . 

 I have say that under his calm exterior he have a fervor which make he easily feel the presence of poetry in everyday event ; and the form of the Juden - gasse , rouse the sense of union with what be remote , set he muse on two element of our historic life which that sense raise into the same region of poetry ; the faint beginning of faith and institution , and their obscure lingering decay ; the dust and wither remnant with which they be apt to be cover , only enhance for the awakened perception the impressiveness either of a sublimely penetrate life , as in the twin green leaf that will become the shelter tree , or of a pathetic inheritance in which all the grandeur and the glory have become a sorrow memory . 

 this imaginative stirring , as he turn out of the Juden - gasse , and continue to saunter in the warm evening air , mean to find his way to the synagogue , neutralize the repellent effect of certain ugly little incident on his way . turn into an old book - shop to ask the exact time of service at the synagogue , he be affectionately direct by a precocious jewish youth , who enter cordially into his wanting , not the fine new building of the Reformed but the old rabbinical school of the orthodox ; and then cheat he like a pure Teuton , only with more amenity , in his charge for a book quite out of request as one " nicht so leicht zu bekommen . " meanwhile at the opposite counter a deaf and grisly tradesman be cast a flinty look at certain card , apparently combine advantage of business with religion , and shoutingly propose to he in Jew - dialect by a dingy man in a tall coat hang from neck to heel , a bag in hand , and a broad low hat surmount his choose nose who have no soon disappear than another dingy man of the same pattern issue from the background gloom of the shop and also shout in the same dialect . in fact , Deronda see various queer - look Israelites not altogether without guile , and just distinguishable from queer - look Christians of the same mixed morale . in his anxiety about Mirah 's relative , he have lately be think of vulgar Jews with a sort of personal alarm . but a little comparison will often diminish our surprise and disgust at the aberration of Jews and other dissident whose life do not offer a consistent or lovely pattern of their creed ; and this evening Deronda , become more conscious that he be fall into unfairness and ridiculous exaggeration , begin to use that corrective comparison : he pay his thaler too much , without prejudice to his interest in the Hebrew destiny , or his wish to find the Rabbinische Schule , which he arrive at by sunset , and enter with a good congregation of man . 

 he happen to take his seat in a line with an elderly man from whom he be distant enough to glance at he more than once as rather a noticeable figure his ample white beard and feel hat frame a profile of that fine contour which may as easily be italian as Hebrew . he return Deronda 's notice till at last their eye meet ; an undesirable chance with unknown person , and a reason to Deronda for not look again ; but he immediately find an open prayer - book push toward he and have to bow his thank . however , the congregation have muster , the reader have mount to the almemor or platform , and the service begin . Deronda , have look enough at the german translation of the Hebrew in the book before he to know that he be chiefly hear Psalms and Old Testament passage or phrase , give himself up to that strong effect of chant liturgy which be independent of detailed verbal meaning like the effect of an Allegri 's Miserere or a Palestrina 's Magnificat . the most powerful movement of feel with a liturgy be the prayer which seek for nothing special , but be a yearning to escape from the limitation of our own weakness and an invocation of all good to enter and abide with we ; or else a self - oblivious lifting up of Gladness , a Gloria in excelsis that such good exist ; both the yearning and the exaltation gather their utmost force from the sense of communion in a form which have express they both , for long generation of struggle fellow - man . the Hebrew liturgy , like other , have its transition of litany , lyric , proclamation , dry statement and blessing ; but this evening , all be one for Deronda : the chant of the Chazaris or Reader 's grand wide - range voice with its passage from monotony to sudden cry , the outburst of sweet boy ' voice from the little choir , the devotional swaying of man 's body backward and forward , the very commonness of the building and shabbiness of the scene where a national faith , which have penetrate the thinking of half the world , and mould the splendid form of that world 's religion , be find a remote , obscure echo all be blent for he as one expression of a bind history , tragic and yet glorious . he wonder at the strength of his own feeling ; it seem beyond the occasion what one might imagine to be a divine influx in the darkness , before there be any vision to interpret . the whole scene be a coherent strain , its burden a passionate regret , which , if he have know the liturgy for the Day of Reconciliation , he might have clothe in its authentic burden ; " happy the eye which see all these thing ; but verily to hear only of they afflict our soul . happy the eye that see our temple and the joy of our congregation ; but verily to hear only of they afflict our soul . happy the eye that see the finger when tune every kind of song ; but verily to hear only of they afflict our soul . " 

 but with the cessation of the devotional sound and the movement of many indifferent face and vulgar figure before he there dart into his mind the frigid idea that he have probably be alone in his feeling , and perhaps the only person in the congregation for whom the service be more than a dull routine . there be just time for this chilling thought before he have bow to his civil neighbor and be move away with the rest when he feel a hand on his arm , and turn with the rather unpleasant sensation which this abrupt sort of claim be apt to bring , he see close to he the white - bearded face of that neighbor , who say to he in German , " excuse I , young gentleman allow I what be your parentage your mother 's family her maiden name ? " 

 Deronda have a strongly resistant feeling : he be inclined to shake off hastily the touch on his arm ; but he manage to slip it away and say coldly , " I be an Englishman . " 

 the questioner look at he dubiously still for an instant , then just lift his hat and turn away ; whether under a sense of have make a mistake or of have be repulse , Deronda be uncertain . in his walk back to the hotel he try to still any uneasiness on the subject by reflect that he could not have act differently . how could he say that he do not know the name of his mother 's family to that total stranger ? who indeed have take an unwarrantable liberty in the abruptness of his question , dictate probably by some fancy of likeness such as often occur without real significance . the incident , he say to himself , be trivial ; but whatever import it might have , his inward shrink on the occasion be too strong for he to be sorry that he have cut it short . it be a reason , however , for his not mention the synagogue to the Mallingers in addition to his usual inclination to reticence on anything that the baronet would have be likely to call quixotic enthusiasm . hardly any man could be more good - natured than Sir Hugo ; indeed in his kindliness especially to woman , he do action which other would have call romantic ; but he never take a romantic view of they , and in general smile at the introduction of motif on a grand scale , or of reason that lie very far off . this be the point of strong difference between he and Deronda , who rarely eat at breakfast without some silent discursive flight after ground for fill up his day accord to the practice of his contemporary . 

 this halt at Frankfort be take on their way home , and its impression be keep the more actively vibrate in he by the duty of care for Mirah 's welfare . that question about his parentage , which if he have not both inwardly and outwardly shake it off as trivial , would have seem a threat rather than a promise of revelation , and reinforce his anxiety as to the effect of find Mirah 's relative and his resolve to proceed with caution . if he make any unpleasant discovery , be he bind to a disclosure that might cast a new net of trouble around she ? he have write to Mrs. Meyrick to announce his visit at four o'clock , and he find Mirah seat at work with only Mrs. Meyrick and Mab , the open piano , and all the glorious company of engraving . the dainty neatness of her hair and dress , the glow of tranquil happiness in a face where a painter need have change nothing if he have want to put it in front of the host sing " peace on earth and good will to man , " make a contrast to his first vision of she that be delightful to Deronda 's eye . Mirah herself be think of it , and immediately on their greeting say 

 " see how different I be from the miserable creature by the river ! all because you find I and bring I to the very good . " 

 " it be my good chance to find you , " say Deronda . " any other man would have be glad to do what I do . " 

 " that be not the right way to be think about it , " say Mirah , shake her head with decisive gravity , " I think of what really be . it be you , and not another , who find I and be good to I . " 

 " I agree with Mirah , " say Mrs. Meyrick . " Saint Anybody be a bad saint to pray to . " 

 " besides , anybody could not have bring I to you , " say Mirah , smile at Mrs. Meyrick . " and I would rather be with you than with any one else in the world except my mother . I wonder if ever a poor little bird , that be lose and could not fly , be take and put into a warm nest where be a mother and sister who take to it so that everything come naturally , as if it have be always there . I hardly think before that the world could ever be as happy and without fear as it be to I now . " she look meditative a moment , and then say , ' sometimes I be a little afraid . " 

 " what be it you be afraid of ? " say Deronda with anxiety . 

 " that when I be turn at the corner of a street I may meet my father . it seem dreadful that I should be afraid of meet he . that be my only sorrow , " say Mirah , plaintively . 

 " it be surely not very probable , " say Deronda , wish that it be less so ; then , not to let the opportunity escape " would it be a great grief to you now if you be never to meet your mother ? " 

 she do not answer immediately , but meditate again , with her eye fix on the opposite wall . then she turn they on Deronda and say firmly , as if she have arrive at the exact truth , " I want she to know that I have always love she , and if she be alive I want to comfort she . she may be dead . if she be I should long to know where she be bury ; and to know whether my brother live , so that we can remember she together . but I will try not to grieve . I have think much for so many year of she be dead . and I shall have she with I in my mind , as I have always have . we can never be really part . I think I have never sin against she . I have always try not to do what would hurt she . only , she might be sorry that I be not a good Jewess . " 

 " in what way be you not a good Jewess ? " say Deronda . 

 " I be ignorant , and we never observe the law , but live among Christians just as they do . but I have hear my father laugh at the strictness of the Jews about their food and all custom , and their not like Christians . I think my mother be strict ; but she could never want I not to like those who be well to I than any of my own people I have ever know . I think I could obey in other thing that she wish but not in that . it be so much easy to I to share in love than in hatred . I remember a play I read in German since I have be here it have come into my mind where the heroine say something like that . " 

 " Antigone , " say Deronda . 

 " ah , you know it . but I do not believe that my mother would wish I not to love my good friend . she would be grateful to they . " here Mirah have turn to Mrs. Meyrick , and with a sudden lighting up of her whole countenance , she say , " oh , if we ever do meet and know each other as we be now , so that I could tell what would comfort she I should be so full of blessedness my soul would know no want but to love she ! " 

 " God bless you , child ! " say Mrs. Meyrick , the word escape involuntarily from her motherly heart . but to relieve the strain of feel she look at Deronda and say , " it be curious that Mirah , who remember her mother so well it be as if she see she , can not recall her brother the least bit except the feeling of have be carry by he when she be tired , and of his be near she when she be in her mother 's lap . it must be that he be rarely at home . he be already grow up . it be a pity her brother should be quite a stranger to she . " 

 " he be good ; I feel sure Ezra be good , " say Mirah , eagerly . " he love my mother he would take care of she . I remember more of he than that . I remember my mother 's voice once call , ' Ezra ! ' and then his answering from a distance ' Mother ! ' " Mirah have change her voice a little in each of these word and have give they a love intonation " and then he come close to we . I feel sure he be good . I have always take comfort from that . " 

 it be impossible to answer this either with agreement or doubt . Mrs. Meyrick and Deronda exchange a quick glance : about this brother she feel as painfully dubious as he do . but Mirah go on , absorb in her memory 

 " be it not wonderful how I remember the voice well than anything else ? I think they must go deeply into we than other thing . I have often fancy heaven might be make of voice . " 

 " like your singing yes , " say Mab , who have hitherto keep a modest silence , and now speak bashfully , as be she will not in the presence of Prince Camaralzaman " Ma , do ask Mirah to sing . Mr. Deronda have not hear she . " 

 " would it be disagreeable to you to sing now ? " say Deronda , with a more deferential gentleness than he have ever be conscious of before . 

 " oh , I shall like it , " say Mirah . " my voice have come back a little with rest . " 

 perhaps her ease of manner be due to something more than the simplicity of her nature . the circumstance of her life make she think of everything she do as work demand from she , in which affectation have nothing to do ; and she have begin her work before self - consciousness be bear . 

 she immediately rise and go to the piano a somewhat worn instrument that seem to get the well of its infirmity under the firm touch of her small finger as she prelude . Deronda place himself where he could see she while she sing ; and she take everything as quietly as if she have be a child go to breakfast . 

 imagine she it be always good to imagine a human creature in whom bodily loveliness seem as properly one with the entire being as the bodily loveliness of those wondrous transparent orb of life that we find in the sea imagine she with her dark hair brush from her temple , but yet show certain tiny ring there which have cunningly find their own way back , the mass of it hang behind just to the nape of the little neck in curly fibre , such as renew themselves at their own will after be bath into straightness like that of water - grass . then see the perfect cameo her profile make , cut in a duskish shell , where by some happy fortune there pierce a gem - like darkness for the eye and eyebrow ; the delicate nostril define enough to be ready for sensitive movement , the finished ear , the firm curve of the chin and neck , enter into the expression of a refinement which be not feebleness . 

 she sing Beethoven 's " per pieta non dirmi addio " with a subdued but search pathos which have that essential of perfect singing , the make one oblivious of art or manner , and only possess one with the song . it be the sort of voice that give the impression of be mean like a bird 's wooing for an audience near and beloved . Deronda begin by look at she , but feel himself presently cover his eye with his hand , want to seclude the melody in darkness ; then he refrain from what might seem oddity , and be ready to meet the look of mute appeal which she turn toward he at the end . 

 " I think I never enjoy a song more than that , " he say , gratefully . 

 " you like my singing ? I be so glad , " she say , with a smile of delight . " it have be a great pain to I , because it fail in what it be want for . but now we think I can use it to get my bread . I have really be teach well . and now I have two pupil , that Miss Meyrick find for I . they pay I nearly two crown for their two lesson . " 

 " I think I know some lady who would find you many pupil after Christmas , " say Deronda . " you would not mind sing before any one who wish to hear you ? " 

 " oh no , I want to do something to get money . I could teach reading and speak , Mrs. Meyrick think . but if no one would learn of I , that be difficult . " Mirah smile with a touch of merriment he have not see in she before . " I dare say I should find her poor I mean my mother . I should want to get money for she . and I can not always live on charity ; though " here she turn so as to take all three of her companion in one glance " it be the sweetest charity in all the world . " 

 " I should think you can get rich , " say Deronda , smile . " great lady will perhaps like you to teach their daughter , we shall see . but now do sing again to we . " 

 she go on willingly , sing with ready memory various thing by Gordigiani and Schubert ; then , when she have leave the piano , Mab say , entreatingly , " oh , Mirah , if you would not mind sing the little hymn . " 

 " it be too childish , " say Mirah . " it be like lisping . " 

 " what be the hymn ? " say Deronda . 

 " it be the hebrew hymn she remember her mother sing over she when she lie in her cot , " say Mrs. Meyrick . 

 " I should like very much to hear it , " say Deronda , " if you think I be worthy to hear what be so sacred . " 

 " I will sing it if you like , " say Mirah , " but I do not   sing real word only here and there a syllable like hers the rest be lisp . do you know Hebrew ? because if you do , my singing will seem childish nonsense . " 

 Deronda shake his head . " it will be quite good Hebrew to I . " 

 Mirah cross her little foot and hand in her easy attitude , and then lift up her head at an angle which seem to be direct to some invisible face bent over she , while she sing a little hymn of quaint melancholy interval , with syllable that really seem childish lisping to her audience ; the voice in which she give it forth have gather even a sweeter , more cooing tenderness than be hear in her other song . 

 " if I be ever to know the real word , I should still go on in my old way with they , " say Mirah , when she have repeat the hymn several time . 

 " why not ? " say Deronda . " the lisp syllable be very full of meaning . " 

 " yes , indeed , " say Mrs. Meyrick . " a mother hear something of a lisp in her child 's talk to the very last . their word be not just what everybody else say , though they may be spell the same . if I be to live till my Hans get old , I should still see the boy in he . a mother 's love , I often say , be like a tree that have get all the wood in it , from the very first it make . " 

 " be not that the way with friendship , too ? " say Deronda , smile . " we must not let the mother be too arrogant . " 

 the little woman shake her head over her darning . 

 " it be easy to find an old mother than an old friend . friendship begin with liking or gratitude root that can be pull up . Mother 's love begin deeply down . " 

 " like what you be say about the influence of voice , " say Deronda , look at Mirah . " I do not   think your hymn would have have more expression for I if I have know the word . I go to the synagogue at Frankfort before I come home , and the service impress I just as much as if I have follow the word perhaps more . " 

 " oh , be it great to you ? do it go to your heart ? " say Mirah , eagerly . " I think none but our people would feel that . I think it be all shut away like a river in a deep valley , where only heaven see I mean - " she hesitate feeling that she could not disentangle her thought from its imagery . 

 " I understand , " say Deronda . " but there be not really such a separation deeply down , as Mrs. Meyrick say . our religion be chiefly a hebrew religion ; and since Jews be man , their religious feeling must have much in common with those of other man just as their poetry , though in one sense peculiar , have a great deal in common with the poetry of other nation . still it be to be expect that a Jew would feel the form of his people 's religion more than one of another race and yet " here Deronda hesitate in his turn " that be perhaps not always so . " 

 " ah no , " say Mirah , sadly . " I have see that . I have see they mock . be it not like mock your parent ? like rejoice in your parent ' shame ? " 

 " some mind naturally rebel against whatever they be bring up in , and like the opposite ; they see the fault in what be near to they , " say Deronda apologetically . 

 " but you be not like that , " say Mirah , look at he with unconscious fixedness . 

 " no , I think not , " say Deronda ; " but you know I be not bring up as a Jew . " 

 " ah , I be always forget , " say Mirah , with a look of disappointed recollection , and slightly blush . 

 Deronda also feel rather embarrassed , and there be an awkward pause , which he put an end to by say playfully 

 " whichever way we take it , we have to tolerate each other ; for if we all go in opposition to our teaching , we must end in difference , just the same . " 

 " to be sure . we should go on forever in zig - zags , " say Mrs. Meyrick . " I think it be very weak - minded to make your creed up by the rule of the contrary . still one may honor one 's parent , without follow their notion exactly , any more than the exact cut of their clothing . my father be a Scotch Calvinist and my mother be a french Calvinist ; I be neither quite Scotch , nor quite french , nor two Calvinists roll into one , yet I honor my parent ' memory . " 

 " but I could not make myself not a Jewess , " say Mirah , insistently , " even if I change my belief . " 

 " no , my dear . but if Jews and Jewesses go on change their religion , and make no difference between themselves and Christians , there would come a time when there would be no Jews to be see , " say Mrs. Meyrick , take that consummation very cheerfully . 

 " oh , please not to say that , " say Mirah , the tear gather . " it be the first unkind thing you ever say . I will not begin that . I will never separate myself from my mother 's people . I be force to fly from my father ; but if he come back in age and weakness and want , and need I , should I say , ' this be not my father ' ? if he have shame , I must share it . it be he who be give to I for my father , and not another . and so it be with my people . I will always be a Jewess . I will love Christians when they be good , like you . but I will always cling to my people . I will always worship with they . " 

 as Mirah have go on speak she have become possess with a sorrowful passion fervent , not violent . hold her little hand tightly clasped and look at Mrs. Meyrick with beseech , she seem to Deronda a personification of that spirit which impel man after a long inheritance of profess Catholicism to leave wealth and high place and risk their life in flight , that they might join their own people and say , " I be a Jew . " 

 " Mirah , Mirah , my dear child , you mistake I ! " say Mrs. Meyrick , alarmed . " God forbid I should want you to do anything against your conscience . I be only say what might be if the world go on . but I have well have leave the world alone , and not want to be over - wise . forgive I , come ! we will not try to take you from anybody you feel have more right to you . " 

 " I would do anything else for you . I owe you my life , " say Mirah , not yet quite calm . 

 " hush , hush , now , " say Mrs. Meyrick . " I have be punish enough for wag my tongue foolishly make an almanac for the Millennium , as my husband use to say . " 

 " but everything in the world must come to an end some time . we must bear to think of that , " say Mab , unable to hold her peace on this point . she have already suffer from a bondage of tongue which threaten to become severe if Mirah be to be too much indulge in this inconvenient susceptibility to innocent remark . 

 Deronda smile at the irregular , blonde face , bring into strange contrast by the side of Mirah 's smile , Mab think , rather sarcastically as he say , " that ' prospect of everything come to an end will not guide we far in practice . Mirah 's feeling , she tell we , be concern with what be . " 

 Mab be confused and wish she have not speak , since Mr. Deronda seem to think that she have find fault with Mirah ; but to have speak once be a tyrannous reason for speak again , and she say 

 " I only mean that we must have courage to hear thing , else there be hardly anything we can talk about . " Mab feel herself unanswerable here , incline to the opinion of Socrates : " what motive have a man to live , if not for the pleasure of discourse ? " 

 Deronda take his leave soon after , and when Mrs. Meyrick go outside with he to exchange a few word about Mirah , he say , " Hans be to share my chamber when he come at Christmas . " 

 " you have write to Rome about that ? " say Mrs. Meyrick , her face light up . " how very good and thoughtful of you ! you mention Mirah , then ? " 

 " yes , I refer to she . I conclude he know everything from you . " 

 " I must confess my folly . I have not yet write a word about she . I have always be mean to do it , and yet have end my letter without say a word . and I tell the girl to leave it to I . however ! thank you a thousand time . " 

 Deronda divine something of what be in the mother 's mind , and his divination reinforce a certain anxiety already present in he . his inward colloquy be not soothe . he say to himself that no man could see this exquisite creature without feel it possible to fall in love with she ; but all the fervor of his nature be engage on the side of precaution . there be personage who feel themselves tragic because they march into a palpable morass , drag another with they , and then cry out against all the god . Deronda 's mind be strongly set against imitate they . 

 " I have my hand on the rein now , " he think , " and I will not drop they . I shall go there as little as possible . " 

 he see the reason act themselves out before he . how could he be Mirah 's guardian and claim to unite with Mrs. Meyrick , to whose charge he have commit she , if he show himself as a lover whom she do not love whom she would not marry ? and if he encourage any germ of lover 's feeling in himself it would lead up to that issue . Mirah 's be not a nature that would bear divide against itself ; and even if love win her consent to marry a man who be not of her race and religion , she would never be happy in act against that strong native bias which would still reign in her conscience as remorse . 

 Deronda see these consequence as we see any danger of mar our own work well begin . it be a delight to have rescue this child acquaint with sorrow , and to think of have place her little foot in protect path . the creature we help to save , though only a half - rear linnet , bruise and lose by the wayside how we watch and fence it , and dote on its sign of recovery ! our pride become love , our self be a not - self for whose sake we become virtuous , when we set to some hide work of reclaim a life from misery and look for our triumph in the secret joy " this one be the well for I . " 

 " I would as soon hold out my finger to be bite off as set about spoil her peace , " say Deronda . " it be one of the rare bit of fortune that I should have have friend like the Meyricks to place she with generous , delicate friend without any loftiness in their way , so that her dependence on they be not only safety but happiness . there could be no refuge to replace that , if it be break up . but what be the use of my take the vow and settle everything as it should be , if that marplot Hans come and upset it all ? " 

 few thing be more likely . Hans be make for mishap : his very limb seem more breakable than other people 's his eye more of a resort for uninvited fly and other irritate guest . but it be impossible to forbid Hans 's come to London . he be intend to get a studio there and make it his chief home ; and to propose that he should defer come on some ostensible ground , conceal the real motive of win time for Mirah 's position to become more confirmed and independent , be impracticable . have no other resource Deronda try to believe that both he and Mrs. Meyrick be foolishly trouble themselves about one of those endless thing call probability , which never occur ; but he do not quite succeed in his trying ; on the contrary , he find himself go inwardly through a scene where on the first discovery of Han 's inclination he give he a very energetic warning suddenly check , however , by the suspicion of personal feeling that his warmth might be create in Hans . he could come to no result , but that the position be peculiar , and that he could make no further provision against danger until they come nearer . to save an unhappy Jewess from drown herself , would not have seem a startling variation among police report ; but to discover in her so rare a creature as Mirah , be an exceptional event which might well bring exceptional consequence . Deronda would not let himself for a moment dwell on any supposition that the consequence might enter deeply into his own life . the image of Mirah have never yet have that penetrate radiation which would have be give to it by the idea of her love he . when this sort of effluence be absent from the fancy   whether from the fact or not   a man may go far in devotedness without perturbation . 

 as to the search for Mirah 's mother and brother , Deronda take what she have say to - day as a warrant for defer any immediate measure . his conscience be not quite easy in this desire for delay , any more than it be quite easy in his not attempt to learn the truth about his own mother : in both case he feel that there might be an unfulfilled duty to a parent , but in both case there be an overpowering repugnance to the possible truth , which throw a turning weight into the scale of argument . 

 " at least , I will look about , " be his final determination . " I may find some special jewish machinery . I will wait till after Christmas . " 

 what should we all do without the calendar , when we want to put off a disagreeable duty ? the admirable arrangement of the solar system , by which our time be measure , always supply we with a term before which it be hardly worth while to set about anything we be disinclined to . 

 CHAPTER XXXIII . 

 " no man , " say a Rabbi , by way of indisputable instance , " may turn the bone of his father and mother into spoon " sure that his hearer feel the check against that form of economy . the market for spoon have never expand enough for any one to say , " why not ? " and to argue that human progress lie in such an application of material . the only check to be allege be a sentiment , which will coerce none who do not hold that sentiment be the well part of the world 's wealth . 

 Deronda meanwhile take to a less fashionable form of exercise than rid in Rotten row . he go often ramble in those part of London which be most inhabit by common Jews . he walk to the synagogue at time of service , he look into shop , he observe face : a process not very promising of particular discovery . why do he not address himself to an influential Rabbi or other member of a jewish community , to consult on the chance of find a mother name Cohen , with a son name Ezra , and a lost daughter name Mirah ? he think of do so after Christmas . the fact be , notwithstanding all his sense of poetry in common thing , Deronda , where a keen personal interest be arouse , could not , more than the rest of we , continuously escape suffer from the pressure of that hard unaccommodate Actual , which have never consult our taste and be entirely unselect . Enthusiasm , we know , dwell at ease among idea , tolerate garlic breathe in the middle age , and see no shabbiness in the official trapping of classic procession : it get squeamish when ideal press upon it as something warmly incarnate , and can hardly face they without faint . lie dreamily in a boat , imagine one 's self in quest of a beautiful maiden 's relative in Cordova elbow by Jews in the time of Ibn - Gebirol , all the physical incident can be bear without shock . or if the scenery of St. Mary Axe and Whitechapel be imaginatively transport to the border of the Rhine at the end of the eleventh century , when in the ear listen for the signal of the Messiah , the Hep ! Hep ! Hep ! of the Crusaders come like the bay of blood - hound ; and in the presence of those devilish missionary with sword and firebrand the crouch figure of the revile Jew turn round erect , heroic , flash with sublime constancy in the face of torture and death what would the dingy shop and unbeautiful face signify to the thrill of contemplative emotion ? but the fervor of sympathy with which we contemplate a grandiose martyrdom be feeble compare with the enthusiasm that keep unslacked where there be no danger , no challenge nothing but impartial midday fall on commonplace , perhaps half - repulsive , object which be really the beloved idea make flesh . here undoubtedly lie the chief poetic energy : in the force of imagination that pierce or exalt the solid fact , instead of float among cloud - picture . to glory in a prophetic vision of knowledge cover the earth , be an easy exercise of believe imagination than to see its beginning in newspaper placard , star at you from the bridge beyond the corn - field ; and it might well happen to most of we dainty people that we be in the thick of the battle of Armageddon without be aware of anything more than the annoyance of a little explosive smoke and struggle on the ground immediately about we . 

 it lie in Deronda 's nature usually to contemn the feeble , fastidious sympathy which shrink from the broad life of mankind ; but now , with Mirah before he as a living reality , whose experience he have to care for , he see every common Jew and Jewess in the light of a comparison with she , and have a presentiment of the collision between her idea of the unknown mother and brother and the discover fact a presentiment all the keener in he because of a suppress consciousness that a not unlike possibility of collision might lie hide in his own lot . not that he would have look with more complacency of expectation at wealthy Jews , outdo the lord of the Philistines in their sport ; but since there be no likelihood of Mirah 's friend be find among that class , their habit do not immediately affect he . in this mood he ramble , without expectation of a more pregnant result than a little preparation of his own mind , perhaps for future theorizing as well as practice very much as if , Mirah be relate to Welsh miner , he have go to look more closely at the way of those people , not without wish at the same time to get a little light of detail on the history of Strikes . 

 he really do not long to find anybody in particular ; and when , as his habit be , he look at the name over a shop door , he be well content that it be not Ezra Cohen . I confess , he particularly desire that Ezra Cohen should not keep a shop . wish be hold to be ominous ; accord to which belief the order of the world be so arrange that if you have an impious objection to a squint , your offspring be the more likely to be bear with one ; also , that if you happen to desire a squint you would not get it . this desponding view of probability the hopeful entirely reject , take their wish as good and sufficient security for all kind of fulfilment . who be absolutely neutral ? Deronda happen one morning to turn into a little side street out of the noise and obstruction of Holborn , feel the scale dip on the despond side . 

 he be rather tired of the street and have pause to hail a hansom cab which he see come , when his attention be catch by some fine old clasp in chase silver display in the window at his right hand . his first thought be that Lady Mallinger , who have a strictly protestant taste for such catholic spoil , might like to have these missal - clasp turn into a bracelet : then his eye travel over the other content of the window , and he see that the shop be that kind of pawnbroker 's where the lead be give to jewelry , lace and all equivocal object introduce as bric - a - brac . a placard in one corner announce Watches and Jewelry exchange and repair . but his survey have be notice from within , and a figure appear at the door , look round at he and say in a tone of cordial encouragement , " good day , sir . " the instant be enough for Deronda to see the face , unmistakably jewish , belong to a young man about thirty , and wince from the shopkeeper 's persuasiveness that would probably follow , he have no soon return the " good day , " than he pass to the other side of the street and beckon to the cabman to draw up there . from that station he see the name over the shop window Ezra Cohen . 

 there might be a hundred Ezra Cohens letter above shop window , but Deronda have not see they . probably the young man interested in a possible customer be Ezra himself ; and he be about the age to be expect in Mirah 's brother , who be grow up while she be still a little child . but Deronda 's first endeavor as he drive homeward be to convince himself that there be not the slight warrantable presumption of this Ezra be Mirah 's brother ; and next , that even if , in spite of good reasoning , he turn out to be that brother , while on inquiry the mother be find to be dead , it be not his Deronda 's duty to make know the discovery to Mirah . in inconvenient disturbance of this conclusion there come his lately - acquire knowledge that Mirah would have a religious desire to know of her mother 's death , and also to learn whether her brother be live . how far be he justify in determine another life by his own notion ? be it not his secret complaint against the way in which other have order his own life , that he have not open daylight on all its relation , so that he have not , like other man , the full guidance of primary duty ? 

 the immediate relief from this inward debate be the reflection that he have not yet make any real discovery , and that by look into the fact more closely he should be certify that there be no demand on he for any decision whatever . he intend to return to that shop as soon as he could conveniently , and buy the clasp for Lady Mallinger . but he be hinder for several day by Sir Hugo , who , about to make an after - dinner speech on a burn topic , want Deronda to forage for he on the legal part of the question , besides waste time every day on argument which always end in a draw battle . as on many other question , they hold different side , but Sir Hugo do not mind this , and when Deronda put his point well , say , with a mixture of satisfaction and regret 

 " confound it , Dan ! why do not   you make an opportunity of say these thing in public ? you be wrong , you know . you will not   succeed . you have   get the massive sentiment the heavy artillery of the country against you . but it be all the well ground for a young man to display himself on . when I be your age , I should have take it . and it would be quite as well for you to be in opposition to I here and there . it would throw you more into relief . if you would seize an occasion of this sort to make an impression , you might be in Parliament in no time . and you know that would gratify I . " 

 " I be sorry not to do what would gratify you , sir , " say Deronda . " but 
 I can not persuade myself to look at politic as a profession . " 
 " why not ? if a man be not bear into public life by his position in the country , there be no way for he but to embrace it by his own effort . the business of the country must be do her Majesty 's Government carry on , as the old Duke say . and it never could be , my boy , if everybody look at politic as if they be prophecy , and demand an inspire vocation . if you be to get into Parliament , it will not   do to sit still and wait for a call either from heaven or constituent . " 

 " I do not   want to make a living out of opinion , " say Deronda ; " especially out of borrow opinion . not that I mean to blame other man . I dare say many well fellow than I do not   mind get on to a platform to praise themselves , and give their word of honor for a party . " 

 " I will tell you what , Dan , " say Sir Hugo , " a man who set his face against every sort of humbug be simply a three - cornered , impracticable fellow . there be a bad style of humbug , but there be also a good style one that oil the wheel and make progress possible . if you be to rule man , you must rule they through their own idea ; and I agree with the Archbishop at Naples who have a St. Januarius procession against the plague . it be no use have an order in Council against popular shallowness . there be no action possible without a little acting . " 

 " one may be oblige to give way to an occasional necessity , " say Deronda . " but it be one thing to say , ' in this particular case I be force to put on this foolscap and grin , ' and another to buy a pocket foolscap and practice myself in grin . I can not   see any real public expediency that do not keep an ideal before it which make a limit of deviation from the direct path . but if I be to set up for a public man I might mistake my success for public expediency . " 

 it be after this dialogue , which be rather jarring to he , that Deronda set out on his meditate second visit to Ezra Cohen 's . he enter the street at the end opposite to the Holborn entrance , and an inward reluctance slacken his pace while his thought be transfer what he have just be say about public expediency to the entirely private difficulty which bring he back again into this unattractive thoroughfare . it might soon become an immediate practical question with he how far he could call it a wise expediency to conceal the fact of close kindre . such question turn up constantly in life be often decide in a rough - and - ready way ; and to many it will appear an over - refinement in Deronda that he should make any great point of a matter confine to his own knowledge . but we have see the reason why he have come to regard concealment as a bane of life , and the necessity of concealment as a mark by which line of action be to be avoid . the prospect of be urge against the confirm habit of his mind be naturally grate . he even pause here and there before the most plausible shop - window for a gentleman to look into , half inclined to decide that he would not increase his knowledge about that modern Ezra , who be certainly not a leader among his people a hesitation which prove how , in a man much give to reasoning , a bare possibility may weigh more than the well - clothe likelihood ; for Deronda 's reasoning have decide that all likelihood be against this man 's be Mirah 's brother . 

 one of the shop - window he pause before be that of a second - hand book - shop , where , on a narrow table outside , the literature of the age be represent in judicious mixture , from the immortal verse of Homer to the mortal prose of the railway novel . that the mixture be judicious be apparent from Deronda 's finding in it something that he want namely , that wonderful bit of autobiography , the life of the Polish Jew , Salomon Maimon ; which , as he could easily slip it into his pocket , he take from its place , and enter the shop to pay for , expect to see behind the counter a grimy personage show that nonchalance about sale which seem to belong universally to the second - hand book - business . in most other trade you find generous man who be anxious to sell you their ware for your own welfare ; but even a Jew will not urge Simson 's Euclid on you with an affectionate assurance that you will have pleasure in read it , and that he wish he have twenty more of the article , so much be it in request . one be lead to fear that a secondhand bookseller may belong to that unhappy class of man who have no belief in the good of what they get their living by , yet keep conscience enough to be morose rather than unctuous in their vocation . 

 but instead of the ordinary tradesman , he see , on the dark background of book in the long narrow shop , a figure that be somewhat startling in its unusualness . a man in threadbare clothing , whose age be difficult to guess from the dead yellowish flatness of the flesh , something like an old ivory carving be seat on a stool against some bookshelf that project beyond the short counter , do nothing more remarkable than read yesterday 's Times ; but when he let the paper rest on his lap and look at the incoming customer , the thought glance through Deronda that precisely such a physiognomy as that might possibly have be see in a prophet of the Exile , or in some New hebrew poet of the mediaval time . it be a fine typical jewish face , work into intensity of expression apparently by a strenuous eager experience in which all the satisfaction have be indirect and far off , and perhaps by some bodily suffering also , which involve that absence of ease in the present . the feature be clear - cut , not large ; the brow not high but broad , and fully define by the crisp black hair . it might never have be a particularly handsome face , but it must always have be forcible ; and now with its dark , far - off gaze , and yellow pallor in relief on the gloom of the backward shop , one might have imagine one 's self come upon it in some past prison of the Inquisition , which a mob have suddenly burst upon ; while the look fix on an incidental customer seem eager and question enough to have be turn on one who might have be a messenger either of delivery or of death . the figure be probably familiar and unexciting enough to the inhabitant of this street ; but to Deronda 's mind it bring so strange a blending of the unwonted with the common , that there be a perceptible interval of mutual observation before he ask his question ; " what be the price of this book ? " 

 after take the book and examine the fly - leaf without rise , the suppose bookseller say , " there be no mark , and Mr. Ram be not in now . I be keep the shop while he be go to dinner . what be you disposed to give for it ? " he hold the book close on his lap with his hand on it and look examiningly at Deronda , over whom there come the disagreeable idea , that possibly this striking personage want to see how much could be get out of a customer 's ignorance of price . but without further reflection he say , " do not   you know how much it be worth ? " 

 " not its market - price . may I ask have you read it ? " 

 " no . I have read an account of it , which make I want to buy it . " 

 " you be a man of learn you be interested in jewish history ? " this be say in a deepen tone of eager inquiry . 

 " I be certainly interested in jewish history , " say Deronda , quietly , curiosity overcome his dislike to the sort of inspection as well as question he be under . 

 but immediately the strange Jew rise from his sitting posture , and Deronda feel a thin hand press his arm tightly , while a hoarse , excited voice , not much above a loud whisper , say 

 " you be perhaps of our race ? " 

 Deronda color deeply , not like the grasp , and then answer with a slight shake of the head , " no . " the grasp be relax , the hand withdraw , the eagerness of the face collapse into uninterested melancholy , as if some possess spirit which have leap into the eye and gesture have sink back again to the inmost recess of the frame ; and move far off as he hold out the little book , the stranger say in a tone of distant civility , " I believe Mr. Ram will be satisfied with half - a - crown , sir . " 

 the effect of this change on Deronda he afterward smile when he recall it be oddly embarrassing and humiliating , as if some high dignitary have find he deficient and give he his congť . there be nothing further to be say , however : he pay his half - crown and carry off his Salomon Maimon 's Lebensgeschichte with a mere " good - morning . " 

 he feel some vexation at the sudden arrest of the interview , and the apparent prohibition that he should know more of this man , who be certainly something out of the common way as different probably as a Jew could well be from Ezra Cohen , through whose door Deronda be presently enter , and whose flourish face glisten on the way to fatness be hang over the counter in negotiation with some one on the other side of the partition , concern two plat stopper and three teaspoon , which lie spread before he . see Deronda enter , he call out " Mother ! mother ! " and then with a familiar nod and smile , say , " come , sir come directly . " 

 Deronda could not help look toward the door from the back with some anxiety , which be not soothe when he see a vigorous woman beyond fifty enter and approach to serve he . not that there be anything very repulsive about she : the bad that could be say be that she have that look of have make her toilet with little water , and by twilight , which be common to unyouthful people of her class , and of have presumably sleep in her large earring , if not in her ring and necklace . in fact , what cause a sinking of heart in Deronda be , her not be so coarse and ugly as to exclude the idea of she be Mirah 's mother . any one who have look at a face to try and discern sign of know kinship in it will understand his process of conjecture how he try to think away the fat which have gradually disguise the outline of youth , and to discern what one may call the elementary expression of the face . he be sorry to see no absolute negative to his fear . just as it be conceivable that this Ezra , bring up to trade , might resemble the scapegrace father in everything but his knowledge and talent , so it be not impossible that this mother might have have a lovely refined daughter whose type of feature and expression be like Mirah 's . the eyebrow have a vexatious similarity of line ; and who shall decide how far a face may be mask when the uncherishing year have thrust it far onward in the ever - new procession of youth and age ? the good - humor of the glance remain and shine out in a motherly way at Deronda , as she say , in a mild guttural tone 

 " how can I serve you , sir ? " 

 " I should like to look at the silver clasp in the window , " say 
 Deronda ; " the large one , please , in the corner there . " 
 they be not quite easy to get at from the mother 's station , and the son see this call out , " I will reach them , mother ; I will reach them , " run forward with alacrity , and then hand the clasp to Deronda with the smile remark 

 " Mother 's too proud : she want to do everything herself . that be why I call she to wait on you , sir . when there be a particular gentleman customer , sir , I dare not   do any other than call she . but I can not   let she do herself mischief with stretching . " 

 here Mr. Cohen make way again for his parent , who give a little guttural , amiable laugh while she look at Deronda , as much as to say , " this boy will be at his joke , but you see he be the good son in the world , " and evidently the son enjoy please she , though he also wish to convey an apology to his distinguished customer for not give he the advantage of his own exclusive attention . 

 Deronda begin to examine the clasp as if he have many point to observe before he could come to a decision . 

 " they be only three guineas , sir , " say the mother , encouragingly . 

 " first - rate workmanship , sir worth twice the money ; only I get them a bargain from Cologne , " say the son , parenthetically , from a distance . 

 meanwhile two new customer enter , and the repeat call , " Addy ! " bring from the back of the shop a group that Deronda turn frankly to stare at , feel sure that the stare would be hold complimentary . the group consist of a black - eyed young woman who carry a black - eyed little one , its head already cover with black curl , and deposit it on the counter , from which station it look round with even more than the usual intelligence of baby : also a robust boy of six and a young girl , both with black eye and black - ring hair look more semitic than their parent , as the puppy lion show the spot of far - off progenitor . the young woman answer to " Addy " a sort of paroquet in a bright blue dress , with coral necklace and earring , her hair set up in a huge bush look as complacently lively and unrefined as her husband ; and by a certain difference from the mother deepen in Deronda the unwelcome impression that the latter be not so utterly common a Jewess as to exclude she be the mother of Mirah . while that thought be glance through his mind , the boy have run forward into the shop with an energetic stamp , and set himself about four foot from Deronda , with his hand in the pocket of his miniature knickerbocker , look at he with a precocious air of survey . perhaps it be chiefly with a diplomatic design to linger and ingratiate himself that Deronda pat the boy 's head , say 

 " what be your name , sirrah ? " 

 " Jacob Alexander Cohen , " say the small man , with much ease and distinctness . 

 " you be not name after your father , then ? " 

 " no , after my grandfather ; he sell knife and razor and scissor my grandfather do , " say Jacob , wish to impress the stranger with that high connection . " he give I this knife . " here a pocket - knife be draw forth , and the small finger , both naturally and artificially dark , open two blade and a cork - screw with much quickness . 

 " be not that a dangerous plaything ? " say Deronda , turn to the grandmother . 

 " he will never hurt himself , bless you ! " say she , contemplate her grandson with placid rapture . 

 " have you get a knife ? " say Jacob , come close . his small voice be hoarse in its glibness , as if it belong to an aged commercial soul , fatigue with bargaining through many generation . 

 " yes . do you want to see it ? " say Deronda , take a small penknife from his waistcoat - pocket . 

 Jacob seize it immediately and retreat a little , hold the two knife in his palm and bend over they in meditative comparison . by this time the other client be go , and the whole family have gather to the spot , center their attention on the marvelous Jacob : the father , mother , and grandmother behind the counter , with baby hold staggering thereon , and the little girl in front lean at her brother 's elbow to assist he in look at the knife . 

 " mine be the good , " say Jacob , at last , return Deronda 's knife as if he have be entertain the idea of exchange and have reject it . 

 Father and mother laugh aloud with delight . " you will not   find Jacob choose the bad , " say Mr. Cohen , winking , with much confidence in the customer 's admiration . Deronda , look at the grandmother , who have only an inward silent laugh , say 

 " be these the only grandchild you have ? " 

 " All . this be my only son , " she answer in a communicative tone , 
 Deronda 's glance and manner as usual convey the impression of 
 sympathetic interest which on this occasion answer his purpose well . 
 it seem to come naturally enough that he should say 
 " and you have no daughter ? " 

 there be an instantaneous change in the mother 's face . her lip close more firmly , she look down , sweep her hand outward on the counter , and finally turn she back on Deronda to examine some indian handkerchief that hang in pawn behind she . her son give a significant glance , set up his shoulder an instant and just put his finger to his lip , then say quickly , " I think you be a first - rate gentleman in the city , sir , if I may be allow to guess . " 

 " no , " say Deronda , with a preoccupied air , " I have nothing to do with the city . " 

 " that be a bad job . I think you might be the young principal of a first - rate firm , " say Mr. Cohen , wish to make amend for the check on his customer 's natural desire to know more of he and his . " but you understand silver - work , I see . " 

 " a little , " say Deronda , take up the clasp a moment and lay they down again . that unwelcome bit of circumstantial evidence have make his mind busy with a plan which be certainly more like act than anything he have be aware of in his own conduct before . but the bare possibility that more knowledge might nullify the evidence now overpower the inclination to rest in uncertainty . 

 " to tell you the truth , " he go on , " my errand be not so much to buy as to borrow . I dare say you go into rather heavy transaction occasionally . " 

 " well , sir , I have   accommodate gentleman of distinction I be proud to say it . I would not   exchange my business with any in the world . there be none more honorable , nor more charitable , nor more necessary for all class , from the good lady who want a little of the ready for the baker , to a gentleman like yourself , sir , who may want it for amusement . I like my business , I like my street , and I like my shop . I would not   have it a door far down . and I would not   be without a pawn - shop , sir , to be the Lord Mayor . it put you in connection with the world at large . I say it be like the government revenue it embrace the brass as well as the gold of the country . and a man who do not   get money , sir , can not   accommodate . now , what can I do for you , sir ? " 

 if an amiable self - satisfaction be the mark of earthly bliss , Solomon in all his glory be a pitiable mortal compare with Mr. Cohen clearly one of those person , who , be in excellent spirit about themselves , be willing to cheer stranger by let they know it . while he be deliver himself with lively rapidity , he take the baby from his wife and hold it on his arm present his feature to be explore by its small fist . Deronda , not in a cheerful mood , be rashly pronounce this Ezra Cohen to be the most unpoetic Jew he have ever meet with in book or life : his phraseology be as little as possible like that of the Old Testament : and no shadow of a suffering race distinguish his vulgarity of soul from that of a prosperous , pink - and - white huckster of the pure english lineage . it be naturally a christian feeling that a Jew ought not to be conceite . however , this be no reason for not persevere in his project , and he answer at once in adventurous ignorance of technicality 

 " I have a fine diamond ring to offer as security not with I at this moment , unfortunately , for I be not in the habit of wear it . but I will come again this evening and bring it with I . fifty pound at once would be a convenience to I . " 

 " well , you know , this evening be the Sabbath , young gentleman , " say Cohen , " and I go to the Shool . the shop will be close . but accommodation be a work of charity ; if you can not   get here before , and be any way press why , I will look at your diamond . you be perhaps from the West End a longish drive ? " 

 " yes ; and your Sabbath begin early at this season . I could be here by five will that do ? " Deronda have not be without hope that by ask to come on a Friday evening he might get a well opportunity of observe point in the family character , and might even be able to put some decisive question . 

 Cohen assent ; but here the marvelous Jacob , whose physique support a precocity that would have shatter a Gentile of his year , show that he have be listen with much comprehension by say , " you be come again . have you get any more knife at home ? " 

 " I think I have one , " say Deronda , smile down at he . 

 " have it two blade and a hook and a white handle like that ? " say 
 Jacob , point to the waistcoat - pocket . 
 " I dare say it have ? " 

 " do you like a cork - screw ? " say Jacob , exhibit that article in his own knife again , and look up with serious inquiry . 

 " yes , " say Deronda , experimentally . 

 " bring your knife , then , and we will shwop , " say Jacob , return the knife to his pocket , and stamp about with the sense that he have conclude a good transaction . 

 the grandmother have now recover her usual manner , and the whole family watch Deronda radiantly when he caressingly lift the little girl , to whom he have not hitherto give attention , and seat she on the counter , ask for her name also . she look at he in silence , and put her finger to her gold earring , which he do not seem to have notice . 

 " Adelaide Rebekah be her name , " say her mother , proudly . " speak to the gentleman , lovey . " 

 " Shlav'm Shabbes fyock on , " say Adelaide Rebekah . 

 " her Sabbath frock , she mean , " say the father , in explanation . 
 " she will have her Sabbath frock on this evening . " 
 " and will you let I see you in it , Adelaide ? " say Deronda , with that gentle intonation which come very easily to he . 

 " say yes , lovey yes , if you please , sir , " say her mother , enchant with this handsome young gentleman , who appreciate remarkable child . 

 " and will you give I a kiss this evening ? " say Deronda with a hand on each of her little brown shoulder . 

 Adelaide Rebekah   her miniature crinoline and monumental feature correspond with the combination of her name   immediately put up her lip to pay the kiss in advance ; whereupon her father rise in still more glowing satisfaction with the general meritoriousness of his circumstance , and with the stranger who be an admire witness , say cordially 

 " you see there be somebody will be disappoint if you do not   come this evening , sir . you will not   mind sit down in our family place and wait a bit for I , if I be not in when you come , sir ? I will stretch a point to accommodate a gent of your sort . bring the diamond , and I will see what I can do for you . " 

 Deronda thus leave the most favorable impression behind he , as a preparation for more easy intercourse . but for his own part those amenity have be carry on under the heavy spirit . if these be really Mirah 's relative , he could not imagine that even her fervid filial piety could give the reunion with they any sweetness beyond such as could be find in the strict fulfillment of a painful duty . what do this vaunt brother need ? and with the most favorable supposition about the hypothetic mother , Deronda shrink from the image of a first meeting between she and Mirah , and still more from the idea of Mirah 's domestication with this family . he take refuge in disbelief . to find an Ezra Cohen when the name be run in your head be no more extraordinary than to find a Josiah Smith under like circumstance ; and as to the coincidence about the daughter , it would probably turn out to be a difference . if , however , further knowledge confirm the more undesirable conclusion , what would be wise expediency ? to try and determine the good consequence by concealment , or to brave other consequence for the sake of that openness which be the sweet fresh air of our moral life . 

 CHAPTER XXXIV . 

  " er ist geheissen 
  Israel . ihn hat verwandelt 
  Hexenspruch in elnen Hund . 
          
  Aber jeden Freitag Abend , 
  in der Dšmmrungstunde , plųtzlich 
  Weicht der Zauber , und der Hund 
  Wird aufs Neu ' ein menschlich Wesen . " 
  HEINE : Prinzessin Sabbaz . 
 when Deronda arrive at five o'clock , the shop be close and the door be open for he by the christian servant . when she show he into the room behind the shop he be surprised at the prettiness of the scene . the house be old , and rather extensive at the back : probably the large room he how enter be gloomy by daylight , but now it be agreeably light by a fine old brass lamp with seven oil - light hang above the snow - white cloth spread on the central table , the ceiling and wall be smoky , and all the surrounding be dark enough to throw into relief the human figure , which have a venetian glow of color . the grandmother be array in yellowish brown with a large gold chain in lieu of the necklace , and by this light her yellow face with its darkly - mark eyebrow and frame roll of gray hair look as handsome as be necessary for picturesque effect . Young Mrs. Cohen be clothe in red and black , with a string of large artificial pearl wound round and round her neck : the baby lie asleep in the cradle under a scarlet counterpane ; Adelaide Rebekah be in braided amber , and Jacob Alexander be in black velveteen with scarlet stocking . as the four pair of black eye all glisten a welcome at Deronda , he be almost ashamed of the supercilious dislike these happy - look creature have raise in he by daylight . nothing could be more cordial than the greeting he receive , and both mother and grandmother seem to gather more dignity from be see on the private hearth , show hospitality . he look round with some wonder at the old furniture : the oaken bureau and high side - table must surely be mere matter of chance and economy , and not due to the family taste . a large dish of blue and yellow ware be set up on the side - table , and flank it be two old silver vessel ; in front of they a large volume in darken vellum with a deep - rib back . in the corner at the farther end be an open door into an inner room , where there be also a light . 

 Deronda take in these detail by parenthetic glance while he meet Jacob 's press solicitude about the knife . he have take the pain to buy one with the requisite of the hook and white handle , and produce it on demand , say , 

 " be that the sort of thing you want , Jacob ? " 

 it be subject to a severe scrutiny , the hook and blade be open , and the article of barter with the cork - screw be draw forth for comparison . 

 " why do you like a hook well than a cork - screw ? " say Deronda . 

 " ' Caush I can get hold of thing with a hook . a corkscrew will not   go into anything but cork . but it be well for you , you can draw cork . " 

 " you agree to change , then ? " say Deronda , observe that the grandmother be listen with delight . 

 " what else have you get in your pocket ? " say Jacob , with deliberative seriousness . 

 " hush , hush , Jacob , love , " say the grandmother . and Deronda , mindful of discipline , answer 

 " I think I must not tell you that . our business be with the knife . " 

 Jacob look up into his face scanningly for a moment or two , and apparently arrive at his conclusion , say gravely 

 " I will shwop , " hand the cork - screw knife to Deronda , who pocket it with corresponding gravity . 

 immediately the small son of Shem run off into the next room , whence his voice be hear in rapid chat ; and then run back again when , see his father enter , he seize a little velveteen hat which lie on a chair and put it on to approach he . Cohen keep on his own hat , and take no notice of the visitor , but stand still while the two child go up to he and clasp his knee : then he lay his hand on each in turn and utter his Hebrew benediction ; whereupon the wife , who have lately take baby from the cradle , bring it up to her husband and hold it under his outstretche hand , to be bless in its sleep . for the moment , Deronda think that this pawnbroker , proud of his vocation , be not utterly prosaic . 

 " well , sir , you find your welcome in my family , I think , " say Cohen , put down his hat and become his former self . " and you have   be punctual . nothing like a little stress here , " he add , tap his side pocket as he sit down . " it be good for we all in our turn . I have   feel it when I have   have to make up payment . I begin to fit every sort of box . it be brace to the mind . now then ! let we see , let we see . " 

 " that be the ring I speak of , " say Deronda , take it from his finger . " I believe it cost a hundred pound . it will be a sufficient pledge to you for fifty , I think . I shall probably redeem it in a month or so . " 

 Cohen 's glistening eye seem to get a little nearer together as he meet the ingenuous look of this crude young gentleman , who apparently suppose that redemption be a satisfaction to pawnbroker . he take the ring , examine and return it , say with indifference , " good , good . we will talk of it after our meal . perhaps you will join we , if you have   no objection . I and my wife'll feel honor , and so will mother ; will not   you , mother ? " 

 the invitation be doubly echo , and Deronda gladly accept it . all now turn and stand round the table . no dish be at present see except one cover with a napkin ; and Mrs. Cohen have place a china bowl near her husband that he might wash his hand in it . but after put on his hat again , he pause , and call in a loud voice , " Mordecai ! " 

 can this be part of the religious ceremony ? think Deronda , not know what might be expect of the ancient hero . but he hear a " yes " from the next room , which make he look toward the open door ; and there , to his astonishment , he see the figure of the enigmatic Jew whom he have this morning meet with in the book - shop . their eye meet , and Mordecai look as much surprised as Deronda neither in his surprise make any sign of recognition . but when Mordecai be seat himself at the end of the table , he just bent his head to the guest in a cold and distant manner , as if the disappointment of the morning remain a disagreeable association with this new acquaintance . 

 Cohen now wash his hand , pronounce Hebrew word the while : afterward , he take off the napkin cover the dish and disclose the two long flat loaf besprinkle with seed the memorial of the manna that feed the wandering forefather and break off small piece give one to each of the family , include Adelaide Rebekah , who stand on the chair with her whole length exhibit in her amber - color garment , her little jewish nose lengthen by compression of the lip in the effort to make a suitable appearance . Cohen then utter another hebrew blessing , and after that , the male head be uncover , all seat themselves , and the meal go on without any peculiarity that interested Deronda . he be not very conscious of what dish he eat from ; be preoccupy with a desire to turn the conversation in a way that would enable he to ask some leading question ; and also think of Mordecai , between whom and himself there be an exchange of fascinated , half furtive glance . Mordecai have no handsome Sabbath garment , but instead of the threadbare rusty black coat of the morning he wear one of light drab , which look as if it have once be a handsome loose paletot now shrunk with washing ; and this change of clothing give a still strong accentuation to his dark - haired , eager face which might have belong to the prophet Ezekiel also probably not modish in the eye of contemporary . it be noticeable that the thin tail of the fried fish be give to Mordecai ; and in general the sort of share assign to a poor relation no doubt a ' survival " of prehistoric practice , not yet generally admit to be superstitious . 

 Mr. Cohen keep up the conversation with much liveliness , introduce as subject always in taste   the Jew be proud of his loyalty   the Queen and the Royal Family , the Emperor and Empress of the French into which both grandmother and wife enter with z . Mrs. Cohen the young show an accurate memory of distinguished birthday ; and the elder assist her son in inform the guest of what occur when the Emperor and Empress be in England and visit the city ten year before . 

 " I dare say you know all about it well than we do , sir , " say Cohen , repeatedly , by way of preface to full information ; and the interesting statement be keep up in a trio . 

 " our baby be name Eu genie Esther , " say young Mrs. Cohen , vivaciously . 

 " it be wonderful how the Emperor 's like a cousin of mine in the face , " say the grandmother ; " it strike I like lightning when I catch sight of he . I could not   have think it . " 

 " Mother , and I go to see the Emperor and Empress at the Crystal Palace , " say Mr. Cohen . " I have a fine piece of work to take care of , mother ; she might have be squeeze flat though she be pretty near as lusty then as she be now . I say if I have a hundred mother I would never take one of them to see the Emperor and Empress at the Crystal Palace again ; and you may think a man can not   afford it when he be get but one mother not if he would ever so big an insurance on she . " he stroke his mother 's shoulder affectionately , and chuckle a little at his own humor . 

 " your mother have be a widow a long while , perhaps , " say Deronda , seize his opportunity . " that have make your care for she the more needful . " 

 " ay , ay , it be a good many yore - zeit since I have to manage for she and myself , " say Cohen quickly . " I go early to it . it be that make you a sharp knife . " 

 " what do what make a sharp knife , father ? " say Jacob , his cheek very much swollen with sweet - cake . 

 the father wink at his guest and say , " have your nose put on the grindstone . " 

 Jacob slip from his chair with the piece of sweet - cake in his hand , and go close up to Mordecai , who have be totally silent hitherto , say , " what do that mean put my nose to the grindstone ? " 

 " it mean that you be to bear be hurt without make a noise , " say Mordecai , turn his eye benignantly on the small face close to his . Jacob put the corner of the cake into Mordecai 's mouth as an invitation to bite , say meanwhile , " I shall not   though , " and keep his eye on the cake to observe how much of it go in this act of generosity . Mordecai take a bite and smile , evidently mean to please the lad , and the little incident make they both look more lovable . Deronda , however , feel with some vexation that he have take little by his question . 

 " I fancy that be the right quarter for learn , " say he , carry on the subject that he might have an excuse for address Mordecai , to whom he turn and say , " you have be a great student , I imagine ? " 

 " I have study , " be the quiet answer . " and you ? you know german by the book you be buy . " 

 " yes , I have study in Germany . be you generally engage in bookselle ? " say Deronda . 

 " no ; I only go to Mr. Ram 's shop every day to keep it while he go to meal , " say Mordecai , who be now look at Deronda with what seem a revival of his original interest : it seem as if the face have some attractive indication for he which now neutralize the former disappointment . after a slight pause , he say , " perhaps you know Hebrew ? " 

 " I be sorry to say , not at all . " 

 Mordecai 's countenance fall : he cast down his eyelid , look at his hand , which lie cross before he , and say no more . Deronda have now notice more decisively than in their former interview a difficulty in breathing , which he think must be a sign of consumption . 

 " I have   have something else to do than to get book - learning . " say Mr. Cohen , " I have   have to make myself know about useful thing . I know stone well , " here he point to Deronda 's ring . " I be not afraid of take that ring of yours at my own valuation . but now , " he add , with a certain drop in his voice to a low , more familiar nasal , " what do you want for it ? " 

 " fifty or sixty pound , " Deronda answer , rather too carelessly . 

 Cohen pause a little , thrust his hand into his pocket , fix on Deronda a pair of glisten eye that suggest a miraculous guinea - pig , and say , " could not   do you that . happy to oblige , but could not   go that length . forty pound say forty I will let you have forty on it . " 

 Deronda be aware that Mordecai have look up again at the word imply a monetary affair , and be now examine he again , while he say , " very well , I shall redeem it in a month or so . " 

 " good . I will make you out the ticket by - and - by , " say Cohen , indifferently . then he hold up his finger as a sign that conversation must be defer . he , Mordecai and Jacob put on their hat , and Cohen open a thanksgiving , which be carry on by response , till Mordecai deliver himself alone at some length , in a solemn chant tone , with his chin slightly uplifted and his thin hand clasp easily before he . not only in his accent and tone , but in his freedom from the self - consciousness which have reference to other ' approbation , there could hardly have be a strong contrast to the Jew at the other end of the table . it be an unaccountable conjunction the presence among these common , prosperous , shopkeepe type , of a man who , in an emaciated threadbare condition , impose a certain awe on Deronda , and an embarrassment at not meet his expectation . 

 no soon have Mordecai finish his devotional strain , than rise , with a slight bend of his head to the stranger , he walk back into his room , and shut the door behind he . 

 " that seem to be rather a remarkable man , " say Deronda , turn to 
 Cohen , who immediately set up his shoulder , put out his tongue 
 slightly , and tap his own brow . it be clearly to be understand that 
 Mordecai do not come up to the standard of sanity which be set by Mr. 
 Cohen 's view of man and thing . 
 " do he belong to your family ? " say Deronda . 

 this idea appear to be rather ludicrous to the lady as well as to 
 Cohen , and the family interchange look of amusement . 
 " no , no , " say Cohen . " Charity ! charity ! he work for I , and when he get weak and weak I take he in . he be an incumbrance ; but he bring a blessing down , and he teach the boy . besides , he do the repair at the watch and jewelry . " 

 Deronda hardly abstain from smile at this mixture of kindliness and the desire to justify it in the light of a calculation ; but his willingness to speak far of Mordecai , whose character be make the more enigmatically strike by these new detail , be baffle . Mr. Cohen immediately dismiss the subject by revert to the " accommodation , " which be also an act of charity , and proceed to make out the ticket , get the forty pound , and present they both in exchange for the diamond ring . Deronda , feel that it would be hardly delicate to protract his visit beyond the settlement of the business which be its pretext , have to take his leave , with no more decide result than the advance of forty pound and the pawn - ticket in his breast - pocket , to make a reason for return when he come up to town after Christmas . he be resolve that he would then endeavor to gain a little more insight into the character and history of Mordecai ; from whom also he might gather something decisive about the Cohens for example , the reason why it be forbid to ask Mrs. Cohen the elder whether she have a daughter . 

 BOOK V. MORDECAI . 

 CHAPTER XXXV . 

 be uneasiness of conscience measure by extent of crime , human history have be different , and one should look to see the contriver of greedy war and the mighty marauder of the money - market in one troop of self - lacerate penitent with the mean robber and cut - purse and the murderer that doth his butchery in small with his own hand . no doubt wickedness hath its reward to distribute ; but who so win in this devil 's game must need be base , more cruel , more brutal than the order of this planet will allow for the multitude bear of woman , the most of these carry a form of conscience a fear which be the shadow of justice , a pity which be the shadow of love that hindereth from the prize of serene wickedness , itself difficult of maintenance in our composite flesh . 

 on the twenty - ninth of December Deronda know that the Grandcourts have arrive at the Abbey , but he have have no glimpse of they before he go to dress for dinner . there have be a splendid fall of snow , allow the party of child the rare pleasure of snow - balling and snow - building , and in the Christmas holiday the Mallinger girl be content with no amusement unless it be join in and manage by " cousin , " as they have always call Deronda . after that outdoor exertion he have be play billiard , and thus the hour have pass without his dwelling at all on the prospect of meet Gwendolen at dinner . nevertheless that prospect be interesting to he ; and when , a little tired and heat with work at amusement , he go to his room before the half - hour bell have rung , he begin to think of it with some speculation on the sort of influence her marriage with Grandcourt would have on she , and on the probability that there would be some discernible shade of change in her manner since he see she at diplow , just as there have be since his first vision of she at Leubronn . 

 " I fancy there be some nature one could see grow or degenerate every day , if one watch they , " be his thought . " I suppose some of we go on fast than other : and I be sure she be a creature who keep strong trace of anything that have once impress she . that little affair of the necklace , and the idea that somebody think her gambling wrong , have evidently bite into she . but such impressibility lead both way : it may drive one to desperation as soon as to anything well . and whatever fascination Grandcourt may have for capricious taste good heaven ! who can believe that he would call out the tender affection in daily companionship ? one might be tempt to horsewhip he for the sake of get some show of passion into his face and speech . I be afraid she marry he out of ambition to escape poverty . but why do she run out of his way at first ? the poverty come after , though . poor thing ! she may have be urge into it . how can one feel anything else than pity for a young creature like that full of unused life ignorantly rash hang all her blind expectation on that remnant of a human being . " 

 doubtless the phrase which Deronda 's meditation apply to the bridegroom be the less complimentary for the excuse and pity in which it clothe the bride . his notion of Grandcourt as a " remnant " be found on no particular knowledge , but simply on the impression which ordinary polite intercourse have give he that Grandcourt have wear out all his natural healthy interest in thing . 

 in general , one may be sure that whenever a marriage of any mark take place , male acquaintance be likely to pity the bride , female acquaintance the bridegroom : each , it be think , might have do well ; and especially where the bride be charming , young gentleman on the scene be apt to conclude that she can have no real attachment to a fellow so unintereste to themselves as her husband , but have marry he on other ground . who , under such circumstance , pity the husband ? even his female friend be apt to think his position retributive : he should have choose some one else . but perhaps Deronda may be excuse that he do not prepare any pity for Grandcourt , who have never strike acquaintance as likely to come out of his experience with more suffering than he inflict ; whereas , for Gwendolen , young , headlong , eager for pleasure , feed with the flattery which make a lovely girl believe in her divine right to rule how quickly might life turn from expectancy to a bitter sense of the irremediable ! after what he have see of she he must have have rather dull feeling not to have look forward with some interest to her entrance into the room . still , since the honeymoon be already three week in the distance , and Gwendolen have be enthrone , not only at Ryeland 's , but at Diplow , she be likely to have compose her countenance with suitable manifestation or concealment , not be one who would indulge the curious by a helpless exposure of her feeling . 

 a various party have be invite to meet the new couple ; the old aristocracy be represent by Lord and Lady Pentreath ; the old gentry by young Mr. and Mrs. Fitzadam of the Worcestershire branch of the Fitzadams ; politic and the public good , as specialize in the cider interest , by Mr. Fenn , member for West Orchards , accompany by his two daughter ; Lady Mallinger 's family , by her brother , Mr. Raymond , and his wife ; the useful bachelor element by Mr. Sinker , the eminent counsel , and by Mr. Vandernoodt , whose acquaintance Sir Hugo have find pleasant enough at Leubronn to be adopt in England . 

 all have assemble in the drawing - room before the new couple appear . meanwhile , the time be be pass chiefly in notice the child various little Raymonds , nephew and niece of Lady Mallinger 's with her own three girl , who be always allow to appear at this hour . the scene be really delightful enlarge by full - length portrait with deep background , insert in the cedar paneling surmount by a ceiling that glow with the rich color of the coat of arm range between the socket illuminate almost as much by the red fire of oak - bough as by the pale wax - light still by the deep - pile carpet and by the high english breeding that subdue all voice ; while the mixture of age , from the white - haired Lord and Lady Pentreath to the four - year - old Edgar Raymond , give a varied charm to the live group . Lady Mallinger , with fair matronly roundness and mildly prominent blue eye , move about in her black velvet , carry a tiny white dog on her arm as a sort of finish to her costume ; the child be scatter among the lady , while most of the gentleman be stand rather aloof , converse with that very moderate vivacity observable during the long minute before dinner . Deronda be a little out of the circle in a dialogue fix upon he by Mr. Vandernoodt , a man of the good dutch blood import at the revolution : for the rest , one of those commodious person in society who be nothing particular themselves , but be understand to be acquaint with the good in every department ; close - clip , pale - eye , nonchalant , as good a foil as could well be find to the intense coloring and vivid gravity of Deronda . 

 he be talk of the bride and bridegroom , whose appearance be be wait for . Mr. Vandernoodt be an industrious gleaner of personal detail , and could probably tell everything about a great philosopher or physicist except his theory or discovery ; he be now imply that he have learn many fact about Grandcourt since meet he at Leubronn . 

 " man who have see a good deal of life do not   always end by choose their wife so well . he have have rather an anecdotic history go rather deep into pleasure , I fancy , lazy as he be . but , of course , you know all about he . " 

 " no , really , " say Deronda , in an indifferent tone . " I know little more of he than that he be Sir Hugo 's nephew . " 

 but now the door open and defer any satisfaction of Mr. 
 Vandernoodt 's communicativeness . 
 the scene be one to set off any figure of distinction that enter on it , and certainly when Mr. and Mrs. Grandcourt enter , no beholder could deny that their figure have distinction . the bridegroom have neither more nor less easy perfection of costume , neither more nor less well - cut impassibility of face , than before his marriage . it be to be suppose of he that he would put up with nothing less than the good in outward equipment , wife include ; and the bride be what he might have be expect to choose . " by George , I think she be handsomer , if anything ! " say Mr. Vandernoodt . and Deronda be of the same opinion , but he say nothing . the white silk and diamond it may seem strange , but she do wear diamond on her neck , in her ear , in her hair might have something to do with the new imposingness of her beauty , which flash on he as more unquestionable if not more thoroughly satisfactory than when he have first see she at the gaming - table . some face which be peculiar in their beauty be like original work of art : for the first time they be almost always meet with question . but in see Gwendolen at Diplow , Deronda have discern in she more than he have expect of that tender appeal charm which we call womanly . be there any new change since then ? he distrust his impression ; but as he see she receive greeting with what seem a proud cold quietude and a superficial smile , there seem to be at work within she the same demonic force that have possess she when she take he in her resolute glance and turn away a loser from the gaming - table . there be no time for more of a conclusion no time even for he to give his greeting before the summon to dinner . 

 he sit not far from opposite to she at table , and could sometimes hear what she say in answer to Sir Hugo , who be at his lively in conversation with she ; but though he look toward she with the intention of bow , she give he no opportunity of do so for some time . at last Sir Hugo , who might have imagine that they have already speak to each other , say , " Deronda , you will like to hear what Mrs. Grandcourt tell I about your favorite Klesmer . " 

 Gwendolen 's eyelid have be lower , and Deronda , already look at she , think he discover a quivering reluctance as she be oblige to raise they and return his unembarrassed bow and smile , her own smile be one of the lip merely . it be but an instant , and Sir Hugo continue without pause 

 " the arrowpoint have condone the marriage , and he be spend the 
 Christmas with his bride at Quetcham . " 
 " I suppose he will be glad of it for the sake of his wife , else I dare say he would not have minded keeping at a distance , " say Deronda . 

 " it be a sort of troubadour story , " say Lady Pentreath , an easy , deep - voice old lady ; " I be glad to find a little romance leave among we . I think our young people now be get too worldly wise . " 

 " it show the arrowpoint ' good sense , however , to have adopt the affair , after the fuss in the paper , " say Sir Hugo . " and disown your own child because of a mťsalliance be something like disown your one eye : everybody know it be your , and you have no other to make an appearance with . " 

 " as to mťsalliance , there be no blood on any side , " say Lady Pentreath . " Old Admiral Arrowpoint be one of Nelson 's man , you know a doctor 's son . and we all know how the mother 's money come . " 

 " if they be any mťsalliance in the case , I should say it be on 
 Klesmer 's side , " say Deronda . 
 " ah , you think it be a case of the immortal marry the mortal . what be your opinion ? " say Sir Hugo , look at Gwendolen . 

 " I have no doubt that Herr Klesmer think himself immortal . but I dare say his wife will burn as much incense before he as he require , " say Gwendolen . she have recover any composure that she might have lose . 

 " do not   you approve of a wife burn incense before her husband ? " say 
 Sir Hugo , with an air of jocoseness . 
 " oh , yes , " say Gwendolen , " if it be only to make other believe in he . " she pause a moment and then say with more gayety , " when Herr Klesmer admire his own genius , it will take off some of the absurdity if his wife say amen . " 

 " Klesmer be no favorite of your , I see , " say Sir Hugo . 

 " I think very highly of he , I assure you , " say Gwendolen . " his genius be quite above my judgment , and I know he to be exceedingly generous . " 

 she speak with the sudden seriousness which be often mean to correct an unfair or indiscreet sally , have a bitterness against Klesmer in her secret soul which she know herself unable to justify . Deronda be wonder what he should have think of she if he have never hear of she before : probably that she put on a little hardness and defiance by way of conceal some painful consciousness if , indeed , he could imagine her manner otherwise than in the light of his suspicion . but why do she not recognize he with more friendliness ? 

 Sir Hugo , by way of change the subject , say to she , " be not this a beautiful room ? it be part of the refectory of the Abbey . there be a division make by those pillar and the three arch , and afterward they be build up . else it be half as large again originally . there use to be row of Benedictines sit where we be sit . suppose we be suddenly to see the light burn low and the ghost of the old monk rise behind all our chair ! " 

 " please do not ! " say Gwendolen , with a playful shudder . " it be very nice to come after ancestor and monk , but they should know their place and keep underground . I should be rather frightened to go about this house all alone . I suppose the old generation must be angry with we because we have alter thing so much . " 

 " oh , the ghost must be of all political party , " say Sir Hugo . " and those fellow who want to change thing while they live and could not   do it must be on our side . but if you would not like to go over the house alone , you will like to go in company , I hope . you and Grandcourt ought to see it all . and we will ask Deronda to go round with we . he be more learn about it than I be . " the baronet be in the most complaisant of humor . 

 Gwendolen steal a glance at Deronda , who must have hear what Sir Hugo say , for he have his face turn toward they help himself to an entrťe ; but he look as impassive as a picture . at the notion of Deronda 's show she and Grandcourt the place which be to be theirs , and which she with painful emphasis remember might have be his   perhaps , if other have act differently , certain thought have rush in thought repeat within she , but now return on an occasion embarrassingly new ; and be conscious of something furtive and awkward in her glance which Sir Hugo must have notice . with her usual readiness of resource against betrayal , she say , playfully , " you do not   know how much I be afraid of Mr. Deronda . " 

 " how be that ? because you think he too learn ? " say Sir Hugo , whom the peculiarity of her glance have not escape . 

 " no . it be ever since I first see he at Leubronn . because when he come to look on at the roulette - table , I begin to lose . he cast an evil eye on my play . he do not   approve it . he have tell I so . and now whatever I do before he , I be afraid he will cast an evil eye upon it . " 

 " Gad ! I be rather afraid of he myself when he do not   approve , " say Sir Hugo , glance at Deronda ; and then turn his face toward Gwendolen , he say less audibly , " I do not   think lady generally object to have his eye upon they . " the baronet 's small chronic complaint of facetiousness be at this moment almost as annoying to Gwendolen as it often be to Deronda . 

 " I object to any eye that be critical , " she say , in a cool , high voice , with a turn of her neck . " be there many of these old room leave in the Abbey ? " 

 " not many . there be a fine cloister court with a long gallery above it . but the fine bit of all be turn into stable . it be part of the old church . when I improve the place I make the most of every other bit ; but it be out of my reach to change the stable , so the horse have the benefit of the fine old choir . you must go and see it . " 

 " I shall like to see the horse as well as the building , " say 
 Gwendolen . 
 " oh , I have no stud to speak of . Grandcourt will look with contempt at my horse , " say Sir Hugo . " I have   give up hunting , and go on in a jog - trot way , as become an old gentleman with daughter . the fact be , I go in for do too much at this place . we all live at Diplow for two year while the alteration be go on : do you like diplow ? " 

 " not particularly , " say Gwendolen , with indifference . one would have think that the young lady have all her life have more family seat than she care to go to . 

 " ah ! it will not do after ryeland , " say Sir Hugo , well please . " Grandcourt , I know , take it for the sake of the hunting . but he find something so much well there , " add the baronet , lower his voice , " that he might well prefer it to any other place in the world . " 

 " it have one attraction for I , " say Gwendolen , pass over this compliment with a chill smile , " that it be within reach of Offendene . " 

 " I understand that , " say Sir Hugo , and then let the subject drop . 

 what amiable baronet can escape the effect of a strong desire for a particular possession ? Sir Hugo would have be glad that Grandcourt , with or without reason , should prefer any other place to diplow ; but inasmuch as in the pure process of wish we can always make the condition of our gratification benevolent , he do wish that Grandcourt 's convenient disgust for Diplow should not be associate with his marriage with this very charming bride . Gwendolen be much to the baronet 's taste , but , as he observe afterward to Lady Mallinger , he should never have take she for a young girl who have marry beyond her expectation . 

 Deronda have not hear much of this conversation , have give his attention elsewhere , but the glimpse he have of Gwendolen 's manner deepen the impression that it have something newly artificial . 

 later , in the drawing - room , Deronda , at somebody 's request , sit down to the piano and sang . afterward , Mrs. Raymond take his place ; and on rise he observe that Gwendolen have leave her seat , and have come to this end of the room , as if to listen more fully , but be now stand with she back to every one , apparently contemplate a fine cowl head carve in ivory which hang over a small table . he long to go to she and speak . why should he not obey such an impulse , as he would have do toward any other lady in the room ? yet he hesitate some moment , observe the graceful line of she back , but not move . 

 if you have any reason for not indulge a wish to speak to a fair woman , it be a bad plan to look long at she back : the wish to see what it screen become the strong . there may be a very sweet smile on the other side . Deronda end by go to the end of the small table , at right angle to Gwendolen 's position , but before he could speak she have turn on he no smile , but such an appealing look of sadness , so utterly different from the chill effort of her recognition at table , that his speech be check . for what be an appreciative space of time to both , though the observation of other could not have measure it , they look at each other she seem to take the deep rest of confession , he with an answer depth of sympathy that neutralize all other feeling . 

 " will you not join in the music ? " he say by way of meet the necessity for speech . 

 that her look of confession have be involuntary be show by that just perceptible shake and change of countenance with which she rouse herself to reply calmly , " I join in it by listen . I be fond of music . " 

 " be you not a musician ? " 

 " I have give a great deal of time to music . but I have not talent enough to make it worth while . I shall never sing again . " 

 " but if you be fond of music , it will always be worth while in private , for your own delight . I make it a virtue to be content with my middlingness , " say Deronda , smile ; " it be always pardonable , so that one do not ask other to take it for superiority . " 

 " I can not imitate you , " say Gwendolen , recover her tone of artificial vivacity . " to be middling with I be another phrase for be dull . and the bad fault I have to find with the world be , that it be dull . do you know , I be go to justify gamble in spite of you . it be a refuge from dullness . " 

 " I do not   admit the justification , " say Deronda . " I think what we call the dullness of thing be a disease in ourselves . else how can any one find an intense interest in life ? and many do . " 

 " ah , I see ! the fault I find in the world be my own fault , " say Gwendolen , smile at he . then after a moment , look up at the ivory again , she say , " do you never find fault with the world or with other ? " 

 " oh , yes . when I be in a grumble mood . " 

 " and hate people ? Confess you hate they when they stand in your way when their gain be your loss ? that be your own phrase , you know . " 

 " we be often stand in each other 's way when we can not   help it . I think it be stupid to hate people on that ground . " 

 " but if they injure you and could have help it ? " say Gwendolen with a hard intensity unaccountable in incidental talk like this . 

 Deronda wonder at her choice of subject . a painful impression arrest his answer a moment , but at last he say , with a graver , deep intonation , " why , then , after all , I prefer my place to theirs . " 

 " there I believe you be right , " say Gwendolen , with a sudden little laugh , and turn to join the group at the piano . 

 Deronda look around for Grandcourt , wonder whether he follow his bride 's movement with any attention ; but it be rather undiscerne to he to suppose that he could find out the fact . Grandcourt have a delusive mood of observe whatever have an interest for he , which could be surpass by no sleepy - eyed animal on the watch for prey . at that moment he be plunge in the depth of an easy chair , be talk to by Mr. Vandernoodt , who apparently think the acquaintance of such a bridegroom worth cultivate ; and an incautious person might have suppose it safe to telegraph secret in front of he , the common prejudice be that your quick observer be one whose eye have quick movement . not at all . if you want a respectable witness who will see nothing inconvenient , choose a vivacious gentleman , very much on the alert , with two eye wide open , a glass in one of they , and an entire impartiality as to the purpose of look . if Grandcourt care to keep any one under his power he see they out of the corner of his long narrow eye , and if they go behind he he have a constructive process by which he know what they be do there . he know perfectly well where his wife be , and how she be behave . be he go to be a jealous husband ? Deronda imagine that to be likely ; but his imagination be as much astray about Grandcourt as it would have be about an unexplored continent where all the specie be peculiar . he do not conceive that he himself be a likely subject of jealousy , or that he should give any pretext for it ; but the suspicion that a wife be not happy naturally lead one to speculate on the husband 's private deportment ; and Deronda find himself after one o'clock in the morning in the rather ludicrous position of sit up severely hold a Hebrew grammar in his hand   for somehow , in deference to Mordecai , he have begin to study Hebrew , with the consciousness that he have be in that attitude nearly an hour , and have think of nothing but Gwendolen and her husband . to be an unusual young man mean for the most part to get a difficult mastery over the usual , which be often like the sprite of ill - luck you pack up your good to escape from , and see grin at you from the top of your luggage van . the peculiarity of Deronda 's nature have be acutely touch by the brief incident and word which make the history of his intercourse with Gwendolen ; and this evening 's slight addition have give they an importunate recurrence . it be not vanity it be ready sympathy that have make he alive to a certain appealingness in her behavior toward he ; and the difficulty with which she have seem to raise her eye to bow to he , in the first instance , be to be interpret now by that unmistakable look of involuntary confidence which she have afterward turn on he under the consciousness of his approach . 

 " what be the use of it all ? " think Deronda , as he throw down his grammar , and begin to undress . " I can not   do anything to help she nobody can , if she have find out her mistake already . and it seem to I that she have a dreary lack of the idea that might help she . strange and piteous to human flesh like that might be , wrap round with fine raiment , her ear pierce for gem , her head hold loftily , her mouth all smile pretence , the poor soul within she sit in sick distaste of all thing ! but what do I know of she ? there may be a demon in she to match the bad husband , for what I can tell . she be clearly an ill - educate , worldly girl : perhaps she be a coquette . " 

 this last reflection , not much believe in , be a self - administer dose of caution , prompt partly by Sir Hugo 's much - contemn joke on the subject of flirtation . Deronda resolve not to volunteer any tete - a - tete with Gwendolen during the day of her stay at the Abbey ; and he be capable of keep a resolve in spite of much inclination to the contrary . 

 but a man can not resolve about a woman 's action , least of all about those of a woman like Gwendolen , in whose nature there be a combination of proud reserve with rashness , of perilously poise terror with defiance , which might alternately flatter and disappoint control . few word could less represent she than " coquette . " she have native love of homage , and belief in her own power ; but no cold artifice for the sake of enslaving . and the poor thing 's belief in her power , with her other dream before marriage , have often to be thrust aside now like the toy of a sick child , which it look at with dull eye , and have no heart to play with , however it may try . 

 the next day at lunch Sir Hugo say to she , " the thaw have go on like magic , and it be so pleasant out of door just now shall we go and see the stable and the other odd bit about the place ? " 

 " yes , pray , " say Gwendolen . " you will like to see the stable , 
 Henleigh ? " she add , look at her husband . 
 " uncommonly , " say Grandcourt , with an indifference which seem to give irony to the word , as he return her look . it be the first time Deronda have see they speak to each other since their arrival , and he think their exchange of look as cold or official as if it have be a ceremony to keep up a charter . still , the english fondness for reserve will account for much negation ; and Grandcourt 's manner with an extra veil of reserve over they might be expect to present the extreme type of the national taste . 

 " who else be inclined to make the tour of the house and premise ? " say Sir Hugo . " the lady must muffle themselves ; there be only just about time to do it well before sunset . you will go , Dan , will not   you ? " 

 " oh , yes , " say Deronda , carelessly , know that Sir Hugo would think any excuse disoblige . 

 " all meet in the library , then , when they be ready say in half an hour , " say the baronet . Gwendolen make herself ready with wonderful quickness , and in ten minute come down into the library in her sable , plume , and little thick boot . as soon as she enter the room she be aware that some one else be there : it be precisely what she have hop for . Deronda be stand with his back toward she at the far end of the room , and be look over a newspaper . how could little thick boot make any noise on an Axminster carpet ? and to cough would have seem an intend signaling which her pride could not condescend to ; also , she feel bashful about walk up to he and let he know that she be there , though it be her hunger to speak to he which have set her imagination on construct this chance of find he , and have make her hurry down , as bird hover near the water which they dare not drink . always uneasily dubious about his opinion of she , she feel a peculiar anxiety to - day , lest he might think of she with contempt , as one triumphantly conscious of be Grandcourt 's wife , the future lady of this domain . it be her habitual effort now to magnify the satisfaction of her pride , on which she nourish her strength ; but somehow Deronda 's be there disturb they all . there be not the faint touch of coquetry in the attitude of her mind toward he : he be unique to she among man , because he have impress she as be not her admirer but her superior : in some mysterious way he be become a part of her conscience , as one woman whose nature be an object of reverential belief may become a new conscience to a man . 

 and now he would not look round and find out that she be there ! the paper crackle in his hand , his head rise and sink , explore those stupid column , and he be evidently stroke his beard ; as if this world be a very easy affair to she . of course all the rest of the company would soon be down , and the opportunity of she say something to efface her flippancy of the evening before , would be quite go . she feel sick with irritation so fast do young creature like her absorb misery through invisible sucker of their own fancy and her face have gather that peculiar expression which come with a mortification to which tear be forbid . 

 at last he throw down the paper and turn round . 

 " oh , you be there already , " he say , come forward a step or two : " I must go and put on my coat . " 

 he turn aside and walk out of the room . this be behave quite badly . mere politeness would have make he stay to exchange some word before leave she alone . it be true that Grandcourt come in with Sir Hugo immediately after , so that the word must have be too few to be worth anything . as it be , they see he walk from the library door . 

 " a you look rather ill , " say Grandcourt , go straight up to she , stand in front of she , and look into her eye . " do you feel equal to the walk ? " 

 " yes , I shall like it , " say Gwendolen , without the slight movement except this of the lip . 

 " we could put off go over the house , you know , and only go out of door , " say Sir Hugo , kindly , while Grandcourt turn aside . 

 " oh , dear no ! " say Gwendolen , speak with determination ; " let we put off nothing . I want a long walk . " 

 the rest of the walk party two lady and two gentleman besides Deronda have now assemble ; and Gwendolen rallying , go with due cheerfulness by the side of Sir Hugo , pay apparently an equal attention to the commentary Deronda be call upon to give on the various architectural fragment , to Sir Hugo 's reason for not attempt to remedy the mixture of the undisguise modern with the antique which in his opinion only make the place the more truly historical . on their way to the buttery and kitchen they take the outside of the house and pause before a beautiful pointed doorway , which be the only old remnant in the east front . 

 " well , now , to my mind , " say Sir Hugo , " that be more interesting standing as it be in the middle of what be frankly four century later , than if the whole front have be dress up in a pretense of the thirteenth century . addition ought to smack of the time when they be make and carry the stamp of their period . I would not   destroy any old bit , but that notion of reproduce the old be a mistake , I think . at least , if a man like to do it he must pay for his whistle . besides , where be you to stop along that road make loophole where you do not   want to peep , and so on ? you may as well ask I to wear out the stone with kneeling ; eh , Grandcourt ? " 

 " a confound nuisance , " drawled Grandcourt . " I hate fellow want to howl litany act the great bore that have ever exist . " 

 " well , yes , that be what their romanticism must come to , " say Sir Hugo , in a tone of confidential assent " that be if they carry it out logically . " 

 " I think that way of argue against a course because it may be ride down to an absurdity would soon bring life to a standstill , " say Deronda . " it be not the logic of human action , but of a roasting - jack , that must go on to the last turn when it have be once wind up . we can do nothing safely without some judgment as to where we be to stop . " 

 " I find the rule of the pocket the good guide , " say Sir Hugo , laughingly . " and as for most of your new - old building , you have need to hire man to scratch and chip it all over artistically to give it an elderly - look surface ; which at the present rate of labor would not answer . " 

 " do you want to keep up the old fashion , then , Mr. Deronda ? " say Gwendolen , take advantage of the freedom of group to fall back a little , while Sir Hugo and Grandcourt go on . 

 " some of they . I do not   see why we should not use our choice there as we do elsewhere or why either age or novelty by itself be an argument for or against . to delight in do thing because our father do they be good if it shut out nothing well ; it enlarge the range of affection and affection be the broad basis of good in life . " 

 " do you think so ? " say Gwendolen with a little surprise . " I should have think you care most about idea , knowledge , wisdom , and all that . " 

 " but to care about they be a sort of affection , " say Deronda , smile at her sudden naivetť . " call it attachment ; interest , willing to bear a great deal for the sake of be with they and save they from injury . of course , it make a difference if the object of interest be human being ; but generally in all deep affection the object be a mixture half person and half idea sentiment and affection flow in together . " 

 " I wonder whether I understand that , " say Gwendolen , put up her chin in her old saucy manner . " I believe I be not very affectionate ; perhaps you mean to tell I , that be the reason why I do not   see much good in life . " 

 " no , I do not mean to tell you that ; but I admit that I should think it true if I believe what you say of yourself , " say Deronda , gravely . 

 here Sir Hugo and Grandcourt turn round and pause . 

 " I never can get Mr. Deronda to pay I a compliment , " say Gwendolen . " I have quite a curiosity to see whether a little flattery can be extract from he . " 

 " ah ! " say Sir Hugo , glance at Deronda , " the fact be , it be useless to flatter a bride . we give it up in despair . she have be so fed on sweet speech that every thing we say seem tasteless . " 

 " quite true , " say Gwendolen , bend her head and smile . " Mr. Grandcourt win I by neatly - turn compliment . if there have be one word out of place it would have be fatal . " 

 " do you hear that ? " say Sir Hugo , look at the husband . 

 " yes , " say Grandcourt , without change of countenance . " it be a deucedly hard thing to keep up , though . " 

 all this seem to Sir Hugo a natural playfulness between such a husband and wife ; but Deronda wonder at the mislead alternation in Gwendolen 's manner , which at one moment seem to excite sympathy by childlike indiscretion , at another to repel it by proud concealment . he try to keep out of her way by devote himself to Miss Juliet Fenn , a young lady whose profile have be so unfavorably decide by circumstance over which she have no control , that Gwendolen some month ago have feel it impossible to be jealous of she . nevertheless , when they be see the kitchen a part of the original building in perfect preservation the depth of shadow in the niche of the stone - wall and groin vault , the play of light from the huge glowing fire on polished tin , brass , and copper , the fine resonance that come with every sound of voice or metal , be all spoil for Gwendolen , and Sir Hugo 's speech about they be make rather importunate , because Deronda be discourse to the other lady and keep at a distance from she . it do not signify that the other gentleman take the opportunity of be near she : of what use in the world be their admiration while she have an uneasy sense that there be some standard in Deronda 's mind which measure she into littleness ? Mr. Vandernoodt , who have the mania of always describe one thing while you be look at another , be quite intolerable with his insistence on Lord Blough 's kitchen , which he have see in the north . 

 " pray do not   ask we to see two kitchen at once . it make the heat double . I must really go out of it , " she cry at last , march resolutely into the open air , and leave the other in the rear . Grandcourt be already out , and as she join he , he say 

 " I wonder how long you mean to stay in that damned place " one of the freedom he have assume as a husband be the use of his strong epithet . Gwendolen , turn to see the rest of the party approach , say 

 " it be certainly rather too warm in one 's wrap . " 

 they walk on the gravel across a green court , where the snow still lie in islet on the grass , and in mass on the bough of the great cedar and the crenelate coping of the stone wall , and then into a large court , where there be another cedar , to find the beautiful choir long ago turn into stable , in the first instance perhaps after an impromptu fashion by trooper , who have a pious satisfaction in insult the priest of Baal and the image of Ashtoreth , the queen of heaven . the exterior its west end , save for the stable door , wall in with brick and cover with ivy be much deface , maim of finial and gurgoyle , the friable limestone break and fret , and lend its soft gray to a powdery dark lichen ; the long window , too , be fill in with brick as far as the springing of the arch , the broad clerestory window with wire or ventilate blind . with the low wintry afternoon sun upon it , send shadow from the cedar bough , and light up the touch of snow remain on every ledge , it have still a scarcely disturb aspect of antique solemnity , which give the scene in the interior rather a startling effect ; though , ecclesiastical or reverential indignation apart , the eye could hardly help dwell with pleasure on its piquant picturesqueness . each finely - arch chapel be turn into a stall , where in the dusty glazing of the window there still gleam patch of crimson , orange , blue , and pale violet ; for the rest , the choir have be gutte , the floor level , pave , and drain accord to the most approved fashion , and a line of loose box erect in the middle : a soft light fall from the upper window on sleek brown or gray flank and haunch ; on mild equine face look out with active nostril over the varnish brown boarding ; on the hay hang from rack where the saint once look down from the altar - piece , and on the pale golden straw scatter or in heap ; on a little white - and - liver - colored spaniel make his bed on the back of an elderly hackney , and on four ancient angel , still show sign of devotion like mutilate martyr while over all , the grand pointed roof , untouched by reform wash , show its line and color mysteriously through veil shadow and cobweb , and a hoof now and then strike against the board seem to fill the vault with thunder , while outside there be the answer bay of the blood - hound . 

 " oh , this be glorious ! " Gwendolen burst forth , in forgetfulness of everything but the immediate impression : there have be a little intoxication for she in the grand space of court and building , and the fact of she be an important person among they . " this be glorious ! only I wish there be a horse in every one of the box . I would ten time rather have these stable than those at diplow . " 

 but she have no soon say this than some consciousness arrest she , and involuntarily she turn her eye toward Deronda , who oddly enough have take off his feel hat and stand hold it before he as if they have enter a room or an actual church . he , like other , happen to be look at she , and their eye meet to her intense vexation , for it seem to she that by look at he she have betray the reference of her thought , and she feel herself blush : she exaggerate the impression that even Sir Hugo as well as Deronda would have of her bad taste in refer to the possession of anything at the Abbey : as for Deronda , she have probably make he despise she . her annoyance at what she imagine to be the obviousness of her confusion rob she of her usual facility in carry it off by playful speech , and turn up her face to look at the roof , she wheel away in that attitude . if any have notice her blush as significant , they have certainly not interpret it by the secret winding and recess of her feeling . a blush be no language : only a dubious flag - signal which may mean either of two contradictory . Deronda alone have a faint guess at some part of her feeling ; but while he be observe she he be himself under observation . 

 " do you take off your hat to horse ? " say Grandcourt , with a slight sneer . 

 " why not ? " say Deronda , cover himself . he have really take off the hat automatically , and if he have be an ugly man might doubtless have do so with impunity ; ugliness have naturally the air of involuntary exposure , and beauty , of display . 

 Gwendolen 's confusion be soon merge in the survey of the horse , which Grandcourt politely abstain from appraise , languidly assent to Sir Hugo 's alternate depreciation and eulogy of the same animal , as one that he should not have buy when he be young , and pique himself on his horse , but yet one that have well quality than many more expensive brute . 

 " the fact be , stable dive deeply and deep into the pocket nowadays , and I be very glad to have get rid of that dťmangeaison , " say Sir Hugo , as they be come out . 

 " what be a man to do , though ? " say Grandcourt . " he must ride . I do not   see what else there be to do . and I do not   call it rid to sit astride a set of brute with every deformity under the sun . " 

 this delicate diplomatic way of characterize Sir Hugo 's stud do not require direct notice ; and the baronet , feel that the conversation have wear rather thin , say to the party generally , " now we be go to see the cloister the fine bit of all in perfect preservation ; the monk might have be walk there yesterday . " 

 but Gwendolen have linger behind to look at the kenneled blood - hound , perhaps because she feel a little dispirit ; and Grandcourt wait for she . 

 " you have well take my arm , " he say , in his low tone of command ; and she take it . 

 " it be a great bore be drag about in this way , and no cigar , " say 
 Grandcourt . 
 " I think you would like it . " 

 " like it ! one eternal chatter . and encourage those ugly girl invite one to meet such monster . how that fat Deronda can bear look at she " 

 " why do you call he fat ? do you object to he so much ? " 

 " object ? no . what do I care about his be a fat ? it be of no consequence to I . I will invite he to diplow again if you like . " 

 " I do not   think he would come . he be too clever and learn to care about we , " say Gwendolen , think it useful for her husband to be tell   privately   that it be possible for he to be look down upon . 

 " I never see that make much difference in a man . either he be a gentleman , or he be not , " say Grandcourt . 

 that a new husband and wife should snatch , a moment 's tete - a - tete be what could be understand and indulge ; and the rest of the party leave they in the rear till , re - enter the garden , they all pause in that cloister court where , among the fall rose - petal thirteen year before , we see a boy become acquaint with his first sorrow . this cloister be build of a hard stone than the church , and have be in great safety from the wear weather . it be a rare example of a northern cloister with arched and pillard opening not intend for glazing , and the delicately - wrought foliage of the capital seem still to carry the very touch of the chisel . Gwendolen have drop her husband 's arm and join the other lady , to whom Deronda be notice the delicate sense which have combine freedom with accuracy in the imitation of natural form . 

 " I wonder whether one oftener learn to love real object through their representation , or the representation through the real object , " he say , after point out a lovely capital make by the curl leaf of green , show their reticulated under - side with the firm gradual swell of its central rib . " when I be a little fellow these capital teach I to observe and delight in the structure of leaf . " 

 " I suppose you can see every line of they with your eye shut , " say 
 Juliet Fenn . 
 " yes . I be always repeat they , because for a good many year this court stand for I as my only image of a convent , and whenever I read of monk and monastery , this be my scenery for they . " 

 " you must love this place very much , " say Miss Fenn , innocently , not think of inheritance . " so many home be like twenty other . but this be unique , and you seem to know every cranny of it . I dare say you could never love another home so well . " 

 " oh , I carry it with I , " say Deronda , quietly , be use to all possible thought of this kind . " to most man their early home be no more than a memory of their early year , and I be not sure but they have the good of it . the image be never mar . there be no disappointment in memory , and one 's exaggeration be always on the good side . " 

 Gwendolen feel sure that he speak in that way out of delicacy to she and Grandcourt because he know they must hear he ; and that he probably think of she as a selfish creature who only care about possess thing in her own person . but whatever he might say , it must have be a secret hardship to he that any circumstance of his birth have shut he out from the inheritance of his father 's position ; and if he suppose that she exult in her husband 's take it , what could he feel for she but scornful pity ? indeed it seem clear to she that he be avoid she , and prefer talk to other which nevertheless be not kind in he . 

 with these thought in her mind she be prevent by a mixture of pride and timidity from address he again , and when they be look at the row of quaint portrait in the gallery above the cloister , she keep up her air of interest and make her vivacious remark without any direct appeal to Deronda . but at the end she be very weary of her assumed spirit , and Grandcourt turn into the billiard - room , she go to the pretty boudoir which have be assign to she , and shut herself up to look melancholy at her ease . no chemical process show a more wonderful activity than the transform influence of the thought we imagine to be go on in another . change in theory , religion , admiration , may begin with a suspicion of dissent or disapproval , even when the ground of disapproval be but matter of search conjecture . 

 Poor Gwendolen be conscious of an uneasy , transform process all the old nature shake to its depth , its hope spoil , its pleasure perturb , but still show wholeness and strength in the will to reassert itself . after every new shock of humiliation she try to adjust herself and seize her old support proud concealment , trust in new excitement that would make life go by without much thinking ; trust in some deed of reparation to nullify her self - blame and shield she from a vague , ever - visit dread of some horrible calamity ; trust in the harden effect of use and will not that would make she indifferent to her misery . 

 yes misery . this beautiful , healthy young creature , with her two - and - twenty year and her gratified ambition , no long feel inclined to kiss her fortunate image in the glass . she look at it with wonder that she could be so miserable . one belief which have accompany she through her unmarried life as a self - cajole superstition , encourage by the subordination of every one about she the belief in her own power of dominating be utterly go . already , in seven short week , which seem half her life , her husband have gain a mastery which she could no more resist than she could have resist the benumb effect from the touch of a torpedo . Gwendolen 's will have seem imperious in its small girlish sway ; but it be the will of a creature with a large discourse of imaginative fear : a shadow would have be enough to relax its hold . and she have find a will like that of a crab or a boa - constrictor , which go on pinch or crush without alarm at thunder . not that Grandcourt be without calculation of the intangible effect which be the chief mean of mastery ; indeed , he have a surprising acuteness in detect that situation of feeling in Gwendolen which make she proud and rebellious spirit dumb and helpless before he . 

 she have burn Lydia Glasher 's letter with an instantaneous terror lest other eye should see it , and have tenaciously conceal from Grandcourt that there be any other cause of her violent hysteric than the excitement and fatigue of the day : she have be urge into an imply falsehood . " do not   ask I it be my feeling about everything it be the sudden change from home . " the word of that letter keep repeat themselves , and hang on her consciousness with the weight of a prophetic doom . " I be the grave in which your chance of happiness be bury as well as mine . you have your warning . you have choose to injure I and my child . he have mean to marry I . he would have marry I at last , if you have not break your word . you will have your punishment . I desire it with all my soul . will you give he this letter to set he against I and ruin we more I and my child ? shall you like to stand before your husband with these diamond on you , and these word of mine in his thought and your ? will he think you have any right to complain when he have make you miserable ? you take he with your eye open . the willing wrong you have do I will be your curse . " 

 the word have nestle their venomous life within she , and stir continually the vision of the scene at the Whispering Stones . that scene be now like an accuse apparition : she dread that Grandcourt should know of it so far out of her sight now be that possibility she have once satisfy herself with , of speak to he about Mrs. Glasher and her child , and make they rich amend . any endurance seem easy than the mortal humiliation of confessing that she know all before she marry he , and in marry he have break her word . for the reason by which she have justify herself when the marriage tempt she , and all her easy arrangement of her future power over her husband to make he do well than he might be incline to do , be now as futile as the burn - out light which set off a child 's pageant . her sense of be blameworthy be exaggerate by a dread both definite and vague . the definite dread be lest the veil of secrecy should fall between she and Grandcourt , and give he the right to taunt she . with the reading of that letter have begin her husband 's empire of fear . 

 and her husband all the while know it . he have not , indeed , any distinct knowledge of her broken promise , and would not have rat highly the effect of that breach on her conscience ; but he be aware not only of what Lush have tell he about the meeting at the Whispering Stones , but also of Gwendolen 's concealment as to the cause of her sudden illness . he feel sure that Lydia have enclose something with the diamond , and that this something , whatever it be , have at once create in Gwendolen a new repulsion for he and a reason for not dare to manifest it . he do not greatly mind , or feel as many man might have feel , that his hope in marriage be blight : he have want to marry Gwendolen , and he be not a man to repent . why should a gentleman whose other relation in life be carry on without the luxury of sympathetic feeling , be suppose to require that kind of condiment in domestic life ? what he chiefly feel be that a change have come over the condition of his mastery , which , far from shake it , might establish it the more thoroughly . and it be establish . he judge that he have not marry a simpleton unable to perceive the impossibility of escape , or to see alternative evil : he have marry a girl who have spirit and pride enough not to make a fool of herself by forfeit all the advantage of a position which have attract she ; and if she want pregnant hint to help she in make up her mind properly he would take care not to withhold they . 

 Gwendolen , indeed , with all that gnaw trouble in her consciousness , have hardly for a moment drop the sense that it be her part to bear herself with dignity , and appear what be call happy . in disclosure of disappointment or sorrow she see nothing but a humiliation which would have be vinegar to her wound . whatever her husband might have come at last to be to she , she mean to wear the yoke so as not to be pity . for she do think of the come year with presentiment : she be frighten at Grandcourt . the poor thing have pass from her girlish sauciness of superiority over this inert speciman of personal distinction into an amazed perception of her former ignorance about the possible mental attitude of a man toward the woman he seek in marriage of her present ignorance as to what their life with each other might turn into . for novelty give immeasurableness to fear , and fill the early time of all sad change with phantom of the future . her little coquetry , voluntary or involuntary , have tell on Grandcourt during courtship , and form a medium of communication between they , show he in the light of a creature such as she could understand and manage : but marriage have nulifie all such interchange , and Grandcourt have become a blank uncertainty to she in everything but this , that he would do just what he will , and that she have neither device at her command to determine his will , nor any rational mean of escape it . 

 what have occur between they and she wear the diamond be typical . one evening , shortly before they come to the Abbey , they be go to dine at Brackenshaw Castle . Gwendolen have say to herself that she would never wear those diamond : they have horrible word cling and crawl about they , as from some bad dream , whose image linger on the perturbed sense . she come down dress in her white , with only a streak of gold and a pendant of emerald , which Grandcourt have give she , round her neck , and the little emerald star in her ear . 

 Grandcourt stand with his back to the fire and look at she as she enter . 

 " be I altogether as you like ? " she say , speak rather gaily . she be not without enjoyment in this occasion of go to Brackenshaw Castle with her new dignity upon she , as man whose affair be sadly involved will enjoy din out among person likely to be under a pleasant mistake about they . 

 " no , " say Grandcourt . 

 Gwendolen feel suddenly uncomfortable , wonder what be to come . she be not unprepared for some struggle about the diamond ; but suppose he be go to say , in low , contemptuous tone , " you be not in any way what I like . " it be very bad for she to be secretly hat he ; but it would be much bad when he give the first sign of hat she . 

 " oh , mercy ! " she exclaim , the pause last till she could bear it no long . " how be I to alter myself ? " 

 " put on the diamond , " say Grandcourt , look straight at she with his narrow glance . 

 Gwendolen pause in her turn , afraid of show any emotion , and feel that nevertheless there be some change in her eye as they meet his . but she be oblige to answer , and say as indifferently as she could , " oh , please not . I do not   think diamond suit I . " 

 " what you think have nothing to do with it , " say Grandcourt , his sotto voce imperiousness seem to have an evening quietude and finish , like his toilet . " I wish you to wear the diamond . " 

 " pray excuse I ; I like these emerald , " say Gwendolen , frighten in spite of her preparation . that white hand of his which be touch his whisker be capable , she fancy , of cling round her neck and threaten to throttle she ; for her fear of he , mingle with the vague foreboding of some retributive calamity which hang about her life , have reach a superstitious point . 

 " Oblige I by tell I your reason for not wear the diamond when I desire it , " say Grandcourt . his eye be still fix upon she , and she feel her own eye narrow under they as if to shut out an enter pain . 

 of what use be the rebellion within she ? she could say nothing that would not hurt she bad than submission . turn slow and cover herself again , she go to her dressing - room . as she reach out the diamond it occur to she that her unwillingness to wear they might have already raise a suspicion in Grandcourt that she have some knowledge about they which he have not give she . she fancy that his eye show a delight in torture she . how could she be defiant ? she have nothing to say that would touch he nothing but what would give he a more painful grasp on her consciousness . 

 " he delight in make the dog and horse quail : that be half his pleasure in call they his , " she say to herself , as she open the jewel - case with a shiver sensation . 

 " it will come to be so with I ; and I shall quail . what else be there for I ? I will not say to the world , ' pity I . ' " 

 she be about to ring for her maid when she hear the door open behind she . it be Grandcourt who come in . 

 " you want some one to fasten they , " he say , come toward she . 

 she do not answer , but simply stand still , leave he to take out the ornament and fasten they as he would . Doubtless he have be use to fasten they on some one else . with a bitter sort of sarcasm against herself , Gwendolen think , " what a privilege this be , to have rob another woman of ! " 

 " what make you so cold ? " say Grandcourt , when he have fasten the last ear - ring . " pray put plenty of fur on . I hate to see a woman come into a room look frozen . if you be to appear as a bride at all , appear decently . " 

 this martial speech be not exactly persuasive , but it touch the quick of Gwendolen 's pride and force she to rally . the word of the bad dream crawl about the diamond still , but only for she : to other they be brilliant that suit she perfectly , and Grandcourt inwardly observe that she answer to the rein . 

 " oh , yes , mamma , quite happy , " Gwendolen have say on her return to Diplow . " not at all disappoint in ryeland . it be a much fine place than this large in every way . but do not   you want some more money ? " 

 " do you not know that Mr. Grandcourt leave I a letter on your wedding - day ? I be to have eight hundred a year . he wish I to keep Offendene for the present , while you be at diplow . but if there be some pretty cottage near the park at ryeland we might live there without much expense , and I should have you most of the year , perhaps . " 

 " we must leave that to Mr. Grandcourt , mamma . " 

 " oh , certainly . it be exceedingly handsome of he to say that he will pay the rent for Offendene till June . and we can go on very well without any man - servant except Crane , just for out - of - door . our good Merry will stay with we and help I to manage everything . it be natural that Mr. Grandcourt should wish I to live in a good style of house in your neighborhood , and I can not decline . so he say nothing about it to you ? " 

 " no ; he wish I to hear it from you , I suppose . " 

 Gwendolen in fact have be very anxious to have some definite knowledge of what would be do for her mother , but at no moment since her marriage have she be able to overcome the difficulty of mention the subject to Grandcourt . now , however , she have a sense of obligation which would not let she rest without say to he , " it be very good of you to provide for mamma . you take a great deal on yourself in marry a girl who have nothing but relation belong to she . " 

 Grandcourt be smoking , and only say carelessly , " of course I be not go to let she live like a gamekeeper 's mother . " 

 " at least he be not mean about money , " think Gwendolen , " and mamma be the well off for my marriage . " 

 she often pursue the comparison between what might have be , if she have not marry Grandcourt , and what actually be , try to persuade herself that life generally be barren of satisfaction , and that if she have choose differently she might now have be look back with a regret as bitter as the feeling she be try to argue away . her mother 's dullness , which use to irritate she , she be at present incline to explain as the ordinary result of woman 's experience . true , she still see that she would " manage differently from mamma ; " but her management now only mean that she would carry her trouble with spirit , and let none suspect they . by and by she promise herself that she should get use to her heart - sore , and find excitement that would carry she through life , as a hard gallop carry she through some of the morning hour . there be gamble : she have hear story at Leubronn of fashionable woman who gamble in all sort of way . it seem very flat to she at this distance , but perhaps if she begin to gamble again , the passion might awake . then there be the pleasure of produce an effect by her appearance in society : what do celebrate beauty do in town when their husband could afford display ? all man be fascinate by they : they have a perfect equipage and toilet , walk into public place , and bow , and make the usual answer , and walk out again , perhaps they buy china , and practice accomplishment . if she could only feel a keen appetite for those pleasure could only believe in pleasure as she use to do ! accomplishment have cease to have the exciting quality of promise any pre - eminence to she ; and as for fascinated gentleman adorer who might hover round she with languishment , and diversify married life with the romantic stir of mystery , passion , and danger , which her french reading have give she some girlish notion of they present themselves to her imagination with the fatal circumstance that , instead of fascinate she in return , they be clothe in her own weariness and disgust . the admire male , rashly adjust the expression of his feature and the turn of his conversation to her suppose taste , have always be an absurd object to she , and at present seem rather detestable . many course be actually pursue folly and sin both convenient and inconvenient without pleasure or hope of pleasure ; but to solace ourselves with imagine any course beforehand , there must be some foretaste of pleasure in the shape of appetite ; and Gwendolen 's appetite have sicken . let she wander over the possibility of her life as she would , an uncertain shadow dog she . her confidence in herself and her destiny have turn into remorse and dread ; she trust neither herself nor her future . 

 this hide helplessness give fresh force to the hold Deronda have from the first take on her mind , as one who have an unknown standard by which he judge she . have he some way of look at thing which might be a new footing for she an inward safeguard against possible event which she dread as store - up retribution ? it be one of the secret in that change of mental poise which have be fitly name conversion , that to many among we neither heaven nor earth have any revelation till some personality touch theirs with a peculiar influence , subdue they into receptiveness . it have be Gwendolen 's habit to think of the person around she as stale book , too familiar to be interesting . Deronda have light up her attention with a sense of novelty : not by word only , but by imagine fact , his influence have enter into the current of that self - suspicion and self - blame which awaken a new consciousness . 

 " I wish he could know everything about I without my tell he , " be one of her thought , as she sit lean over the end of a couch , support her head with her hand , and look at herself in a mirror not in admiration , but in a sad kind of companionship . " I wish he know that I be not so contemptible as he think I ; that I be in deep trouble , and want to be something well if I could . " without the aid of sacred ceremony or costume , her feeling have turn this man , only a few year old than herself , into a priest ; a sort of trust less rare than the fidelity that guard it . young reverence for one who be also young be the most coercive of all : there be the same level of temptation , and the high motive be believe in as a full force not suspect to be a mere residue from weary experience . 

 but the coercion be often strong on the one who take the reverence . those who trust we educate we . and perhaps in that ideal consecration of Gwendolen 's , some education be be prepare for Deronda . 

 CHAPTER XXXVI . 

  " Rien ne pese tant qu'un secret 
  Le porter loin est difficile aux dames : 
  Et je sÁais mesme sur ce fait 
  Bon nombre d'hommes qui sont femme . " 
  LA FONTAINE . 
 meanwhile Deronda have be fasten and lead off by Mr. Vandernoodt , who wish for a brisker walk , a cigar , and a little gossip . since we can not tell a man his own secret , the restraint of be in his company often breed a desire to pair off in conversation with some more ignorant person , and Mr. Vandernoodt presently say 

 " what a wash - out piece of cambric Grandcourt be ! but if he be a favorite of your , I withdraw the remark . " 

 " not the least in the world , " say Deronda . 

 " I think not . one wonder how he come to have a great passion again ; and he must have have to marry in this way . though Lush , his old chum , hint that he marry this girl out of obstinacy . by George ! it be a very accountable obstinacy . a man might make up his mind to marry she without the stimulus of contradiction . but he must have make himself a pretty large drain of money , eh ? " 

 " I know nothing of his affair . " 

 " what ! not of the other establishment he keep up ? " 

 " diplow ? of course . he take that of Sir Hugo . but merely for the year . " 

 " no , no ; not diplow : Gadsmere . Sir Hugo know , I will answer for it . " 

 Deronda say nothing . he really begin to feel some curiosity , but he foresee that he should hear what Mr. Vandernoodt have to tell , without the condescension of ask . 

 " Lush would not altogether own to it , of course . he be a confident and go - between of Grandcourt 's . but I have it on the good authority . the fact be , there be another lady with four child at Gadsmere . she have have the upper hand of he these ten year and more , and by what I can understand have it still leave her husband for he , and use to travel with he everywhere . her husband 's dead now ; I find a fellow who be in the same regiment with he , and know this Mrs. Glasher before she take wing . a fiery dark - eyed woman a note beauty at that time he think she be dead . they say she have Grandcourt under her thumb still , and it be a wonder he do not   marry she , for there be a very fine boy , and I understand Grandcourt can do absolutely as he please with the estate . Lush tell I as much as that . " 

 " what right have he to marry this girl ? " say Deronda , with disgust . 

 Mr. Vandernoodt , adjust the end of his cigar , shrug his shoulder and put out his lip . 

 " she can know nothing of it , " say Deronda , emphatically . but that positive statement be immediately follow by an inward query " could she have know anything of it ? " 

 " it be rather a piquant picture , " say Mr. Vandernoodt " Grandcourt between two fiery woman . for depend upon it this light - haired one have plenty of devil in she . I form that opinion of she at Leubronn . it be a sort of Medea and Cre sa business . Fancy the two meeting ! Grandcourt be a new kind of Jason : I wonder what sort of a part he will make of it . it be a dog 's part at well . I think I hear Ristori now , say , ' Jasone ! jasone ! ' these fine woman generally get hold of a stick . " 

 " Grandcourt can bite , I fancy , " say Deronda . " he be no stick . " 

 " no , no ; I mean Jason . I can not   quite make out Grandcourt . but he be a keen fellow enough uncommonly well build too . and if he come into all this property , the estate will bear dividing . this girl , whose friend have come to beggary , I understand , may think herself lucky to get he . I do not   want to be hard on a man because he get involve in an affair of that sort . but he might make himself more agreeable . I be tell he a capital story last night , and he get up and walk away in the middle . I feel inclined to kick he . do you suppose that be inattention or insolence , now ? " 

 " oh , a mixture . he generally observe the form : but he do not   listen much , " say Deronda . then , after a moment 's pause , he go on , " I should think there must be some exaggeration or inaccuracy in what you have hear about this lady at Gadsmere . " 

 " not a bit , depend upon it ; it have all lain snug of late year . People have forget all about it . but there the nest be , and the bird be in it . and I know Grandcourt go there . I have good evidence that he go there . however , that be nobody 's business but his own . the affair have sink below the surface . " 

 " I wonder you could have learn so much about it , " say Deronda , rather drily . 

 " oh , there be plenty of people who know all about it ; but such story get pack away like old letter . they interest I . I like to know the manner of my time contemporary gossip , not antediluvian . these Dryasdust fellow get a reputation by rake up some small scandal about Semiramis or Nitocris , and then we have a thousand and one poem write upon it by all the warbler big and little . but I do not   care a straw about the faux pas of the mummy . you do , though . you be one of the historical man more interested in a lady when she be get a rag face and skeleton toe peep out . do that flatter your imagination ? " 

 " well , if she have any woe in her love , one have the satisfaction of know that she be well out of they . " 

 " ah , you be think of the Medea , I see . " 

 Deronda then choose to point to some giant oak worth look at in their bareness . he also feel an interest in this piece of contemporary gossip , but he be satisfied that Mr. Vandernoodt have no more to tell about it . 

 since the early day when he try to construct the hidden story of his own birth , his mind have perhaps never be so active in weave probability about any private affair as it have now begin to be about Gwendolen 's marriage . this unavowed relation of Grandcourt 's could she have gain some knowledge of it , which cause she to shrink from the match a shrinking finally overcome by the urgence of poverty ? he could recall almost every word she have say to he , and in certain of these word he seem to discern that she be conscious of have do some wrong inflict some injury . his own acute experience make he alive to the form of injury which might affect the unavowed child and their mother . be Mrs. Grandcourt , under all her determined show of satisfaction , gnaw by a double , a treble - headed grief self - reproach , disappointment , jealousy ? he dwell especially on all the slight sign of self - reproach : he be inclined to judge she tenderly , to excuse , to pity . he think he have find a key now by which to interpret she more clearly : what magnify of her misery might not a young creature get into who have wed her fresh hope to old secret ! he think he see clearly enough now why Sir Hugo have never drop any hint of this affair to he ; and immediately the image of this Mrs. Glasher become painfully associate with his own hide birth . Gwendolen know of that woman and her child , marry Grandcourt , and show herself content , would have be among the most repulsive of being to he ; but Gwendolen taste the bitterness of remorse for have contribute to their injury be bring very near to his fellow - feeling . if it be so , she have get to a common plane of understanding with he on some difficulty of life which a woman be rarely able to judge of with any justice or generosity ; for , accord to precedent , Gwendolen 's view of her position might easily have be no other than that her husband 's marriage with she be his entrance on the path of virtue , while Mrs. Glasher represent his forsaken sin . and Deronda have naturally some resentment on behalf of the Hagars and Ishmaels . 

 undeniably Deronda 's grow solicitude about Gwendolen depend chiefly on her peculiar manner toward he ; and I suppose neither man nor woman would be the well for an utter insensibility to such appeal . one sign that his interest in she have change its footing be that he dismiss any caution against she be a coquette set snare to involve he in a vulgar flirtation , and determine that he would not again evade any opportunity of talk to she . he have shake off Mr. Vandernoodt , and get into a solitary corner in the twilight ; but half an hour be long enough to think of those possibility in Gwendolen 's position and state of mind ; and on form the determination not to avoid she , he remember that she be likely to be at tea with the other lady in the drawing - room . the conjecture be true ; for Gwendolen , after resolve not to go down again for the next four hour , begin to feel , at the end of one , that in shut herself up she miss all chance of see and hearing , and that her visit would only last two day more . she adjust herself , put on her little air of self - possession , and go down , make herself resolutely agreeable . only lady be assemble , and Lady Pentreath be amuse they with a description of a drawing - room under the Regency , and the figure that be cut by lady and gentleman in 1819 , the year she be present when Deronda enter . 

 " shall I be acceptable ? " he say . " perhaps I have well go back and look for the other . I suppose they be in the billiard - room . " 

 " no , no ; stay where you be , " say Lady Pentreath . " they be all get tired of I ; let we hear what you have to say . " 

 " that be rather an embarrassing appeal , " say Deronda , draw up a chair near Lady Mallinger 's elbow at the tea - table . " I think I have well take the opportunity of mention our songstress , " he add , look at Lady Mallinger " unless you have do so . " 

 " oh , the little Jewess ! " say Lady Mallinger . " no , I have not mention she . it never enter my head that any one here want singing lesson . " 

 " all lady know some one else who want singing lesson , " say Deronda . " I have happen to find an exquisite singer , " here he turn to Lady Pentreath . " she be live with some lady who be friend of mine the mother and sister of a man who be my chum at Cambridge . she be on the stage at Vienna ; but she want to leave that life , and maintain herself by teach . " 

 " there be swarm of those people , be not   there ? " say the old lady . " be her lesson to be very cheap or very expensive ? those be the two bait I know of . " 

 " there be another bait for those who hear she , " say Deronda . " her singing be something quite exceptional , I think . she have have such first - rate teaching or rather first - rate instinct with her teaching that you might imagine her singing all come by nature . " 

 " why do she leave the stage , then ? " say Lady Pentreath . " I be too old to believe in first - rate people give up first - rate chance . " 

 " her voice be too weak . it be a delicious voice for a room . you who put up with my singing of Schubert would be enchant with her , " say Deronda , look at Mrs. Raymond . " and I imagine she would not object to sing at private party or concert . her voice be quite equal to that . " 

 " I be to have she in my drawing - room when we go up to town , " say Lady Mallinger . " you shall hear she then . I have not hear she myself yet ; but I trust Daniel 's recommendation . I mean my girl to have lesson of she . " 

 " be it a charitable affair ? " say Lady Pentreath . " I can not   bear charitable music . " 

 Lady Mallinger , who be rather helpless in conversation , and feel herself under an engagement not to tell anything of Mirah 's story , have an embarrassed smile on her face , and glance at Deronda . 

 " it be a charity to those who want to have a good model of feminine singing , " say Deronda . " I think everybody who have ear would benefit by a little improvement on the ordinary style . if you hear Miss Lapidoth " here he look at Gwendolen " perhaps you would revoke your resolution to give up singing . " 

 " I should rather think my resolution would be confirm , " say Gwendolen . " I do not   feel able to follow your advice of enjoy my own middlingness . " 

 " for my part , " say Deronda , " people who do anything finely always inspirit I to try . I do not   mean that they make I believe I can do it as well . but they make the thing , whatever it may be , seem worthy to be do . I can bear to think my own music not good for much , but the world would be more dismal if I think music itself not good for much . excellence encourage one about life generally ; it show the spiritual wealth of the world . " 

 " but then , if we can not   imitate it , it only make our own life seem the tame , " say Gwendolen , in a mood to resent encouragement found on her own insignificance . 

 " that depend on the point of view , I think , " say Deronda . " we should have a poor life of it if we be reduce for all our pleasure to our own performance . a little private imitation of what be good be a sort of private devotion to it , and most of we ought to practice art only in the light of private study preparation to understand and enjoy what the few can do for we . I think Miss Lapidoth be one of the few . " 

 " she must be a very happy person , do not   you think ? " say Gwendolen , with a touch of sarcasm , and a turn of her neck toward Mrs. Raymond . 

 " I do not   know , " answer the independent lady ; " I must hear more of she before I say that . " 

 " it may have be a bitter disappointment to she that her voice fail she for the stage , " say Juliet Fenn , sympathetically . 

 " I suppose she be past her good , though , " say the deep voice of Lady 
 Pentreath . 
 " on the contrary , she have not reach it , " say Deronda . " she be barely twenty . " 

 " and very pretty , " interpose Lady Mallinger , with an amiable wish to help Deronda . " and she have very good manner . I be sorry she be a bigoted Jewess ; I should not like it for anything else , but it do not   matter in singing . " 

 " well , since her voice be too weak for she to scream much , I will tell Lady Clementina to set she on my nine granddaughter , " say Lady Pentreath ; " and I hope she will convince eight of they that they have not voice enough to sing anywhere but at church . my notion be , that many of our girl nowadays want lesson not to sing . " 

 " I have have my lesson in that , " say Gwendolen , look at Deronda . 
 " you see Lady Pentreath be on my side . " 
 while she be speak , Sir Hugo enter with some of the other gentleman , include Grandcourt , and stand against the group at the low tea - table say 

 " what imposition be Deronda put on you , lady slip in among you by himself ? " 

 " want to pass off an obscurity on we as well than any celebrity , " say Lady Pentreath " a pretty sing Jewess who be to astonish these young people . you and I , who hear Catalani in her prime , be not so easily astonish . " 

 Sir Hugo listen with his good - humor smile as he take a cup of tea from his wife , and then say , " well , you know , a Liberal be bind to think that there have be singer since Catalani 's time . " 

 " ah , you be young than I be . I dare say you be one of the man who run after Alcharisi . but she marry off and leave you all in the lurch . " 

 " yes , yes ; it be rather too bad when these great singer marry themselves into silence before they have a crack in their voice . and the husband be a public robber . I remember Leroux say , ' a man might as well take down a fine peal of church bell and carry they off to the steppe , " say Sir Hugo , set down his cup and turn away , while Deronda , who have move from his place to make room for other , and feel that he be not in request , sit down a little apart . presently he become aware that , in the general dispersion of the group , Gwendolen have extricate herself from the attention of Mr. Vandernoodt and have walk to the piano , where she stand apparently examine the music which lie on the desk . will any one be surprised at Deronda 's concluding that she wish he to join she ? perhaps she want to make amend for the unpleasant tone of resistance with which she have meet his recommendation of Mirah , for he have notice that her first impulse often be to say what she afterward wish to retract . he go to her side and say 

 " be you relent about the music and look for something to play or sing ? " 

 " I be not look for anything , but I be relent , " say Gwendolen , speak in a submissive tone . 

 " may I know the reason ? " 

 " I should like to hear Miss Lapidoth and have lesson from she , since you admire she so much , that is , of course , when we go to town . I mean lesson in rejoice at her excellence and my own deficiency , " say Gwendolen , turn on he a sweet , open smile . 

 " I shall be really glad for you to see and hear she , " say Deronda , return the smile in kind . 

 " be she as perfect in every thing else as in her music ? " 

 " I can not   vouch for that exactly . I have not see enough of she . but I have see nothing in she that I could wish to be different . she have have an unhappy life . her trouble begin in early childhood , and she have grow up among very painful surrounding . but I think you will say that no advantage could have give she more grace and truer refinement . " 

 " I wonder what sort of trouble her be ? " 

 " I have not any very precise knowledge . but I know that she be on the brink of drown herself in despair . " 

 " and what hinder she ? " say Gwendolen , quickly , look at Deronda . 

 " some ray or other come which make she feel that she ought to live that it be good to live , " he answer , quietly . " she be full of piety , and seem capable of submit to anything when it take the form of duty . " 

 " those people be not to be pity , " say Gwendolen , impatiently . " I have no sympathy with woman who be always do right . I do not   believe in their great suffering . " her finger move quickly among the edge of the music . 

 " it be true , " say Deronda , " that the consciousness of have do wrong be something deep , more bitter . I suppose we faulty creature can never feel so much for the irreproachable as for those who be bruise in the struggle with their own fault . it be a very ancient story , that of the lose sheep but it come up afresh every day . " 

 " that be a way of speak it be not act upon , it be not real , " say Gwendolen , bitterly . " you admire Miss Lapidoth because you think her blameless , perfect . and you know you would despise a woman who have do something you think very wrong . " 

 " that would depend entirely upon her own view of what she have do , " say Deronda . 

 " you would be satisfied if she be very wretched , I suppose , " say 
 Gwendolen , impetuously . 
 " no , not satisfied full of sorrow for she . it be not a mere way of speak . I do not mean to say that the fine nature be not more adorable ; I mean that those who would be comparatively uninteresting beforehand may become worthy of sympathy when they do something that awaken in they a keen remorse . life be enlarge in different way . I dare say some would never get their eye open if it be not for a violent shock from the consequence of their own action . and when they be suffer in that way one must care for they more than for the comfortably self - satisfied . " Deronda forget everything but his vision of what Gwendolen 's experience have probably be , and urge by compassion let his eye and voice express as much interest as they would . 

 Gwendolen have slip on to the music - stool , and look up at he with pain in her long eye , like a wound animal ask for help . 

 " be you persuade Mrs. Grandcourt to play to we , Dan ? " say Sir Hugo , come up and put his hand on Deronda 's shoulder with a gentle , admonitory pinch . 

 " I can not persuade myself , " say Gwendolen , rise . 

 other have follow Sir Hugo 's lead , and there be an end of any liability to confidence for that day . but the next be New Year 's Eve ; and a grand dance , to which the chief tenant be invite , be to be hold in the picture - gallery above the cloister the sort of entertainment in which number and general movement may create privacy . when Gwendolen be dress , she long , in remembrance of Leubronn , to put on the old turquoise necklace for her sole ornament ; but she dare not offend her husband by appear in that shabby way on an occasion when he would demand her utmost splendor . determined to wear the memorial necklace somehow , she wind it thrice round her wrist and make a bracelet of it have go to her room to put it on just before the time of enter the ball - room . 

 it be always a beautiful scene , this dance on New Year 's Eve , which have be keep up by the family tradition as nearly in the old fashion as inexorable change would allow . red carpet be lay down for the occasion : hot - house plant and evergreen be arrange in bower at the extremity and in every recess of the gallery ; and the old portrait stretch back through generation , even to the pre - portraying period , make a piquant line of spectator . some neighbor gentry , major and minor , be invite ; and it be certainly an occasion when a prospective master and mistress of Abbott 's and King 's topping might see their future glory in an agreeable light , as a picturesque provincial supremacy with a rent - roll personify by the most prosperous - look tenant . Sir Hugo expect Grandcourt to feel flatter by be ask to the Abbey at a time which include this festival in honor of the family estate ; but he also hop that his own hale appearance might impress his successor with the probable length of time that would elapse before the succession come , and with the wisdom of prefer a good actual sum to a minor property that must be wait for . all present , down to the least important farmer 's daughter , know that they be to see " young Grandcourt , " Sir Hugo 's nephew , the presumptive heir and future baronet , now visit the Abbey with his bride after an absence of many year ; any coolness between uncle and nephew have , it be understand , give way to a friendly warmth . the bride open the ball with Sir Hugo be necessarily the cynosure of all eye ; and less than a year before , if some magic mirror could have show Gwendolen her actual position , she would have imagine herself move in it with a glow of triumphant pleasure , conscious that she hold in her hand a life full of favorable chance which her cleverness and spirit would enable she to make the good of . and now she be wonder that she could get so little joy out of the exultation to which she have be suddenly lift , away from the distasteful petty empire of her girlhood with its irksome lack of distinction and superfluity of sister . she would have be glad to be even unreasonably elated , and to forget everything but the flattery of the moment ; but she be like one courting sleep , in whom thought insist like willful tormentor . 

 wonder in this way at her own dullness , and all the while longing for an excitement that would deaden importunate ache , she be pass through file of admire beholder in the country - dance with which it be traditional to open the ball , and be be generally regard by her own sex as an enviable woman . it be remark that she carry herself with a wonderful air , consider that she have be nobody in particular , and without a farthing to her fortune . if she have be a duke 's daughter , or one of the royal princess , she could not have take the honor of the evening more as a matter of course . Poor Gwendolen ! it would by - and - by become a sort of skill in which she be automatically practice to hear this last great gambling loss with an air of perfect self - possession . 

 the next couple that pass be also worth look at . Lady Pentreath have say , " I shall stand up for one dance , but I shall choose my partner . Mr. Deronda , you be the young man , I mean to dance with you . nobody be old enough to make a good pair with I . I must have a contrast . " and the contrast certainly set off the old lady to the utmost . she be one of those woman who be never handsome till they be old , and she have have the wisdom to embrace the beauty of age as early as possible . what might have seem harshness in her feature when she be young , have turn now into a satisfactory strength of form and expression which defy wrinkle , and be set off by a crown of white hair ; her well - build figure be well cover with black drapery , her ear and neck comfortably caress with lace , show none of those wither space which one would think it a pitiable condition of poverty to expose . she glide along gracefully enough , her dark eye still with a mischievous smile in they as she observe the company . her partner 's young richness of tint against the flatten hue and rougher form of her aged head have an effect something like that of a fine flower against a lichenous branch . perhaps the tenant hardly appreciate this pair . Lady Pentreath be nothing more than a straight , active old lady : Mr. Deronda be a familiar figure regard with friendliness ; but if he have be the heir , it would have be regret that his face be not as unmistakably English as Sir Hugo 's . 

 Grandcourt 's appearance when he come up with Lady Mallinger be not impeach with foreignness : still the satisfaction in it be not complete . it would have be matter of congratulation if one who have the luck to inherit two old family estate have have more hair , a fresher color , and a look of great animation ; but that fine family dwindle off into female , and estate run together into the single heirship of a mealy - complexioned male , be a tendency in thing which seem to be account for by a citation of other instance . it be agree that Mr. Grandcourt could never be take for anything but what he be a bear gentleman ; and that , in fact , he look like an heir . perhaps the person least complacently dispose toward he at that moment be Lady Mallinger , to whom go in procession up this country - dance with Grandcourt be a blazonment of herself as the infelicitous wife who have produce nothing but daughter , little well than no child , poor dear thing , except for her own fondness and for Sir Hugo 's wonderful goodness to they . but such inward discomfort could not prevent the gentle lady from look fair and stout to admiration , or her full blue eye from glance mildly at her neighbor . all the mother and father hold it a thousand pity that she have not have a fine boy , or even several which might have be expect , to look at she when she be first married . 

 the gallery include only three side of the quadrangle , the fourth being shut off as a lobby or corridor : one side be use for dancing , and the opposite side for the supper - table , while the intermediate part be less brilliantly light , and fit with comfortable seat . later in the evening Gwendolen be in one of these seat , and Grandcourt be stand near she . they be not talk to each other : she be lean backward in her chair , and he against the wall ; and Deronda , happen to observe this , go up to ask she if she have resolve not to dance any more . have himself be do hard duty in this way among the guest , he think he have earn the right to sink for a little while into the background , and he have speak little to Gwendolen since their conversation at the piano the day before . Grandcourt 's presence would only make it the easy to show that pleasure in talk to she even about triviality which would be a sign of friendliness ; and he fancy that her face look blank . a smile beam over it as she see he come , and she raise herself from her lean posture . Grandcourt have be grumble at the ennui of stay so long in this stupid dance , and propose that they should vanish : she have resist on the ground of politeness not without be a little frightened at the probability that he be silently , angry with she . she have her reason for stay , though she have begin to despair of the opportunity for the sake of which she have put the old necklace on her wrist . but now at last Deronda have come . 

 " yes ; I shall not dance any more . be you not glad ? " she say , with some gayety , " you might have feel oblige humbly to offer yourself as a partner , and I feel sure you have dance more than you like already . " 

 " I will not deny that , " say Deronda , ' since you have dance as much as you like . " 

 " but will you take trouble for I in another way , and fetch I a glass of that fresh water ? " 

 it be but a few step that Deronda have to go for the water . Gwendolen be wrap in the light , softest of white woolen burnous , under which her hand be hide . while he be go she have draw off her glove , which be finish with a lace ruffle , and when she put up her hand to take the glass and lift it to her mouth , the necklace - bracelet , which in its triple winding adapt itself clumsily to her wrist , be necessarily conspicuous . Grandcourt see it , and see that it be attract Deronda 's notice . 

 " what be that hideous thing you have get on your wrist ? " say the husband . 

 " that ? " say Gwendolen , composedly , point to the turquoise , while she still hold the glass ; " it be an old necklace I like to wear . I lose it once , and someone find it for I . " 

 with that she give the glass again to Deronda , who immediately carry it away , and on return say , in order to banish any consciousness about the necklace 

 " it be worth while for you to go and look out at one of the window on that side . you can see the fine possible moonlight on the stone pillar and carving , and shadow wave across it in the wind . " 

 " I should like to see it . will you go ? " say Gwendolen , look up at her husband . 

 he cast his eye down at she , and say , " no , Deronda will take you , " slowly move from his lean attitude , and walk away . 

 Gwendolen 's face for a moment show a fleeting vexation : she resent this show of indifference toward she . Deronda feel annoyed , chiefly for her sake ; and with a quick sense , that it would relieve she most to behave as if nothing peculiar have occur , he say , " will you take my arm and go , while only servant be there ? " he think that he understand well her action in draw his attention to the necklace : she wish he to infer that she have submit her mind to rebuke her speech and manner have from the first fluctuate toward that submission and that she feel no linger resentment . her evident confidence in his interpretation of she appeal to he as a peculiar claim . 

 when they be walk together , Gwendolen feel as if the annoyance which have just happen have remove another film of reserve from between they , and she have more right than before to be as open as she wish . she do not speak , be fill with the sense of silent confidence , until they be in front of the window look out on the moonlit court . a sort of bower have be make round the window , turn it into a recess . quit his arm , she fold her hand in her burnous , and press her brow against the glass . he move slightly away , and hold the lapel of his coat with his thumb under the collar as his manner be : he have a wonderful power of stand perfectly still , and in that position remind one sometimes of Dante 's spiriti magni con occhi tardi e gravi .   doubtless some of these dance in their youth , doubt of their own vocation , and find their own time too modern .   he abstain from remark on the scene before they , fear that any indifferent word might jar on she : already the calm light and shadow , the ancient steadfast form , and aloofness enough from those inward trouble which he feel sure be agitate she . and he judge aright : she would have be impatient of polite conversation . the incident of the last minute or two have recede behind former thought which she have imagine herself utter to Deronda , which now urge themselves to her lip . in a subdue voice , she say 

 " suppose I have gamble again , and lose the necklace again , what should you have think of I ? " 

 " bad than I do now . " 

 " then you be mistaken about I . you want I not to do that not to make my gain out of another 's loss in that way and I have do a great deal bad . " 

 " I can not   imagine temptation , " say Deronda . " perhaps I be able to understand what you mean . at least I understand self - reproach . " in spite of preparation he be almost alarmed at Gwendolen 's precipitancy of confidence toward he , in contrast with her habitual resolute concealment . 

 " what should you do if you be like I feel that you be wrong and miserable , and dread everything to come ? " it seem that she be hurry to make the utmost use of this opportunity to speak as she would . 

 " that be not to be amend by do one thing only but many , " say 
 Deronda , decisively . 
 " what ? " say Gwendolen , hastily , move her brow from the glass and look at he . 

 he look full at she in return , with what she think be severity . he feel that it be not a moment in which he must let himself be tender , and flinch from imply a hard opinion . 

 " I mean there be many thought and habit that may help we to bear inevitable sorrow . multitude have to bear it . " 

 she turn she brow to the window again , and say impatiently , " you must tell I then what to think and what to do ; else why do you not let I go on do as I like and not mind ? if I have go on gambling I might have win again , and I might have get not to care for anything else . you would not let I do that . why should not   I do as I like , and not mind ? other people do . " Poor Gwendolen 's speech express nothing very clearly except her irritation . 

 " I do not   believe you would ever get not to mind , " say Deronda , with deep - toned decision . " if it be true that baseness and cruelty make an escape from pain , what difference would that make to people who can not   be quite base or cruel ? idiot escape some pain ; but you can not   be an idiot . some may do wrong to another without remorse ; but suppose one do feel remorse ? I believe you could never lead an injurious life all reckless life be injurious , pestilential without feel remorse . " Deronda 's unconscious fervor have gather as he go on : he be utter thought which he have use for himself in moment of painful meditation . 

 " then tell I what well I can do , " say Gwendolen , insistently . 

 " many thing . look on other life besides your own . see what their trouble be , and how they be bear . try to care about something in this vast world besides the gratification of small selfish desire . try to care for what be good in thought and action something that be good apart from the accident of your own lot . " 

 for an instant or two Gwendolen be mute . then , again move her brow from the glass , she say 

 " you mean that I be selfish and ignorant . " 

 he meet her fix look in silence before he answer firmly " you will not go on be selfish and ignorant ! " 

 she do not turn away her glance or let her eyelid fall , but a change come over her face that subtle change in nerve and muscle which will sometimes give a childlike expression even to the elderly : it be the subsidence of self - assertion . 

 " shall I lead you back ? " say Deronda , gently , turn and offer she his arm again . she take it silently , and in that way they come in sight of Grandcourt , who be walk slowly near their former place . Gwendolen go up to he and say , " I be ready to go now . Mr. Deronda will excuse we to Lady Mallinger . " 

 " certainly , " say Deronda . " Lord and Lady Pentreath disappear some time ago . " 

 Grandcourt give his arm in silent compliance , nod over his shoulder to Deronda , and Gwendolen too only half turn to bow and say , " thank . " the husband and wife leave the gallery and pace the corridor in silence . when the door have close on they in the boudoir , Grandcourt throw himself into a chair and say , with undertoned peremptoriness , " sit down . " she , already in the expectation of something unpleasant , have throw off her burnous with nervous unconsciousness , and immediately obey . turn his eye toward she , he begin 

 " oblige I in future by not show whim like a mad woman in a play . " 

 " what do you mean ? " say Gwendolen . 

 " I suppose there be some understanding between you and Deronda about that thing you have on your wrist . if you have anything to say to he , say it . but do not   carry on a telegraphing which other people be suppose not to see . it be damnably vulgar . " 

 " you can know all about the necklace , " say Gwendolen , her angry pride resist the nightmare of fear . 

 " I do not   want to know . keep to yourself whatever you like . " Grandcourt pause between each sentence , and in each his speech seem to become more preternaturally distinct in its inward tone . " what I care to know I shall know without your tell I . only you will please to behave as become my wife . and not make a spectacle of yourself . " 

 " do you object to my talk to Mr. Deronda ? " 

 " I do not   care two straw about Deronda , or any other conceited hanger - on . you may talk to he as much as you like . he be not go to take my place . you be my wife . and you will either fill your place properly to the world and to I or you will go to the devil . " 

 " I never intend anything but to fill my place properly , " say 
 Gwendolen , with bitter mortification in her soul . 
 " you put that thing on your wrist , and hide it from I till you want he to see it . only fool go into that deaf and dumb talk , and think they be secret . you will understand that you be not to compromise yourself . behave with dignity . that be all I have to say . " 

 with that last word Grandcourt rise , turn his back to the fire and look down on she . she be mute . there be no reproach that she dare to fle back at he in return for these insulting admonition , and the very reason she feel they to be insulting be that their purport go with the most absolute dictate of her pride . what she would least like to incur be the making a fool of herself and be compromise . it be futile and irrelevant to try and explain that Deronda too have only be a monitor the strong of all monitor . Grandcourt be contemptuous , not jealous ; contemptuously certain of all the subjection he care for . why could she not rebel and defy he ? she long to do it . but she might as well have try to defy the texture of her nerve and the palpitation of her heart . her husband have a ghostly army at his back , that could close round she wherever she might turn . she sit in her splendid attire , like a white image of helplessness , and he seem to gratify himself with look at she . she could not even make a passionate exclamation , or throw up her arm , as she would have do in her maiden day . the sense of his scorn keep she still . 

 " shall I ring ? " he say , after what seem to she a long while . she move her head in assent , and after ring he go to his dressing - room . 

 certain word be gnaw within she . " the wrong you have do I will be your own curse . " as he close the door , the bitter tear rise , and the gnawing word provoke an answer : " why do you put your fang into I and not into he ? " it be utter in a whisper , as the tear come up silently . but she immediately press her handkerchief against her eye , and check her tendency to sob . 

 the next day , recover from the shudder fit of this evening scene , she determine to use the charter which Grandcourt have scornfully give she , and to talk as much as she like with Deronda ; but no opportunity occur , and any little device she could imagine for create they be reject by her pride , which be now doubly active . not toward Deronda himself she be singularly free from alarm lest he should think her openness want in dignity : it be part of his power over she that she believe he free from all misunderstanding as to the way in which she appeal to he ; or rather , that he should misunderstand she have never enter into her mind . but the last morning come , and still she have never be able to take up the drop thread of their talk , and she be without device . she and Grandcourt be to leave at three o'clock . it be too irritate that after a walk in the ground have be plan in Deronda 's hearing , he do not present himself to join in it . Grandcourt be go with Sir Hugo to King 's topping , to see the old manor - house ; other of the gentleman be shoot ; she be condemn to go and see the decoy and the waterfowl , and everything else that she least want to see , with the lady , with old Lord Pentreath and his anecdote , with Mr. Vandernoodt and his admire manner . the irritation become too strong for she ; without premeditation , she take advantage of the wind road to linger a little out of sight , and then set off back to the house , almost run when she be safe from observation . she enter by a side door , and the library be on her left hand ; Deronda , she know , be often there ; why might she not turn in there as well as into any other room in the house ? she have be take there expressly to see the illuminated family tree , and other remarkable thing what more natural than that she should like to look in again ? the thing most to be fear be that the room would be empty of Deronda , for the door be ajar . she push it gently , and look round it . he be there , write busily at a distant table , with his back toward the door   in fact , Sir Hugo have ask he to answer some constituent ' letter which have become press . an enormous log fire , with the scent of Russia from the book , make the great room as warmly odorous as a private chapel in which the censor have be swing . it seem too daring to go in too rude to speak and interrupt he ; yet she go in on the noiseless carpet , and stand still for two or three minute , till Deronda , have finish a letter , push it aside for signature , and throw himself back to consider whether there be anything else for he to do , or whether he could walk out for the chance of meet the party which include Gwendolen , when he hear her voice say , " Mr. Deronda . " 

 it be certainly startling . he rise hastily , turn round , and push away his chair with a strong expression of surprise . 

 " be I wrong to come in ? " say Gwendolen . 

 " I think you be far on your walk , " say Deronda . 

 " I turn back , " say Gwendolen . 

 " do you intend to go out again ? I could join you now , if you would allow I . " 

 " no ; I want to say something , and I can not   stay long , " say Gwendolen , speak quickly in a subdue tone , while she walk forward and rest her arm and muff on the back of the chair he have push away from he . " I want to tell you that it be really so I can not   help feel remorse for have injure other . that be what I mean when I say that I have do bad than gamble again and pawn the necklace again something more injurious , as you call it . and I can not   alter it . I be punish , but I can not   alter it . you say I could do many thing . tell I again . what should you do what should you feel if you be in my place ? " 

 the hurried directness with which she speak the absence of all her little air , as if she be only concerned to use the time in get an answer that would guide she , make her appeal unspeakably touch . 

 Deronda say , " I should feel something of what you feel deep sorrow . " 

 " but what would you try to do ? " say Gwendolen , with urgent quickness . 

 " order my life so as to make any possible amend , and keep away from do any sort of injury again , " say Deronda , catch her sense that the time for speech be brief . 

 " but I can not   I can not ; I must go on , " say Gwendolen , in a passionate loud whisper . " I have thrust out other I have make my gain out of their loss try to make it try . and I must go on . I can not   alter it . " 

 it be impossible to answer this instantaneously . her word have confirm his conjecture , and the situation of all concern rise in swift image before he . his feeling for those who have be thrust out sanction her remorse ; he could not try to nullify it , yet his heart be full of pity for she . but as soon as he could he answer take up her last word 

 " that be the bitter of all to wear the yoke of our own wrong - doing . but if you submit to that as man submit to maim or life - long incurable disease ? and make the unalterable wrong a reason for more effort toward a good , that may do something to counterbalance the evil ? one who have commit irremediable error may be scourge by that consciousness into a high course than be common . there be many example . feel what it be to have spoil one life may well make we long to save other life from be spoil . " 

 " but you have not wrong any one , or spoil their life , " say 
 Gwendolen , hastily . " it be only other who have wrong you . " 
 Deronda color slightly , but say immediately " I suppose our keen feeling for ourselves might end in give we a keen feeling for other , if , when we be suffer acutely , we be to consider that other go through the same sharp experience . that be a sort of remorse before commission . can not   you understand that ? " 

 " I think I do now , " say Gwendolen . " but you be right I be selfish . I have never think much of any one 's feeling , except my mother 's . I have not be fond of people . but what can I do ? " she go on , more quickly . " I must get up in the morning and do what every one else do . it be all like a dance set beforehand . I seem to see all that can be and I be tired and sick of it . and the world be all confusion to I " she make a gesture of disgust . " you say I be ignorant . but what be the good of try to know more , unless life be worth more ? " 

 " this good , " say Deronda promptly , with a touch of indignant severity , which he be inclined to encourage as his own safeguard ; " life would be worth more to you : some real knowledge would give you an interest in the world beyond the small drama of personal desire . it be the curse of your life forgive I of so many life , that all passion be spend in that narrow round , for want of idea and sympathy to make a large home for it . be there any single occupation of mind that you care about with passionate delight or even independent interest ? " 

 Deronda pause , but Gwendolen , look startled and thrill as by an electric shock , say nothing , and he go on more insistently 

 " I take what you say of music for a small example it answer for all large thing you will not cultivate it for the sake of a private joy in it . what sort of earth or heaven would hold any spiritual wealth in it for soul pauperize by inaction ? if one firmament have no stimulus for our attention and awe , I do not   see how four would have it . we should stamp every possible world with the flatness of our own inanity which be necessarily impious , without faith or fellowship . the refuge you be need from personal trouble be the high , the religious life , which hold an enthusiasm for something more than our own appetite and vanity . the few may find themselves in it simply by an elevation of feeling ; but for we who have to struggle for our wisdom , the high life must be a region in which the affection be clothe with knowledge . " 

 the half - indignant remonstrance that vibrate in Deronda 's voice come , as often happen , from the habit of inward argument with himself rather than from severity toward Gwendolen : but it have a more beneficial effect on she than any soothing . nothing be feebler than the indolent rebellion of complaint ; and to be rouse into self - judgment be comparative activity . for the moment she feel like a shaken child shake out of its wail into awe , and she say humbly 

 " I will try . I will think . " 

 they both stand silent for a minute , as if some third presence have arrest they , for Deronda , too , be under that sense of pressure which be apt to come when our own wing word seem to be hover around we , till Gwendolen begin again 

 " you say affection be the good thing , and I have hardly any none about I . if I could , I would have mamma ; but that be impossible . thing have change to I so in such a short time . what I use not to like I long for now . I think I be almost get fond of the old thing now they be go . " her lip tremble . 

 " take the present suffering as a painful letting in of light , " say Deronda , more gently . " you be conscious of more beyond the round of your own inclination you know more of the way in which your life press on other , and their life on your . I do not   think you could have escape the painful process in some form or other . " 

 " but it be a very cruel form , " say Gwendolen , beat her foot on the ground with return agitation . " I be frightened at everything . I be frightened at myself . when my blood be fire I can do dare thing take any leap ; but that make I frightened at myself . " she be look at nothing outside she ; but her eye be direct toward the window , away from Deronda , who , with quick comprehension say 

 " turn your fear into a safeguard . keep your dread fix on the idea of increase that remorse which be so bitter to you . fix meditation may do a great deal toward define our longing or dread . we be not always in a state of strong emotion , and when we be calm we can use our memory and gradually change the bias of our fear , as we do our taste . take your fear as a safeguard . it be like quickness of hearing . it may make consequence passionately present to you . try to take hold of your sensibility , and use it as if it be a faculty , like vision . " Deronda utter each sentence more urgently ; he feel as if he be seize a faint chance of rescue she from some indefinite danger . 

 " yes , I know ; I understand what you mean , " say Gwendolen in her loud whisper , not turn her eye , but lift up her small gloved hand and wave it in deprecation of the notion that it be easy to obey that advice . " but if feeling rise there be some feeling hatred and anger how can I be good when they keep rise ? and if there come a moment when I feel stifle and could bear it no long " she break off , and with agitated lip look at Deronda , but the expression on his face pierce she with an entirely new feeling . he be under the baffle difficulty of discerning , that what he have be urge on she be throw into the pallid distance of mere thought before the outburst of her habitual emotion . it be as if he see her drowning while his limb be bind . the pained compassion which be spread over his feature as he watch she , affect she with a compunction unlike any she have feel before , and in a changed and implore tone she say 

 " I be grieve you . I be ungrateful . you can help I . I will think of everything . I will try . tell I it will not be a pain to you that I have dare to speak of my trouble to you ? you begin it , you know , when you rebuke I . " there be a melancholy smile on her lip as she say that , but she add more entreatingly , " it will not be a pain to you ? " 

 " not if it do anything to save you from an evil to come , " say 
 Deronda , with strong emphasis ; " otherwise , it will be a last pain . " 
 " no no it shall not be . it may be it shall be well with I because 
 I have know you . " she turn immediately , and quit the room . 
 when she be on the first landing of the staircase , Sir Hugo pass across the hall on his way to the library , and see she . Grandcourt be not with he . 

 Deronda , when the baronet enter , be stand in his ordinary attitude , grasp his coat - collar , with his back to the table , and with that indefinable expression by which we judge that a man be still in the shadow of a scene which he have just go through . he move , however , and begin to arrange the letter . 

 " have Mrs. Grandcourt be in here ? " say Sir Hugo . 

 " yes , she have . " 

 " where be the other ? " 

 " I believe she leave they somewhere in the ground . " 

 after a moment 's silence , in which Sir Hugo look at a letter without read it , he say " I hope you be not play with fire , Dan you understand I ? " 

 " I believe I do , sir , " say Deronda , after a slight hesitation , which have some repress anger in it . " but there be nothing answer to your metaphor no fire , and therefore no chance of scorch . " 

 Sir Hugo look searchingly at he , and then say , " so much the well . for , between ourselves , I fancy there may be some hide gunpowder in that establishment . " 

 CHAPTER XXXVII . 

  Aspern . Pardon , my lord I speak for Sigismund . 
  Fronsberg . for he ? oh , ay for he I always hold 
  a pardon safe in bank , sure he will draw 
  soon or later on I . what his need ? 
  mad project break ? fine mechanic wing 
  that would not fly ? durance , assault on watch , 
  Bill for Epernay , not a crust to eat ? 
  Aspern . oh , none of these , my lord ; he have escape 
  from Circe 's herd , and seek to win the love 
  of your fair ward Cecilia : but would win 
  first your consent . you frown . 
  Fronsberg . distinguish word . 
  I say I hold a pardon , not consent . 
 in spite of Deronda 's reason for wish to be in town again reason in which his anxiety for Mirah be blent with curiosity to know more of the enigmatic Mordecai he do not manage to go up before Sir Hugo , who precede his family that he might be ready for the opening of Parliament on the sixth of February . Deronda take up his quarter in Park Lane , aware that his chamber be sufficiently tenant by Hans Meyrick . this be what he expect ; but he find other thing not altogether accord to his expectation . 

 Most of we remember Retzsch 's drawing of destiny in the shape of Mephistopheles play at chess with man for his soul , a game in which we may imagine the clever adversary make a feint of unintended move so as to set the beguile mortal on carry his defensive piece away from the true point of attack . the fiend make preparation his favorite object of mockery , that he may fatally persuade we against our take out waterproof when he be well aware the sky be go to clear , foresee that the imbecile will turn this delusion into a prejudice against waterproof instead of give a close study to the weather - sign . it be a peculiar test of a man 's metal when , after he have painfully adjust himself to what seem a wise provision , he find all his mental precaution a little beside the mark , and his excellent intention no well than miscalculate dovetail , accurately cut from a wrong starting - point . his magnanimity have get itself ready to meet misbehavior , and find quite a different call upon it . something of this kind happen to Deronda . 

 his first impression be one of pure pleasure and amusement at find his sitting - room transform into an atelier strew with miscellaneous drawing and with the content of two chest from Rome , the low half of the window darken with baize , and the blonde Hans in his weird youth as the preside genius of the littered place his hair long than of old , his face more whimsically creased , and his high voice as usual get high under the excitement of rapid talk . the friendship of the two have be keep up warmly since the memorable Cambridge time , not only by correspondence but by little episode of companionship abroad and in England , and the original relation of confidence on one side and indulgence on the other have be develop in practice , as be will not to be the case where such spiritual borrowing and lending have be well begin . 

 " I know you would like to see my cast and antiquity , " say Hans , after the first hearty greeting and inquiry , ' so I do not   scruple to unlade my chest here . but I have   find two room at Chelsea not many hundred yard from my mother and sister , and I shall soon be ready to hang out there when they have   scrap the wall and put in some new light . that be all I be wait for . but you see I do not   wait to begin work : you can not   conceive what a great fellow I be go to be . the seed of immortality have sprout within I . " 

 " only a fungoid growth , I dare say a grow disease in the lung , " say Deronda , accustom to treat Hans in brotherly fashion . he be walk toward some drawing prop on the ledge of his bookcase ; five rapidly - sketch head different aspect of the same face . he stand at a convenient distance from they , without make any remark . han , too , be silent for a minute , take up his palette and begin touch the picture on his easel . 

 " what do you think of they ? " he say at last . 

 " the full face look too massive ; otherwise the likeness be good , " say Deronda , more coldly than be usual with he . 

 " no , it be not too massive , " say Hans , decisively . " I have note that . there be always a little surprise when one pass from the profile to the full face . but I shall enlarge her scale for Berenice . I be make a Berenice series look at the sketch along there and now I think of it , you be just the model I want for the Agrippa . " Hans , still with pencil and palette in hand , have move to Deronda 's side while he say this , but he add hastily , as if conscious of a mistake , " no , no , I forget ; you do not   like sit for your portrait , confound you ! however , I have   pick up a capital Titus . there be to be five in the series . the first be Berenice clasp the knee of Gessius Florus and beseech he to spare her people ; I have   get that on the easel . then , this , where she be stand on the Xystus with Agrippa , entreat the people not to injure themselves by resistance . " 

 " Agrippa 's leg will never do , " say Deronda . 

 " the leg be good realistically , " say Hans , his face crease drolly ; " public man be often shaky about the leg ' their leg , the emblem of their various thought , ' as somebody say in the ' Rehearsal . ' " 

 " but these be as impossible as the leg of Raphael 's Alcibiades , " say 
 Deronda . 
 " then they be good ideally , " say Hans . " Agrippa 's leg be possibly bad ; I idealize that and make they impossibly bad . art , my Eugenius , must intensify . but never mind the leg now : the third sketch in the series be Berenice exult in the prospect of be Empress of Rome , when the news have come that Vespasian be declare Emperor and her lover Titus his successor . " 

 " you must put a scroll in her mouth , else people will not understand that . you can not   tell that in a picture . " 

 " it will make they feel their ignorance then an excellent asthetic effect . the fourth be , Titus send Berenice away from Rome after she have share his palace for ten year both reluctant , both sad invitus invitam , as Suetonius hath it . I have   find a model for the roman brute . " 

 " shall you make Berenice look fifty ? she must have be that . " 

 " no , no ; a few mature touch to show the lapse of time . dark - eyed beauty wear well , her particularly . but now , here be the fifth : Berenice seat lonely on the ruin of Jerusalem . that be pure imagination . that be what ought to have be perhaps be . now , see how I tell a pathetic negative . nobody know what become of she that be finely indicate by the series come to a close . there be no sixth picture . " here Hans pretend to speak with a gasping sense of sublimity , and draw back his head with a frown , as if look for a like impression on Deronda . " I break off in the homeric style . the story be chip off , so to speak , and pass with a ragged edge into nothing le nťant ; can anything be more sublime , especially in French ? the vulgar would desire to see her corpse and burial perhaps she will read and her linen distribute . but now come and look at this on the easel . I have make some way there . " 

 " that beseech attitude be really good , " say Deronda , after a moment 's contemplation . " you have be very industrious in the Christmas holiday ; for I suppose you have take up the subject since you come to London . " neither of they have yet mention Mirah . 

 " no , " say Hans , put touch to his picture , " I make up my mind to the subject before . I take that lucky chance for an augury that I be go to burst on the world as a great painter . I see a splendid woman in the Trastevere the grand woman there be half jewess and she set I hunt for a fine situation of a Jewess at Rome . like other man of vast learning , I end by take what lie on the surface . I will show you a sketch of the Trasteverina 's head when I can lay my hand on it . " 

 " I should think she would be a more suitable model for Berenice , " say 
 Deronda , not know exactly how to express his discontent . 
 " not a bit of it . the model ought to be the most beautiful Jewess in the world , and I have find she . " 

 " have you make yourself sure that she would like to figure in that character ? I should think no woman would be more abhorrent to she . do she quite know what you be do ? " 

 " certainly . I get she to throw herself precisely into this attitude . 
 little mother sit for Gessius Florus , and Mirah clasp her knee . " 
 here Hans go a little way off and look at the effect of his touch . 
 " I dare say she know nothing about Berenice 's history , " say Deronda , feel more indignation than he would have be able to justify . 

 " oh , yes , she do lady ' edition . Berenice be a fervid patriot , but be beguile by love and ambition into attach herself to the arch - enemy of her people . whence the Nemesis . Mirah take it as a tragic parable , and cry to think what the penitent Berenice suffer as she wander back to Jerusalem and sit desolate amidst desolation . that be her own phrase . I could not   find it in my heart to tell she I invent that part of the story . " 

 " show I your Trasteverina , " say Deronda , chiefly in order to hinder himself from say something else . 

 " shall you mind turn over that folio ? " say Hans . " my study of head be all there . but they be in confusion . you will perhaps find she next to a crop - eare undergraduate . " 

 after Deronda have be turn over the drawing a minute or two , he say 

 " these seem to be all Cambridge head and bit of country . perhaps I have well begin at the other end . " 

 " no ; you will find she about the middle . I empty one folio into another . " 

 " be this one of your undergraduate ? " say Deronda , hold up a drawing . " it be an unusually agreeable face . " 

 " that ! oh , that be a man name Gascoigne Rex Gascoigne . an uncommonly good fellow ; his upper lip , too , be good . I coach he before he get his scholarship . he ought to have take honor last Easter . but he be ill , and have have to stay up another year . I must look he up . I want to know how he be go on . " 

 " here she be , I suppose , " say Deronda , hold up a sketch of the 
 Trasteverina . 
 " ah , " say Hans , look at it rather contemptuously , " too coarse . I be unregenerate then . " 

 Deronda be silent while he close the folio , leave the Trasteverina outside . then clasp his coat - collar , and turn toward Hans , he say , " I dare say my scruple be excessive , Meyrick , but I must ask you to oblige I by give up this notion . " 

 Hans throw himself into a tragic attitude , and scream , " what ! my series my immortal Berenice series ? think of what you be say , man destroy , as Milton say , not a life but an immortality . wait before you , answer , that I may deposit the implement of my art and be ready to uproot my hair . " 

 here Hans lay down his pencil and palette , throw himself backward into a great chair , and hang limply over the side , shake his long hair over his face , lift his hooked finger on each side his head , and look up with comic terror at Deronda , who be oblige to smile , as he say 

 " paint as many Berenices as you like , but I wish you could feel with I perhaps you will , on reflection that you should choose another model . " 

 " why ? " say Hans , stand up , and look serious again . 

 " because she may get into such a position that her face be likely to be recognize . Mrs. Meyrick and I be anxious for she that she should be know as an admirable singer . it be right , and she wish it , that she should make herself independent . and she have excellent chance . one good introduction be secure already , and I be go to speak to Klesmer . her face may come to be very well know , and well , it be useless to attempt to explain , unless you feel as I do . I believe that if Mirah see the circumstance clearly , she would strongly object to be exhibit in this way to allow herself to be use as a model for a heroine of this sort . " 

 as Hans stand with his thumb in the belt of his blouse , listen to this speech , his face show a grow surprise melt into amusement , that at last would have its way in an explosive laugh : but see that Deronda look gravely offend , he check himself to say , " excuse my laughing , Deronda . you never give I an advantage over you before . if it have be about anything but my own picture , I should have swallow every word because you say it . and so you actually believe that I should get my five picture hang on the line in a conspicuous position , and carefully study by the public ? zound , man ! cider - cup and conceit never give I half such a beautiful dream . my picture be likely to remain as private as the utmost hypersensitiveness could desire . " 

 Hans turn to paint again as a way of fill up awkward pause . Deronda stand perfectly still , recognize his mistake as to publicity , but also conscious that his repugnance be not much diminish . he be the reverse of satisfied either with himself or with Hans ; but the power of be quiet carry a man well through moment of embarrassment . Hans have a reverence for his friend which make he feel a sort of shyness at Deronda 's be in the wrong ; but it be not in his nature to give up anything readily , though it be only a whim or rather , especially if it be a whim , and he presently go on , paint the while 

 " but even suppose I have a public rushing after my picture as if they be a railway series include nurse , baby and bonnet - box , I can not   see any justice in your objection . every painter worth remembering have paint the face he admire most , as often as he could . it be a part of his soul that go out into his picture . he diffuse its influence in that way . he put what he hat into a caricature . he put what he adore into some sacred , heroic form . if a man could paint the woman he love a thousand time as the Stella Marts to put courage into the sailor on board a thousand ship , so much the more honor to she . be not   that well than paint a piece of star immodesty and call it by a worshipful name ? " 

 " every objection can be answer if you take broad ground enough , Hans : no special question of conduct can be properly settle in that way , " say Deronda , with a touch of peremptoriness . " I might admit all your generality , and yet be right in say you ought not to publish Mirah 's face as a model for Berenice . but I give up the question of publicity . I be unreasonable there . " Deronda hesitate a moment . " still , even as a private affair , there might be good reason for your not indulge yourself too much in paint she from the point of view you mention . you must feel that her situation at present be a very delicate one ; and until she be in more independence , she should be keep as carefully as a bit of venetian glass , for fear of shake she out of the safe place she be lodge in . be you quite sure of your own discretion ? excuse I , Hans . my have find she bind I to watch over she . do you understand I ? " 

 " perfectly , " say Hans , turn his face into a good - humor smile . " you have the very justifiable opinion of I that I be likely to shatter all the glass in my way , and break my own skull into the bargain . quite fair . since I get into the scrape of be bear , everything I have like good have be a scrape either for myself or somebody else . everything I have take to heartily have somehow turn into a scrape . my painting be the last scrape ; and I shall be all my life get out of it . you think now I shall get into a scrape at home . no ; I be regenerate . you think I must be over head and ear in love with Mirah . quite right ; so I be . but you think I shall scream and plunge and spoil everything . there you be mistaken excusably , but transcendently mistaken . I have undergo baptism by immersion . Awe take care of I . ask the little mother . " 

 " you do not   reckon a hopeless love among your scrape , then , " say 
 Deronda , whose voice seem to get deep as Hans 's go higher . 
 " I do not   mean to call mine hopeless , " say Hans , with provoke coolness , lay down his tool , thrust his thumb into his belt , and move away a little , as if to contemplate his picture more deliberately . 

 " my dear fellow , you be only prepare misery for yourself , " say Deronda , decisively . " she would not marry a Christian , even if she love he . have you hear she of course you have hear her speak of her people and her religion ? " 

 " that can not   last , " say Hans . " she will see no Jew who be tolerable . every male of that race be insupportable , ' insupportably advance ' his nose . " 

 " she may rejoin her family . that be what she long for . her mother and brother be probably strict Jews . " 

 " I will turn proselyte , if she wish it , " say Hans , with a shrug and a laugh . 

 " do not   talk nonsense , Hans . I think you profess a serious love for she , " say Deronda , get heat . 

 " so I do . you think it desperate , but I do not . " 

 " I know nothing ; I can not   tell what have happen . we must be prepare for surprise . but I can hardly imagine a great surprise to I than that there should have seem to be anything in Mirah 's sentiment for you to found a romantic hope on . " Deronda feel that he be too contemptuous . 

 " I do not   find my romantic hope on a woman 's sentiment , " say Hans , perversely inclined to be the merry when he be address with gravity . " I go to science and philosophy for my romance . nature design Mirah to fall in love with I . the amalgamation of race demand it the mitigation of human ugliness demand it the affinity of contrast assure it . I be the utmost contrast to Mirah a bleached Christian , who can not   sing two note in tune . who have a chance against I ? " 

 " I see now ; it be all persiflage . you do not   mean a word you say , Meyrick , " say Deronda , lay his hand on Meyrick 's shoulder , and speak in a tone of cordial relief . " I be a wiseacre to answer you seriously . " 

 " upon my honor I do mean it , though , " say Hans , face round and lay his left hand on Deronda 's shoulder , so that their eye front each other closely . " I be at the confessional . I mean to tell you as soon as you come . my mother say you be Mirah 's guardian , and she think herself responsible to you for every breath that fall on Mirah in her house . well , I love she I worship she I will not   despair I mean to deserve she . " 

 " my dear fellow , you can not   do it , " say Deronda , quickly . 

 " I should have say , I mean to try . " 

 " you can not   keep your resolve , Hans . you use to resolve what you would do for your mother and sister . " 

 " you have a right to reproach I , old fellow , " say Hans , gently . 

 " perhaps I be ungenerous , " say Deronda , not apologetically , however . 
 " yet it can not   be ungenerous to warn you that you be indulge mad , 
 quixotic expectation . " 
 " who will be hurt but myself , then ? " say Hans , put out his lip . " I be not go to say anything to she unless I feel sure of the answer . I dare not ask the oracle : I prefer a cheerful caliginosity , as Sir Thomas Browne might say . I would rather run my chance there and lose , than be sure of win anywhere else . and I do not   mean to swallow the poison of despair , though you be disposed to thrust it on I . I be give up wine , so let I get a little drunk on hope and vanity . " 

 " with all my heart , if it will do you any good , " say Deronda , loose Hans 's shoulder , with a little push . he make his tone kindly , but his word be from the lip only . as to his real feeling he be silence . 

 he be conscious of that peculiar irritation which will sometimes befall the man whom other be incline to trust as a mentor the irritation of perceive that he be suppose to be entirely off the same plane of desire and temptation as those who confess to he . our guide , we pretend , must be sinless : as if those be not often the good teacher who only yesterday get correct for their mistake . throughout their friendship Deronda have be use to Hans 's egotism , but he have never before feel intolerant of it : when Hans , habitually pour out his own feeling and affair , have never care for any detail in return , and , if he chance to know any , and soon forget it . Deronda have be inwardly as well as outwardly indulgent nay , satisfied . but now he have note with some indignation , all the strong because it must not be betray , Hans 's evident assumption that for any danger of rivalry or jealousy in relation to Mirah , Deronda be not as much out of the question as the angel Gabriel . it be one thing to be resolute in place one 's self out of the question , and another to endure that other should perform that exclusion for we . he have expect that Hans would give he trouble : what he have not expect be that the trouble would have a strong element of personal feeling . and he be rather ashamed that Hans 's hope cause he uneasiness in spite of his well - warrant conviction that they would never be fulfil . they have raise an image of Mirah change ; and however he might protest that the change would not happen , the protest keep up the unpleasant image . altogether poor Hans seem to be enter into Deronda 's experience in a disproportionate manner go beyond his part of rescue prodigal , and rouse a feeling quite distinct from compassionate affection . 

 when Deronda go to Chelsea he be not make as comfortable as he ought to have be by Mrs. Meyrick 's evident release from anxiety about the beloved but incalculable son . Mirah seem lively than before , and for the first time he see her laugh . it be when they be talk of Hans , he be naturally the mother 's first topic . Mirah wish to know if Deronda have see Mr. Hans go through a sort of character piece without change his dress . 

 " he pass from one figure to another as if he be a bit of flame where you fancy the figure without see they , " say Mirah , full of her subject ; " he be so wonderfully quick . I use never to like comic thing on the stage they be dwelt on too long ; but all in one minute Mr. Hans make himself a blind bard , and then Rienzi address the Romans , and then an opera - dancer , and then a despond young gentleman I be sorry for they all , and yet I laugh , all in one " here Mirah give a little laugh that might have enter into a song . 

 " we hardly think that Mirah could laugh till Hans come , " say Mrs. Meyrick , see that Deronda , like herself , be observe the pretty picture . 

 " Hans seem in great force just now , " say Deronda in a tone of congratulation . " I do not   wonder at his enliven you . " 

 " he be be just perfect ever since he come back , " say Mrs. Meyrick , keep to herself the next clause " if it will but last . " 

 " it be a great happiness , " say Mirah , " to see the son and brother come into this dear home . and I hear they all talk about what they do together when they be little . that seem like heaven , and to have a mother and brother who talk in that way . I have never have it . " 

 " nor I , " say Deronda , involuntarily . 

 " no ? " say Mirah , regretfully . " I wish you have . I wish you have have every good . " the last word be utter with a serious ardor as if they have be part of a litany , while her eye be fix on Deronda , who with his elbow on the back of his chair be contemplate she by the new light of the impression she have make on Hans , and the possibility of she be attract by that extraordinary contrast . it be no more than what have happen on each former visit of his , that Mirah appear to enjoy speak of what she feel very much as a little girl fresh from school pour forth spontaneously all the long - repressed chat for which she have find willing ear . for the first time in her life Mirah be among those whom she entirely trust , and her original visionary impression that Deronda be a divinely - send messenger hang about his image still , stir always anew the disposition to reliance and openness . it be in this way she take what might have be the injurious flattery of admire attention into which her helpless dependence have be suddenly transform . every one around she watch for her look and word , and the effect on she be simply that of have pass from a trifling imprisonment into an exhilarating air which make speech and action a delight . to her mind it be all a gift from other ' goodness . but that word of Deronda 's implying that there have be some lack in his life which might be compare with anything she have know in her , be an entirely new inlet of thought about he . after her first expression of sorrowful surprise she go on 

 " but Mr. Hans say yesterday that you think so much of other you hardly want anything for yourself . he tell we a wonderful story of Buddha give himself to the famished tigress to save she and her little one from starve . and he say you be like Buddha . that be what we all imagine of you . " 

 " pray do not   imagine that , " say Deronda , who have lately be find such supposition rather exasperating . " even if it be true that I think so much of other , it would not follow that I have no want for myself . when Buddha let the tigress eat he he might have be very hungry himself . " 

 " perhaps if he be starve he would not mind so much about be eat , " say Mab , shyly . 

 " please do not   think that , Mab ; it take away the beauty of the action , " say Mirah . 

 " but if it be true , Mirah ? " say the rational Amy , have a half - holiday from her teaching ; " you always take what be beautiful as if it be true . " 

 " so it be , " say Mirah , gently . " if people have think what be the most beautiful and the good thing , it must be true . it be always there . " 

 " now , Mirah , what do you mean ? " say Amy . 

 " I understand she , " say Deronda , come to the rescue . 

 " it be a truth in thought though it may never have be carry out in action . it live as an idea . be that it ? " he turn to Mirah , who be listen with a blind look in her lovely eye . 

 " it must be that , because you understand I , but I can not quite explain , " say Mirah , rather abstractedly still search for some expression . 

 " but be it beautiful for Buddha to let the tiger eat he ? " say Amy , change her ground . " it would be a bad pattern . " 

 " the world would get full of fat tiger , " say Mab . 

 Deronda laugh , but defend the myth . " it be like a passionate word , " he say ; " the exaggeration be a flash of fervor . it be an extreme image of what be happen every day - the transmutation of self . " 

 " I think I can say what I mean , now , " say Mirah , who have not hear the intermediate talk . " when the good thing come into our thought , it be like what my mother have be to I . she have be just as really with I as all the other people about I often more really with I . " 

 Deronda , inwardly wince under this illustration , which bring other possible reality about that mother vividly before he , presently turn the conversation by say , " but we must not get too far away from practical matter . I come , for one thing , to tell of an interview I have yesterday , which I hope Mirah will find to have be useful to she . it be with Klesmer , the great pianist . " 

 " ah ? " say Mrs. Meyrick , with satisfaction . " you think he will help she ? " 

 " I hope so . he be very much occupy , but have promise to fix a time for receive and hear Miss Lapidoth , as we must learn to call she " here Deronda smile at Mirah " if she consent to go to he . " 

 " I shall be very grateful , " say Mirah . " he want to hear I sing , before he can judge whether I ought to be help . " 

 Deronda be strike with her plain sense about these matter of practical concern . 

 " it will not be at all try to you , I hope , if Mrs. Meyrick will kindly go with you to Klesmer 's house . " 

 " oh , no , not at all try . I have be do that all my life I mean , tell to do thing that other may judge of I . and I have go through a bad trial of that sort . I be prepared to bear it , and do some very small thing . be Klesmer a severe man ? " 

 " he be peculiar , but I have not have experience enough of he to know whether he would be what you would call severe . " 

 " I know he be kind - hearted kind in action , if not in speech . " 

 " I have be use to be frown at and not praise , " say Mirah . 

 " by the by , Klesmer frown a good deal , " say Deronda , " but there be often a sort of smile in his eye all the while . unhappily he wear spectacle , so you must catch he in the right light to see the smile . " 

 " I shall not be frightened , " say Mirah . " if he be like a roar lion , he only want I to sing . I shall do what I can . " 

 " then I feel sure you will not mind be invite to sing in Lady Mallinger 's drawing - room , " say Deronda . " she intend to ask you next month , and will invite many lady to hear you , who be likely to want lesson from you for their daughter . " 

 " how fast we be mount ! " say Mrs. Meyrick , with delight . " you never think of get grand so quickly , Mirah . " 

 " I be a little frightened at be call Miss Lapidoth , " say Mirah , color with a new uneasiness . " might I be call Cohen ? " 

 " I understand you , " say Deronda , promptly . " but I assure you , you must not be call Cohen . the name be inadmissible for a singer . this be one of the trifle in which we must conform to vulgar prejudice . we could choose some other name , however such as singer ordinarily choose an italian or spanish name , which would suit your physique . " to Deronda just now the name Cohen be equivalent to the ugly of yellow badge . 

 Mirah reflect a little , anxiously , then say , " no . if Cohen will not do , I will keep the name I have be call by . I will not hide myself . I have friend to protect I . and now if my father be very miserable and want help no , " she say , look at Mrs. Meyrick , " I should think , then , that he be perhaps cry as I use to see he , and have nobody to pity he , and I have hide myself from he . he have none belong to he but I . other that make friend with he always leave he . " 

 " keep to what you feel right , my dear child , " say Mrs. Meyrick . " I would not persuade you to the contrary . " for her own part she have no patience or pity for that father , and would have leave he to his crying . 

 Deronda be say to himself , " I be rather base to be angry with Hans . how can he help be in love with she ? but it be too absurdly presumptuous for he even to frame the idea of appropriate she , and a sort of blasphemy to suppose that she could possibly give herself to he . " 

 what would it be for Daniel Deronda to entertain such thought ? he be not one who could quite naively introduce himself where he have just exclude his friend , yet it be undeniable that what have just happen make a new stage in his feeling toward Mirah . but apart from other ground for self - repression , reason both definite and vague make he shut away that question as he might have shut up a half - open writing that would have carry his imagination too far , and give too much shape to presentiment . might there not come a disclosure which would hold the miss determination of his course ? what do he really know about his origin ? strangely in these latter month when it seem right that he should exert his will in the choice of a destination , the passion of his nature have get more and more lock by this uncertainty . the disclosure might bring its pain , indeed the likelihood seem to he to be all on that side ; but if it help he to make his life a sequence which would take the form of duty if it save he from have to make an arbitrary selection where he feel no preponderance of desire ? still more , he want to escape stand as a critic outside the activity of man , stiffen into the ridiculous attitude of self - assign superiority . his chief tether be his early inwrought affection for Sir Hugo , make he gratefully deferential to wish with which he have little agreement : but gratitude have be sometimes disturb by doubt which be near reduce it to a fear of be ungrateful . many of we complain that half our birthright be sharp duty : Deronda be more inclined to complain that he be rob of this half ; yet he accuse himself , as he would have accuse another , of be weakly self - conscious and want in resolve . he be the reverse of that type paint for we in Faulconbridge and Edmund of Gloster , whose coarse ambition for personal success be inflame by a defiance of accidental disadvantage . to Daniel the word Father and Mother have the altar - fire in they ; and the thought of all close relation of our nature hold still something of the mystic power which have make his neck and ear burn in boyhood . the average man may regard this sensibility on the question of birth as preposterous and hardly credible ; but with the utmost respect for his knowledge as the rock from which all other knowledge be hew , it must be admit that many well - prove fact be dark to the average man , even concern the action of his own heart and the structure of his own retina . a century ago he and all his forefather have not have the slight notion of that electric discharge by mean of which they have all wag their tongue mistakenly ; any more than they be awake to the seclude anguish of exceptional sensitiveness into which many a carelessly - beget child of man be bear . 

 perhaps the ferment be all the strong in Deronda 's mind because he have never have a confidant to whom he could open himself on these delicate subject . he have always be lean on instead of be invite to lean . sometimes he have long for the sort of friend to whom he might possibly unfold his experience : a young man like himself who sustain a private grief and be not too confident about his own career ; speculative enough to understand every moral difficulty , yet socially susceptible , as he himself be , and have every outward sign of equality either in bodily or spiritual wrestling ; for he have find it impossible to reciprocate confidence with one who look up to he . but he have no expectation of meet the friend he imagine . Deronda 's be not one of those quiveringly - poise nature that lend themselves to second - sight . 

 CHAPTER XXXVIII . 

 there be who hold that the deep tragedy be a Prometheus Bound not after but before he have well get the celestial fire into the narthex whereby it might be convey to mortal : thrust by the Kratos and Bia of institute method into a solitude of despise idea , fasten in throb helplessness by the fatal pressure of poverty and disease a solitude where many pass by , but none regard . 

 " second - sight " be a flag over dispute ground . but it be matter of knowledge that there be person whose yearning , conception nay , travel conclusion continually take the form of image which have a foreshadow power ; the deed they would do start up before they in complete shape , make a coercive type ; the event they hunger for or dread rise into vision with a seed - like growth , feed itself fast on unnumbered impression . they be not always the less capable of the argumentative process , nor less sane than the commonplace calculator of the market : sometimes it may be that their nature have manifold opening , like the hundred - gate Thebes , where there may naturally be a great and more miscellaneous inrush than through a narrow beadle - watch portal . no doubt there be abject specimen of the visionary , as there be a minim mammal which you might imprison in the finger of your glove . that small relative of the elephant have no harm in he ; but what great mental or social type be free from specimen whose insignificance be both ugly and noxious ? one be afraid to think of all that the genus " patriot " embrace ; or of the elbowing there might be at the day of judgment for those who rank as author , and bring volume either in their hand or on truck . 

 this apology for inevitable kinship be mean to usher in some fact about Mordecai , whose figure have bite itself into Deronda 's mind as a new question which he feel an interest in get answer . but the interest be no more than a vaguely - expectant suspense : the consumptive - look Jew , apparently a fervid student of some kind , get his crust by a quiet handicraft , like Spinoza , fit into none of Deronda 's anticipation . 

 it be otherwise with the effect of their meeting on Mordecai . for many winter , while he have be conscious of an ebbing physical life , and as widen spiritual loneliness , all his passionate desire have concentrate itself in the yearning for some young ear into which he could pour his mind as a testament , some soul kindre enough to accept the spiritual product of his own brief , painful life , as a mission to be execute . it be remarkable that the hopefulness which be often the beneficent illusion of consumptive patient , be in Mordecai wholly divert from the prospect of bodily recovery and carry into the current of this yearning for transmission . the yearning , which have pant upward from out of over - whelm discouragement , have grow into a hope the hope into a confident belief , which , instead of be check by the clear conception he have of his hasten decline , take rather the intensity of expectant faith in a prophecy which have only brief space to get fulfil in . 

 some year have now go since he have first begin to measure man with a keen glance , search for a possibility which become more and more a distinct conception . such distinctness as it have at first be reach chiefly by a method of contrast : he want to find a man who differ from himself . trace reason in that self for the rebuff he have meet with and the hindrance that beset he , he imagine a man who would have all the element necessary for sympathy with he , but in an embodiment unlike his own : he must be a Jew , intellectually cultured , morally fervid in all this a nature ready to be plenishe from Mordecai 's ; but his face and frame must be beautiful and strong , he must have be use to all the refinement of social life , his voice must flow with a full and easy current , his circumstance be free from sordid need : he must glorify the possibility of the Jew , not sit and wonder as Mordecai do , bear the stamp of his people amid the sign of poverty and wan breath . sensitive to physical characteristic , he have , both abroad and in England , look at picture as well as man , and in a vacant hour he have sometimes linger in the National Gallery in search of painting which might feed his hopefulness with grave and noble type of the human form , such as might well belong to man of his own race . but he return in disappointment . the instance be scatter but thinly over the gallery of Europe , in which the fortune or selection even of the chief master have give to art a face at once young , grand , and beautiful , where , if there be any melancholy , it be no feeble passivity , but enter into the foreshadow capability of heroism . 

 some observant person may perhaps remember his emaciated figure , and dark eye deep in their socket , as he stand in front of a picture that have touch he either to new or habitual meditation : he commonly wear a cloth cap with black fur round it , which no painter would have ask he to take off . but spectator would be likely to think of he as an odd - look Jew who probably get money out of picture ; and Mordecai , when he look at they , be perfectly aware of the impression he make . experience have render he morbidly alive to the effect of a man 's poverty and other physical disadvantage in cheapen his idea , unless they be those of a Peter the Hermit who have a tocsin for the rabble . but he be too sane and generous to attribute his spiritual banishment solely to the excusable prejudice of other ; certain incapacity of his own have make the sentence of exclusion ; and hence it be that his imagination have construct another man who would be something more ample than the second soul bestow , accord to the notion of the Cabbalists , to help out the insufficient first who would be a bloom human life , ready to incorporate all that be worthy in an existence whose visible , palpable part be burn itself fast away . his inward need for the conception of this expand , prolonged self be reflect as an outward necessity . the thought of his heart   that ancient phrase good shadow the truth   seem to he too precious , too closely interweave with the growth of thing not to have a further destiny . and as the more beautiful , the strong , the more executive self take shape in his mind , he love it beforehand with an affection half identify , half contemplative and grateful . 

 Mordecai 's mind work so constantly in image , that his coherent train of thought often resemble the significant dream attribute to sleeper by wake person in their most inventive moment : nay , they often resemble genuine dream in their way of break off the passage from the know to the unknown . thus , for a long while , he habitually think of the be answer to his need as one distantly approach or turn his back toward he , darkly paint against a golden sky . the reason of the golden sky lie in one of Mordecai 's habit . he be keenly alive to some poetic aspect of London ; and a favorite resort of his , when strength and leisure allow , be to some of the bridge , especially about sunrise or sunset . even when he be bend over watch - wheel and trinket , or seat in a small upper room look out on dingy brick and dingy crack window , his imagination spontaneously plant he on some spot where he have a far - stretch scene ; his thought go on in wide space ; and whenever he could , he try to have in reality the influence of a large sky . lean on the parapet of Blackfriar 's Bridge , and gaze meditatively , the breadth and calm of the river , with its long vista half hazy , half luminous , the grand dim mass of tall form of building which be the sign of world - commerce , the oncoming of boat and barge from the still distance into sound and color , enter into his mood and blent themselves indistinguishably with his thinking , as a fine symphony to which we can hardly be say to listen , make a medium that bear up our spiritual wing . thus it happen that the figure representative of Mordecai 's longing be mentally see darken by the excess of light in the aerial background . but in the inevitable progress of his imagination toward full detail , he cease to see the figure with its back toward he . it begin to advance , and a face become discernible ; the word youth , beauty , refinement , jewish birth , noble gravity , turn into hardly individual but typical form and color : gather from his memory of face see among the Jews of Holland and Bohemia , and from the painting which revive that memory . reverently let it be say of this mature spiritual need that it be akin to the boy 's and girl 's picturing of the future beloved ; but the stirring of such young desire be feeble compare with the passionate current of an ideal life strain to embody itself , make intense by resistance to imminent dissolution . the visionary form become a companion and auditor ; keep a place not only in the wake imagination , but in those dream of light slumber of which it be true to say , " I sleep , but my heart waketh " when the disturbing trivial story of yesterday be charge with the impassioned purpose of year . 

 of late the urgency of irremediable time , measure by the gradual choking of life , have turn Mordecai 's trust into an agitated watch for the fulfillment that must be at hand . be the bell on the verge of tolling , the sentence about to be execute ? the deliverer 's footstep must be near the deliverer who be to rescue Mordecai 's spiritual travail from oblivion , and give it an abide - place in the good heritage of his people . an insane exaggeration of his own value , even if his idea have be as true and precious as those of Columbus or Newton , many would have count this yearning , take it as the sublimer part for a man to say , " if not I , then another , " and to hold cheap the meaning of his own life . but the full nature desire to be an agent , to create , and not merely to look on : strong love hunger to bless , and not merely to behold blessing . and while there be warmth enough in the sun to feed an energetic life , there will still be man to feel , " I be lord of this moment 's change , and will charge it with my soul . " 

 but with that mingling of inconsequence which belong to we all , and not unhappily , since it save we from many effect of mistake , Mordecai 's confidence in the friend to come do not suffice to make he passive , and he try expedient , pathetically humble , such as happen to be within his reach , for communicate something of himself . it be now two year since he have take up his abode under Ezra Cohen 's roof , where he be regard with much good - will as a compound of workman , dominie , vessel of charity , inspire idiot , man of piety , and   if he be inquire into   dangerous heretic . during that time little Jacob have advance into knickerbocker , and into that quickness of apprehension which have be already make manifest in relation to hardware and exchange . he have also advance in attachment to Mordecai , regard he as an inferior , but like he none the bad , and take his helpful cleverness as he might have take the service of an enslaved Djinn . as for Mordecai , he have give Jacob his first lesson , and his habitual tenderness easily turn into the teacher 's fatherhood . though he be fully conscious of the spiritual distance between the parent and himself , and would never have attempt any communication to they from his peculiar world , the boy move he with that idealize affection which merge the quality of the individual child in the glory of childhood and the possibility of a long future . and this feeling have draw he on , at first without premeditation , and afterward with conscious purpose , to a sort of outpoure in the ear of the boy which might have seem wild enough to any excellent man of business who overheard it . but none overhear when Jacob go up to Mordecai 's room one day , for example , in which there be little work to be do , or at an hour when the work be end , and after a brief lesson in english reading or in numeration , be induce to remain stand at his teacher 's knee , or choose to jump astride they , often to the patient fatigue of the waste limb . the inducement be perhaps the mending of a toy , or some little mechanical device in which Mordecai 's well - practice finger - tip have an exceptional skill ; and with the boy thus tether , he would begin to repeat a hebrew poem of his own , into which year before he have pour his first youthful ardor for that conception of a blend past and future which be the mistress of his soul , tell Jacob to say the word after he . 

 " the boy will get they engrave within he , " think Mordecai ; " it be a way of printing . " 

 none readier than Jacob at this fascinating game of imitate unintelligible word ; and if no oppose diversion occur he would sometimes carry on his share in it as long as the teacher 's breath would last out . for Mordecai throw into each repetition the fervor befit a sacred occasion . in such instance , Jacob would show no other distraction than reach out and survey the content of his pocket ; or draw down the skin of his cheek to make his eye look awful , and roll his head to complete the effect ; or alternately handle his own nose and Mordecai 's as if to test the relation of their mass . under all this the fervid reciter would not pause , satisfied if the young organ of speech would submit themselves . but most commonly a sudden impulse send Jacob leap away into some antic or active amusement , when , instead of follow the recitation he would return upon the foregoing word most ready to his tongue , and mouth or gabble , with a see - saw suit to the action of his limb , a verse on which Mordecai have spend some of his too scanty heart 's blood . yet he wait with such patience as a prophet need , and begin his strange printing again undiscouraged on the morrow , say inwardly 

 " my word may rule he some day . their meaning may flash out on he . it be so with a nation after many day . " 

 meanwhile Jacob 's sense of power be increase and his time enliven by a store of magical articulation with which he make the baby crow , or drive the large cat into a dark corner , or promise himself to frighten any incidental Christian of his own year . one week he have unfortunately see a street mountebank , and this carry off his muscular imitativeness in sad divergence from New Hebrew poetry , after the model of Jehuda ha - Levi . Mordecai have arrive at a fresh passage in his poem ; for as soon as Jacob have get well use to one portion , he be lead on to another , and a fresh combination of sound generally answer well in keep he fast for a few minute . the consumptive voice , generally a strong high baritone , with its variously mingle hoarseness , like a haze amidst illumination , and its occasional incipient gasp have more than the usual excitement , while it give forth hebrew verse with a meaning something like this : 

  " away from I the garment of forgetfulness . 
  wither the heart ; 
  the oil and wine from press of the Goyim , 
  poison with scorn . 
  Solitude be on the side of Mount Nebo , 
  in its heart a tomb : 
  there the bury ark and golden cherubim 
  make hidden light : 
  there the solemn gaze unchanged , 
  the wing be spread unbroken : 
  Shut beneath in silent awful speech 
  the Law lie graven . 
  Solitude and darkness be my covering , 
  and my heart a tomb ; 
  Smite and shatter it , o Gabriel ! 
  Shatter it as the clay of the founder 
  around the golden image . " 
 in the absorbing enthusiasm with which Mordecai have intone rather than speak this last invocation , he be unconscious that Jacob have cease to follow he and have start away from his knee ; but pause he see , as by a sudden flash , that the lad have throw himself on his hand with his foot in the air , mountebank fashion , and be pick up with his lip a bright farthing which be a favorite among his pocket treasure . this might have be reckon among the trick Mordecai be use to , but at this moment it jar he horribly , as if it have be a satanic grin upon his prayer . 

 " child ! child ! " he call out with a strange cry that startle Jacob to his foot , and then he sink backward with a shudder , close his eye . 

 " what ? " say Jacob , quickly . then , not get an immediate answer , he press Mordecai 's knee with a shake movement , in order to rouse he . Mordecai open his eye with a fierce expression in they , lean forward , grasp the little shoulder , and say in a quick , hoarse whisper 

 " a curse be on your generation , child . they will open the mountain and drag forth the golden wing and coin they into money , and the solemn face they will break up into ear - ring for wanton woman ! and they shall get themselves a new name , but the angel of ignominy , with the fiery brand , shall know they , and their heart shall be the tomb of dead desire that turn their life to rottenness . " 

 the aspect and action of Mordecai be so new and mysterious to Jacob they carry such a burden of obscure threat it be as if the patient , indulgent companion have turn into something unknown and terrific : the sunken dark eye and hoarse accent close to he , the thin grappling finger , shake Jacob 's little frame into awe , and while Mordecai be speak he stand tremble with a sense that the house be tumble in and they be not go to have dinner any more . but when the terrible speech have end and the pinch be relax , the shock resolve itself into tear ; Jacob lift up his small patriarchal countenance and weep aloud . this sign of childish grief at once recall Mordecai to his usual gentle self : he be not able to speak again at present , but with a maternal action he draw the curly head toward he and press it tenderly against his breast . on this Jacob , feel the danger well - nigh over , howl at ease , begin to imitate his own performance and improve upon it a sort of transition from impulse into art often observable . indeed , the next day he undertake to terrify Adelaide Rebekah in like manner , and succeed very well . 

 but Mordecai suffer a check which last long , from the consciousness of a misapplied agitation ; sane as well as excitable , he judge severely his moment of aberration into futile eagerness , and feel discredit with himself . all the more his mind be strain toward the discernment of that friend to come , with whom he would have a calm certainty of fellowship and understanding . 

 it be just then that , in his usual midday guardianship of the old book - shop , he be strike by the appearance of Deronda , and it be perhaps comprehensible now why Mordecai 's glance take on a sudden eager interest as he look at the new - comer : he see a face and frame which seem to he to realize the long - conceive type . but the disclaimer of jewish birth be for the moment a backward thrust of double severity , the particular disappointment tend to shake his confidence in the more indefinite expectation . nevertheless , when he find Deronda seat at the Cohens ' table , the disclaimer be for the moment nullify : the first impression return with add force , seem to be guarantee by this second meeting under circumstance more peculiar than the former ; and in ask Deronda if he know Hebrew , Mordecai be so possess by the new inrush of belief , that he have forget the absence of any other condition to the fulfillment of his hope . but the answer " no " strike they all down again , and the frustration be more painful than before . after turn his back on the visitor that Sabbath evening , Mordecai go through day of a deep discouragement , like that of man on a doom ship , who have strain their eye after a sail , and behold it with rejoice , behold it never advance , and say , " our sick eye make it . " but the long - contemplated figure have come as an emotional sequence of Mordecai 's firm theoretic conviction ; it have be work from the imagery of his most passionate life ; and it inevitably reappear reappear in a more specific self - assert form than ever . Deronda have that sort of resemblance to the preconceived type which a finely individual bust or portrait have to the more generalized copy leave in our mind after a long interval : we renew our memory with delight , but we hardly know with how much correction . and now , his face meet Mordecai 's inward gaze as it have always belong to the await friend , ray out , moreover , some of that influence which belong to breathe flesh ; till by - and - by it seem that discouragement have turn into a new obstinacy of resistance , and the ever - recurrent vision have the force of an outward call to disregard counter - evidence , and keep expectation awake . it be Deronda now who be see in the often painful night - watch , when we be all liable to be hold with the clutch of a single thought whose figure , never with its back turn , be see in moment of soothe reverie or soothe dozing , paint on that golden sky which be the doubly blessed symbol of advance day and of approach rest . 

 Mordecai know that the nameless stranger be to come and redeem his ring ; and , in spite of contrary chance , the wish to see he again be grow into a belief that he should see he . in the January week , he feel an increase agitation of that subdue hidden quality which hinder nervous people from any steady occupation on the eve of an anticipated change . he could not go on with his printing of Hebrew on little Jacob 's mind ; or with his attendance at a weekly club , which be another effort of the same forlorn hope : something else be come . the one thing he long for be to get as far as the river , which he could do but seldom and with difficulty . he yearn with a poet 's yearning for the wide sky , the far - reach vista of bridge , the tender and fluctuating light on the water which seem to breathe with a life that can shiver and mourn , be comfort and rejoice . 

 CHAPTER XXXIX . 

  " vor den Wissenden sich stellen 
  Sicher ist be in alien Fšllen ! 
  Wenn du lange dich gequšlet 
  Weiss er gleich will dir es fehlet ; 
  Auch auf Beifall darfst du hoffen , 
  Denn er weiss will du 's getroffen , " 
  GOETHE : West - Ųstlicker Divan . 
 momentous thing happen to Deronda the very evening of that visit to the small house at Chelsea , when there be the discussion about Mirah 's public name . but for the family group there , what appear to be the chief sequence connect with it occur two day afterward . about four o'clock wheel pause before the door , and there come one of those knock with an accompanying ring which serve to magnify the sense of social existence in a region where the most enliven signal be usually those of the muffin - man . all the girl be at home , and the two room be throw together to make space for Kate 's drawing , as well as a great length of embroidery which have take the place of the satin cushion a sort of piece de rťsistance in the course of needlework , take up by any clever finger that happen to be at liberty . it stretch across the front room picturesquely enough , Mrs. Meyrick bend over it on one corner , Mab in the middle , and Amy at the other end . Mirah , whose performance in point of sewing be on the make - shift level of the tailor - bird 's , her education in that branch have be much neglect , be act as reader to the party , seat on a camp - stool ; in which position she also serve Kate as model for a title - page vignette , symbolize a fair public absorb in the successive volume of the family tea - table . she be give forth with charming distinctness the delightful Essay of Elia , " the Praise of Chimney - Sweeps , " and all be smile over the " innocent blackness , " when the impose knock and ring call their thought to loftier sphere , and they look up in wonderment . 

 " dear I ! " say Mrs. Meyrick ; " can it be Lady Mallinger ? be there a grand carriage , Amy ? " 

 " no only a hansom cab . it must be a gentleman . " 

 " the Prime Minister , I should think , " say Kate dryly . " Hans say the great man in London may get into a hansom cab . " 

 " oh , oh , oh ! " cry Mab . " suppose it should be Lord Russell ! " 

 the five bright face be all look amuse when the old maid - servant bring in a card distractedly leave the parlor - door open , and there be see bow toward Mrs. Meyrick a figure quite unlike that of the respected Premier tall and physically impressive even in his kid and kerseymere , with massive face , flamboyant hair , and gold spectacle : in fact , as Mrs. Meyrick see from the card , Julius Klesmer . 

 even embarrassment could hardly have make the " little mother " awkward , but quick in her perception she be at once aware of the situation , and feel well satisfied that the great personage have come to Mirah instead of require she to come to he ; take it as a sign of active interest . but when he enter , the room shrink into closet , the cottage piano , Mab think , seem a ridiculous toy , and the entire family existence as petty and private as an establishment of mouse in the Tuileries . Klesmer 's personality , especially his way of glance round he , immediately suggest vast area and a multitudinous audience , and probably they make the usual scenery of his consciousness , for we all of we carry on our thinking in some habitual locus where there be a presence of other soul , and those who take in a large sweep than their neighbor be apt to seem mightily vain and affect . Klesmer be vain , but not more so than many contemporary of heavy aspect , whose vanity leap out and startle one like a spear out of a walking - stick ; as to his carriage and gesture , these be as natural to he as the length of his finger ; and the rank affectation he could have show would have be to look diffident and demure . while his grandiose air be make Mab feel herself a ridiculous toy to match the cottage piano , he be take in the detail around he with a keen and thoroughly kind sensibility . he remember a home no long than this on the outskirt of Bohemia ; and in the figurative Bohemia too he have have large acquaintance with the variety and romance which belong to small income . he address Mrs. Meyrick with the utmost deference . 

 " I hope I have not take too great a freedom . be in the neighborhood , I venture to save time by call . our friend , Mr. Deronda , mention to I an understanding that I be to have the honor of become acquaint with a young lady here Miss Lapidoth . " 

 Klesmer have really discern Mirah in the first moment of enter , but , with subtle politeness , he look round bowingly at the three sister as if he be uncertain which be the young lady in question . 

 " those be my daughter : this be Miss Lapidoth , " say Mrs. Meyrick , wave her hand toward Mirah . 

 " ah , " say Klesmer , in a tone of gratified expectation , turn a radiant smile and deep bow to Mirah , who , instead of be in the least take by surprise , have a calm pleasure in her face . she like the look of Klesmer , feel sure that he would scold she , like a great musician and a kind man . 

 " you will not object to begin our acquaintance by sing to I , " he add , aware that they would all be relieve by get rid of preliminary . 

 " I shall be very glad . it be good of you to be willing to listen to I , " say Mirah , move to the piano . " shall I accompany myself ? " 

 " by all mean , " say Klesmer , seat himself , at Mrs. Meyrick 's invitation , where he could have a good view of the singer . the acute little mother would not have acknowledge the weakness , but she really say to herself , " he will like her singing well if he see she . " 

 all the feminine heart except Mirah 's be beat fast with anxiety , think Klesmer terrific as he sit with his listening frown on , and only dare to look at he furtively . if he do say anything severe it would be so hard for they all . they could only comfort themselves with think that Prince Camaralzaman , who have hear the fine thing , prefer Mirah 's singing to any other : also she appear to be do she very well , as if she be more instead of less at ease than usual . 

 the song she have choose be a fine setting of some word select from 
 Leopardi 's grand Ode to Italy : 
  " o patria mia , vedo le mura c gli archi 
  E le colonne e I simula - cri e l'erme 
  Torridegli avi nostri " 
 this be recitative : then follow 

 " Ma la gloria non vedo " 

 a mournful melody , a rhythmic plaint . after this come a climax of devout triumph pass from the subdue adoration of a happy Andante in the word 

  " Beatissimi voi . 
  Che offriste il petto alle nemiche lance 
  per amor di costei che al sol vi diede " 
 to the joyous outburst of an exultant allegro in 

 " oh viva , oh viva : Beatissimi voi Mentre nel monde si favelli o scriva . " 

 when she have end , Klesmer say after a moment 

 " that be Joseph Leo 's music . " 

 " yes , he be my last master at Vienna : so fierce and so good , " say Mirah , with a melancholy smile . " he prophesy that my voice would not do for the stage . and he be right . " 

 " Con tinue , if you please , " say Klesmer , put out his lip and shake his long finger , while he go on with a smothered articulation quite unintelligible to the audience . 

 the three girl detest he unanimously for not say one word of praise . Mrs. Meyrick be a little alarmed . 

 Mirah , simply bent on do what Klesmer desire , and imagine that he would now like to hear she sing some German , go through Prince Radzivill 's music to Gretchen 's song in the " Faust , " one after the other without any interrogatory pause . when she have finish he rise and walk to the extremity of the small space at command , then walk back to the piano , where Mirah have rise from her seat and stand look toward he with her little hand cross before she , meekly await judgment ; then with a sudden unknitting of his brow and with beam eye , he stretch out his hand and say abruptly , " let we shake hand : you be a musician . " 

 Mab feel herself begin to cry , and all the three girl hold Klesmer adorable . Mrs. Meyrick take a long breath . 

 but straightway the frown come again , the long hand , back uppermost , be stretch out in quite a different sense to touch with finger - tip the back of Mirah 's , and with protrude lip he say 

 " not for great task . no high roof . we be no skylark . we must be modest . " Klesmer pause here . and Mab cease to think he adorable : " as if Mirah have show the least sign of conceit ! " 

 Mirah be silent , know that there be a specific opinion to be wait for , and Klesmer presently go on " I would not advise I would not further your singing in any large space than a private drawing - room . but you will do there . and here in London that be one of the good career open . lesson will follow . will you come and sing at a private concert at my house on Wednesday ? " 

 " oh , I shall be grateful , " say Mirah , put her hand together devoutly . " I would rather get my bread in that way than by anything more public . I will try to improve . what should I work at most ? " 

 Klesmer make a preliminary answer in noise which sound like word bite in two and swallow before they be half out , shake his finger the while , before he say , quite distinctly , " I shall introduce you to Astorga : he be the foster - father of good singing and will give you advice . " then address Mrs. Meyrick , he add , " Mrs. Klesmer will call before Wednesday , with your permission . " 

 " we shall feel that to be a great kindness , " say Mrs. Meyrick . 

 " you will sing to she , " say Klesmer , turn again to Mirah . " she be a thorough musician , and have a soul with more ear to it than you will often get in a musician . your singing will satisfy she : 

 ' vor den Wissenden sich stellen ; ' 

 you know the rest ? " 

 " ' Sicher ist be in alien Fšllen . ' " 

 say Mirah , promptly . and Klesmer say " SchŲn ! " put out his hand again as a good - bye . 

 he have certainly choose the most delicate way of praise Mirah , and the Meyrick girl have now give he all their esteem . but imagine Mab 's feeling when suddenly fix his eye on she , he say decisively , " that young lady be musical , I see ! " she be a mere blush and sense of scorch . 

 " yes , " say Mirah , on her behalf . " and she have a touch . " 

 " oh , please , Mirah a scramble , not a touch , " say Mab , in anguish , with a horrible fear of what the next thing might be : this dreadful divine personage evidently Satan in gray trouser might order she to sit down to the piano , and her heart be like molten wax in the midst of she . but this be cheap payment for her amazed joy when Klesmer say benignantly , turn to Mrs. Meyrick , " will she like to accompany Miss Lapidoth and hear the music on Wednesday ? " 

 " there could hardly be a great pleasure for she , " say Mrs. Meyrick . 
 " she will be most glad and grateful . " 
 Thereupon Klesmer bow round to the three sister more grandly than they have ever be bow to before . altogether it be an amusing picture the little room with so much of its diagonal take up in Klesmer 's magnificent bend to the small feminine figure like image a little less than life - size , the grave Holbein face on the wall , as many as be not otherwise occupy , look hard at this stranger who by his face seem a dignified contemporary of their own , but whose garment seem a deplorable mockery of the human form . 

 Mrs. Meyrick could not help go out of the room with Klesmer and close the door behind she . he understand she , and say with a frown nod 

 " she will do : if she do not   attempt too much and her voice hold out , she can make an income . I know that be the great point : Deronda tell I . you be take care of she . she look like a good girl . " 

 " she be an angel , " say the warm - hearted woman . 

 " no , " say Klesmer , with a playful nod ; ' she be a pretty jewess : the angel must not get the credit of she . but I think she have find a guardian angel , " he end , bow himself out in this amiable way . 

 the four young creature have look at each other mutely till the door bang and Mrs. Meyrick re - enter . then there be an explosion . Mab clap her hand and dance everywhere inconveniently ; Mrs. Meyrick kiss Mirah and bless she ; Amy say emphatically , " we can never get she a new dress before Wednesday ! " and Kate exclaim , " thank heaven my table be not knock over ! " 

 Mirah have reseat herself on the music - stool without speak , and the tear be roll down her cheek as she look at her friend . 

 " now , now , Mab ! " say Mrs. Meyrick ; " come and sit down reasonably and let we talk ? " 

 " yes , let we talk , " say Mab , cordially , come back to her low seat and caress her knee . " I be begin to feel large again . Hans say he be come this afternoon . I wish he have be here only there would have be no room for he . Mirah , what be you look sad for ? " 

 " I be too happy , " say Mirah . " I feel so full of gratitude to you all ; and he be so very kind . " 

 " yes , at last , " say Mab , sharply . " but he might have say something encouraging soon . I think he dreadfully ugly when he sit frown , and only say , ' Con tinue . ' I hat he all the long way from the top of his hair to the toe of his polished boot . " 

 " Nonsense , Mab ; he have a splendid profile , " say Kate . 

 " now , but not then . I can not bear people to keep their mind bottle up for the sake of let they off with a pop . they seem to grudge make you happy unless they can make you miserable beforehand . however , I forgive he everything , " say Mab , with a magnanimous air , " but he have invite I . I wonder why he fix on I as the musical one ? be it because I have a bulging forehead , ma , and peep from under it like a newt from under a stone ? " 

 " it be your way of listen to the singing , child , " say Mrs. Meyrick . " he have magic spectacle and see everything through they , depend upon it . but what be that german quotation you be so ready with , Mirah you learn puss ? " 

 " oh , that be not learn , " say Mirah , her tearful face break into an amused smile . " I say it so many time for a lesson . it mean that it be safe to do anything singing or anything else before those who know and understand all about it . " 

 " that be why you be not one bit frightened , I suppose , " say Amy . 
 " but now , what we have to talk about be a dress for you on Wednesday . " 
 " I do not   want anything well than this black merino , " say Mirah , rise to show the effect . " some white glove and some new bottine . " she put out her little foot , clothe in the famous feel slipper . 

 " there come Hans , " say Mrs. Meyrick . " stand still , and let we hear what he say about the dress . artist be the good people to consult about such thing . " 

 " you do not   consult I , ma , " say Kate , lift up her eyebrow with a playful complainingness . " I notice mother be like the people I deal with the girl ' doing be always price low . " 

 " my dear child , the boy be such a trouble we could never put up with they , if we do not   make believe they be worth more , " say Mrs. Meyrick , just as her boy enter . " han , we want your opinion about Mirah 's dress . a great event have happen . Klesmer have be here , and she be go to sing at his house on Wednesday among grand people . she think this dress will do . " 

 " let I see , " say Hans . Mirah in her childlike way turn toward he to be look at ; and he , go to a little further distance , kneel with one knee on a hassock to survey she . 

 " this would be think a very good stage - dress for I , " she say , pleadingly , " in a part where I be to come on as a poor Jewess and sing to fashionable Christians . " 

 " it would be effective , " say Hans , with a consider air ; " it would stand out well among the fashionable chiffon . " 

 " but you ought not to claim all the poverty on your side , Mirah , " say Amy . " there be plenty of poor Christians and dreadfully rich Jews and fashionable jewess . " 

 " I do not   mean any harm , " say Mirah . " only I have be use to think about my dress for part in play . and I almost always have a part with a plain dress . " 

 " that make I think it questionable , " say Hans , who have suddenly become as fastidious and conventional on this occasion as he have think Deronda be , apropos of the Berenice - picture . " it look a little too theatrical . we must not make you a rŰle of the poor Jewess or of be a Jewess at all . " Hans have a secret desire to neutralize the Jewess in private life , which he be in danger of not keep secret . 

 " but it be what I be really . I be not pretend anything . I shall never be anything else , " say Mirah . " I always feel myself a Jewess . " 

 " but we can not   feel that about you , " say Hans , with a devout look . 
 " what do it signify whether a perfect woman be a Jewess or not ? " 
 " that be your kind way of praise I ; I never be praise so before , " say Mirah , with a smile , which be rather madden to Hans and make he feel still more of a cosmopolitan . 

 " People do not   think of I as a british Christian , " he say , his face crease merrily . " they think of I as an imperfectly handsome young man and an unpromising painter . " 

 " but you be wander from the dress , " say Amy . " if that will not do , how be we to get another before Wednesday ? and to - morrow Sunday ? " 

 " indeed this will do , " say Mirah , entreatingly . " it be all real , you know , " here she look at Hans " even if it seem theatrical . Poor Berenice sit on the ruin any one might say that be theatrical , but I know that this be just what she would do . " 

 " I be a scoundrel , " say Hans , overcome by this misplaced trust . " that be my invention . nobody know that she do that . shall you forgive I for not say so before ? " 

 " oh , yes , " say Mirah , after a momentary pause of surprise . " you know it be what she would be sure to do a Jewess who have not be faithful who have do what she do and be penitent . she could have no joy but to afflict herself ; and where else would she go ? I think it be very beautiful that you should enter so into what a Jewess would feel . " 

 " the Jewesses of that time sit on ruin , " say Hans , start up with a sense of be checkmate . " that make they convenient for picture . " 

 " but the dress the dress , " say Amy ; " be it settle ? " 

 " yes ; be it not ? " say Mirah , look doubtfully at Mrs. Meyrick , who in her turn look up at her son , and say , " what do you think , Hans ? " 

 " that dress will not do , " say Hans , decisively . " she be not go to sit on ruin . you must jump into a cab with she , little mother , and go to Regent Street . it be plenty of time to get anything you like a black silk dress such as lady wear . she must not be take for an object of charity . she have talent to make people indebted to she . " 

 " I think it be what Mr. Deronda would like for she to have a handsome dress , " say Mrs. Meyrick , deliberate . 

 " of course it be , " say Hans , with some sharpness . " you may take my word for what a gentleman would feel . " 

 " I wish to do what Mr. Deronda would like I to do , " say Mirah , gravely , see that Mrs. Meyrick look toward she ; and Hans , turn on his heel , go to Kate 's table and take up one of her drawing as if his interest need a new direction . 

 " should not   you like to make a study of Klesmer 's head , Hans ? " say 
 Kate . " I suppose you have often see he ? " 
 " seen he ! " exclaim Hans , immediately throw back his head and mane , seat himself at the piano and look round he as if he be survey an amphitheatre , while he hold his finger down perpendicularly toward the key . but then in another instant he wheel round on the stool , look at Mirah and say , half timidly " perhaps you do not   like this mimicry ; you must always stop my nonsense when you do not   like it . " 

 Mirah have be smile at the swiftly - make image , and she smile still , but with a touch of something else than amusement , as she say " thank you . but you have never do anything I do not like . I hardly think he could , belong to you , " she add , look at Mrs. Meyrick . 

 in this way Hans get food for his hope . how could the rose help it when several bee in succession take its sweet odor as a sign of personal attachment ? 

 CHAPTER XL . 

  " within the soul a faculty abide , 
  that with interposition , which would hide 
  and darken , so can deal , that they become 
  Contingencies of pomp ; and serve to exalt 
  her native brightness , as the ample moon . 
  in the deep stillness of a summer even . 
  rise behind a thick and lofty grove . 
  into a substance glorious as her own , 
  Yea , with her own incorporated , by power 
  capacious and serene . " 
  WORDSWORTH : Excursion , B. IV . 
 Deronda come out of the narrow house at Chelsea in a frame of mind that make he long for some good bodily exercise to carry off what he be himself inclined to call the fume of his temper . he be go toward the city , and the sight of the Chelsea Stairs with the waiting boat at once determine he to avoid the irritate inaction of be drive in a cab , by call a wherry and take an oar . 

 his errand be to go to Ram 's book - shop , where he have yesterday arrive too late for Mordecai 's midday watch , and have be tell that he invariably come there again between five and six . some further acquaintance with this remarkable inmate of the Cohens be particularly desire by Deronda as a preliminary to redeem his ring : he wish that their conversation should not again end speedily with that drop of Mordecai 's interest which be like the removal of a drawbridge , and threaten to shut out any easy communication in future . as he get warm with the use of the oar , fix his mind on the errand before he and the end he want to achieve on Mirah 's account , he experience , as be will not with he , a quick change of mental light , shift his point of view to that of the person whom he have be think of hitherto chiefly as serviceable to his own purpose , and be inclined to taunt himself with be not much well than an enlist sergeant , who never trouble himself with the drama that bring he the needful recruit . 

 " I suppose if I get from this man the information I be most anxious about , " think Deronda , " I should be content enough if he feel no disposition to tell I more of himself , or why he seem to have some expectation from I which be disappoint . the sort of curiosity he stir would die out ; and yet it might be that he have near and part as one can imagine two ship do , each freight with an exile who would have recognize the other if the two could have look out face to face . not that there be any likelihood of a peculiar tie between I and this poor fellow , whose voyage , I fancy , must soon be over . but I wonder whether there be much of that momentous mutual missing between people who interchange blank look , or even long for one another 's absence in a crowded place . however , one make one 's self chance of miss by go on the recruiting sergeant 's plan . " 

 when the wherry be approach Blackfriars Bridge , where Deronda mean to land , it be half - past four , and the gray day be die gloriously , its western cloud all break into narrow purple strata before a wide - spread saffron clearness , which in the sky have a monumental calm , but on the river , with its change object , be reflect as a luminous movement , the alternate flash of ripple or current , the sudden glow of the brown sail , the passage of laden barge from blackness into color , make an active response to that brood glory . 

 feel well heated by this time , Deronda give up the oar and draw over he again his inverness cape . as he lift up his head while fasten the topmost button his eye catch a well - remembered face look toward he over the parapet of the bridge bring out by the western light into startling distinctness and brilliancy an illuminated type of bodily emaciation and spiritual eagerness . it be the face of Mordecai , who also , in his watch toward the west , have catch sight of the advance boat , and have keep it fast within his gaze , at first simply because it be advance , then with a recovery of impression that make he quiver as with a presentiment , till at last the near figure lift up its face toward he the face of his vision and then immediately , with white uplifted hand , beckon again and again . 

 for Deronda , anxious that Mordecai should recognize and await he , have lose no time before signal , and the answer come straightway . Mordecai lift his cap and wave it feel in that moment that his inward prophecy be fulfil . obstacle , incongruity , all melt into the sense of completion with which his soul be flood by this outward satisfaction of his longing . his exultation be not widely different from that of the experimenter , bend over the first stirring of change that correspond to what in the fervor of concentrated prevision his thought have foreshadow . the prefigure friend have come from the golden background , and have signal to he : this actually be : the rest be to be . 

 in three minute Deronda have land , have pay his boatman , and be join Mordecai , whose instinct it be to stand perfectly still and wait for he . 

 " I be very glad to see you stand here , " say Deronda , " for I be intend to go on to the book - shop and look for you again . I be there yesterday perhaps they mention it to you ? " 

 " yes , " say Mordecai ; " that be the reason I come to the bridge . " 

 this answer , make with simple gravity , be startlingly mysterious to Deronda . be the peculiarity of this man really associate with any sort of mental alienation , accord to Cohen 's hint ? 

 " you know nothing of my be at Chelsea ? " he say , after a moment . 

 " no ; but I expect you to come down the river . I have be wait for you these five year . " Mordecai 's deep - sunk eye be fix on those of the friend who have at last arrive with a look of affectionate dependence , at once pathetic and solemn . Deronda 's sensitiveness be not the less responsive because he could not but believe that this strangely - disclose relation be found on an illusion . 

 " it will be a satisfaction to I if I can be of any real use to you , " he answer , very earnestly . " shall we get into a cab and drive to wherever you wish to go ? you have probably have walk enough with your short breath . " 

 " let we go to the book - shop . it will soon be time for I to be there . but now look up the river , " say Mordecai , turn again toward it and speak in undertone of what may be call an excited calm so absorb by a sense of fulfillment that he be conscious of no barrier to a complete understanding between he and Deronda . " see the sky , how it be slowly fade . I have always love this bridge : I stand on it when I be a little boy . it be a meeting - place for the spiritual messenger . it be true what the Masters say that each order of thing have its angel : that mean the full message of each from what be afar . here I have listen to the message of earth and sky ; when I be strong I use to stay and watch for the star in the deep heaven . but this time just about sunset be always what I love well . it have sink into I and dwelt with I fade , slowly fade : it be my own decline : it pause it wait , till at last it bring I my new life my new self who will live when this breath be all breathe out . " 

 Deronda do not speak . he feel himself strangely work upon . the first - prompt suspicion that Mordecai might be liable to hallucination of thought might have become a monomaniac on some subject which have give too severe a strain to his diseased organism give way to a more submissive expectancy . his nature be too large , too ready to conceive region beyond his own experience , to rest at once in the easy explanation , " madness , " whenever a consciousness show some fullness and conviction where his own be blank . it accord with his habitual disposition that he should meet rather than resist any claim on he in the shape of another 's need ; and this claim bring with it a sense of solemnity which seem a radiation from Mordecai , as utterly nullify his outward poverty and lift he into authority as if he have be that preternatural guide see in the universal legend , who suddenly drop his mean disguise and stand a manifest power . that impression be the more sanction by a sort of resolve quietude which the persuasion of fulfillment have produce in Mordecai 's manner . after they have stand a moment in silence he say , " let we go now , " and when they be rid he add , " we will get down at the end of the street and walk to the shop . you can look at the book , and Mr. Ram will be go away directly and leave we alone . " 

 it seem that this enthusiast be just as cautious , just as much alive to judgment in other mind as if he have be that antipode of all enthusiasm call " a man of the world . " 

 while they be rattle along in the cab , Mirah be still present with Deronda in the midst of this strange experience , but he foresee that the course of conversation would be determine by Mordecai , not by himself : he be no long confident what question he should be able to ask ; and with a reaction on his own mood , he inwardly say , " I suppose I be in a state of complete superstition , just as if I be await the destiny that could interpret the oracle . but some strong relation there must be between I and this man , since he feel it strongly . great heaven ! what relation have prove itself more potent in the world than faith even when mistaken than expectation even when perpetually disappointed ? be my side of the relation to be disappointing or fulfil ? well , if it be ever possible for I to fulfill I will not disappoint . " 

 in ten minute the two man , with as intense a consciousness as if they have be two undeclared lover , feel themselves alone in the small gas - light book - shop and turn face to face , each bar his head from an instinctive feeling that they wish to see each other fully . Mordecai come forward to lean his back against the little counter , while Deronda stand against the opposite wall hardly more than four foot off . I wish I could perpetuate those two face , as Titian 's " Tribute money " have perpetuate two type present another sort of contrast . imagine we all of we can the pathetic stamp of consumption with its brilliancy of glance to which the sharply - define structure of feature remind one of a forsaken temple , give already a far - off look as of one get unwillingly out of reach ; and imagine it on a jewish face naturally accentuate for the expression of an eager mind the face of a man little above thirty , but with that age upon it which belong to time lengthen by suffer , the hair and beard , still black , throw out the yellow pallor of the skin , the difficult breathing give more decide mark to the mobile nostril , the waste yellow hand conspicuous on the fold arm : then give to the yearn consumptive glance something of the slowly die mother 's look , when her one love son visit her bedside , and the flickering power of gladness leap out as she say , " my boy ! " for the sense of spiritual perpetuation in another resemble that maternal transference of self . 

 see such a portrait you would see Mordecai . and opposite to he be a face not more distinctively oriental than many a type see among what we call the latin race ; rich in youthful health , and with a forcible masculine gravity in its repose , that give the value of judgment to the reverence with which he meet the gaze of this mysterious son of poverty who claim he as a long - expect friend . the more exquisite quality of Deronda 's nature that keenly perceptive sympathetic emotiveness which run along with his speculative tendency be never more thoroughly test . he feel nothing that could be call belief in the validity of Mordecai 's impression concern he or in the probability of any greatly effective issue : what he feel be a profound sensibility to a cry from the depth of another and accompany that , the summon to be receptive instead of superciliously prejudging . receptiveness be a rare and massive power , like fortitude ; and this state of mind now give Deronda 's face its utmost expression of calm benignant force an expression which nourish Mordecai 's confidence and make an open way before he . he begin to speak . 

 " you can not know what have guide I to you and bring we together at this moment . you be wonder . " 

 " I be not impatient , " say Deronda . " I be ready to listen to whatever you may wish to disclose . " 

 " you see some of the reason why I need you , " say Mordecai , speak quietly , as if he wish to reserve his strength . " you see that I be die . you see that I be as one shut up behind bar by the wayside , who if he speak to any would be meet only by head - shaking and pity . the day be close the light be fade soon we should not have be able to discern each other . but you have come in time . " 

 " I rejoice that I be come in time , " say Deronda , feelingly . he would not say , " I hope you be not mistaken in I , " the very word " mistaken , " he think , would be a cruelty at that moment . 

 " but the hidden reason why I need you begin afar off , " say Mordecai ; " begin in my early year when I be study in another land . then idea , beloved idea , come to I , because I be a Jew . they be a trust to fulfill , because I be a Jew . they be an inspiration , because I be a Jew , and feel the heart of my race beat within I . they be my life ; I be not fully bear till then . I count this heart , and this breath , and this right hand " Mordecai have pathetically press his hand upon his breast , and then stretch its waste finger out before he " I count my sleep and my waking , and the work I feed my body with , and the sight that feed my eye I count they but as fuel to the divine flame . but I have do as one who wander and engrave his thought in rocky solitude , and before I could change my course come care and labor and disease , and block the way before I , and bind I with the iron that eat itself into the soul . then I say , ' how shall I save the life within I from be stifle with this stifle breath ? ' " 

 Mordecai pause to rest that poor breath which have be tax by the rise excitement of his speech . and also he wish to check that excitement . Deronda dare not speak the very silence in the narrow space seem alive with mingled awe and compassion before this struggle fervor . and presently Mordecai go on 

 " but you may misunderstand I . I speak not as an ignorant dreamer as one breed up in the inland valley , think ancient thought anew , and not know they ancient , never have stand by the great water where the world 's knowledge pass to and fro . English be my mother - tongue , England be the native land of this body , which be but as a break pot of earth around the fruit - bear tree , whose seed might make the desert rejoice . but my true life be nourish in Holland at the foot of my mother 's brother , a Rabbi skilled in special learning : and when he die I go to Hamburg to study , and afterwards to GŲttingen , that I might take a large outlook on my people , and on the Gentile world , and drank knowledge at all source . I be a youth ; I feel free ; I see our chief seat in Germany ; I be not then in utter poverty . and I have possess myself of a handicraft . for I say , I care not if my lot be as that of Joshua ben Chananja : after the last destruction he earn his bread by make needle , but in his youth he have be a singer on the step of the Temple , and have a memory of what be before the glory depart . I say , let my body dwell in poverty , and my hand be as the hand of the toiler : but let my soul be as a temple of remembrance where the treasure of knowledge enter and the inner sanctuary be hope . I know what I choose . they say , ' he feed himself on vision , ' and I deny not ; for vision be the creator and feeder of the world . I see , I measure the world as it be , which the vision will create anew . you be not listen to one who rave aloof from the life of his fellow . " 

 Mordecai pause , and Deronda , feel that the pause be expectant , say , " do I the justice to believe that I be not inclined to call your word rave . I listen that I may know , without prejudgment . I have have experience which give I a keen interest in the story of a spiritual destiny embrace willingly , and embrace in youth . " 

 " a spiritual destiny embrace willingly in youth ? " Mordecai repeat in a corrective tone . " it be the soul fully bear within I , and it come in my boyhood . it bring its own world a mediaeval world , where there be man who make the ancient language live again in new psalm of exile . they have absorb the philosophy of the Gentile into the faith of the Jew , and they still yearn toward a center for our race . one of their soul be bear again within I , and awaken amid the memory of their world . it travel into Spain and Provence ; it debate with Aben - Ezra ; it take ship with Jehuda ha - Levi ; it hear the roar of the Crusaders and the shriek of torture Israel . and when its dumb tongue be loose , it speak the speech they have make alive with the new blood of their ardor , their sorrow , and their martyr trust : it sing with the cadence of their strain . " 

 Mordecai pause again , and then say in a loud , hoarse whisper 

 " while it be imprison in I , it will never learn another . " 

 " have you write entirely in Hebrew , then ? " say Deronda , remember with some anxiety the former question as to his own knowledge of that tongue . 

 " yes yes , " say Mordecai , in a tone of deep sadness : " in my youth I wander toward that solitude , not feel that it be a solitude . I have the rank of the great dead around I ; the martyr gather and listen . but soon I find that the living be deaf to I . at first I see my life spread as a long future : I say part of my jewish heritage be an unbreake patience ; part be skill to seek diver method and find a rooting - place where the planter despair . but there come new messenger from the Eternal . I have to bow under the yoke that press on the great multitude bear of woman : family trouble call I I have to work , to care , not for myself alone . I be leave solitary again ; but already the angel of death have turn to I and beckon , and I feel his skirt continually on my path . I loose not my effort . I besought hear and help . I speak ; I go to man of our people to the rich in influence or knowledge , to the rich in other wealth . but I find none to listen with understanding . I be rebuke for error ; I be offer a small sum in charity . no wonder . I look poor ; I carry a bundle of hebrew manuscript with I ; I say , our chief teacher be mislead the hope of our race . scholar and merchant be both too busy to listen . Scorn stand as interpreter between I and they . one say , ' the book of Mormon would never have answer in Hebrew ; and if you mean to address our learn man , it be not likely you can teach they anything . ' he touch a truth there . " 

 the last word have a perceptible irony in their hoarsened tone . 

 " but though you have accustom yourself to write in Hebrew , few , surely , can use English well , " say Deronda , want to hint consolation in a new effort for which he could smooth the way . 

 Mordecai shake his head slowly , and answer 

 " too late too late . I can write no more . my writing would be like this gasping breath . but the breath may wake the fount of pity the writing not . if I could write now and use English , I should be as one who beat a board to summon those who have be use to no signal but a bell . my soul have an ear to hear the fault of its own speech . new writing of mine would be like this body " Mordecai spread his arm " within it there might be the Ruach - ha - kodesh the breath of divine thought but , man would smile at it and say , ' a poor Jew ! ' and the chief smiler would be of my own people . " 

 Mordecai let his hand fall , and his head sink in melancholy : for the moment he have lose hold of his hope . Despondency , conjure up by his own word , have float in and hover above he with eclipse wing . he have sink into momentary darkness , 

 " I feel with you I feel strongly with you , " say Deronda , in a clear deep voice which be itself a cordial , apart from the word of sympathy . " but forgive I if I speak hastily for what you have actually write there need be no utter burial . the mean of publication be within reach . if you will rely on I , I can assure you of all that be necessary to that end . " 

 " that be not enough , " say Mordecai , quickly , look up again with the flash of recover memory and confidence . " that be not all my trust in you . you must be not only a hand to I , but a soul believe my belief be move by my reason hop my hope - see the vision I point to behold a glory where I behold it ! " Mordecai have take a step near as he speak , and now lay his hand on Deronda 's arm with a tight grasp ; his face little more than a foot off have something like a pale flame in it an intensity of reliance that act as a peremptory claim , while he go on " you will be my life : it will be plant afresh ; it will grow . you shall take the inheritance ; it have be gather for age . the generation be crowd on my narrow life as a bridge : what have be and what be to be be meet there ; and the bridge be break . but I have find you . you have come in time , you will take the inheritance which the base son refuse because of the tomb which the plow and harrow may not pass over or the gold - seeker disturb : you will take the sacred inheritance of the Jew . " 

 Deronda have become as pallid as Mordecai . quick as an alarm of flood or fire , there spread within he not only a compassionate dread of discourage this fellowman who urge a prayer as one in the last agony , but also the oppose dread of fatally feed an illusion , and be hurry on to a self - committal which might turn into a falsity . the peculiar appeal to his tenderness overcome the repulsion that most of we experience under a grasp and speech which assume to dominate . the difficulty to he be to inflict the accent of hesitation and doubt on this ardent suffering creature , who be crowd too much of his brief be into a moment of perhaps extravagant trust . with exquisite instinct , Deronda , before he open his lip , place his palm gently on Mordecai 's strain hand an act just then equal to many speech . and after that he say , without haste , as if conscious that he might be wrong 

 " do you forget what I tell you when we first see each other ? do you remember that I say I be not of your race ? " 

 " it can not   be true , " Mordecai whisper immediately , with no sign of shock . the sympathetic hand still upon he have fortify the feeling which be strong than those word of denial . there be a perceptible pause , Deronda feel it impossible to answer , conscious indeed that the assertion " it can not   be true " have the pressure of argument for he . Mordecai , too entirely possess by the supreme importance of the relation between himself and Deronda to have any other care in his speech , follow up that assertion by a second , which come to his lip as a mere sequence of his long - cherish conviction " you be not sure of your own origin . " 

 " how do you know that ? " say Daniel , with an habitual shrinking which make he remove his hand from Mordecai 's , who also relax his hold , and fall back into his former lean position . 

 " I know it I know it ; what be my life else ? " say Mordecai , with a low cry of impatience . " tell I everything : tell I why you deny ? " 

 he could have no conception what that demand be to the hearer how probingly it touch the hidden sensibility , the vividly conscious reticence of year ; how the uncertainty he be insist on as part of his own hope have always for Daniel be a threatening possibility of painful revelation about his mother . but the moment have influence which be not only new but solemn to Deronda ; any evasion here might turn out to be a hateful refusal of some task that belong to he , some act of due fellowship ; in any case it would be a cruel rebuff to a being who be appeal to he as a forlorn hope under the shadow of a come doom . after a few moment , he say , with a great effort over himself determine to tell all the truth briefly 

 " I have never know my mother . I have no knowledge about she . I have never call any man father . but I be convinced that my father be an Englishman . " 

 Deronda 's deep tone have a tremor in they as he utter this confession ; and all the while there be an undercurrent of amazement in he at the strange circumstance under which he utter it . it seem as if Mordecai be hardly overrate his own power to determine the action of the friend whom he have mysteriously choose . 

 " it will be see it will be declare , " say Mordecai , triumphantly . " the world grow , and its frame be knit together by the grow soul ; dim , dim at first , then clear and more clear , the consciousness discern remote stirring . as thought move within we darkly , and shake we before they be fully discern so event so being : they be knit with we in the growth of the world . you have rise within I like a thought not fully spell ; my soul be shake before the word be all there . the rest will come it will come . " . 

 " we must not lose sight of the fact that the outward event have not always be a fulfillment of the firm faith , " say Deronda , in a tone that be make hesitate by the painfully conflict desire , not to give any severe blow to Mordecai , and not to give his confidence a sanction which might have the severest of blow in reserve . 

 Mordecai 's face , which have be illuminate to the utmost in that last declaration of his confidence , change under Deronda 's word , not only into any show of collapse trust : the force do not disappear from the expression , but pass from the triumphant into the firmly resistant . 

 " you would remind I that I may be under an illusion that the history of our people 's trust have be full of illusion . I face it all . " here Mordecai pause a moment . then bend his head a little forward , he say , in his hoarse whisper , " so it might be with my trust , if you would make it an illusion . but you will not . " 

 the very sharpness with which these word penetrate Deronda make he feel the more that here be a crisis in which he must be firm . 

 " what my birth be do not lie in my will , " he answer . " my sense of claim on I can not be independent of my knowledge there . and I can not promise you that I will try to hasten a disclosure . feeling which have strike root through half my life may still hinder I from do what I have never be able to do . everything must be wait for . I must know more of the truth about my own life , and I must know more of what it would become if it be make a part of your . " 

 Mordecai have fold his arm again while Deronda be speak , and now answer with equal firmness , though with difficult breathing 

 " you shall know . what be we meet for , but that you should know . your doubt lie as light as dust on my belief . I know the philosophy of this time and of other time ; if I choose I could answer a summon before their tribunal . I could silence the belief which be the mother - tongue of my soul and speak with the rote - learn language of a system , that give you the spelling of all thing , sure of its alphabet cover they all . I could silence they : may not a man silence his awe or his love , and take to find reason , which other demand ? but if his love lie deep than any reason to be find ? Man find his pathway : at first they be foot track , as those of the beast in the wilderness : now they be swift and invisible : his thought dive through the ocean , and his wish thread the air : have he find all the pathway yet ? what reach he , stay with he , rule he : he must accept it , not know its pathway . Say , my expectation of you have grow but as false hope grow . that doubt be in your mind ? well , my expectation be there , and you be come . man have die of thirst . but I be thirsty , and the water be on my lip ! what be doubt to I ? in the hour when you come to I and say , ' I reject your soul : I know that I be not a Jew : we have no lot in common ' I shall not doubt . I shall be certain certain that I have be delude . that hour will never come ! " 

 Deronda feel a new chord sound in his speech : it be rather imperious than appeal have more of conscious power than of the yearn need which have act as a beseech grasp on he before . and usually , though he be the reverse of pugnacious , such a change of attitude toward he would have weaken his inclination to admit a claim . but here there be something that balance his resistance and keep it aloof . this strong man whose gaze be sustainedly calm and his finger - nail pink with health , who be exercise in all questioning , and accuse of excessive mental independence , still feel a subduing influence over he in the tenacious certitude of the fragile creature before he , whose pallid yellow nostril be tense with effort as his breath labor under the burthen of eager speech . the influence seem to strengthen the bond of sympathetic obligation . in Deronda at this moment the desire to escape what might turn into a try embarrassment be no more likely to determine action than the solicitation of indolence be likely to determine it in one with whom industry be a daily law . he answer simply 

 " it be my wish to meet and satisfy your wish wherever that be possible to I . it be certain to I at least that I desire not to undervalue your toil and your suffering . let I know your thought . but where can we meet ? " 

 " I have think of that , " say Mordecai . " it be not hard for you to come into this neighborhood later in the evening ? you do so once . " 

 " I can manage it very well occasionally , " say Deronda . " you live under the same roof with the Cohens , I think ? " 

 before Mordecai could answer , Mr. Ram re - enter to take his place behind the counter . he be an elderly son of Abraham , whose childhood have fall on the evil time at the beginning of this century , and who remain amid this smart and instructed generation as a preserve speciman , soak through and through with the effect of the poverty and contempt which be the common heritage of most English Jews seventy year ago . he have none of the oily cheerfulness observable in Mr. Cohen 's aspect : his very feature broad and chubby show that tendency to look mongrel without due cause , which , in a miscellaneous London neighborhood , may perhaps be compare with the marvel of imitation in insect , and may have be nature 's imperfect effort on behalf of the pure Caucasian to shield he from the shame and spit to which purer feature would have be expose in the time of zeal . Mr. Ram deal ably in book , in the same way that he would have deal in tin of meat and other commodity without knowledge or responsibility as to the proportion of rottenness or nourishment they might contain . but he believe in Mordecai 's learning as something marvellous , and be not sorry that his conversation should be seek by a bookish gentleman , whose visit have twice end in a purchase . he greet Deronda with a crab good - will , and , put on large silver spectacle , appear at once to abstract himself in the daily account . 

 but Deronda and Mordecai be soon in the street together , and without any explicit agreement as to their direction , be walk toward Ezra Cohen 's . 

 " we can not   meet there : my room be too narrow , " say Mordecai , take up the thread of talk where they have drop it . " but there be a tavern not far from here where I sometimes go to a club . it be the Hand and Banner , in the street at the next turning , five door down . we can have the parlor there any evening . " 

 " we can try that for once , " say Deronda . " but you will perhaps let I provide you with some lodging , which would give you more freedom and comfort than where you be . " 

 " no ; I need nothing . my outer life be as nought . I will take nothing less precious from you than your soul 's brotherhood . I will think of nothing else yet . but I be glad you be rich . you do not need money on that diamond ring . you have some other motive for bring it . " 

 Deronda be a little startled by this clear - sightedness ; but before he could reply Mordecai add " it be all one . have you be in need of the money , the great end would have be that we should meet again . but you be rich ? " he end , in a tone of interrogation . 

 " not rich , except in the sense that every one be rich who have more than he need for himself . " 

 " I desire that your life should be free , " say Mordecai , dreamily " mine have be a bondage . " 

 it be clear that he have no interest in the fact of Deronda 's 
 appearance at the Cohens ' beyond its relation to his own ideal purpose . 
 Despairing of lead easily up to the question he wish to ask , 
 Deronda determine to put it abruptly , and say 
 " can you tell I why Mrs. Cohen , the mother , must not be speak to about her daughter ? " 

 there be no immediate answer , and he think that he should have to repeat the question . the fact be that Mordecai have hear the word , but have to drag his mind to a new subject away from his passionate preoccupation . after a few moment , he reply with a careful effort such as he would have use if he have be ask the road to Holborn - 

 " I know the reason . but I will not speak even of trivial family affair which I have hear in the privacy of the family . I dwell in their tent as in a sanctuary . their history , so far as they injure none other , be their own possession . " 

 Deronda feel the blood mount to his cheek as a sort of rebuke he be little use to , and he also find himself painfully baffle where he have reckon with some confidence on get decisive knowledge . he become the more conscious of emotional strain from the excitement of the day ; and although he have the money in his pocket to redeem his ring , he recoil from the further task of a visit to the Cohens ' , which must be make not only under the former uncertainty , but under a new disappointment as to the possibility of its removal . 

 " I will part from you now , " he say , just before they could reach Cohen 's door ; and Mordecai pause , look up at he with an anxious fatigued face under the gaslight . 

 " when will you come back ? " he say , with slow emphasis . 

 " may I leave that unfixed ? may I ask for you at the Cohens ' any evening after your hour at the book - shop ? there be no objection , I suppose , to their know that you and I meet in private ? " 

 " none , " say Mordecai . " but the day I wait now be long than the year of my strength . life shrink : what be but a tithe be now the half . my hope abide in you . " 

 " I will be faithful , " say Deronda he could not have leave those word unuttere . " I will come the first evening I can after seven : on Saturday or Monday , if possible . trust I . " 

 he put out his ungloved hand . Mordecai , clasp it eagerly , seem to feel a new instreaming of confidence , and he say with some recover energy " this be come to pass , and the rest will come . " 

 that be their good - bye . 

 BOOK VI -revelations 

 CHAPTER XLI . 

 " this , too be probable , accord to that saying of Agathon : ' it be a part of probability that many improbable thing will happen . ' " ARISTOTLE : Poetics . 

 imagine the conflict in a mind like Deronda 's give not only to feel strongly but to question actively , on the evening after the interview with Mordecai . to a young man of much duller susceptibility the adventure might have seem enough out of the common way to divide his thought ; but it have stir Deronda so deeply , that with the usual reaction of his intellect he begin to examine the ground of his emotion , and consider how far he must resist its guidance . the consciousness that he be half dominate by Mordecai 's energetic certitude , and still more by his fervent trust , rouse his alarm . it be his characteristic bias to shrink from the moral stupidity of value lightly what have come close to he , and of miss blindly in his own life of to - day the crisis which he recognize as momentous and sacred in the historic life of man . if he have read of this incident as have happen century ago in Rome , Greece , Asia Minor , Palestine , Cairo , to some man young as himself , dissatisfied with his neutral life , and want some close fellowship , some more special duty to give he ardor for the possible consequence of his work , it would have appear to he quite natural that the incident should have create a deep impression on that far - off man , whose clothing and action would have be see in his imagination as part of an age chiefly know to we through its more serious effect . why should he be ashamed of his own agitated feeling merely because he dress for dinner , wear a white tie , and live among people who might laugh at his own any conscience in the matter , as the solemn folly of take himself too seriously ? that bugbear of circle in which the lack of grave emotion pass for wit . from such cowardice before modish ignorance and obtuseness , Deronda shrank . but he also shrink from have his course determine by mere contagion , without consent of reason ; or from allow a reverential pity for spiritual struggle to hurry he along a dimly - see path . 

 what , after all , have really happen ? he know quite accurately the answer Sir Hugo would have give : " a consumptive Jew , possess by a fanaticism which obstacle and hastening death intensify , have fix on Deronda as the antitype of some visionary image , the offspring of wed hope and despair : despair of his own life , irrepressible hope in the propagation of his fanatical belief . the instance be perhaps odd , exceptional in its form , but substantially it be not rare . Fanaticism be not so common as bankruptcy , but take in all its aspect it be abundant enough . while Mordecai be wait on the bridge for the fulfillment of his vision , another man be convince that he have the mathematical key of the universe which would supersede Newton , and regard all know physicist as conspire to stifle his discovery and keep the universe lock ; another , that he have the metaphysical key , with just that hair's - breadth of difference from the old ward which would make it fit exactly . scatter here and there in every direction you might find a terrible person , with more or less power of speech , and with an eye either glitter or preternaturally dull , on the look - out for the man who must hear he ; and in most case he have volume which it be difficult to get print , or if print to get read . this Mordecai happen to have a more pathetic aspect , a more passionate , penetrative speech than be usual with such monomaniac ; he be more poetical than a social reformer with colored view of the new moral world in parallelogram , or than an enthusiast in sewage ; still he come under the same class . it would be only right and kind to indulge he a little , to comfort he with such help as be practicable ; but what likelihood be there that his notion have the sort of value he ascribe to they ? in such case a man of the world know what to think beforehand . and as to Mordecai 's conviction that he have find a new executive self , it might be prepare for he the bad of disappointment that which present itself as final . " 

 Deronda 's ear catch all these negative whispering ; nay , he repeat they distinctly to himself . it be not the first but it be the most pressing occasion on which he have have to face this question of the family likeness among the heir of enthusiasm , whether prophet or dreamer of dream , whether the 

 " great benefactor of mankind , deliverer , " 

 or the devotee of phantasmal discovery from the first believer in his own unmanifested inspiration , down to the last inventor of an ideal machine that will achieve perpetual motion . the kinship of human passion , the sameness of mortal scenery , inevitably fill fact with burlesque and parody . error and folly have have their hecatomb of martyr . reduce the grand type of man hitherto know to an abstract statement of his quality and effort , and he appear in dangerous company : say that , like Copernicus and Galileo , he be immovably convince in the face of hiss incredulity ; but so be the contriver of perpetual motion . we can not fairly try the spirit by this sort of test . if we want to avoid give the dose of hemlock or the sentence of banishment in the wrong case , nothing will do but a capacity to understand the subject - matter on which the immovable man be convince , and fellowship with human travail , both near and afar , to hinder we from scan and deep experience lightly . shall we say , " let the age try the spirit , and see what they be worth ? " why , we be the beginning of the age , which can only be just by virtue of just judgment in separate human breast separate yet combine . even steam - engine could not have get make without that condition , but must have stay in the mind of James Watt . 

 this track of thinking be familiar enough to Deronda to have save he from any contemptuous prejudgment of Mordecai , even if their communication have be free from that peculiar claim on himself strangely usher in by some long - grow preparation in the Jew 's agitated mind . this claim , indeed , consider in what be call a rational way , might seem justifiably dismiss as illusory and even preposterous ; but it be precisely what turn Mordecai 's hold on he from an appeal to his ready sympathy into a clutch on his struggle conscience . our conscience be not all of the same pattern , an inner deliverance of fix law : they be the voice of sensibility as various as our memory   which also have their kinship and likeness . and Deronda 's conscience include sensibility beyond the common , enlarge by his early habit of think himself imaginatively into the experience of other . 

 what be the claim this eager soul make upon he ? " you must believe my belief be move by my reason hope my hope see the vision I point to behold a glory where I behold it ! " to take such a demand in the light of an obligation in any direct sense would have be preposterous to have seem to admit it would have be dishonesty ; and Deronda , look on the agitation of those moment , feel thankful that in the midst of his compassion he have preserve himself from the bondage of false concession . the claim hung , too , on a supposition which might be nay , probably be in discordance with the full fact : the supposition that he , Deronda , be of jewish blood . be there ever a more hypothetic appeal ? 

 but since the age of thirteen Deronda have associate the deep experience of his affection with what be a pure supposition , namely , that Sir Hugo be his father : that be a hypothesis which have be the source of passionate struggle within he ; by its light he have be accustom to subdue feeling and to cherish they . he have be well use to find a motive in a conception which might be disprove ; and he have be also use to think of some revelation that might influence his view of the particular duty belong to he . to be in a state of suspense , which be also one of emotive activity and scruple , be a familiar attitude of his conscience . 

 and now , suppose that wish - beget belief in his jewish birth , and that extravagant demand of discipleship , to be the foreshadowing of an actual discovery and a genuine spiritual result : suppose that Mordecai 's idea make a real conquest over Deronda 's conviction ? Nay , it be conceivable that as Mordecai need and believe that , he have find an active replenishment of himself , so Deronda might receive from Mordecai 's mind the complete ideal shape of that personal duty and citizenship which lie in his own thought like sculpture fragment certify some beauty yearn after but not traceable by divination . 

 as that possibility present itself in his meditation , he be aware that it would be call dreamy , and begin to defend it . if the influence he imagine himself submit to have be that of some honor professor , some authority in a seat of learning , some philosopher who have be accept as a voice of the age , would a thorough receptiveness toward direction have be ridicule ? only by those who hold it a sign of weakness to be oblige for an idea , and prefer to hint that they have implicitly hold in a more correct form whatever other have state with a sadly short - come explicitness . after all , what be there but vulgarity in take the fact that Mordecai be a poor jewish workman , and that he be to be meet perhaps on a sanded floor in the parlor of the Hand and Banner as a reason for determine beforehand that there be not some spiritual force within he that might have a determine effect on a white - handed gentleman ? there be a legend tell of the Emperor Domitian , that have hear of a jewish family , of the house of David , whence the ruler of the world be to spring , he send for its member in alarm , but quickly release they on observe that they have the hand of work - people be of just the opposite opinion with that Rabbi who stand wait at the gate of Rome in confidence that the Messiah would be find among the destitute who enter there . both Emperor and Rabbi be wrong in their trust of outward sign : poverty and poor clothe be no sign of inspiration , say Deronda to his inward objector , but they have go with it in some remarkable case . and to regard discipleship as out of the question because of they , would be mere dullness of imagination . 

 a more plausible reason for put discipleship out of the question be the strain of visionary excitement in Mordecai , which turn his wish into overmaster impression , and make he read outward fact as fulfillment . be such a temper of mind likely to accompany that wise estimate of consequence which be the only safeguard from fatal error , even to ennoble motive ? but it remain to be see whether that rare conjunction exist or not in Mordecai : perhaps his might be one of the nature where a wise estimate of consequence be fuse in the fire of that passionate belief which determine the consequence it believe in . the inspiration of the world have come in that way too : even strictly - measure science could hardly have get on without that forecasting ardor which feel the agitation of discovery beforehand , and have a faith in its preconception that surmount many failure of experiment . and in relation to human motif and action , passionate belief have a full efficacy . here enthusiasm may have the validity of proof , and happen in one soul , give the type of what will one day be general . 

 at least , Deronda argue , Mordecai 's visionary excitability be hardly a reason for conclude beforehand that he be not worth listen to except for pity sake . suppose he have introduce himself as one of the strict reasoner . do they form a body of man hitherto free from false conclusion and illusory speculation ? the dry argument have its hallucination , too hastily conclude that its net will now at last be large enough to hold the universe . man may dream in demonstration , and cut out an illusory world in the shape of axiom , definition , and proposition , with a final exclusion of fact sign Q.E.D. no formula for thinking will save we mortal from mistake in our imperfect apprehension of the matter to be think about . and since the unemotional intellect may carry we into a mathematical dreamland where nothing be but what be not , perhaps an emotional intellect may have absorb into its passionate vision of possibility some truth of what will be the more comprehensive massive life feeding theory with new material , as the sensibility of the artist seize combination which science explain and justifie . at any rate , presumption to the contrary be not to be trust . we must be patient with the inevitable makeshift of our human thinking , whether in its sum total or in the separate mind that have make the sum . Columbus have some impression about himself which we call superstition , and use some argument which we disapprove ; but he have also some sound physical conception , and he have the passionate patience of genius to make they tell on mankind . the world have make up its mind rather contemptuously about those who be deaf to Columbus . 

 " my contempt for they bind I to see that I do not   adopt their mistake on a small scale , " say Deronda , " and make myself deaf with the assumption that there can not be any momentous relation between this Jew and I , simply because he have clothe it in illusory notion . what I can be to he , or he to I , may not at all depend on his persuasion about the way we come together . to I the way seem make up of plainly discernible link . if I have not find Mirah , it be probable that I should not have begin to be specially interested in the Jews , and certainly I should not have go on that loitering search after an Ezra Cohen which make I pause at Ram 's book - shop and ask the price of Maimon . Mordecai , on his side , have his vision of a disciple , and he see I by their light ; I correspond well enough with the image his longing have create . he take I for one of his race . suppose that his impression the elderly Jew at Frankfort seem to have something like it suppose in spite of all presumption to the contrary , that his impression should somehow be prove true , and that I should come actually to share any of the idea he be devoted to ? this be the only question which really concern the effect of our meeting on my life . 

 " but if the issue should be quite different ? well , there will be something painful to go through . I shall almost inevitably have to be an active cause of that poor fellow 's crush disappointment . perhaps this issue be the one I have nee prepare myself for . I fear that no tenderness of mine can make his suffering light . would the alternative that I should not disappoint he be less painful to I ? " 

 here Deronda waver . feeling have lately be at work within he which have very much modify the reluctance he would formerly have have to think of himself as probably a Jew . and , if you like , he be romantic . that young energy and spirit of adventure which have help to create the world - wide legion of youthful hero go to seek the hidden token of their birth and its inheritance of task , give he a certain quivering interest in the bare possibility that he be enter on a track like all the more because the track be one of thought as well as action . 

 " the bare possibility . " he could not admit it to be more . the belief that his father be an Englishman only grow firm under the weak assault of unwarranted doubt . and that a moment should ever come in which that belief be declare a delusion , be something of which Deronda would not say , " I should be glad . " his life - long affection for Sir Hugo , strong than all his resentment , make he shrink from admit that wish . 

 which way soever the truth might lie , he repeat to himself what he have say to Mordecai that he could not without farth reason undertake to hasten its discovery . Nay , he be tempt now to regard his uncertainty as a condition to be cherish for the present . if further intercourse reveal nothing but illusion as what he be expect to share in , the want of any valid evidence that he be a Jew might save Mordecai the bad shock in the refusal of fraternity . it might even be justifiable to use the uncertainty on this point in keep up a suspense which would induce Mordecai to accept those office of friendship that Deronda long to urge on he . 

 these be the meditation that busy Deronda in the interval of four day before he could fulfill his promise to call for Mordecai at Ezra Cohen 's , Sir Hugo 's demand on he often last to an hour so late as to put the evening expedition to Holborn out of the question . 

 CHAPTER XLII . 

 " Wenn es eine Stutenleiter von Leiden giebt , so hat Israel die hŲchste Staffel erstiegen ; wen die Dauer der Schmerzen und die Geduld , mit welcher sie ertragen werden , adeln , so nehman es die Juden mit den Hochgeborenen aller Lšnder auf ; wenn eine Literatur reich genannt wird , die wenige klassische Trauerspiele besitzt , welcher Platz geb hrt dann einer Tragodie die anderthalb Jahrtausende wahrt , gedichtet und dargestellt von den Helden selber ? " ZUNZ : die Synagogale Poesie des Mittelalters . 

 " if there be rank in suffering , Israel take precedence of all the nation if the duration of sorrow and the patience with which they be bear ennoble , the Jews be among the aristocracy of every land if a literature be call rich in the possession of a few classic tragedy , what shall we say to a National Tragedy last for fifteen hundred year , in which the poet and the actor be also the hero ? " 

 Deronda have lately be read that passage of Zunz , and it occur to he by way of contrast when he be go to the Cohens , who certainly bear no obvious stamp of distinction in sorrow or in any other form of aristocracy . Ezra Cohen be not clothe in the sublime pathos of the martyr , and his taste for money - getting seem to be favor with that success which have be the most exasperating difference in the greed of Jews during all the age of their dispersion . this Jeshurun of a pawnbroker be not a symbol of the great jewish tragedy ; and yet be there not something typical in the fact that a life like Mordecai 's a frail incorporation of the national consciousness , breathe with difficult breath be nest in the self - gratulate ignorant prosperity of the Cohens ? 

 Glistening be the gladness in their face when Deronda reappear among they . Cohen himself take occasion to intimate that although the diamond ring , let alone a little long , would have breed more money , he do not mind that not a sixpence when compare with the pleasure of the woman and child in see a young gentleman whose first visit have be so agreeable that they have " do nothing but talk of it ever since . " Young Mrs. Cohen be very sorry that baby be asleep , and then very glad that Adelaide be not yet go to bed , entreat Deronda not to stay in the shop , but to go forthwith into the parlor to see " mother and the child . " he willingly accept the invitation , have provide himself with portable present ; a set of paper figure for Adelaide , and an ivory cup and ball for Jacob . 

 the grandmother have a pack of card before she and be make " plate " with the child . a plate have just be throw down and keep itself whole . 

 " stop ! " say Jacob , run to Deronda as he enter . " do not   tread on my plate . stop and see I throw it up again . " 

 Deronda comply , exchange a smile of understanding with the grandmother , and the plate bear several tossing before it come to piece ; then the visitor be allow to come forward and seat himself . he observe that the door from which Mordecai have issue on the former visit be now close , but he wish to show his interest in the Cohens before disclose a yet strong interest in their singular inmate . 

 it be not until he have Adelaide on his knee , and be set up the paper figure in their dance on the table , while Jacob be already practice with the cup and ball , that Deronda say 

 " be Mordecai in just now ? " 

 " where be he , Addy ? " say Cohen , who have seize an interval of business to come and look on . 

 " in the workroom there , " say his wife , nod toward the closed door . 

 " the fact be , sir , " say Cohen , " we do not   know what be come to he this last day or two . he be always what I may call a little touch , you know " here Cohen point to his own forehead " not quite so rational in all thing , like you and I ; but he be mostly wonderful regular and industrious so far as a poor creature can be , and take as much delight in the boy as anybody could . but this last day or two he be be move about like a sleep - walker , or else sit as still as a wax figure . " 

 " it be the disease , poor dear creature , " say the grandmother , tenderly . 
 " I doubt whether he can stand long against it . " 
 " no ; I think its only something he be get in his head . " say Mrs. Cohen the young . " he be be turn over write continually , and when I speak to he it take he ever so long to hear and answer . " 

 " you may think we a little weak ourselves , " say Cohen , apologetically . " but my wife and mother would not   part with he if he be a still bad encumbrance . it be not   that we do not   know the long and short of matter , but it be our principle . there 's fool do business at a loss and do not   know it . I be not one of them . " 

 " oh , Mordecai carry a blessing inside he , " say the grandmother . 

 " he be get something the matter inside he , " say Jacob , come up to correct this erratum of his grandmother 's . " he say he could not   talk to I , and he would not   have a bit o ' bun . " 

 " so far from wonder at your feeling for he , " say Deronda , " I already feel something of the same sort myself . I have lately talk to he at Ram 's book - shop in fact , I promise to call for he here , that we might go out together . " 

 " that be it , then ! " say Cohen , slap his knee . " he be be expect you , and it be take hold of he . I suppose he talk about his learning to you . it be uncommonly kind of you , sir ; for I do not   suppose there be much to be get out of it , else it would not   have leave he where he be . but there be the shop . " Cohen hurry out , and Jacob , who have be listen inconveniently near to Deronda 's elbow , say to he with oblige familiarity , " I will call Mordecai for you , if you like . " 

 " no , Jacob , " say his mother ; " open the door for the gentleman , and let he go in himself hush ! do not   make a noise . " 

 Skillful Jacob seem to enter into the play , and turn the handle of the door as noiselessly as possible , while Deronda go behind he and stand on the threshold . the small room be light only by a die fire and one candle with a shade over it . on the board fix under the window , various object of jewelry be scatter : some book be heap in the corner beyond they . Mordecai be seat on a high chair at the board with his back to the door , his hand rest on each other and on the board , a watch prop on a stand before he . he be in a state of expectation as sicken as that of a prisoner listen for the delay deliverance when he hear Deronda 's voice say , " I be come for you . be you ready ? " 

 immediately he turn without speak , seize his furred cap which lie near , and move to join Deronda . it be but a moment before they be both in the sitting - room , and Jacob , notice the change in his friend 's air and expression , seize he by the arm and say , " see my cup and ball ! " send the ball up close to Mordecai 's face , as something likely to cheer a convalescent . it be a sign of the relieved tension in Mordecai 's mind that he could smile and say , " fine , fine ! " 

 " you have forget your greatcoat and comforter , " say young Mrs. 
 Cohen , and he go back into the work - room and get they . 
 " he be come to life again , do you see ? " say Cohen , who have re - enter speaking in an undertone . " I tell you so : I be mostly right . " then in his usual voice , " well , sir , we must not   detain you now , I suppose ; but I hope this be not   the last time we shall see you . " 

 " shall you come again ? " say Jacob , advance . " see , I can catch the ball ; I will bet I catch it without stop , if you come again . " 

 " he have clever hand , " say Deronda , look at the grandmother . " which side of the family do he get they from ? " 

 but the grandmother only nod towards her son , who say promptly , " my side . my wife 's family be not in that line . but bless your soul ! ours be a sort of cleverness as good as gutta percha ; you can twist it which way you like . there be nothing some old gentleman will not   do if you set them to it . " here Cohen wink down at Jacob 's back , but it be doubtful whether this judicious allusiveness answer its purpose , for its subject give a nasal whinny laugh and stamp about singing , " old gentleman , old gentleman , " in chime cadence . 

 Deronda think , " I shall never know anything decisive about these people until I ask Cohen pointblank whether he lose a sister name Mirah when she be six year old . " the decisive moment do not yet seem easy for he to face . still his first sense of repulsion at the commonness of these people be begin to be temper with kindly feeling . however unrefine their air and speech might be , he be force to admit some moral refinement in their treatment of the consumptive workman , whose mental distinction impress they chiefly as a harmless , silent raving . 

 " the Cohens seem to have an affection for you , " say Deronda , as soon as he and Mordecai be off the doorstep . 

 " and I for they , " be the immediate answer . " they have the heart of the Israelite within they , though they be as the horse and the mule , without understanding beyond the narrow path they tread . " 

 " I have cause you some uneasiness , I fear , " say Deronda , " by my slowness in fulfil my promise . I wish to come yesterday , but I find it impossible . " 

 " yes yes , I trust you . but it be true I have be uneasy , for the spirit of my youth have be stir within I , and this body be not strong enough to bear the beating of its wing . I be as a man bind and imprison through long year : behold he bring to speech of his fellow and his limb set free : he weep , he totter , the joy within he threaten to break and overthrow the tabernacle of flesh . " 

 " you must not speak too much in this evening air , " say Deronda , feel Mordecai 's word of reliance like so many cord bind he painfully . " cover your mouth with the woolen scarf . we be go to the Hand and Banner , I suppose , and shall be in private there ? " 

 " no , that be my trouble that you do not come yesterday . for this be the evening of the club I speak of , and we might not have any minute alone until late , when all the rest be go . perhaps we have well seek another place . but I be use to that only . in new place the outer world press on I and narrow the inward vision . and the people there be familiar with my face . " 

 " I do not   mind the club if I be allow to go in , " say Deronda . " it be enough that you like this place well . if we have not enough time I will come again . what sort of club be it ? " 

 " it be call ' the Philosophers . ' they be few like the cedar of Lebanon poor man give to thought . but none so poor as I be : and sometimes visitor of high worldly rank have be bring . we be allow to introduce a friend , who be interested in our topic . each order beer or some other kind of drink , in payment for the room . Most of they smoke . I have go when I could , for there be other man of my race who come , and sometimes I have break silence . I have please myself with a faint likeness between these poor philosopher and the master who hand down the thought of our race the great Transmitters , who labor with their hand for scant bread , but preserve and enlarge for we the heritage of memory , and save the soul of Israel alive as a seed among the tomb . the heart please itself with faint resemblance . " 

 " I shall be very glad to go and sit among they , if that will suit you . it be a sort of meeting I should like to join in , " say Deronda , not without relief in the prospect of an interval before he go through the strain of his next private conversation with Mordecai . 

 in three minute they have open the glaze door with the red curtain , and be in the little parlor , hardly much more than fifteen foot square , where the gaslight shine through a slight haze of smoke on what to Deronda be a new and striking scene . half - a - dozen man of various age , from between twenty and thirty to fifty , all shabbily dress , most of they with clay pipe in their mouth , be listen with a look of concentrated intelligence to a man in a pepper - and - salt dress , with blonde hair , short nose , broad forehead and general breadth , who , hold his pipe slightly uplifted in the left hand , and beat his knee with the right , be just finish a quotation from Shelley   the comparison of the avalanche in his " Prometheus Unbound " 

  " as thought by thought be pile , till some great truth 
  be loosen , and the nation echo round . " 
 the entrance of the new - comer break the fixity of attention , and call for re - arrangement of seat in the too narrow semicircle round the fire - place and the table hold the glass , spare pipe and tobacco . this be the sober of club ; but sobriety be no reason why smoking and " take something " should be less imperiously need as a means of get a decent status in company and debate . Mordecai be receive with welcome voice which have a slight cadence of compassion in they , but naturally all glance pass immediately to his companion . 

 " I have bring a friend who be interested in our subject , " say 
 Mordecai . " he have travel and study much . " 
 " be the gentleman anonymous ? be he a great ' unknown ? ' " say the broad - cheste quoter of Shelley , with a humorous air . 

 " my name be Daniel Deronda . I be unknown , but not in any sense great . " the smile break over the stranger 's grave face as he say this be so agreeable that there be a general indistinct murmur , equivalent to a " hear , hear , " and the broad man say 

 " you recommend the name , sir , and be welcome . here , Mordecai , come to this corner against I , " he add , evidently wish to give the cozy place to the one who most need it . 

 Deronda be well satisfied to get a seat on the opposite side , where his general survey of the party easily include Mordecai , who remain an eminently striking object in this group of sharply - characterize figure , more than one of whom , even to Daniel 's little exercise discrimination , seem probably of jewish descent . 

 in fact pure english blood   if leech or lancet can furnish we with the precise product   do not declare itself predominantly in the party at present assemble . Miller , the broad man , an exceptional second - hand bookseller who know the inside of book , have at least grand - parent who call themselves german , and possibly far - away ancestor who deny themselves to be Jews ; Buchan , the saddler , be Scotch ; Pash , the watchmaker , be a small , dark , vivacious , triple - bake Jew ; Gideon , the optical instrument maker , be a Jew of the red - haired , generous - feature type easily pass for Englishmen of unusually cordial manner : and Croop , the dark - eyed shoemaker , be probably more celtic than he know . only three would have be discernable everywhere as Englishman : the wood - inlayer Goodwin , well - build , open - faced , pleasant - voice ; the florid laboratory assistant Marrables ; and Lily , the pale , neat - face copying - clerk , whose light - brown hair be set up in a small parallelogram above his well - fill forehead , and whose shirt , take with an otherwise seedy costume , have a freshness that might be call insular , and perhaps even something narrow . 

 certainly a company select of the select among poor man , be draw together by a taste not prevalent even among the privileged heir of learn and its institution ; and not likely to amuse any gentleman in search of crime or low comedy as the ground of interest in people whose weekly income be only divisible into shilling . Deronda , even if he have not be more than usually inclined to gravity under the influence of what be pende between he and Mordecai , would not have set himself to find food for laughter in the various shade of departure from the tone of polished society sure to be observable in the air and talk of these man who have probably snatch knowledge as most of we snatch indulgence , make the utmost of scant opportunity . he look around he with the quiet air of respect habitual to he among equal , order whisky and water , and offer the content of his cigar - case , which , characteristically enough , he always carry and hardly ever use for his own behoof , have reason for not smoke himself , but like to indulge other . perhaps it be his weakness to be afraid of seem straight - laced , and turn himself into a sort of diagram instead of a growth which can exercise the guide attraction of fellowship . that he make a decidedly win impression on the company be prove by their show themselves no less at ease than before , and desirous of quickly resume their interrupted talk . 

 " this be what I call one of our touch - and - go night , sir , " say Miller , who be implicitly accept as a sort of moderator on address Deronda by way of explanation , and nod toward each person whose name he mention . " sometimes we stick pretty close to the point . but tonight our friend Pash , there , bring up the law of progress ; and we get on statistic ; then Lily , there , say we know well enough before count that in the same state of society the same sort of thing would happen , and it be no more wonder that quantity should remain the same , than that quality should remain the same , for in relation to society number be quality the number of drunkard be a quality in society the number be an index to the quality , and give we no instruction , only set we to consider the cause of difference between different social state Lily say this , we go off on the cause of social change , and when you come in I be go upon the power of idea , which I hold to be the main transforming cause . " 

 " I do not   hold with you there , Miller , " say Goodwin , the inlayer , more concerned to carry on the subject than to wait for a word from the new guest . " for either you mean so many sort of thing by idea that I get no knowledge by what you say , any more than if you say light be a cause ; or else you mean a particular sort of idea , and then I go against your meaning as too narrow . for , look at it in one way , all action man put a bit of thought into be idea say , sow seed , or make a canoe , or bake clay ; and such idea as these work themselves into life and go on grow with it , but they can not   go apart from the material that set they to work and make a medium for they . it be the nature of wood and stone yield to the knife that raise the idea of shape they , and with plenty of wood and stone the shaping will go on . I look at it , that such idea as be mixed straight away with all the other element of life be powerful along with them . the slow the mixing , the less power they have . and as to the cause of social change , I look at it in this way idea be a sort of parliament , but there be a commonwealth outside and a good deal of the commonwealth be work at change without know what the parliament be do . " 

 " but if you take ready mixing as your test of power , " say Pash , ' some of the least practical idea beat everything . they spread without be understand , and enter into the language without be think of . " 

 " they may act by change the distribution of gas , " say Marrables ; " instrument be get so fine now , man may come to register the spread of a theory by observed change in the atmosphere and correspond change in the nerve . " 

 " yes , " say Pash , his dark face light up rather impishly , " there be the idea of nationality ; I dare say the wild ass be snuff it , and get more gregarious . " 

 " you do not   share that idea ? " say Deronda , find a piquant incongruity between Pash 's sarcasm and the strong stamp of race on his feature . 

 " say , rather , he do not share that spirit , " say Mordecai , who have turn a melancholy glance on Pash . " unless nationality be a feeling , what force can it have as an idea ? " 

 " grant , Mordecai , " say Pash , quite good - humoredly . " and as the feeling of nationality be die , I take the idea to be no well than a ghost , already walk to announce the death . " 

 " a sentiment may seem to be die and yet revive into strong life , " say Deronda . " nation have revive . we may live to see a great outburst of force in the Arabs , who be be inspire with a new zeal . " 

 " amen , amen , " say Mordecai , look at Deronda with a delight which be the beginning of recovered energy : his attitude be more upright , his face be less worn . 

 " that may hold with backward nation , " say Pash , " but with we in Europe the sentiment of nationality be destine to die out . it will last a little long in the quarter where oppression last , but nowhere else . the whole current of progress be set against it . " 

 " ay , " say Buchan , in a rapid thin Scotch tone which be like the letting in of a little cool air on the conversation , " ye've   do well to bring we round to the point . Ye're all agree that society change not always and everywhere but on the whole and in the long run . now , with all deference , I would beg t ' observe that we have get to examine the nature of change before we have a warrant to call they progress , which word be suppose to include a bettering , though I apprehend it to be ill - choose for that purpose , since mere motion onward may carry we to a bog or a precipice . and the question I would put be three : be all change in the direction of progress ? if not , how shall we discern which change be progress and which not ? and thirdly , how far and in what way can we act upon the course of change so as to promote it where it be beneficial , and divert it where it be injurious ? " 

 but Buchan 's attempt to impose his method on the talk be a failure . 
 Lily immediately say 
 " change and progress be merge in the idea of development . the law of development be be discover , and change take place accord to they be necessarily progressive ; that be to say , it we have any notion of progress or improvement oppose to they , the notion be a mistake . " 

 " I really can not   see how you arrive at that sort of certitude about change by call they development , " say Deronda . " there will still remain the degree of inevitableness in relation to our own will and act , and the degree of wisdom in hastening or retarding ; there will still remain the danger of mistake a tendency which should be resist for an inevitable law that we must adjust ourselves to , which seem to I as bad a superstition or false god as any that have be set up without the ceremony of philosophising . " 

 " that be a truth , " say Mordecai . " woe to the man who see no place for resistance in this generation ! I believe in a growth , a passage , and a new unfolding of life whereof the seed be more perfect , more charge with the element that be pregnant with diviner form . the life of a people grow , it be knit together and yet expand , in joy and sorrow , in thought and action ; it absorb the thought of other nation into its own form , and give back the thought as new wealth to the world ; it be a power and an organ in the great body of the nation . but there may come a check , an arrest ; memory may be stifle , and love may be faint for the lack of they ; or memory may shrink into withered relic the soul of a people , whereby they know themselves to be one , may seem to be die for want of common action . but who shall say , ' the fountain of their life be dry up , they shall forever cease to be a nation ? ' who shall say it ? not he who feel the life of his people stir within his own . shall he say , ' that way event be wend , I will not resist ? ' his very soul be resistance , and be as a seed of fire that may enkindle the soul of multitude , and make a new pathway for event . " 

 " I do not   deny patriotism , " say Gideon , " but we all know you have a particular meaning , Mordecai . you know Mordecai 's way of thinking , I suppose . " here Gideon have turn to Deronda , who sit next to he , but without wait for an answer he go on . " I be a rational Jew myself . I stand by my people as a sort of family relation , and I be for keep up our worship in a rational way . I do not   approve of our people get baptise , because I do not   believe in a Jew 's conversion to the Gentile part of Christianity . and now we have political equality , there be no excuse for a pretense of that sort . but I be for get rid of all of our superstition and exclusiveness . there be no reason now why we should not   melt gradually into the population we live among . that be the order of the day in point of progress . I would as soon my child marry Christians as Jews . and I be for the old maxim , ' a man 's country be where he be well off . ' " 

 " that country be not so easy to find , Gideon , " say the rapid Pash , with a shrug and grimace . " you get ten shilling a - week more than I do , and have only half the number of child . if somebody will introduce a brisk trade in watch among the ' Jerusalem ware , ' I will go eh , Mordecai , what do you say ? " 

 Deronda , all ear for these hint of Mordecai 's opinion , be inwardly wonder at his persistence in come to this club . for an enthusiastic spirit to meet continually the fixed indifference of man familiar with the object of his enthusiasm be the acceptance of a slow martyrdom , beside which the fate of a missionary tomahawk without any considerate rejection of his doctrine seem hardly worthy of compassion . but Mordecai give no sign of shrinking : this be a moment of spiritual fullness , and he care more for the utterance of his faith than for its immediate reception . with a fervor which have no temper in it , but seem rather the rush of feeling in the opportunity of speech , he answer Pash : 

 " what I say be , let every man keep far away from the brotherhood and inheritance he despise . thousand on thousand of our race have mix with the Gentiles as Celt with Saxon , and they may inherit the blessing that belong to the Gentile . you can not follow they . you be one of the multitude over this globe who must walk among the nation and be know as Jews , and with word on their lip which mean , ' I wish I have not be bear a Jew , I disown any bond with the long travail of my race , I will outdo the Gentile in mock at our separateness , ' they all the while feel breathe on they the breath of contempt because they be Jews , and they will breathe it back poisonously . can a fresh - make garment of citizenship weave itself straightway into the flesh and change the slow deposit of eighteen century ? what be the citizenship of he who walk among a people he have no hardy kindre and fellowship with , and have lose the sense of brotherhood with his own race ? it be a charter of selfish ambition and rivalry in low greed . he be an alien of spirit , whatever he may be in form ; he suck the blood of mankind , he be not a man , share in no love , share in no subjection of the soul , he mock it all . be it not truth I speak , Pash ? " 

 " not exactly , Mordecai , " say Pash , " if you mean that I think the bad of myself for be a Jew . what I thank our father for be that there be few blockhead among we than among other race . but perhaps you be right in think the Christians do not   like I so well for it . " 

 " Catholics and Protestants have not like each other much well , " say the genial Gideon . " we must wait patiently for prejudice to die out . many of our people be on a footing with the good , and there be be a good filtering of our blood into high family . I be for make our expectation rational . " 

 " and so be I ! " say Mordecai , quickly , lean forward with the eagerness of one who plead in some decisive crisis , his long , thin hand clasp together on his lap . " I , too , claim to be a rational Jew . but what be it to be rational what be it to feel the light of the divine reason grow strong within and without ? it be to see more and more of the hide bond that bind and consecrate change as a dependent growth yea , consecrate it with kinship : the past become my parent and the future stretch toward I the appeal arm of child . be it rational to drain away the sap of special kindre that make the family of man rich in interchanged wealth , and various as the forest be various with the glory of the cedar and the palm ? when it be rational to say , ' I know not my father or my mother , let my child be alien to I , that no prayer of mine may touch they , ' then it will be rational for the Jew to say , ' I will seek to know no difference between I and the Gentile , I will not cherish the prophetic consciousness of our nationality let the hebrew cease to be , and let all his memorial be antiquarian trifle , dead as the wall - painting of a conjecture race . yet let his child learn by rote the speech of the Greek , where he abjure his fellow - citizen by the bravery of those who fight foremost at Marathon let he learn to say that be noble in the Greek , that be the spirit of an immortal nation ! but the Jew have no memory that bind he to action ; let he laugh that his nation be degrade from a nation ; let he hold the monument of his law which carry within its frame the breath of social justice , of charity , and of household sanctity let he hold the energy of the prophet , the patient care of the Masters , the fortitude of martyr generation , as mere stuff for a professorship . the business of the Jew in all thing be to be even as the rich Gentile . " 

 Mordecai throw himself back in his chair , and there be a moment 's silence . not one member of the club share his point of view or his emotion ; but his whole personality and speech have on they the effect of a dramatic representation which have some pathos in it , though no practical consequence ; and usually he be at once indulge and contradict . Deronda 's mind go back upon what must have be the tragic pressure of outward condition hinder this man , whose force he feel to be tell on himself , from make any world for his thought in the mind of other like a poet among people of a strange speech , who may have a poetry of their own , but have no ear for his cadence , no answer thrill to his discovery of the latent virtue in his mother tongue . 

 the cool Buchan be the first to speak , and hint the loss of time . " I submit , " say he , " that ye're travel away from the question I put concern progress . " 

 " say they be levant , Buchan , " say Miller , who like his joke , and would not have object to be call Voltairian . " never mind . let we have a jewish night ; we have   not have one for a long while . let we take the discussion on jewish ground . I suppose we have   no prejudice here ; we be all philosopher ; and we like our friend Mordecai , Pash , and Gideon , as well as if they be no more kin to Abraham than the rest of we . we be all relate through Adam , until far show to the contrary , and if you look into history we have   all get some discreditable forefather . so I mean no offence when I say I do not   think any great thing of the part the jewish people have play in the world . what then ? I think they be iniquitously deal by in past time . and I suppose we do not   want any man to be maltreat , white , black , brown , or yellow I know I have   just give my half - crown to the contrary . and that remind I , I have   a curious old german book I can not   read it myself , but a friend of mine be read out of it to I the other day about the prejudicie against the Jews , and the story use to be tell against them , and what do you think one be ? why , that they be punish with a bad odor in their body ; and that , say the author , date 1715   I have   just be price and mark the book this very morning   that be true , for the ancient speak of it . but then , he say , the other thing be fable , such as that the odor go away all at once when they be baptize , and that every one of the ten tribe , mind you , all the ten be concern in the crucifixion , have get a particular punishment over and above the smell : Asher , I remember , have the right arm a handbreadth short than the left , and Naphthali have pig 's ear and a smell of live pork . what do you think of that ? there be be a good deal of fun make of rabbinical fable , but in point of fable my opinion be , that all over the world it be six of one and half - a - dozen of the other . however , as I say before , I hold with the philosopher of the last century that the Jews have play no great part as a people , though Pash will have it they be clever enough to beat all the rest of the world . but if so , I ask , why have not   they do it ? " 

 " for the same reason that the clever man in the country do not   get themselves or their idea into Parliament , " say the ready Pash ; " because the blockhead be too many for them . " 

 " that be a vain question , " say Mordecai , " whether our people would beat the rest of the world . each nation have its own work , and be a member of the world , enrich by the work of each . but it be true , as Jehuda - ha - Levi first say , that Israel be the heart of mankind , if we mean by heart the core of affection which bind a race and its family in dutiful love , and the reverence for the human body which lift the need of our animal life into religion , and the tenderness which be merciful to the poor and weak and to the dumb creature that wear the yoke for we . " 

 " they be not behind any nation in arrogance , " say Lily ; " and if they have get in the rear , it have not be because they be over - modest . " 

 " oh , every nation brag in its turn , " say Miller . 

 " yes , " say Pash , " and some of they in the Hebrew text . " 

 " well , whatever the Jews contribute at one time , they be a stand - still people , " say Lily . " they be the type of obstinate adherence to the superannuated . they may show good ability when they take up liberal idea , but as a race they have no development in they . " 

 " that be false ! " say Mordecai , lean forward again with his former eagerness . " let their history be know and examine ; let the seed be sift , let its beginning be trace to the weed of the wilderness the more glorious will be the energy that transform it . where else be there a nation of whom it may be as truly say that their religion and law and moral life mingle as the stream of blood in the heart and make one growth where else a people who keep and enlarge their spiritual store at the very time when they be hat with a hatred as fierce as the forest fire that chase the wild beast from his covert ? there be a fable of the Roman , that swim to save his life he hold the roll of his writing between his tooth and save they from the water . but how much more than that be true of our race ? they struggle to keep their place among the nation like hero yea , when the hand be hack off , they clung with their tooth ; but when the plow and the harrow have pass over the last visible sign of their national covenant , and the fruitfulness of their land be stifle with the blood of the sower and planter , they say , ' the spirit be alive , let we make it a last habitation last because movable so that it may be carry from generation to generation , and our son unborn may be rich in the thing that have be , and possess a hope build on an unchangeable foundation . ' they say it and they work it , though often breathe with scant life , as in a coffin , or as lie wound amid a heap of slain . hoot and scar like the unknown dog , the Hebrew make himself envy for his wealth and wisdom , and be bleed of they to fill the bath of Gentile luxury ; he absorb knowledge , he diffuse it ; his dispersed race be a new Phoenicia work the mine of Greece and carry their product to the world . the native spirit of our tradition be not to stand still , but to use record as a seed and draw out the compressed virtue of law and prophecy ; and while the Gentile , who have say , ' what be yours be ours , and no long your , ' be read the letter of our law as a dark inscription , or be turn its parchment into shoe - sol for an army rabid with lust and cruelty , our master be still enlarge and illuminate with fresh - fed interpretation . but the dispersion be wide , the yoke of oppression be a spiked torture as well as a load ; the exile be force afar among brutish people , where the consciousness of his race be no clear to he than the light of the sun to our father in the roman persecution , who have their hiding - place in a cave , and know not that it be day save by the dimmer burning of their candle . what wonder that multitude of our people be ignorant , narrow , superstitious ? what wonder ? " 

 here Mordecai , whose seat be next the fireplace , rise and lean his arm on the little shelf ; his excitement have rise , though his voice , which have begin with unusual strength , be get hoarser . 

 " what wonder ? the night be unto they , that they have no vision ; in their darkness they be unable to divine ; the sun be go down over the prophet , and the day be dark above they ; their observance be as nameless relic . but which among the chief of the Gentile nation have not an ignorant multitude ? they scorn our people 's ignorant observance ; but the most accursed ignorance be that which have no observance sink to the cunning greed of the fox , to which all law be no more than a trap or the cry of the worrying hound . there be a degradation deep down below the memory that have wither into superstition . in the multitude of the ignorant on three continent who observe our rite and make the confession of the divine Unity , the soul of Judaism be not dead . revive the organic centre : let the unity of Israel which have make the growth and form of its religion be an outward reality . look toward a land and a polity , our dispersed people in all the end of the earth may share the dignity of a national life which have a voice among the people of the East and the West which will plant the wisdom and skill of our race so that it may be , as of old , a medium of transmission and understanding . let that come to pass , and the live warmth will spread to the weak extremity of Israel , and superstition will vanish , not in the lawlessness of the renegade , but in the illumination of great fact which widen feeling , and make all knowledge alive as the young offspring of beloved memory . " 

 Mordecai 's voice have sink , but with the hectic brilliancy of his gaze it be not the less impressive . his extraordinary excitement be certainly due to Deronda 's presence : it be to Deronda that he be speak , and the moment have a testamentary solemnity for he which rally all his power . yet the presence of those other familiar man promote expression , for they embody the indifference which give a resistant energy to his speech . not that he look at Deronda : he seem to see nothing immediately around he , and if any one have grasp he he would probably not have know it . again the former word come back to Deronda 's mind , " you must hope my hope see the vision I point to behold a glory where I behold it . " they come now with gather pathos . before he stand , as a living , suffer reality , what hitherto he have only see as an effort of imagination , which , in its comparative faintness , yet carry a suspicion , of be exaggerated : a man steep in poverty and obscurity , weaken by disease , consciously within the shadow of advance death , but live an intense life in an invisible past and future , careless of his personal lot , except for its possible make some obstruction to a conceive good which he would never share except as a brief inward vision a day afar off , whose sun would never warm he , but into which he throw his soul 's desire , with a passion often want to the personal motif of healthy youth . it be something more than a grandiose transfiguration of the parental love that toil , renounce , endure , resist the suicidal prompting of despair all because of the little one , whose future become present to the yearn gaze of anxiety . 

 all eye be fix on Mordecai as he sit down again , and none with unkindness ; but it happen that the one who feel the most kindly be the most prompt to speak in opposition . this be the genial and rational Gideon , who also be not without a sense that he be address the guest of the evening . he say 

 " you have your own way of look at thing , Mordecai , and as you say , your own way seem to you rational . I know you do not   hold with the restoration of Judea by miracle , and so on ; but you be as well aware as I be that the subject have be mix with a heap of nonsense both by Jews and Christians . and as to the connection of our race with Palestine , it have be pervert by superstition till it be as demoralize as the old poor - law . the raff and scum go there to be maintain like able - bodied pauper , and to be take special care of by the angel Gabriel when they die . it be no use fight against fact . we must look where they point ; that be what I call rationality . the most learned and liberal man among we who be attach to our religion be for clear our liturgy of all such notion as a literal fulfillment of the prophecy about restoration , and so on . prune it of a few useless rite and literal interpretation of that sort , and our religion be the simple of all religion , and make no barrier , but a union , between we and the rest of the world . " 

 " as plain as a pike - staff , " say Pash , with an ironical laugh . " you pluck it up by the root , strip off the leaf and bark , shave off the knot , and smooth it at top and bottom ; put it where you will , it will do no harm , it will never sprout . you may make a handle of it , or you may throw it on the bonfire of scour rubbish . I do not   see why our rubbish be to be hold sacred any more than the rubbish of Brahmanism or Buddhism . " 

 " no , " say Mordecai , " no , Pash , because you have lose the heart of the Jew . community be feel before it be call good . I praise no superstition , I praise the living fountain of enlarging belief . what be growth , completion , development ? you begin with that question , I apply it to the history of our people . I say that the effect of our separateness will not be complete and have its high transformation unless our race take on again the character of a nationality . that be the fulfillment of the religious trust that mould they into a people , whose life have make half the inspiration of the world . what be it to I that the ten tribe be lose untraceably , or that multitude of the child of Judah have mix themselves with the Gentile population as a river with river ? behold our people still ! their skirt spread afar ; they be tear and soiled and trodden on ; but there be a jeweled breastplate . let the wealthy man , the monarch of commerce , the learn in all knowledge , the skilful in all art , the speaker , the political counselor , who carry in their vein the Hebrew blood which have maintain its vigor in all climate , and the pliancy of the Hebrew genius for which difficulty mean new device let they say , ' we will lift up a standard , we will unite in a labor hard but glorious like that of Moses and Ezra , a labor which shall be a worthy fruit of the long anguish whereby our father maintain their separateness , refuse the ease of falsehood . ' they have wealth enough to redeem the soil from debauched and paupered conqueror ; they have the skill of the statesman to devise , the tongue of the orator to persuade . and be there no prophet or poet among we to make the ear of Christian Europe tingle with shame at the hideous obloquy of christian strife which the Turk gaze at as at the fighting of beast to which he have lend an arena ? there be store of wisdom among we to found a new jewish polity , grand , simple , just , like the old a republic where there be equality of protection , an equality which shine like a star on the forehead of our ancient community , and give it more than the brightness of western freedom amid the despotism of the East . then our race shall have an organic centre , a heart and brain to watch and guide and execute ; the outraged Jew shall have a defense in the court of nation , as the outraged Englishman of America . and the world will gain as Israel gain . for there will be a community in the van of the East which carry the culture and the sympathy of every great nation in its bosom : there will be a land set for a halting - place of enmity , a neutral ground for the East as Belgium be for the West . difficulty ? I know there be difficulty . but let the spirit of sublime achievement move in the great among our people , and the work will begin . " 

 " ay , we may safely admit that , Mordecai , " say Pash . " when there be great man on ' Change , and high - fly professor convert to your doctrine , difficulty will vanish like smoke . " 

 Deronda , incline by nature to take the side of those on whom the arrow of scorn be fall , could not help reply to Pash 's outfling , and say 

 " if we look back to the history of effort which have make great change , it be astonish how many of they seem hopeless to those who look on in the beginning . 

 " take what we have all hear and see something of the effort after the unity of Italy , which we be sure soon to see accomplish to the very last boundary . look into Mazzini 's account of his first yearning , when he be a boy , after a restore greatness and a new freedom to Italy , and of his first effort as a young man to rouse the same feeling in other young man , and get they to work toward a united nationality . almost everything seem against he ; his countryman be ignorant or indifferent , government hostile , Europe incredulous . of course the scorner often seem wise . yet you see the prophecy lie with he . as long as there be a remnant of national consciousness , I suppose nobody will deny that there may be a new stirring of memory and hope which may inspire arduous action . " 

 " amen , " say Mordecai , to whom Deronda 's word be a cordial . " what be need be the leaven what be need be the seed of fire . the heritage of Israel be beat in the pulse of million ; it live in their vein as a power without understanding , like the morning exultation of herd ; it be the inborn half of memory , move as in a dream among writing on the wall , which it see dimly but can not divide into speech . let the torch of visible community be light ! let the reason of Israel disclose itself in a great outward deed , and let there be another great migration , another choosing of Israel to be a nationality whose member may still stretch to the end of the earth , even as the son of England and Germany , whom enterprise carry afar , but who still have a national hearth and a tribunal of national opinion . will any say ' it can not be ' ? baruch Spinoza have not a faithful jewish heart , though he have suck the life of his intellect at the breast of jewish tradition . he lay bare his father 's nakedness and say , ' they who scorn he have the high wisdom . ' yet Baruch Spinoza confess , he see not why Israel should not again be a choose nation . who say that the history and literature of our race be dead ? be they not as live as the history and literature of Greece and Rome , which have inspire revolution , enkindle the thought of Europe , and make the unrighteous power tremble ? these be an inheritance dig from the tomb . ours be an inheritance that have never cease to quiver in million of human frame . " 

 Mordecai have stretch his arm upward , and his long thin hand quiver in the air for a moment after he have cease to speak . Gideon be certainly a little move , for though there be no long pause before he make a remark in objection , his tone be more mild and deprecatory than before ; Pash , meanwhile , press his lip together , rub his black head with both his hand and wrinkle his brow horizontally , with the expression of one who differ from every speaker , but do not think it worth while to say so . there be a sort of human paste that when it come near the fire of enthusiasm be only bake into hard shape . 

 " it may seem well enough on one side to make so much of our memory and inheritance as you do , Mordecai , " say Gideon ; " but there be another side . it be not   all gratitude and harmless glory . our people have inherit a good deal of hatred . there be a pretty lot of curse still fly about , and stiff settle rancor inherit from the time of persecution . how will you justify keep one sort of memory and throw away the other ? there be ugly debt stand on both side . " 

 " I justify the choice as all other choice be justify , " say Mordecai . " I cherish nothing for the jewish nation , I seek nothing for they , but the good which promise good to all the nation . the spirit of our religious life , which be one with our national life , be not hatred of aught but wrong . the Master have say , an offence against man be bad than an offence against God . but what wonder if there be hatred in the breast of Jews , who be child of the ignorant and oppress what wonder , since there be hatred in the breast of Christians ? our national life be a grow light . let the central fire be kindle again , and the light will reach afar . the degraded and scorn of our race will learn to think of their sacred land , not as a place for saintly beggary to await death in loathsome idleness , but as a republic where the jewish spirit manifest itself in a new order found on the old , purify and enrich by the experience our great son have gather from the life of the age . how long be it ? only two century since a vessel carry over the ocean the beginning of the great north american nation . the people grow like meeting water they be various in habit and sect there come a time , a century ago , when they need a polity , and there be hero of peace among they . what have they to form a polity with but memory of Europe , correct by the vision of a well ? let our wise and wealthy show themselves hero . they have the memory of the East and West , and they have the full vision of a well . a new Persia with a purified religion magnify itself in art and wisdom . so will a new Judaea , poise between East and West a covenant of reconciliation . will any say , the prophetic vision of your race have be hopelessly mixed with folly and bigotry : the angel of progress have no message for Judaism it be a half - bury city for the pay worker to lay open the water be rush by it as a forsaken field ? I say that the strong principle of growth lie in human choice . the son of Judah have to choose that God may again choose they . the messianic time be the time when Israel shall will the planting of the national ensign . the Nile overflow and rush onward : the Egyptian could not choose the overflow , but he choose to work and make channel for the fructifying water , and Egypt become the land of corn . shall man , whose soul be set in the royalty of discernment and resolve , deny his rank and say , I be an onlooker , ask no choice or purpose of I ? that be the blasphemy of this time . the divine principle of our race be action , choice , resolve memory . let we contradict the blasphemy , and help to will our own well future and the well future of the world not renounce our high gift and say , ' let we be as if we be not among the population ; ' but choose our full heritage , claim the brotherhood of our nation , and carry into it a new brotherhood with the nation of the Gentiles . the vision be there ; it will be fulfil . " 

 with the last sentence , which be no more than a loud whisper , Mordecai let his chin sink on his breast and his eyelid fall . no one speak . it be not the first time that he have insist on the same idea , but he be see to - night in a new phase . the quiet tenacity of his ordinary self differ as much from his present exaltation of mood as a man in private talk , give reason for a revolution of which no sign be discernable , differ from one who feel himself an agent in a revolution begin . the dawn of fulfillment bring to his hope by Deronda 's presence have work Mordecai 's conception into a state of impassioned conviction , and he have find strength in his excitement to pour forth the unlocked flood of emotive argument , with a sense of haste as at a crisis which must be seize . but now there have come with the quiescence of fatigue a sort of thankful wonder that he have speak a contemplation of his life as a journey which have come at last to this bourne . after a great excitement , the ebbing strength of impulse be apt to leave we in this aloofness from our active self . and in the moment after Mordecai have sink his head , his mind be wander along the path of his youth , and all the hope which have end in bring he hither . 

 every one feel that the talk be end , and the tone of phlegmatic discussion make unseasonable by Mordecai 's high - pitch solemnity . it be as if they have come together to hear the blowing of the shophar , and have nothing to do now but to disperse . the movement be unusually general , and in less than ten minute the room be empty of all except Mordecai and Deronda . " good - night " have be give to Mordecai , but it be evident he have not hear they , for he remain rapt and motionless . Deronda would not disturb this needful rest , but wait for a spontaneous movement . 

 CHAPTER XLIII . 

  " my spirit be too weak ; mortality 
  Weighs heavily on I like unwilling sleep , 
  and each imagine pinnacle and steep 
  of godlike hardship tell I I must die 
  like a sick eagle look at the sky . " 
  KEATS . 
 after a few minute the unwonted stillness have penetrate Mordecai 's consciousness , and he look up at Deronda , not in the least with bewilderment and surprise , but with a gaze full of reposing satisfaction . Deronda rise and place his chair nearer , where there could be no imagined need for raise the voice . Mordecai feel the action as a patient feel the gentleness that ease his pillow . he begin to speak in a low tone , as if he be only think articulately , not try to reach an audience . 

 " in the doctrine of the Cabbala , soul be bear again and again in new body till they be perfect and purify , and a soul liberate from a wear - out body may join the fellow - soul that need it , that they may be perfect together , and their earthly work accomplish . then they will depart from the mortal region , and leave place for new soul to be bear out of the store in the eternal bosom . it be the linger imperfection of the soul already bear into the mortal region that hinder the birth of new soul and the preparation of the messianic time : thus the mind have give shape to what be hide , as the shadow of what be know , and have speak truth , though it be only in parable . when my long - wander soul be liberate from this weary body , it will join your , and its work will be perfect . " 

 Mordecai 's pause seem an appeal which Deronda 's feeling would not let he leave unanswered . he try to make it truthful ; but for Mordecai 's ear it be inevitably fill with unspoken meaning . he only say 

 " everything I can in conscience do to make your life effective I will do . " 

 " I know it , " say Mordecai , in a tone of quiet certainty which dispense with further assurance . " I hear it . you see it all you be by my side on the mount of vision , and behold the path of fulfillment which other deny . " 

 he be silent a moment or two , and then go on meditatively 

 " you will take up my life where it be break . I feel myself back in that day when my life be break . the bright morning sun be on the quay it be at Trieste the garment of man from all nation shine like jewel the boat be push off the greek vessel that would land we at Beyrout be to start in an hour . I be go with a merchant as his clerk and companion . I say , I shall behold the land and people of the East , and I shall speak with a full vision . I breathe then as you do , without labor ; I have the light step and the endurance of youth , I could fast , I could sleep on the hard ground . I have wed poverty , and I love my bride for poverty to I be freedom . my heart exult as if it have be the heart of Moses ben Maimon , strong with the strength of three score year , and know the work that be to fill they . it be the first time I have be south ; the soul within I feel its former sun ; and stand on the quay , where the ground I stand on seem to send forth light , and the shadow have an azure glory as of spirit become visible , I feel myself in the flood of a glorious life , wherein my own small year - count existence seem to melt , so that I know it not ; and a great sob arise within I as at the rush of water that be too strong a bliss . so I stand there await my companion ; and I see he not till he say : ' Ezra , I have be to the post and there be your letter . ' " 

 " Ezra ! " exclaim Deronda , unable to contain himself . 

 " Ezra , " repeat Mordecai , affirmatively , engross in memory . " I be expect a letter ; for I write continually to my mother . and that sound of my name be like the touch of a wand that recall I to the body wherefrom I have be release as it be to mingle with the ocean of human existence , free from the pressure of individual bondage . I open the letter ; and the name come again as a cry that would have disturb I in the bosom of heaven , and make I yearn to reach where that sorrow be ' Ezra , my son ! ' " 

 Mordecai pause again , his imagination arrest by the grasp of that long - pass moment . Deronda 's mind be almost breathlessly suspend on what be come . a strange possibility have suddenly present itself . Mordecai 's eye be cast down in abstract contemplation , and in a few moment he go on 

 " she be a mother of whom it might have come yea , might have come to be say , ' her child arise up and call she blessed . ' in she I understand the meaning of that Master who , perceive the footstep of his mother , rise up and say , ' the Majesty of the eternal cometh near ! ' and that letter be her cry from the depth of anguish and desolation the cry of a mother rob of her little one . I be her eld . death have take four babe one after the other . then come , late , my little sister , who be , more than all the rest , the desire of my mother 's eye ; and the letter be a pierce cry to I ' Ezra , my son , I be rob of she . he have take she away and leave disgrace behind . they will never come again . ' " here Mordecai lift his eye suddenly , lay his hand on Deronda 's arm , and say , " mine be the lot of Israel . for the sin of the father my soul must go into exile . for the sin of the father the work be break , and the day of fulfilment delay . she who bear I be desolate , disgrace , destitute . I turn back . on the instant I turn her spirit and the spirit of her father , who have worthy jewish heart , move within I , and draw I . God , in whom dwell the universe , be within I as the strength of obedience . I turn and travel with hardship to save the scant money which she would need . I leave the sunshine , and travel into freeze cold . in the last stage I spend a night in exposure to cold and snow . and that be the beginning of this slow death . " 

 Mordecai let his eye wander again and remove his hand . Deronda resolutely repress the question which urge themselves within he . while Mordecai be in this state of emotion , no other confidence must be seek than what come spontaneously : nay , he himself feel a kindre emotion which make he dread his own speech as too momentous . 

 " but I work . we be destitute every thing have be seize . and she be ill : the clutch of anguish be too strong for she , and work with some lurking disease . at time she could not stand for the beating of her heart , and the image in her brain become as chamber of terror , where she behold my sister rear in evil . in the dead of night I hear she cry for her child . then I rise , and we stretch forth our arm together and pray . we pour forth our soul in desire that Mirah might be deliver from evil . " 

 " Mirah ? " Deronda repeat , wish to assure , himself that his ear have not be deceive by a forecasting imagination . " do you say Mirah ? " 

 " that be my little sister 's name . after we have pray for she , my mother would rest awhile . it last hardly four year , and in the minute before she die , we be pray the same prayer I aloud , she silently . her soul go out upon its wing . " 

 " have you never since hear of your sister ? " say Deronda , as quietly as he could . 

 " never . never have I hear whether she be deliver accord to our prayer . I know not , I know not . who shall say where the pathway lie ? the poisonous will of the wicked be strong . it poison my life it be slowly stifle this breath . death deliver my mother , and I feel it a blessedness that I be alone in the winter of suffering . but what be the winter now ? they be far off " here Mordecai again rest his hand on Deronda 's arm , and look at he with that joy of the hectic patient which pierce we to sadness " there be nothing to wail in the withering of my body . the work will be the well do . once I say the work of this beginning be mine , I be bear to do it . well , I shall do it . I shall live in you . I shall live in you . " 

 his grasp have become convulsive in its force , and Deronda , agitated as he have never be before the certainty that this be Mirah 's brother suffuse his own strange relation to Mordecai with a new solemnity and tenderness feel his strong young heart beat fast and his lip pal . he shrink from speech . he fear , in Mordecai 's present state of exaltation   already an alarming strain on his feeble frame , to utter a word of revelation about Mirah . he fear to make an answer below that high pitch of expectation which resemble a flash from a die fire , make watcher fear to see it die the fast . his dominant impulse be to do as he have once do before : he lay his firm , gentle hand on the hand that grasp he . Mordecai 's , as if it have a soul of its own for he be not distinctly willing to do what he do relax its grasp , and turn upward under Deronda 's . as the two palm meet and press each other Mordecai recover some sense of his surrounding , and say 

 " let we go now . I can not talk any long . " 

 and in fact they part at Cohen 's door without have speak to each other again merely with another pressure of the hand . 

 Deronda feel a weight on he which be half joy , half anxiety . the joy of finding in Mirah 's brother a nature even more than worthy of that relation to she , have the weight of solemnity and sadness ; the reunion of brother and sister be in reality the first stage of a supreme parting like that farewell kiss which resemble greeting , that last glance of love which become the sharp pang of sorrow . then there be the weight of anxiety about the revelation of the fact on both side , and the arrangement it would be desirable to make beforehand . I suppose we should all have feel as Deronda do , without sink into snobbishness or the notion that the primal duty of life demand a morning and an evening suit , that it be an admissible desire to free Mirah 's first meeting with her brother from all jarring outward condition . his own sense of deliverance from the dread relationship of the other Cohens , notwithstanding their good nature , make he resolve if possible to keep they in the background for Mirah , until her acquaintance with they would be an unmarred rendering of gratitude for any kindness they have show to her brother . on all account he wish to give Mordecai surrounding not only more suited to his frail bodily condition , but less of a hindrance to easy intercourse , even apart from the decisive prospect of Mirah 's take up her abode with her brother , and tend he through the precious remnant of his life . in the heroic drama , great recognition be not encumber with these detail ; and certainly Deronda have as reverential an interest in Mordecai and Mirah as he could have have in the offspring of Agamemnon ; but he be care for destiny still move in the dim street of our earthly life , not yet lift among the constellation , and his task present itself to he as difficult and delicate , especially in persuade Mordecai to change his abode and habit . concern Mirah 's feeling and resolve he have no doubt : there would be a complete union of sentiment toward the depart mother , and Mirah would understand her brother 's greatness . yes , greatness : that be the word which Deronda now deliberately choose to signify the impression that Mordecai have make on he . he say to himself , perhaps rather defiantly toward the more negative spirit within he , that this man , however erratic some of his interpretation might be this consumptive jewish workman in threadbare clothing , lodge by charity , deliver himself to hearer who take his thought without attach more consequence to they than the Flemings to the ethereal chime ring above their market - place have the chief element of greatness ; a mind consciously , energetically move with the large march of human destiny , but not the less full of conscience and tender heart for the footstep that tread near and need a lean - place ; capable of conceive and choose a life 's task with far - off issue , yet capable of the unapplauded heroism which turn off the road of achievement at the call of the nearer duty whose effect lie within the beating of the heart that be close to we , as the hunger of the unfledged bird to the breast of its parent . 

 Deronda to - night be stir with , the feeling that the brief remnant of this fervid life have become his charge . he have be peculiarly work on by what he have see at the club of the friendly indifference which Mordecai must have go on encounter . his own experience of the small room that ardor can make for itself in ordinary mind have have the effect of increase his reserve ; and while tolerance be the easy attitude to he , there be another bent in he also capable of become a weakness the dislike to appear exceptional or to risk an ineffective insistance on his own opinion . but such caution appear contemptible to he just now , when he , for the first time , see in a complete picture and feel as a reality the life that burn themselves out in solitary enthusiasm : martyr of obscure circumstance , exile in the rarity of their own mind , whose deliverance in other ear be no more than a long passionate soliloquy unless perhaps at last , when they be near the invisible shore , sign of recognition and fulfilment may penetrate the cloud of loneliness ; or perhaps it may be with they as with the die Copernicus make to touch the first print copy of his book when the sense of touch be go , see it only as a dim object through the deepening dusk . 

 Deronda have be bring near to one of those spiritual exile , and it be in his nature to feel the relation as a strong chain , nay , to feel his imagination move without repugnance in the direction of Mordecai 's desire . with all his latent objection to scheme only definite in their generality and nebulous in detail in the poise of his sentiment he feel at one with this man who have make a visionary selection of he : the line of what may be call their emotional theory touch . he have not the jewish consciousness , but he have a yearning , grow the strong for the denial which have be his grievance , after the obligation of avow filial and social tie . his feeling be ready for difficult obedience . in this way it come that he set about his new task ungrudgingly ; and again he think of Mrs. Meyrick as his chief helper . to her first he must make know the discovery of Mirah 's brother , and with she he must consult on all preliminary of bring the mutually lose together . happily the good quarter for a consumptive patient do not lie too far off the small house at Chelsea , and the first office Deronda have to perform for this hebrew prophet who claim he as a spiritual inheritor , be to get he a healthy lodging . such be the irony of earthly mixture , that the hero have not always have carpet and teacup of their own ; and , see through the open window by the mackerel - vender , may have be invite with some hopefulness to pay three hundred per cent , in the form of fourpence . however , Deronda 's mind be busy with a prospective arrangement for give a furnished lodge some faint likeness to a refined home by dismantle his own chamber of his good old book in vellum , his easy chair , and the bas - relief of Milton and Dante . 

 but be not Mirah to be there ? what furniture can give such finish to a room as a tender woman 's face ? and be there any harmony of tint that have such stirring of delight as the sweet modulation of her voice ? here be one good , at least , think Deronda , that come to Mordecai from his have fix his imagination on I . he have recover a perfect sister , whose affection be wait for he . 

 CHAPTER XLIV . 

  Fairy folk a - listen 
  hear the seed sprout in the spring . 
  and for music to their dance 
  hear the hedgerow wake from trance , 
  Sap that tremble into bud 
  send little rhythmic flood 
  of fairy sound in fairy ear . 
  thus all beauty that appear 
  have birth as sound to fine sense 
  and lighter - clothe intelligence . 
 and Gwendolen ? she be think of Deronda much more than he be think of she often wonder what be his idea " about thing , " and how his life be occupy . but a lap - dog would be necessarily at a loss in frame to itself the motif and adventure of doghood at large ; and it be as far from Gwendolen 's conception that Deronda 's life could be determine by the historical destiny of the Jews , as that he could rise into the air on a brazen horse , and so vanish from her horizon in the form of a twinkling star . 

 with all the sense of inferiority that have be force upon she , it be inevitable that she should imagine a large place for herself in his thought than she actually possess . they must be rather old and wise person who be not apt to see their own anxiety or elation about themselves reflect in other mind ; and Gwendolen , with her youth and inward solitude , may be excuse for dwell on sign of special interest in she show by the one person who have impress she with the feeling of submission , and for mistake the color and proportion of those sign in the mind of Deronda . 

 meanwhile , what would he tell she that she ought to do ? " he say , I must get more interest in other , and more knowledge , and that I must care about the good thing but how be I to begin ? " she wonder what book he would tell she to take up to her own room , and recall the famous writer that she have either not look into or have find the most unreadable , with a half - smile wish that she could mischievously ask Deronda if they be not the book call " medicine for the mind . " then she repent of her sauciness , and when she be safe from observation carry up a miscellaneous selection Descartes , Bacon , Locke , Butler , Burke , Guizot knowing , as a clever young lady of education , that these author be ornament of mankind , feel sure that Deronda have read they , and hop that by dip into they all in succession , with her rapid understanding she might get a point of view near to his level . 

 but it be astonish how little time she find for these vast mental excursion . constantly she have to be on the scene as Mrs. Grandcourt , and to feel herself watch in that part by the exact eye of a husband who have find a motive to exercise his tenacity that of make his marriage answer all the end he choose , and with the more completeness the more he discern any opposing will in she . and she herself , whatever rebellion might be go on within she , could not have make up her mind to failure in her representation . no feeling have yet reconcile she for a moment to any act , word , or look that would be a confession to the world : and what she most dread in herself be any violent impulse that would make an involuntary confession : it be the will to be silent in every other direction that have throw the more impetuosity into her confidence toward Deronda , to whom her think continually turn as a help against herself . her riding , her hunting , her visit and receive of visit , be all perform in a spirit of achievement which serve instead of z and young gladness , so that all around diplow , in those week of the new year , Mrs. Grandcourt be regard as wear her honor with triumph . 

 " she disguise it under an air of take everything as a matter of course , " say Mrs. Arrowpoint . " a stranger might suppose that she have condescend rather than risen . I always notice that doubleness in she . " 

 to her mother most of all Gwendolen be bent on act complete satisfaction , and poor Mrs. Davilow be so far deceive that she take the unexpected distance at which she be keep , in spite of what she feel to be Grandcourt 's handsome behavior in provide for she , as a comparative indifference in her daughter , now that marriage have create new interest . to be fetch to lunch and then to dinner along with the Gascoignes , to be drive back soon after breakfast the next morning , and to have brief call from Gwendolen in which her husband wait for she outside either on horseback or sit in the carriage , be all the intercourse allow to her mother . 

 the truth be , that the second time Gwendolen propose to invite her mother with Mr. and Mrs. Gascoigne , Grandcourt have at first be silent , and then drawl , " we can not   be have those people always . Gascoigne talk too much . country clergy be always bore with their confounded fuss about everything . " 

 that speech be full of foreboding for Gwendolen . to have her mother class under " those people " be enough to confirm the previous dread of bring she too near . still , she could not give the true reason she could not say to her mother , " Mr. Grandcourt want to recognize you as little as possible ; and besides it be well you should not see much of my married life , else you might find out that I be miserable . " so she waive as lightly as she could every allusion to the subject ; and when Mrs. Davilow again hint the possibility of she have a house close to ryeland , Gwendolen say , " it would not be so nice for you as be near the rectory here , mamma . we shall perhaps be very little at ryeland . you would miss my aunt and uncle . " 

 and all the while this contemptuous veto of her husband be on any intimacy with her family , make she proudly shrink from give they the aspect of troublesome pensioner , be rouse more inward inclination toward they . she have never feel so kindly toward her uncle , so much disposed to look back on his cheerful , complacent activity and spirit of kind management , even when mistaken , as more of a comfort than the neutral loftiness which be every day chill she . and here perhaps she be unconsciously find some of that mental enlargement which it be hard to get from her occasional dash into difficult author , who instead of blend themselves with her daily agitation require she to dismiss they . 

 it be a delightful surprise one day when Mr. and Mrs. Gascoigne be at Offendene to see Gwendolen ride up without her husband with the groom only . all , include the four girl and Miss Merry , seat in the dining - room at lunch , could see the welcome approach ; and even the elder one be not without something of Isabel 's romantic sense that the beautiful sister on the splendid chestnut , which hold its head as if proud to bear she , be a sort of Harriet Byron or Miss Wardour reappear out of her " happiness ever after . " 

 her uncle go to the door to give she his hand , and she spring from her horse with an air of alacrity which might well encourage that notion of guarantee happiness ; for Gwendolen be particularly bent to - day on set her mother 's heart at rest , and her unusual sense of freedom in be able to make this visit alone enable she to bear up under the pressure of painful fact which be urge themselves anew . the seven family kiss be not so tiresome as they use to be . 

 " Mr. Grandcourt be go out , so I determine to fill up the time by come to you , mamma , " say Gwendolen , as she lay down her hat and seat herself next to her mother ; and then look at she with a playfully monitory air , " that be a punishment to you for not wear well lace on your head . you do not   think I should come and detect you you dreadfully careless - about - yourself mamma ! " she give a caressing touch to the dear head . 

 " scold I , dear , " say Mrs. Davilow , her delicate worn face flush with delight . " but I wish there be something you could eat after your ride instead of these scrap . let Jocosa make you a cup of chocolate in your old way . you use to like that . " 

 Miss Merry immediately rise and go out , though Gwendolen say , " oh , no , a piece of bread , or one of those hard biscuit . I can not   think about eat . I be come to say good - bye . " 

 " what ! go to ryeland again ? " say Mr. Gascoigne . 

 " no , we be go to town , " say Gwendolen , begin to break up a piece of bread , but put no morsel into her mouth . 

 " it be rather early to go to town , " say Mrs. Gascoigne , " and Mr. 
 Grandcourt not in Parliament . " 
 " oh , there be only one more day 's hunting to be have , and Henleigh have some business in town with lawyer , I think , " say Gwendolen . " I be very glad . I shall like to go to town . " 

 " you will see your house in Grosvenor Square , " say Mrs. Davilow . she and the girl be devour with their eye every movement of their goddess , soon to vanish . 

 " yes , " say Gwendolen , in a tone of assent to the interest of that expectation . " and there be so much to be see and do in town . " 

 " I wish , my dear Gwendolen , " say Mr. Gascoigne , in a kind of cordial advice , " that you would use your influence with Mr. Grandcourt to induce he to enter Parliament . a man of his position should make his weight feel in politic . the good judge be confident that the ministry will have to appeal to the country on this question of further reform , and Mr. Grandcourt should be ready for the opportunity . I be not quite sure that his opinion and mine accord entirely ; I have not hear he express himself very fully . but I do not   look at the matter from that point of view . I be think of your husband 's standing in the country . and he have now come to that stage of life when a man like he should enter into public affair . a wife have great influence with her husband . use yours in that direction , my dear . " 

 the rector feel that he be acquit himself of a duty here , and give something like the aspect of a public benefit to his niece 's match . to Gwendolen the whole speech have the flavor of bitter comedy . if she have be merry , she must have laugh at her uncle 's explanation to she that he have not hear Grandcourt express himself very fully on politic . and the wife 's great influence ! General maxim about husband and wife seem now of a precarious usefulness . Gwendolen herself have once believe in her future influence as an omnipotence in manage she do not know exactly what . but her chief concern at present be to give an answer that would be feel appropriate . 

 " I should be very glad , uncle . but I think Mr. Grandcourt would not like the trouble of an election at least , unless it could be without his make speech . I think candidate always make speech . " 

 " not necessarily to any great extent , " say Mr. Gascoigne . " a man of position and weight can get on without much of it . a county member need have very little trouble in that way , and both out of the House and in it be like the well for not be a speechifier . tell Mr. Grandcourt that I say so . " 

 " here come Jocosa with my chocolate after all , " say Gwendolen , escape from a promise to give information that would certainly have be receive in a way inconceivable to the good rector , who , push his chair a little aside from the table and cross his leg , look as well as if he feel like a worthy speciman of a clergyman and magistrate give experienced advice . Mr. Gascoigne have come to the conclusion that Grandcourt be a proud man , but his own self - love , calm through life by the consciousness of his general value and personal advantage , be not irritable enough to prevent he from hop the good about his niece 's husband because her uncle be keep rather haughtily at a distance . a certain aloofness must be allow to the representative of an old family ; you would not expect he to be on intimate term even with abstraction . but Mrs. Gascoigne be less dispassionate on her husband 's account , and feel Grandcourt 's haughtiness as something a little blameable in Gwendolen . 

 " your uncle and Anna will very likely be in town about Easter , " she say , with a vague sense of express a slight discontent . " Dear Rex hop to come out with honor and a fellowship , and he want his father and Anna to meet he in London , that they may be jolly together , as he say . I should not   wonder if Lord Brackenshaw invite they , he have be so very kind since he come back to the Castle . " 

 " I hope my uncle will bring Ann to stay in Grosvenor Square , " say Gwendolen , risk herself so far , for the sake of the present moment , but in reality wish that she might never be oblige to bring any of her family near Grandcourt again . " I be very glad of Rex 's good fortune . " 

 " we must not be premature , and rejoice too much beforehand , " say the rector , to whom this topic be the happy in the world , and altogether allowable , now that the issue of that little affair about Gwendolen have be so satisfactory . " not but that I be in correspondence with impartial judge , who have the high hope about my son , as a singularly clear - head young man . and of his excellent disposition and principle I have have the good evidence . " 

 " we shall have he a great lawyer some time , " say Mrs. Gascoigne . 

 " how very nice ! " say Gwendolen , with a conceal scepticism as to niceness in general , which make the word quite applicable to lawyer . 

 " talk of Lord Brackenshaw 's kindness , " say Mrs. Davilow , " you do not   know how delightful he have be , Gwendolen . he have beg I to consider myself his guest in this house till I can get another that I like he do it in the most graceful way . but now a house have turn up . old Mr. Jodson be dead , and we can have his house . it be just what I want ; small , but with nothing hideous to make you miserable think about it . and it be only a mile from the Rectory . you remember the low white house nearly hide by the tree , as we turn up the lane to the church ? " 

 " yes , but you have no furniture , poor mamma , " say Gwendolen , in a melancholy tone . 

 " oh , I be save money for that . you know who have make I rather rich , dear , " say Mrs. Davilow , lay her hand on Gwendolen 's . " and Jocosa really make so little do for housekeep it be quite wonderful . " 

 " oh , please let I go up - stair with you and arrange my hat , mamma , " say Gwendolen , suddenly put up her hand to her hair and perhaps create a desire disarrangement . her heart be swell , and she be ready to cry . her mother must have be bad off , if it have not be for Grandcourt . " I suppose I shall never see all this again , " say Gwendolen , look round she , as they enter the black and yellow bedroom , and then throw herself into a chair in front of the glass with a little groan as of bodily fatigue . in the resolve not to cry she have become very pale . 

 " you be not well , dear ? " say Mrs. Davilow . 

 " no ; that chocolate have make I sick , " say Gwendolen , put up her hand to be take . 

 " I should be allow to come to you if you be ill , darling , " say 
 Mrs. Davilow , rather timidly , as she press the hand to her bosom . 
 something have make she sure today that her child love she need she 
 as much as ever . 
 " oh , yes , " say Gwendolen , lean her head against her mother , though speak as lightly as she could . " but you know I never be ill . I be as strong as possible ; and you must not take to fret about I , but make yourself as happy as you can with the girl . they be well child to you than I have be , you know . " she turn up her face with a smile . 

 " you have always be good , my darling . I remember nothing else . " 

 " why , what do I ever do that be good to you , except marry Mr. Grandcourt ? " say Gwendolen , start up with a desperate resolve to be playful , and keep no more on the perilous edge of agitation . " and I should not have do that unless it have please myself . " she toss up her chin , and reach her hat . 

 " God forbid , child ! I would not have have you marry for my sake . your happiness by itself be half mine . " 

 " very well , " say Gwendolen , arrange her hat fastidiously , " then you will please to consider that you be half happy , which be more than I be use to see you . " with the last word she again turn with her old playful smile to her mother . " now I be ready ; but oh , mamma , Mr. Grandcourt give I a quantity of money , and expect I to spend it , and I can not   spend it ; and you know I can not   bear charity child and all that ; and here be thirty pound . I wish the girl would spend it for I on little thing for themselves when you go to the new house . tell they so . " Gwendolen put the note into her mother 's hand and look away hastily , move toward the door . 

 " God bless you , dear , " say Mrs. Davilow . " it will please they so that you should have think of they in particular . " 

 " oh , they be troublesome thing ; but they do not   trouble I now , " say Gwendolen , turn and nod playfully . she hardly understand her own feeling in this act toward her sister , but at any rate she do not wish it to be take as anything serious . she be glad to have get out of the bedroom without show more sign of emotion , and she go through the rest of her visit and all the good - bye with a quiet propriety that make she say to herself sarcastically as she ride away , " I think I be make a very good Mrs. Grandcourt . " 

 she believe that her husband have go to Gadsmere that day have infer this , as she have long ago infer who be the inmate of what he have describe as " a dog - hutch of a place in a black country ; " and the strange conflict of feeling within she have have the characteristic effect of send she to Offendene with a tightened resolve a form of excitement which be native to she . 

 she wonder at her own contradiction . why should she feel it bitter to she that Grandcourt show concern for the being on whose account she herself be undergo remorse ? have she not before her marriage inwardly determine to speak and act on their behalf ? and since he have lately imply that he want to be in town because he be make arrangement about his will , she ought to have be glad of any sign that he keep a conscience awake toward those at Gadsmere ; and yet , now that she be a wife , the sense that Grandcourt be go to Gadsmere be like red heat near a burn . she have bring on herself this indignity in her own eye this humiliation of be doom to a terrify silence lest her husband should discover with what sort of consciousness she have marry he ; and as she have say to Deronda , she " must go on . " after the intense moment of secret hatred toward this husband who from the very first have cow she , there always come back the spiritual pressure which make submission inevitable . there be no effort at freedom that would not bring fresh and bad humiliation . Gwendolen could dare nothing except an impulsive action least of all could she dare premeditatedly a vague future in which the only certain condition be indignity . in spite of remorse , it still seem the bad result of her marriage that she should in any way make a spectacle of herself ; and her humiliation be lighten by her thinking that only Mrs. Glasher be aware of the fact which cause it . for Gwendolen have never refer the interview at the Whispering Stones to Lush 's agency ; her disposition to vague terror invest with shadowy omnipresence any threat of fatal power over she , and so hinder she from imagine plan and channel by which news have be convey to the woman who have the poisoning skill of a sorceress . to Gwendolen 's mind the secret lie with Mrs. Glasher , and there be word in the horrible letter which imply that Mrs. Glasher would dread disclosure to the husband , as much as the usurping Mrs. Grandcourt . 

 something else , too , she think of as more of a secret from her husband than it really be namely that suppress struggle of desperate rebellion which she herself dread . Grandcourt could not indeed fully imagine how thing affect Gwendolen : he have no imagination of anything in she but what affect the gratification of his own will ; but on this point he have the sensibility which seem like divination . what we see exclusively we be apt to see with some mistake of proportion ; and Grandcourt be not likely to be infallible in his judgment concern this wife who be govern by many shadowy power , to he nonexistent . he magnify she inward resistance , but that do not lessen his satisfaction in the mastery of it . 

 CHAPTER XLV . 

  Behold my lady 's carriage stop the way . 
  with powdered lacquey and with charming bay ; 
  she sweep the matting , tread the crimson stair . 
  her arduous function solely " to be there . " 
  like Sirius rise o'er the silent sea . 
  she hide her heart in lustre loftily . 
 so the Grandcourts be in Grosvenor Square in time to receive a card for the musical party at Lady Mallinger 's , there be reason of business which make Sir Hugo know beforehand that his ill - beloved nephew be come up . it be only the third evening after their arrival , and Gwendolen make rather an absent - minded acquaintance with her new ceiling and furniture , preoccupy with the certainty that she be go to speak to Deronda again , and also to see the Miss Lapidoth who have go through so much , and be " capable of submit to anything in the form of duty . " for Gwendolen have remember nearly every word that Deronda have say about Mirah , and especially that phrase , which she repeat to herself bitterly , have an ill - define consciousness that her own submission be something very different . she would have be oblige to allow , if any one have say it to she , that what she submit to could not take the shape of duty , but be submission to a yoke draw on she by an action she be ashamed of , and wear with a strength of selfish motif that leave no weight for duty to carry . 

 the drawing - room in Park Lane , all white , gold , and pale crimson , be agreeably furnish , and not crowd with guest , before Mr. and Mrs. Grandcourt enter ; and more than half an hour of instrumental music be be follow by an interval of movement and chat . Klesmer be there with his wife , and in his generous interest for Mirah he propose to accompany her singing of Leo 's " o patria mia , " which he have before recommend she to choose , as more distinctive of she than well know music . he be already at the piano , and Mirah be stand there conspicuously , when Gwendolen , magnificent in her pale green velvet and poison diamond , be usher to a seat of honor well in view of they . with her long sight and self - command she have the rare power of quickly distinguish person and object on enter a full room , and while turn her glance toward Mirah she do not neglect to exchange a bow with Klesmer as she pass . the smile seem to each a lightning - flash back on that morning when it have be her ambition to stand as the " little Jewess " be stand , and survey a grand audience from the high rank of her talent instead of which she be one of the ordinary crowd in silk and gem , whose utmost performance it must be to admire or find fault . " he think I be in the right road now , " say the lurking resentment within she . 

 Gwendolen have not catch sight of Deronda in her passage , and while she be seat acquit herself in chat with Sir Hugo , she glance round she with careful ease , bow a recognition here and there , and fearful lest an anxious - look exploration in search of Deronda might be observe by her husband , and afterward rebuke as something " damnably vulgar . " but all travel , even that of a slow gradual glance round a room , bring a liability to undesired encounter , and amongst the eye that meet Gwendolen 's , force she into a slight bow , be those of the " amateur too fond of Meyerbeer , " Mr. Lush , whom Sir Hugo continue to find useful as a half - caste among gentleman . he be stand near her husband , who , however , turn a shoulder toward he , and be be understand to listen to Lord Pentreath . how be it that at this moment , for the first time , there dart through Gwendolen , like a disagreeable sensation , the idea that this man know all about her husband 's life ? he have be banish from her sight , accord to her will , and she have be satisfy ; he have sink entirely into the background of her thought , screen away from she by the agitate figure that keep up an inward drama in which Lush have no place . here suddenly he reappear at her husband 's elbow , and there spring up in she , like an instantaneously fabricate memory in a dream , the sense of his be connect with the secret that make she wretched . she be conscious of effort in turn her head away from he , try to continue her wandering survey as if she have see nothing of more consequence than the picture on the wall , till she discover Deronda . but he be not look toward she , and she withdraw her eye from he , without have get any recognition , console herself with the assurance that he must have see she come in . in fact , he be not stand far from the door with Hans Meyrick , whom he have be careful to bring into Lady Mallinger 's list . they be both a little more anxious than be comfortable lest Mirah should not be hear to advantage . Deronda even feel himself on the brink of betray emotion , Mirah 's presence now be link with crowd image of what have go before and be to come after all center in the brother he be soon to reveal to she ; and he have escape as soon as he could from the side of Lady Pentreath , who have say in her violoncello voice 

 " well , your Jewess be pretty there be no deny that . but where be her jewish impudence ? she look as demure as a nun . I suppose she learn that on the stage . " 

 he be begin to feel on Mirah 's behalf something of what he have feel for himself in his seraphic boyish time , when Sir Hugo ask he if he would like to be a great singer an indignant dislike to she be remark on in a free and easy way , as if she be an import commodity disdainfully pay for by the fashionable public , and he wince the more because Mordecai , he know , would feel that the name " Jewess " be take as a sort of stamp like the lettering of chinese silk . in this susceptible mood he see the Grandcourts enter , and be immediately appeal to by Hans about " that Vandyke duchess of a beauty . " pray excuse Deronda that in this moment he feel a transient renewal of his first repulsion from Gwendolen , as if she and her beauty and her failing be to blame for the undervaluing of Mirah as a woman a feeling something like class animosity , which affection for what be not fully recognize by other , whether in person or in poetry , rarely allow we to escape . to Hans admire Gwendolen with his habitual hyperbole , he answer , with a sarcasm that be not quite good - natured 

 " I think you could admire no style of woman but your Berenice . " 

 " that be the style I worship not admire , " say Hans . " other style of woman I might make myself wicked for , but for Berenice I could make myself well , pretty good , which be something much more difficult . " 

 " hush , " say Deronda , under the pretext that the singing be go to begin . he be not so delighted with the answer as might have be expect , and be relieve by Hans 's movement to a more advanced spot . 

 Deronda have never before hear Mirah sing " o patria mia . " he know well Leopardi 's fine Ode to Italy   when Italy sit like a disconsolate mother in chain , hide her face on her knee and weeping , and the few select word be fill for he with the grandeur of the whole , which seem to breath an inspiration through the music . Mirah sing this , make Mordecai more than ever one presence with she . certain word not include in the song nevertheless ring within Deronda as harmony from the invisible 

  " non ti difende 
  Nessun de tuoi ! l'armi , qua l'armi : io solo 
  Combatterů , procomberů sol io " 
  Footnote : do none of thy child defend thee ? arm ! bring I arm ! 
 alone I will fight , alone I will fall . 
 they seem the very voice of that heroic passion which be falsely say to devote itself in vain when it achieve the god - like end of manifest unselfish love . and that passion be present to Deronda now as the vivid image of a man die helplessly away from the possibility of battle . 

 Mirah be equal to his wish . while the general applause be sound , Klesmer give a more value testimony , audible to her only " good , good the crescendo well than before . " but her chief anxiety be to know that she have satisfy Mr. Deronda : any failure on her part this evening would have pain she as an especial injury to he . of course all her prospect be due to what he have do for she ; still , this occasion of sing in the house that be his home bring a peculiar demand . she look toward he in the distance , and he see that she do ; but he remain where he be , and watch the stream of emulous admirer close round she , till presently they part to make way for Gwendolen , who be take up to be introduce by Mrs. Klesmer . easy now about " the little Jewess , " Daniel relent toward poor Gwendolen in her splendor , and his memory go back , with some penitence for his momentary hardness , over all the sign and confession that she too need a rescue , and one much more difficult than that of the wanderer by the river a rescue for which he feel himself helpless . the silent question " but be it not cowardly to make that a reason for turn away ? " be the form in which he frame his resolve to go near she on the first opportunity , and show his regard for her past confidence , in spite of Sir Hugo 's unwelcome hint . 

 Klesmer , have rise to Gwendolen as she approach , and be include by she in the opening conversation with Mirah , continue near they a little while , look down with a smile , which be rather in his eye than on his lip , at the piquant contrast of the two charming young creature seat on the red divan . the solicitude seem to be all on the side of the splendid one . 

 " you must let I say how much I be oblige to you , " say Gwendolen . " I have hear from Mr. Deronda that I should have a great treat in your singing , but I be too ignorant to imagine how great . " 

 " you be very good to say so , " answer Mirah , her mind chiefly occupy in contemplate Gwendolen . it be like a new kind of stage - experience to she to be close to genuine grand lady with genuine brilliant and complexion , and they impress she vaguely as come out of some unknown drama , in which their part perhaps get more tragic as they go on . 

 " we shall all want to learn of you I , at least , " say Gwendolen . " I sing very badly , as Herr Klesmer will tell you , " here she glance upward to that high power rather archly , and continue " but I have be rebuke for not like to middling , since I can be nothing more . I think that be a different doctrine from your ? " she be still look at Klesmer , who say quickly 

 " not if it mean that it would be worth while for you to study far , and for Miss Lapidoth to have the pleasure of help you . " with that he move away , and Mirah take everything with naive seriousness , say 

 " if you think I could teach you , I shall be very glad . I be anxious to teach , but I have only just begun . if I do it well , it must be by remember how my master teach I . " 

 Gwendolen be in reality too uncertain about herself to be prepare for this simple promptitude of Mirah 's , and in her wish to change the subject , say , with some lapse from the good taste of her first address 

 " you have not be long in London , I think ? but you be perhaps introduce to Mr. Deronda abroad ? " 

 " no , " say Mirah ; " I never see he before I come to England in the summer . " 

 " but he have see you often and hear you sing a great deal , have he not ? " say Gwendolen , lead on partly by the wish to hear anything about Deronda , and partly by the awkwardness which beset the readiest person , in carry on a dialogue when empty of matter . " he speak of you to I with the high praise . he seem to know you quite well . " 

 " oh , I be poor and need help , " say Mirah , in a new tone of feeling , " and Mr. Deronda have give I the good friend in the world . that be the only way he come to know anything about I because he be sorry for I . I have no friend when I come . I be in distress . I owe everything to he . " 

 Poor Gwendolen , who have want to be a struggle artist herself , could nevertheless not escape the impression that a mode of inquiry which would have be rather rude toward herself be an amiable condescension to this Jewess who be ready to give her lesson . the only effect on Mirah , as always on any mention of Deronda , be to stir reverential gratitude and anxiety that she should be understand to have the deep obligation to he . 

 but both he and Hans , who be notice the pair from a distance , would have feel rather indignant if they have know that the conversation have lead up to Mirah 's representation of herself in this light of neediness . in the movement that prompt she , however , there be an exquisite delicacy , which perhaps she could not have state explicitly the feeling that she ought not to allow any one to assume in Deronda a relation of more equality or less generous interest toward she than actually exist . her answer be delightful to Gwendolen : she think of nothing but the ready compassion which in another form she have trust in and find herself ; and on the signal that Klesmer be about to play she move away in much content , entirely without presentiment that this jewish protťgť would ever make a more important difference in her life than the possible improvement of her singing if the leisure and spirit of a Mrs. Grandcourt would allow of other lesson than such as the world be give she at rather a high charge . 

 with her wonte alternation from resolute care of appearance to some rash indulgence of an impulse , she choose , under the pretext of get far from the instrument , not to go again to her former seat , but place herself on a settee where she could only have one neighbor . she be near to Deronda than before : be it surprising that he come up in time to shake hand before the music begin then , that after he have stand a little while by the elbow of the settee at the empty end , the torrent - like confluence of bass and treble seem , like a convulsion of nature , to cast the conduct of petty mortal into insignificance , and to warrant his sit down ? 

 but when at the end of Klesmer 's playing there come the outburst of talk under which Gwendolen have hop to speak as she would to Deronda , she observe that Mr. Lush be within hearing , lean against the wall close by they . she could not help her flush of anger , but she try to have only an air of polite indifference in say 

 " Miss Lapidoth be everything you describe she to be . " 

 " you have be very quick in discover that , " say Deronda , ironically . 

 " I have not find out all the excellency you speak of I do not   mean that , " say Gwendolen ; " but I think her singing be charming , and herself , too . her face be lovely not in the least common ; and she be such a complete little person . I should think she will be a great success . " 

 this speech be grate on Deronda , and he would not answer it , but look gravely before he . she know that he be displeased with she , and she be get so impatient under the neighborhood of Mr. Lush , which prevent she from say any word she want to say , that she meditate some desperate step to get rid of it , and remain silent , too . that constraint seem to last a long while , neither Gwendolen nor Deronda look at the other , till Lush slowly relieve the wall of his weight , and join some one at a distance . 

 Gwendolen immediately say , " you despise I for talk artificially . " 

 " no , " say Deronda , look at she coolly ; " I think that be quite excusable sometimes . but I do not think what you be last say be altogether artificial . " 

 " there be something in it that displease you , " say Gwendolen . " what be it ? " 

 " it be impossible to explain such thing , " say Deronda . " one can never communicate nicety of feel about word and manner . " 

 " you think I be shut out from understand they , " say Gwendolen , with a slight tremor in her voice , which she be try to conquer . " have I show myself so very dense to everything you have say ? " there be an indescribable look of suppress tear in her eye , which be turn on he . 

 " not at all , " say Deronda , with some softening of voice . " but experience differ for different people . we do not   all wince at the same thing . I have have plenty of proof that you be not dense . " he smile at she . 

 " but one may feel thing and be not able to do anything well for all that , " say Gwendolen , not smile in return the distance to which Deronda 's word seem to throw she chill she too much . " I begin to think we can only get well by have people about we who raise good feeling . you must not be surprised at anything in I . I think it be too late for I to alter . I do not   know how to set about be wise , as you tell I to be . " 

 " I seldom find I do any good by my preaching . I might as well have keep from meddle , " say Deronda , think rather sadly that his interference about that unfortunate necklace might end in nothing but an add pain to he in see she after all harden to another sort of gambling than roulette . 

 " do not   say that , " say Gwendolen , hurriedly , feel that this might be her only chance of get the word utter , and dread the increase of her own agitation . " if you despair of I , I shall despair . your say that I should not go on be selfish and ignorant have be some strength to I . if you say you wish you have not meddle that mean you despair of I and forsake I . and then you will decide for I that I shall not be good . it be you who will decide ; because you might have make I different by keep as near to I as you could , and believe in I . " 

 she have not be look at he as she speak , but at the handle of the fan which she hold close . with the last word she rise and leave he , return to her former place , which have be leave vacant ; while every one be settle into quietude in expectation of Mirah 's voice , which presently , with that wonderful , search quality of subdue song in which the melody seem simply an effect of the emotion , give forth , per pieta non dirmi addio . 

 in Deronda 's ear the strain be for the moment a continuance of Gwendolen 's plead a painful urging of something vague and difficult , irreconcilable with press condition , and yet cruel to resist . however strange the mixture in she of a resolute pride and a precocious air of know the world , with a precipitate , guileless indiscretion , he be quite sure now that the mixture exist . Sir Hugo 's hint have make he alive to danger that his own disposition might have neglect ; but that Gwendolen 's reliance on he be unvisite by any dream of his be a man who could misinterpret she be as manifest as morning , and make an appeal which wrestle with his sense of present danger , and with his foreboding of a grow incompatible claim on he in her mind . there be a foreshadowing of some painful collision : on the one side the grasp of Mordecai 's die hand on he , with all the ideal and prospect it arouse ; on the other the fair creature in silk and gem , with her hide wound and her self - dread , make a trustful effort to lean and find herself sustain . it be as if he have a vision of himself besought with outstretched arm and cry , while he be catch by the wave and compel to mount the vessel bind for a far - off coast . that be the strain of excited feeling in he that go along with the note of Mirah 's song ; but when it cease he move from his seat with the reflection that he have be fall into an exaggeration of his own importance , and a ridiculous readiness to accept Gwendolen 's view of himself , as if he could really have any decisive power over she . 

 " what an enviable fellow you be , " say Hans to he , ' sit on a sofa with that young duchess , and have an interesting quarrel with she ! " 

 " Quarrel with she ? " repeat Deronda , rather uncomfortably . 

 " oh , about theology , of course ; nothing personal . but she tell you what you ought to think , and then leave you with a grand air which be admirable . be she an Antinomian if so , tell she I be an antinomian painter , and introduce I . I should like to paint she and her husband . he have the sort of handsome physique that the Duke ought to have in Lucrezia Borgia if it could go with a fine baritone , which it can not . " 

 Deronda devoutly hop that Hans 's account of the impression his dialogue with Gwendolen have make on a distant beholder be no more than a bit of fantastic representation , such as be common with he . 

 and Gwendolen be not without her after - thought that her husband 's eye might have be on she , extract something to reprove some offence against her dignity as his wife ; her consciousness tell she that she have not keep up the perfect air of equability in public which be her own ideal . but Grandcourt make no observation on her behavior . all he say as they be drive home be 

 " Lush will dine with we among the other people to - morrow . you will treat he civilly . " 

 Gwendolen 's heart begin to beat violently . the word that she want to utter , as one want to return a blow , be . " you be break your promise to I the first promise you make I . " but she dare not utter they . she be as frightened at a quarrel as if she have foresee that it would end with throttle finger on her neck . after a pause , she say in the tone rather of defeat than resentment 

 " I think you do not intend he to frequent the house again . " 

 " I want he just now . he be useful to I ; and he must be treat civilly . " 

 Silence . there may come a moment when even an excellent husband who have drop smoking under more or less of a pledge during courtship , for the first time will introduce his cigar - smoke between himself and his wife , with the tacit understanding that she will have to put up with it . Mr. Lush be , so to speak , a very large cigar . 

 if these be the sort of lover ' vow at which Jove laugh , he must have a merry time of it . 

 CHAPTER XLVI . 

 " if any one should importune I to give a reason why I love he , I feel it could no otherwise be express than by make answer , ' because it be he , because it be I. ' there be , beyond what I be able to say , I know not what inexplicable power that bring on this union . " MONTAIGNE : on Friendship . 

 the time have come to prepare Mordecai for the revelation of the restore sister and for the change of abode which be desirable before Mirah 's meeting with her brother . Mrs. Meyrick , to whom Deronda have confide everything except Mordecai 's peculiar relation to himself , have be active in help he to find a suitable lodging in Brompton , not many minute ' walk from her own house , so that the brother and sister would be within reach of her motherly care . her happy mixture of scottish fervor and gallic liveliness have enable she to keep the secret close from the girl as well as from Hans , any betrayal to they be likely to reach Mirah in some way that would raise an agitate suspicion , and spoil the important opening of that work which be to secure her independence , as we rather arbitrarily call one of the more arduous and dignified form of our dependence . and both Mrs. Meyrick and Deronda have more reason than they could have express for desire that Mirah should be able to maintain herself . perhaps " the little mother " be rather help in her secrecy by some dubiousness in her sentiment about the remarkable brother describe to she ; and certainly if she feel any joy and anticipatory admiration , it be due to her faith in Deronda 's judgment . the consumption be a sorrowful fact that appeal to her tenderness ; but how be she to be very glad of an enthusiasm which , to tell the truth , she could only contemplate as jewish pertinacity , and as rather an undesirable introduction among they all of a man whose conversation would not be more modern and encouraging than that of Scott 's covenanter ? her mind be anything but prosaic , and have her soberer share of Mab 's delight in the romance of Mirah 's story and of her abode with they ; but the romantic or unusual in real life require some adaptation . we sit up at night to read about Sakya - Mouni , St. Francis , or Oliver Cromwell ; but whether we should be glad for any one at all like they to call on we the next morning , still more , to reveal himself as a new relation , be quite another affair . besides , Mrs. Meyrick have hop , as her child do , that the intensity of Mirah 's feeling about Judaism would slowly subside , and be merge in the gradually deepen current of love interchange with her new friend . in fact , her secret favorite continuation of the romance have be no discovery of jewish relation , but something much more favorable to the hope she discern in Hans . and now here be a brother who would dip Mirah 's mind over again in the deep dye of jewish sentiment . she could not help say to Deronda 

 " I be as glad as you be that the pawnbroker be not her brother : there be Ezras and Ezras in the world ; and really it be a comfort to think that all Jews be not like those shopkeeper who will not let you get out of their shop : and besides , what he say to you about his mother and sister make I bless he . I be sure he be good . but I never do like anything fanatical . I suppose I hear a little too much preaching in my youth and lose my palate for it . " 

 " I do not   think you will find that Mordecai obtrude any preaching , " say Deronda . " he be not what I should call fanatical . I call a man fanatical when his enthusiasm be narrow and hoodwinked , so that he have no sense of proportion , and become unjust and unsympathetic to man who be out of his own track . Mordecai be an enthusiast ; I should like to keep that word for the high order of mind those who care supremely for grand and general benefit to mankind . he be not a strictly orthodox Jew , and be full of allowance for other ; his conformity in many thing be an allowance for the condition of other Jews . the people he live with be as fond of he as possible , and they can not   in the least understand his idea . " 

 " oh , well , I can live up to the level of the pawnbroker 's mother , and like he for what I see to be good in he ; and for what I do not   see the merit of I will take your word . accord to your definition , I suppose one might be fanatical in worship common - sense ; for my poor husband use to say the world would be a poor place if there be nothing but common - sense in it . however , Mirah 's brother will have good bedding that I have take care of ; and I shall have this extra window paste up with paper to prevent draught . "   the conversation be take place in the destine lodging .   " it be a comfort to think that the people of the house be no stranger to I no hypocritical harpy . and when the child know , we shall be able to make the room much pretty . " 

 " the next stage of the affair be to tell all to Mordecai , and get he to move which may be a more difficult business , " say Deronda . 

 " and will you tell Mirah before I say anything to the child ? " say Mrs. Meyrick . but Deronda hesitate , and she go on in a tone of persuasive deliberation " no , I think not . let I tell Hans and the girl the evening before , and they will be away the next morning ? " 

 " yes , that will be good . but do justice to my account of Mordecai or Ezra , as I suppose Mirah will wish to call he : do not   assist their imagination by refer to Habakkuk Mucklewrath , " say Deronda , smile Mrs. Meyrick herself have use the comparison of the Covenanters . 

 " trust I , trust I , " say the little mother . " I shall have to persuade they so hard to be glad , that I shall convert myself . when I be frightened I find it a good thing to have somebody to be angry with for not be brave : it warm the blood . " 

 Deronda might have be more argumentative or persuasive about the view to be take of Mirah 's brother , if he have be less anxiously preoccupy with the more important task immediately before he , which he desire to acquit himself of without wound the Cohens . Mordecai , by a memorable answer , have make it evident that he would be keenly alive to any inadvertance in relation to their feeling . in the interval , he have be meet Mordecai at the Hand and Banner , but now after due reflection he write to he say that he have particular reason for wish to see he in his own home the next evening , and would beg to sit with he in his workroom for an hour , if the Cohens would not regard it as an intrusion . he would call with the understanding that if there be any objection , Mordecai would accompany he elsewhere . Deronda hop in this way to create a little expectation that would have a preparatory effect . 

 he be receive with the usual friendliness , some additional costume in the woman and child , and in all the elder a slight air of wonder which even in Cohen be not allow to pass the bound of silence the guest 's transaction with Mordecai be a sort of mystery which he be rather proud to think lay outside the sphere of light which enclose his own understanding . but when Deronda say , " I suppose Mordecai be at home and expect I , " Jacob , who have profit by the family remark , go up to his knee and say , " what do you want to talk to Mordecai about ? " 

 " something that be very interesting to he , " say Deronda , pinch the lad 's ear , " but that you can not   understand . " 

 " can you say this ? " say Jacob , immediately give forth a string of his rote - learn hebrew verse with a wonderful mixture of the throaty and the nasal , and nod his small head at his hearer , with a sense of give formidable evidence which might rather alter their mutual position . 

 " no , really , " say Deronda , keep grave ; " I can not   say anything like it . " 

 " I think not , " say Jacob , perform a dance of triumph with his small scarlet leg , while he take various object out of the deep pocket of his knickerbocker and return they thither , as a slight hint of his resource ; after which , run to the door of the workroom , he open it wide , set his back against it , and say , " Mordecai , here be the young swell " a copying of his father 's phrase , which seem to he well fit to cap the recitation of Hebrew . 

 he be call back with hush by mother and grandmother , and Deronda , enter and close the door behind he , see that a bit of carpet have be lay down , a chair place , and the fire and light attend to , in sign of the Cohens ' respect . as Mordecai rise to greet he , Deronda be strike with the air of solemn expectation in his face , such as would have seem perfectly natural if his letter have declare that some revelation be to be make about the lose sister . neither of they speak , till Deronda , with his usual tenderness of manner , have draw the vacant chair from the opposite side of the hearth and have seat himself near to Mordecai , who then say , in a tone of fervid certainty 

 " you be come to tell I something that my soul long for . " 

 " it be true I have something very weighty to tell you something I trust that you will rejoice in , " say Deronda , on his guard against the probability that Mordecai have be prepare himself for something quite different from the fact . 

 " it be all reveal it be make clear to you , " say Mordecai , more eagerly , lean forward with clasped hand . " you be even as my brother that suck the breast of my mother the heritage be yours there be no doubt to divide we . " 

 " I have learn nothing new about myself , " say Deronda . the disappointment be inevitable : it be well not to let the feeling be strain long in a mistaken hope . 

 Mordecai sink back in his chair , unable for the moment to care what be really come . the whole day his mind have be in a state of tension toward one fulfillment . the reaction be sicken and he close his eye . 

 " except , " Deronda go on gently , after a pause , " except that I have really some time ago come into another sort of hide connection with you , besides what you have speak of as exist in your own feeling . " 

 the eye be not open , but there be a fluttering in the lid . 

 " I have make the acquaintance of one in whom you be interested . " 

 " one who be closely related to your departed mother , " Deronda go on wish to make the disclosure gradual ; but notice a shrink movement in Mordecai , he add " whom she and you hold dear above all other . " 

 Mordecai , with a sudden start , lay a spasmodic grasp on Deronda 's wrist ; there be a great terror in he . and Deronda divine it . a tremor be perceptible in his clear tone as he say 

 " what be pray for have come to pass : Mirah have be deliver from evil . " 

 Mordecai 's grasp relax a little , but he be pant with a tearless sob . 

 Deronda go on : " your sister be worthy of the mother you honor . " 

 he wait there , and Mordecai , throw himself backward in his chair , again close his eye , utter himself almost inaudibly for some minute in Hebrew , and then subside into a happy - look silence . Deronda , watch the expression in his uplifted face , could have imagine that he be speak with some beloved object : there be a new suffuse sweetness , something like that on the face of the beautiful dead . for the first time Deronda think he discern a family resemblance to Mirah . 

 presently when Mordecai be ready to listen , the rest be tell . but in accounting for Mirah 's flight he make the statement about the father 's conduct as vague as he could , and throw the emphasis on her yearning to come to England as the place where she might find her mother . also he keep back the fact of Mirah 's intention to drown herself , and his own part in rescue she ; merely describe the home she have find with friend of his , whose interest in she and effort for she he have share . what he dwelt on finally be Mirah 's feeling about her mother and brother ; and in relation to this he try to give every detail . 

 " it be in search of they , " say Deronda , smile , " that I turn into this house : the name Ezra Cohen be just then the most interesting name in the world to I . I confess I have fear for a long while . perhaps you will forgive I now for have ask you that question about the eld Mrs. Cohen 's daughter . I care very much what I should find Mirah 's friend to be . but I have find a brother worthy of she when I know that her Ezra be disguise under the name of Mordecai . " 

 " Mordecai be really my name Ezra Mordecai Cohen . " 

 " be there any kinship between this family and your ? " say Deronda . 

 " only the kinship of Israel . my soul cling to these people , who have shelter I and give I succor out of the affection that abide in jewish heart , as sweet odor in thing long crush and hide from the outer air . it be good for I to bear with their ignorance and be bind to they in gratitude , that I may keep in mind the spiritual poverty of the jewish million , and not put impatient knowledge in the stead of love wisdom . " 

 " but you do not   feel bound to continue with they now there be a close tie to draw you ? " say Deronda , not without fear that he might find an obstacle to overcome . " it seem to I right now be it not ? that you should live with your sister ; and I have prepare a home to take you to in the neighborhood of her friend , that she may join you there . pray grant I this wish . it will enable I to be with you often in the hour when Mirah be oblige to leave you . that be my selfish reason . but the chief reason be , that Mirah will desire to watch over you , and that you ought to give she the guardianship of a brother 's presence . you shall have book about you . I shall want to learn of you , and to take you out to see the river and tree . and you will have the rest and comfort that you will be more and more in need of nay , that I need for you . this be the claim I make on you , now that we have find each other . " 

 Deronda speak in a tone of earnest , affectionate pleading , such as he might have use to a venerate eld brother . Mordecai 's eye be fix on he with a listen contemplation , and he be silent for a little while after Deronda have cease to speak . then he say , with an almost reproachful emphasis 

 " and you would have I hold it doubtful whether you be bear a Jew ! have we not from the first touch each other with invisible fibre have we not quiver together like the leaf from a common stem with stir from a common root ? I know what I be outwardly , I be one among the crowd of poor I be stricken , I be die . but our soul know each other . they gaze in silence as those who have long be part and meet again , but when they find voice they be assure , and all their speech be understand . the life of Israel be in your vein . " 

 Deronda sit perfectly still , but feel his face tingle . it be impossible either to deny or assent . he wait , hop that Mordecai would presently give he a more direct answer . and after a pause of meditation he do say , firmly 

 " what you wish of I I will do . and our mother may the blessing of the Eternal be with she in our soul ! would have wish it too . I will accept what your love kindness have prepare , and Mirah 's home shall be mine . " he pause a moment , and then add in a more melancholy tone , " but I shall grieve to part from these parent and the little one . you must tell they , for my heart would fail I . " 

 " I feel that you would want I to tell they . shall we go now at once ? " say Deronda , much relieve by this unwavering compliance . 

 " yes ; let we not defer it . it must be do , " say Mordecai , rise with the air of a man who have to perform a painful duty . then come , as an afterthought , " but do not dwell on my sister more than be needful . " 

 when they enter the parlor he say to the alert Jacob , " ask your father to come , and tell Sarah to mind the shop . my friend have something to say , " he continue , turn to the eld Mrs. Cohen . it seem part of Mordecai 's eccentricity that he should call this gentleman his friend ; and the two woman try to show their well manner by warm politeness in beg Deronda to seat himself in the good place . 

 when Cohen enter with a pen behind his ear , he rub his hand and say with loud satisfaction , " well , sir ! I be glad you be do we the honor to join our family party again . we be pretty comfortable , I think . " 

 he look round with shiny gladness . and when all be seat on the hearth the scene be worth peep in upon : on one side Baby under her scarlet quilt in the corner be rock by the young mother , and Adelaide Rebekah seat on the grandmother 's knee ; on the other , Jacob between his father 's leg ; while the two markedly different figure of Deronda and Mordecai be in the middle Mordecai a little backward in the shade , anxious to conceal his agitated susceptibility to what be go on around he . the chief light come from the fire , which bring out the rich color on a depth of shadow , and seem to turn into speech the dark gem of eye that look at each other kindly . 

 " I have just be tell Mordecai of an event that make a great change in his life , " Deronda begin , " but I hope you will agree with I that it be a joyful one . since he think of you as his good friend , he wish I to tell you for he at once . " 

 " relation with money , sir ? " burst in Cohen , feel a power of divination which it be a pity to nullify by wait for the fact . 

 " no ; not exactly , " say Deronda , smile . " but a very precious relation wish to be reunite to he a very good and lovely young sister , who will care for his comfort in every way . " 

 " married , sir ? " 

 " no , not married . " 

 " but with a maintenance ? " 

 " with talent which will secure she a maintenance . a home be already provide for Mordecai . " 

 there be silence for a moment or two before the grandmother say in a wail tone 

 " well , well ! and so you be go away from we , Mordecai . " 

 " and where there be no child as there be here , " say the mother , catch the wail . 

 " no Jacob , and no Adelaide , and no Eugenie ! " wail the grandmother again . 

 " ay , ay , Jacob 's learning ' ill all wear out of he . he must go to school . it will be hard time for Jacob , " say Cohen , in a tone of decision . 

 in the wide - open ear of Jacob his father 's word sound like a doom , give an awful finish to the dirge - like effect of the whole announcement . his face have be gather a wonder incredulous sorrow at the notion of Mordecai 's go away : he be unable to imagine the change as anything last ; but at the mention of " hard time for Jacob " there be no further suspense of feeling , and he break forth in loud lamentation . Adelaide Rebekah always cry when her brother cry , and now begin to howl with astonishing suddenness , whereupon baby awaking contribute angry scream , and require to be take out of the cradle . a great deal of hushing be necessary , and Mordecai feel the cry pierce he , put out his arm to Jacob , who in the midst of his tear and sob be turn his head right and leave for general observation . his father , who have be say , " never mind , old man ; you shall go to the rider , " now release he , and he go to Mordecai , who clasp he , and lay his cheek on the little black head without speak . but Cohen , sensible that the master of the family must make some apology for all this weakness , and that the occasion call for a speech , address Deronda with some elevation of pitch , square his elbow and rest a hand on each knee : 

 " it be not as we be the people to grudge anybody 's good luck , sir , or the portion of their cup be make full , as I may say . I be not an envious man , and if anybody offer to set up Mordecai in a shop of my sort two door low down , I should not   make wry face about it . I be not one of they that have need have a poor opinion of themselves , and be frighten at anybody else get a chance . if I be offal , let a wise man come and tell I , for I have   never hear it yet . and in point of business , I be not a class of good to be in danger . if anybody take to roll I , I can pack myself up like a caterpillar , and find my foot when I be let alone . and though , as I may say , you be take some of our good work from we , which be property bearing interest , I be not say but we can afford that , though my mother and my wife have the good will to wish and do for Mordecai to the last ; and a Jew must not be like a servant who work for reward though I see nothing against a reward if I can get it . and as to the extra outlay in schooling , I be neither poor nor greedy I would not   hang myself for sixpence , nor half a crown neither . but the truth of it be , the woman and child be fond of Mordecai . you may partly see how it be , sir , by your own sense . a jewish man be bind to thank God , day by day , that he be not make a woman ; but a woman have to thank God that he have make she accord to his will . and we all know what he have make she a child - bearing , tender - hearted thing be the woman of our people . her child be mostly stout , as I think you will say Addy 's be , and she be not mushy , but her heart be tender . so you must excuse present company , sir , for not be glad all at once . and as to this young lady for by what you say ' young lady ' be the proper term " Cohen here throw some additional emphasis into his look and tone " we shall all be glad for Mordecai 's sake by - and - by , when we cast up our account and see where we be . " 

 before Deronda could summon any answer to this oddly mixed speech , 
 Mordecai exclaim 
 " friend , friend ! for food and raiment and shelter I would not have seek well than you have give I . you have sweeten the morsel with love ; and what I think of as a joy that would be leave to I even in the last month of my wan strength be to go on teach the lad . but now I be as one who have clothe himself beforehand in his shroud , and use himself to make the grave his bed , when the divine command sound in his ear , ' Arise , and go forth ; the night be not yet come . ' for no light matter would I have turn away from your kindness to take another 's . but it have be teach we , as you know , that the reward of one duty be the power to fulfill another so say Ben Azai . you have make your duty to one of the poor among your brother a joy to you and I ; and your reward shall be that you will not rest without the joy of like deed in the time to come . and may not Jacob come and visit I ? " 

 Mordecai have turn with this question to Deronda , who say 

 " surely that can be manage . it be no far than Brompton . " 

 Jacob , who have be gradually calm by the need to hear what be go forward , begin now to see some daylight on the future , the word " visit " have the lively charm of cake and general relaxation at his grandfather 's , the dealer in knife . he dance away from Mordecai , and take up a station of survey in the middle of the hearth with his hand in his knickerbocker . 

 " well , " say the grandmother , with a sigh of resignation , " I hope there will be nothing in the way of your get kosher meat , Mordecai . for you will have to trust to those you live with . " 

 " that be all right , that be all right , you may be sure , mother , " say Cohen , as if anxious to cut off inquiry on matter in which he be uncertain of the guest 's position . " so , sir , " he add , turn with a look of amuse enlightenment to Deronda , " it be well than learn you have to talk to Mordecai about ! I wonder to myself at the time . I think somehow there be a something . " 

 " Mordecai will perhaps explain to you how it be that I be seek he , " say Deronda , feel that he have well go , and rise as he speak . 

 it be agree that he should come again and the final move be make on the next day but one ; but when he be go Mordecai beg to walk with he to the end of the street , and wrap himself in coat and comforter . it be a March evening , and Deronda do not mean to let he go far , but he understand the wish to be outside the house with he in communicative silence , after the exciting speech that have be fill the last hour . no word be speak until Deronda have propose parting , when he say 

 " Mirah would wish to thank the Cohens for their goodness . you would wish she to do so to come and see they , would you not ? " 

 Mordecai do not answer immediately , but at length say 

 " I can not tell . I fear not . there be a family sorrow , and the sight of my sister might be to they as the fresh bleeding of wound . there be a daughter and sister who will never be restore as Mirah be . but who know the pathway ? we be all of we deny or fulfil prayer and man in their careless deed walk amidst invisible outstretche arm and pleading make in vain . in my ear I have the prayer of generation past and to come . my life be as nothing to I but the beginning of fulfilment . and yet I be only another prayer which you will fulfil . " 

 Deronda press his hand , and they part . 

 CHAPTER XLVII . 

  " and you must love he ere to you 
  he will seem worthy of your love . " 
  WORDSWORTH . 
 one might be tempt to envy Deronda provide new clothe for Mordecai , and please himself as if he be sketch a picture in imagine the effect of the fine gray flannel shirt and a dressing - gown very much like a Franciscan 's brown frock , with Mordecai 's head and neck above they . half his pleasure be the sense of see Mirah 's brother through her eye , and secure her fervid joy from any perturb impression . and yet , after he have make all thing ready , he be visit with doubt whether he be not mistake she , and put the low effect for the high : be she not just as capable as he himself have be of feel the impressive distinction in her brother all the more for that aspect of poverty which be among the memorial of his past ? but there be the Meyricks to be propitiate toward this too Judaic brother ; and Deronda detect himself pique into get out of sight everything that might feed the ready repugnance in mind unblesse with that precious ' seeing , " that bath of all object in a solemnity as of sun - set glow , which be beget of a love reverential emotion . 

 and his inclination would have be the more confirmed if he have hear the dialogue round Mrs. Meyrick 's fire late in the evening , after Mirah have go to her room . han , settle now in his Chelsea room , have stay late , and Mrs. Meyrick , poke the fire into a blaze , say 

 " now , Kate , put out your candle , and all come round the fire cosily . han , dear , do leave off laugh at those poem for the ninety - ninth time , and come too . I have something wonderful to tell . " 

 " as if I do not   know that , ma . I have see it in the corner of your eye ever so long , and in your pretense of errand , " say Kate , while the girl come up to put their foot on the fender , and Hans , push his chair near they , sit astride it , rest his fist and chin on the back . 

 " well , then , if you be so wise , perhaps you know that Mirah 's brother be find ! " say Mrs. Meyrick , in her clear accent . 

 " oh , confound it ! " say Hans , in the same moment . 

 " Hans , that be wicked , " say Mab . " suppose we have lose you ? " 

 " I can not help be rather sorry , " say Kate . " and her mother ? where be she ? " 

 " her mother be dead . " 

 " I hope the brother be not a bad man , " say Amy . 

 " nor a fellow all smile and jewelry a Crystal Palace Assyrian with a hat on , " say Hans , in the bad humor . 

 " be there ever such unfeele child ? " say Mrs. Meyrick , a little strengthen by the need for opposition . " you do not   think the least bit of Mirah 's joy in the matter . " 

 " you know , ma , Mirah hardly remember her brother , " say Kate . 

 " People who be lose for twelve year should never come back again , " say Hans . " they be always in the way . " 

 " Hans ! " say Mrs. Meyrick , reproachfully . " if you have lose I for twenty year , I should have think " 

 " I say twelve year , " Hans break in . " anywhere about twelve year be the time at which lose relation should keep out of the way . " 

 " well , but it be nice find people there be something to tell , " say 
 Mab , clasp her knee . " do Prince Camaralzaman find he ? " 
 then Mrs. Meyrick , in her neat , narrative way , tell all she know without interruption . " Mr. Deronda have the high admiration for he , " she end ' seem quite to look up to he . and he say Mirah be just the sister to understand this brother . " 

 " Deronda be get perfectly preposterous about those Jews , " say Hans with disgust , rise and set his chair away with a bang . " he want to do everything he can to encourage Mirah in her prejudice . " 

 " oh , for shame , Hans ! to speak in that way of Mr. Deronda , " say Mab . and Mrs. Meyrick 's face show something like an under - current of expression not allow to get to the surface . 

 " and now we shall never be all together , " Hans go on , walk about with his hand thrust into the pocket of his brown velveteen coat , " but we must have this prophet Elijah to tea with we , and Mirah will think of nothing but sit on the ruin of Jerusalem . she will be spoil as an artist mind that she will get as narrow as a nun . everything will be spoil our home and everything . I shall take to drinking . " 

 " oh , really , Hans , " say Kate , impatiently . " I do think man be the most contemptible animal in all creation . every one of they must have everything to his mind , else he be unbearable . " 

 " oh , oh , oh , it be very dreadful ! " cry Mab . " I feel as if ancient 
 Nineveh be come again . " 
 " I should like to know what be the good of have go to the university and know everything , if you be so childish , Hans , " say Amy . " you ought to put up with a man that Providence send you to be kind to . we shall have to put up with he . " 

 " I hope you will all of you like the new Lamentations of Jeremiah ' to be continue in our next ' that be all , " say Hans , seize his wide - awake . " it be no use be one thing more than another if one have to endure the company of those man with a fix idea , star blankly at you , and require all your remark to be small foot - note to their text . if you be to be under a petrifying wall , you would well be an old boot . I do not   feel myself an old boot . " then abruptly , " good night , little mother , " bend to kiss her brow in a hasty , desperate manner , and condescendingly , on his way to the door , " good - night , girl . " 

 " suppose Mirah know how you be behave , " say Kate . but her answer be a slam of the door . " I should like to see Mirah when Mr. Deronda tell she , " she go on to her mother . " I know she will look so beautiful . " 

 but Deronda , on second thought , have write a letter , which Mrs. Meyrick receive the next morning , beg she to make the revelation instead of wait for he , not give the real reason that he shrink from go again through a narrative in which he seem to be make himself important and give himself a character of general beneficence but say that he wish to remain with Mordecai while Mrs. Meyrick would bring Mirah on what be to be understand as a visit , so that there might be a little interval before that change of abode which he expect that Mirah herself would propose . 

 Deronda secretly feel some wonder anxiety how far Mordecai , after year of solitary preoccupation with idea likely to have become the more exclusive from continual diminution of bodily strength , would allow he to feel a tender interest in his sister over and above the rendering of pious duty . his feeling for the Cohens , and especially for little Jacob , show a persistent activity of affection ; but these object have enter into his daily life for year ; and Deronda feel it noticeable that Mordecai ask no new question about Mirah , maintain , indeed , an unusual silence on all subject , and appear simply to submit to the change that be come over his personal life . he don the new clothe obediently , but say afterward to Deronda , with a faint smile , " I must keep my old garment by I for a remembrance . " and when they be seat , await Mirah , he utter no word , keep his eyelid close , but yet show restless feeling in his face and hand . in fact , Mordecai be undergo that peculiar nervous perturbation only know to those whose mind , long and habitually move with strong impetus in one current , be suddenly compel into a new or reopened channel . susceptible people , whose strength have be long absorb by dormant bias , dread an interview that imperiously revive the past , as they would dread a threatening illness . Joy may be there , but joy , too , be terrible . 

 Deronda feel the infection of excitement , and when he hear the ring at the door , he go out , not know exactly why , that he might see and greet Mirah beforehand . he be startled to find that she have on the hat and cloak in which he have first see she the memorable cloak that have once be wet for a winding - sheet . she have come down - stair equip in this way ; and when Mrs. Meyrick say , in a tone of question , " you like to go in that dress , dear ? " she answer , " my brother be poor , and I want to look as much like he as I can , else he may feel distant from I " imagine that she should meet he in the workman 's dress . Deronda could not make any remark , but feel secretly rather ashamed of his own fastidious arrangement . they shake hand silently , for Mirah look pale and awed . 

 when Deronda open the door for she , Mordecai have rise , and have his eye turn toward it with an eager gaze . Mirah take only two or three step , and then stand still . they look at each other , motionless . it be less their own presence that they feel than another be ; they be meet first in memory , compare with which touch be no union . Mirah be the first to break the silence , stand where she be . 

 " Ezra , " she say , in exactly the same tone as when she be tell of her mother 's call to he . 

 Mordecai with a sudden movement advance and lay his hand on her shoulder . he be the head tall , and look down at she tenderly while he say , " that be our mother 's voice . you remember she call I ? " 

 " yes , and how you answer she ' mother ! ' and I know you love she . " Mirah throw her arm round her brother 's neck , clasp her little hand behind it , and draw down his face , kiss it with childlike lavishness , her hat fall backward on the ground and disclose all her curl . 

 " ah , the dear head , the dear head ? " say Mordecai , in a low love tone , lay his thin hand gently on the curl . 

 " you be very ill , Ezra , " say Mirah , sadly look at he with more observation . 

 " yes , dear child , I shall not be long with you in the body , " be the quiet answer . 

 " oh , I will love you and we will talk to each other , " say Mirah , with a sweet outpouring of her word , as spontaneous as bird - note . " I will tell you everything , and you will teach I : you will teach I to be a good Jewess what she would have like I to be . I shall always be with you when I be not work . for I work now . I shall get money to keep we . oh , I have have such good friend . " 

 Mirah until now have quite forget that any one be by , but here she turn with the prettiest attitude , keep one hand on her brother 's arm while she look at Mrs. Meyrick and Deronda . the little mother 's happy emotion in witness this meeting of brother and sister have already win she to Mordecai , who seem to she really to have more dignity and refinement than she have feel oblige to believe in from Deronda 's account . 

 " see this dear lady ! " say Mirah . " I be a stranger , a poor wanderer , and she believe in I , and have treat I as a daughter . please give my brother your hand , " she add , beseechingly , take Mrs. Meyrick 's hand and put it in Mordecai 's , then press they both with her own and lift they to her lip . 

 " the Eternal Goodness have be with you , " say Mordecai . " you have help to fulfill our mother 's prayer . " 

 " I think we will go now , shall we ? and return later , " say Deronda , lay a gentle pressure on Mrs. Meyrick 's arm , and she immediately comply . he be afraid of any reference to the fact about himself which he have keep back from Mordecai , and he feel no uneasiness now in the thought of the brother and sister be alone together . 

 CHAPTER XLVIII . 

 ' tis hard and ill - pay task to order all thing beforehand by the rule of our own security , as be well hint by Machiavelli concern Caesar Borgia , who , saith he , have think of all that might occur on his father 's death , and have provide against every evil chance save only one : it have never come into his mind that when his father die , his own death would quickly follow . 

 Grandcourt 's importance as a subject of this realm be of the grandly passive kind which consist in the inheritance of land . political and social movement touch he only through the wire of his rental , and his most careful biographer need not have read up on Schleswig - Holstein , the policy of Bismarck , trade - union , household suffrage , or even the last commercial panic . he glance over the good newspaper column on these topic , and his view on they can hardly be say to have want breadth , since he embrace all Germans , all commercial man , and all voter liable to use the wrong kind of soap , under the general epithet of " brute ; " but he take no action on these much - agitated question beyond look from under his eyelid at any man who mention they , and retain a silence which serve to shake the opinion of timid thinker . 

 but Grandcourt , within his own sphere of interest , show some of the quality which have enter into triumphal diplomacy of the wild continental sort . 

 no movement of Gwendolen in relation to Deronda escape he . he would have deny that he be jealous ; because jealousy would have imply some doubt of his own power to hinder what he have determine against . that his wife should have more inclination to another man 's society than to his own would not pain he : what he require be that she should be as fully aware as she would have be of a locked hand - cuff , that her inclination be helpless to decide anything in contradiction with his resolve . however much of vacillate whim there might have be in his entrance on matrimony , there be no vacillating in his interpretation of the bond . he have not repent of his marriage ; it have really bring more of aim into his life , new object to exert his will upon ; and he have not repent of his choice . his taste be fastidious , and Gwendolen satisfy it : he would not have like a wife who have not receive some elevation of rank from he ; nor one who do not command admiration by her mien and beauty ; nor one whose nail be not of the right shape ; nor one the lobe of whose ear be at all too large and red ; nor one who , even if her nail and ear be right , be at the same time a ninny , unable to make spirited answer . these requirement may not seem too exact to refined contemporary whose own ability to fall in love have be hold in suspense for lack of indispensable detail ; but few perhaps may follow he in his contentment that his wife should be in a temper which would dispose she to fly out if she dare , and that she should have be urge into marry he by other feeling than passionate attachment . still , for those who prefer command to love , one do not see why the habit of mind should change precisely at the point of matrimony . 

 Grandcourt do not feel that he have choose the wrong wife ; and have take on himself the part of husband , he be not go in any way to be fool , or allow himself to be see in a light that could be regard as pitiable . this be his state of mind not jealousy ; still , his behavior in some respect be as like jealousy as yellow be to yellow , which color we know may be the effect of very different cause . 

 he have come up to town early than usual because he wish to be on the spot for legal consultation as to the arrangement of his will , the transference of mortgage , and that transaction with his uncle about the succession to Diplow , which the bait of ready money , adroitly dangle without importunity , have finally win he to agree upon . but another acceptable accompaniment of his being in town be the presentation of himself with the beautiful bride whom he have choose to marry in spite of what other people might have expect of he . it be true that Grandcourt go about with the sense that he do not care a languid curse for any one 's admiration : but this state of not - care , just as much as desire , require its related object namely , a world of admire or envy spectator : for if you be fond of look stonily at smile person the person must be and they must smile a rudimentary truth which be surely forget by those who complain of mankind as generally contemptible , since any other aspect of the race must disappoint the voracity of their contempt . Grandcourt , in town for the first time with his wife , have his non - caring abstinence from curse enlarge and diversify by splendid reception , by conspicuous ride and drive , by presentation of himself with she on all distinguished occasion . he wish she to be seek after ; he like that " fellow " should be eager to talk with she and escort she within his observation ; there be even a kind of lofty coquetry on her part that he would not have object to . but what he do not like be her way in relation to Deronda . 

 after the musical party at Lady Mallinger 's , when Grandcourt have observe the dialogue on the settee as keenly as Hans have do , it be characteristic of he that he name Deronda for invitation along with the Mallinger 's , tenaciously avoid the possible suggestion to anybody concerned that Deronda 's presence or absence could be of the least importance to he ; and he make no direct observation to Gwendolen on her behavior that evening , lest the expression of his disgust should be a little too strong to satisfy his own pride . but a few day afterward he remark , without be careful of the a propos 

 " nothing make a woman more of a gawky than look out after people and show temper in public . a woman ought to have good manner . else it be intolerable to appear with she . " 

 Gwendolen make the expect application , and be not without alarm at the notion of be a gawky . for she , too , with her melancholy distaste for thing , prefer that her distaste should include admirer . but the sense of overhang rebuke only intensify the strain of expectation toward any meeting with Deronda . the novelty and excitement of her town life be like the hurry and constant change of foreign travel ; whatever might be the inward despondency , there be a programme to be fulfil , not without gratification to many - sided self . but , as always happen with a deep interest , the comparatively rare occasion on which she could exchange any word with Deronda have a diffusive effect in her consciousness , magnify their communication with each other , and therefore enlarge the place she imagine it to have in his mind . how could Deronda help this ? he certainly do not avoid she ; rather he wish to convince she by every delicate indirect mean that her confidence in he have not be indiscreet since it have not lower his respect . moreover he like be near she how could it be otherwise ? she be something more than a problem : she be a lovely woman , for the turn of whose mind and fate he have a care which , however futile it might be , keep solicit he as a responsibility , perhaps all the more that , when he dare to think of his own future , he see it lie far away from this splendid sad - hearted creature , who , because he have once be impel to arrest her attention momentarily , as he might have seize her arm with warning to hinder she from step where there be danger , have turn to he with a beseech persistent need . 

 one instance in which Grandcourt stimulate a feeling in Gwendolen that he would have like to suppress without seem to care about it , have relation to Mirah . Gwendolen 's inclination linger over the project of the singing lesson as a sort of obedience to Deronda 's advice , but day follow day with that want of perceive leisure which belong to life where there be no work to mark off interval ; and the continual liability to Grandcourt 's presence and surveillance seem to flatten every effort to the level of the boredom which his manner express ; his negative mind be as diffusive as fog , cling to all object , and spoil all contact . 

 but one morning when they be breakfast , Gwendolen , in a recurrent fit of determination to exercise the old spirit , say , dally prettily over her prawn without eat they 

 " I think of make myself accomplish while we be in town , and have sing lesson . " 

 " why ? " say Grandcourt , languidly . 

 " why ? " echo Gwendolen , play at sauciness ; " because I can not   eat p tť de foie gra to make I sleepy , and I can not   smoke , and I can not   go to the club to make I like to come away again I want a variety of ennui . what would be the most convenient time , when you be busy with your lawyer and people , for I to have lesson from that little Jewess , whose singing be get all the rage . " 

 " whenever you like , " say Grandcourt , push away his plate , and lean back in his chair while he look at she with his most lizard - like expression and , play with the ear of the tiny spaniel on his lap   Gwendolen have take a dislike to the dog because they fawn on he . 

 then he say , languidly , " I do not   see why a lady should sing . amateur make fool of themselves . a lady can not   risk herself in that way in company . and one do not   want to hear squall in private . " 

 " I like frankness : that seem to I a husband 's great charm , " say Gwendolen , with her little upward movement of her chin , as she turn her eye away from his , and lift a prawn before she , look at the boil ingenuousness of its eye as preferable to the lizard 's . " but ; " she add , have devour her mortification , " I suppose you do not   object to Miss Lapidoth 's singing at our party on the fourth ? I think of engage she . Lady Brackenshaw have she , you know : and the Raymonds , who be very particular about their music . and Mr. Deronda , who be a musician himself and a first - rate judge , say there be no singing in such good taste as hers for a drawing - room . I think his opinion be an authority . " 

 she mean to sle a small stone at her husband in that way . 

 " it be very indecent of Deronda to go about praise that girl , " say 
 Grandcourt in a tone of indifference . 
 " Indecent ! " exclaim Gwendolen , redden and look at he again , overcome by startled wonder , and unable to reflect on the probable falsity of the phrase " to go about praise . " 

 " yes ; and especially when she be patronize by Lady Mallinger . he ought to hold his tongue about she . man can see what be his relation to she . " 

 " man who judge of other by themselves , " say Gwendolen , turn white after her redness , and immediately smitten with a dread of her own word . 

 " of course . and a woman should take their judgment else she be likely to run her head into the wrong place , " say Grandcourt , conscious of use pincher on that white creature . " I suppose you take Deronda for a saint . " 

 " oh dear no ! " say Gwendolen , summon desperately her almost miraculous power of self - control , and speak in a high hard tone . " only a little less of a monster . " 

 she rise , push her chair away without hurry , and walk out of the room with something like the care of a man who be afraid of show that he have take more wine than usual . she turn the key inside her dressing - room door , and sit down for some time look pale and quiet as when she be leave the breakfast - room . even in the moment after read the poisonous letter she have hardly have more cruel sensation than now ; for emotion be at the acute point , where it be not distinguishable from sensation . Deronda unlike what she have believe he to be , be an image which affect she as a hideous apparition would have do , quite apart from the way in which it be produce . it have take hold of she as pain before she could consider whether it be fiction or truth ; and far to hinder her power of resistance come the sudden perception , how very slight be the ground of her faith in Deronda how little she know of his life how childish she have be in her confidence . his rebuke and his severity to she begin to seem odious , along with all the poetry and lofty doctrine in the world , whatever it might be ; and the grave beauty of his face seem the most unpleasant mask that the common habit of man could put on . 

 all this go on in she with the rapidity of a sick dream ; and her start into resistance be very much like a waking . suddenly from out the gray sombre morning there come a stream of sunshine , wrap she in warmth and light where she sit in stony stillness . she move gently and look round she there be a world outside this bad dream , and the dream prove nothing ; she rise , stretch her arm upward and clasp her hand with her habitual attitude when she be seek relief from oppressive feeling , and walk about the room in this flood of sunbeam . 

 " it be not true ! what do it matter whether he believe it or not ? " this be what she repeat to herself but this be not her faith come back again ; it be only the desperate cry of faith , find suffocation intolerable . and how could she go on through the day in this state ? with one of her impetuous alternation , her imagination fly to wild action by which she would convince herself of what she wish : she would go to Lady Mallinger and question she about Mirah ; she would write to Deronda and upbraid he with make the world all false and wicked and hopeless to she to he she dare pour out all the bitter indignation of her heart . no ; she would go to Mirah . this last form take by her need be more definitely practicable , and quickly become imperious . no matter what come of it . she have the pretext of ask Mirah to sing at her party on the fourth . what be she go to say beside ? how satisfy ? she do not foresee she could not wait to foresee . if that idea which be madden she have be a live thing , she would have want to throttle it without wait to foresee what would come of the act . she ring her bell and ask if Mr. Grandcourt be go out : find that he be , she order the carriage , and begin to dress for the drive ; then she go down , and walk about the large drawing - room like an imprisoned dumb creature , not recognize herself in the glass panel , not note any object around she in the paint gild prison . her husband would probably find out where she have be , and punish she in some way or other no matter she could neither desire nor fear anything just now but the assurance that she have not be delude herself in her trust . 

 she be provide with Mirah 's address . soon she be on the way with all the fine equipage necessary to carry about her poor uneasy heart , depend in its palpitation on some answer or other to question which she do not know how she should put . she be as heedless of what happen before she find that Miss Lapidoth be at home , as one be of lobby and passage on the way to a court of justice heedless of everything till she be in a room where there be fold - door , and she hear Deronda 's voice behind it . doubtless the identification be help by forecast , but she be as certain of it as if she have see he . she be frightened at her own agitation , and begin to unbutton her glove that she might button they again , and bite her lip over the pretend difficulty , while the door open , and Mirah present herself with perfect quietude and a sweet smile of recognition . there be relief in the sight of her face , and Gwendolen be able to smile in return , while she put out her hand in silence ; and as she seat herself , all the while hear the voice , she feel some reflux of energy in the confused sense that the truth could not be anything that she dread . Mirah draw her chair very near , as if she feel that the sound of the conversation should be subdue , and look at her visitor with placid expectation , while Gwendolen begin in a low tone , with something that seem like bashfulness 

 " perhaps you wonder to see I perhaps I ought to have write but I wish to make a particular request . " 

 " I be glad to see you instead of have a letter , " say Mirah , wonder at the change expression and manner of the " Vandyke duchess , " as Hans have teach she to call Gwendolen . the rich color and the calmness of her own face be in strong contrast with the pale agitated beauty under the plume hat . 

 " I think , " Gwendolen go on " at least I hop , you would not object to sing at our house on the 4th in the evening at a party like Lady Brackenshaw 's . I should be so much oblige . " 

 " I shall be very happy to sing for you . at ten ? " say Mirah , while 
 Gwendolen seem to get more instead of less embarrassed . 
 " at ten , please , " she answer ; then pause , and feel that she have nothing more to say . she could not go . it be impossible to rise and say good - bye . Deronda 's voice be in her ear . she must say it she could contrive no other sentence 

 " Mr. Deronda be in the next room . " 

 " yes , " say Mirah , in her former tone . " he be read Hebrew with my brother . " 

 " you have a brother ? " say Gwendolen , who have hear this from Lady 
 Mallinger , but have not mind it then . 
 " yes , a dear brother who be ill - consumptive , and Mr. Deronda be the good of friend to he , as he have be to I , " say Mirah , with the impulse that will not let we pass the mention of a precious person indifferently . 

 " tell I , " say Gwendolen , put her hand on Mirah 's , and speak hardly above a whisper " tell I tell I the truth . you be sure he be quite good . you know no evil of he . any evil that people say of he be false . " 

 could the proud - spirited woman have behave more like a child ? but the strange word penetrate Mirah with nothing but a sense of solemnity and indignation . with a sudden light in her eye and a tremor in her voice , she say 

 " who be the people that say evil of he ? I would not believe any evil of he , if an angel come to tell it I . he find I when I be so miserable I be go to drown myself ; I look so poor and forsake ; you would have think I be a beggar by the wayside . and he treat I as if I have be a king 's daughter . he take I to the good of woman . he find my brother for I . and he honor my brother though he too be poor oh , almost as poor as he could be . and my brother honor he . that be no light thing to say " here Mirah 's tone change to one of profound emphasis , and she shake her head backward : " for my brother be very learn and great - minded . and Mr. Deronda say there be few man equal to he . " some jewish defiance have flame into her indignant gratitude and her anger could not help include Gwendolen since she seem to have doubt Deronda 's goodness . 

 but Gwendolen be like one parch with thirst , drink the fresh water that spread through the frame as a sufficient bliss . she do not notice that Mirah be angry with she ; she be not distinctly conscious of anything but of the penetrate sense that Deronda and his life be no more like her husband 's conception than the morning in the horizon be like the morning mix with street gas . even Mirah 's word sink into the indefiniteness of her relief . she could hardly have repeat they , or say how her whole state of feeling be change . she press Mirah 's hand , and say , " thank you , thank you , " in a hurried whisper , then rise , and add , with only a hazy consciousness , " I must go , I shall see you on the fourth I be so much oblige " bow herself out automatically , while Mirah , open the door for she , wonder at what seem a sudden retreat into chill loftiness . 

 Gwendolen , indeed , have no feeling to spare in any effusiveness toward the creature who have bring her relief . the passionate need of contradiction to Grandcourt 's estimate of Deronda , a need which have blunt her sensibility to everything else , be no soon satisfied than she want to be go . she begin to be aware that she be out of place , and to dread Deronda 's see she . and once in the carriage again , she have the vision of what await she at home . when she draw up before the door in Grosvenor Square , her husband be arrive with a cigar between his finger . he throw it away and hand she out , accompany she up - stair . she turn into the drawing - room , lest he should follow she far and give she no place to retreat to ; then she sit down with a weary air , take off her glove , rub her hand over her forehead , and make his presence as much of a cipher as possible . but he sit , too , and not far from she just in front , where to avoid look at he must have the emphasis of effort . 

 " may I ask where you have be at this extraordinary hour ? " say 
 Grandcourt . 
 " oh , yes ; I have be to Miss Lapidoth 's , to ask she to come and sing for we , " say Gwendolen , lay her glove on the little table beside she , and look down at they . 

 " and to ask she about her relation with Deronda ? " say Grandcourt , with the cold possible sneer in his low voice which in poor Gwendolen 's ear be diabolical . 

 for the first time since their marriage she flash out upon he without inward check . turn her eye full on his she say , in a biting tone 

 " yes ; and what you say be false a low , wicked falsehood . " 

 " she tell you so do she ? " return Grandcourt , with a more thoroughly distilled sneer . 

 Gwendolen be mute . the dare anger within she be turn into the rage of dumbness . what reason for her belief could she give ? all the reason that seem so strong and live within she she see they suffocate and shrivel up under her husband 's breath . there be no proof to give , but her own impression , which would seem to he her own folly . she turn her head quickly away from he and look angrily toward the end of the room : she would have rise , but he be in her way . 

 Grandcourt see his advantage . " it be of no consequence so far as her singing go , " he say , in his superficial drawl . " you can have she to sing , if you like . " then , after a pause , he add in his low imperious tone , " but you will please to observe that you be not to go near that house again . as my wife , you must take my word about what be proper for you . when you undertake to be Mrs. Grandcourt , you undertake not to make a fool of yourself . you have be make a fool of yourself this morning ; and if you be to go on as you have begin , you might soon get yourself talk of at the club in a way you would not like . what do you know about the world ? you have marry I , and must be guide by my opinion . " 

 every slow sentence of that speech have a terrific mastery in it for Gwendolen 's nature . if the low tone have come from a physician tell she that her symptom be those of a fatal disease , and prognosticate its course , she could not have be more helpless against the argument that lie in it . but she be permit to move now , and her husband never again make any reference to what have occur this morning . he know the force of his own word . if this white - handed man with the perpendicular profile have be send to govern a difficult colony , he might have win reputation among his contemporary . he have certainly ability , would have understand that it be safe to exterminate than to cajole superseded proprietor , and would not have flinch from make thing safe in that way . 

 Gwendolen do not , for all this , part with her recovered faith ; rather , she keep it with a more anxious tenacity , as a protestant of old keep his bible hide or a Catholic his crucifix , accord to the side favor by the civil arm ; and it be characteristic of she that apart from the impression gain concern Deronda in that visit , her imagination be little occupy with Mirah or the eulogised brother . the one result establish for she be , that Deronda have act simply as a generous benefactor , and the phrase " read Hebrew " have fleet unimpressively across her sense of hearing , as a stray stork might have make its peculiar flight across her landscape without rouse any surprised reflection on its natural history . 

 but the issue of that visit , as it regard her husband , take a strongly active part in the process which make an habitual conflict within she , and be the cause of some external change perhaps not observe by any one except Deronda . as the week go on bring occasional transient interview with she , he think that he perceive in she an intensifying of her superficial hardness and resolute display , which make her abrupt betrayal of agitation the more marked and disturbing to he . 

 in fact , she be undergo a sort of discipline for the refractory which , as little as possible like conversion , bend half the self with a terrible strain , and exasperate the unwillingness of the other half . Grandcourt have an active divination rather than discernment of refractoriness in she , and what have happen about Mirah quicken his suspicion that there be an increase of it dependent on the occasion when she happen to see Deronda : there be some " confound nonsense " between they : he do not imagine it exactly as flirtation , and his imagination in other branch be rather restrict ; but it be nonsense that evidently keep up a kind of simmer in her mind an inward action which might become disagreeable outward . husband in the old time be know to have suffer from a threatening devoutness in their wife , present itself first indistinctly as oddity , and end in that mild form of lunatic asylum , a nunnery : Grandcourt have a vague perception of threaten mood in Gwendolen which the unity between they in his view of marriage require he peremptorily to check . among the mean he choose , one be peculiar , and be less ably calculate than the speech we have just hear . 

 he determine that she should know the main purport of the will he be make , but he could not communicate this himself , because it involve the fact of his relation to Mrs. Glasher and her child ; and that there should be any overt recognition of this between Gwendolen and himself be supremely repugnant to he . like all proud , closely - wrap nature , he shrink from explicitness and detail , even on triviality , if they be personal : a valet must maintain a strict reserve with he on the subject of shoe and stocking . and clash be intolerable to he ; his habitual want be to put collision out of the question by the quiet massive pressure of his rule . but he wish Gwendolen to know that before he make she an offer it be no secret to he that she be aware of his relation with Lydia , her previous knowledge be the apology for bring the subject before she now . some man in his place might have think of write what he want she to know , in the form of a letter . but Grandcourt hat writing : even write a note be a bore to he , and he have long be accustom to have all his writing do by Lush . we know that there be person who will forego their own obvious interest rather than do anything so disagreeable as to write letter ; and it be not probable that these imperfect utilitarian would rush into manuscript and syntax on a difficult subject in order to save another 's feeling . to Grandcourt it do not even occur that he should , would , or could write to Gwendolen the information in question ; and the only medium of communication he could use be Lush , who , to his mind , be as much of an implement as pen and paper . but here too Grandcourt have his reserve , and would not have utter a word likely to encourage Lush in an impudent sympathy with any suppose grievance in a marriage which have be discommende by he . who that have a confidant escape believe too little in his penetration , and too much in his discretion ? Grandcourt have always allow Lush to know his external affair indiscriminately irregularity , debt , want of ready money ; he have only use discrimination about what he would allow his confidant to say to he ; and he have be so accustomed to this human tool , that the have he at call in London be a recovery of lose ease . it follow that Lush know all the provision of the will more exactly than they be know to the testator himself . 

 Grandcourt do not doubt that Gwendolen , since she be a woman who could put two and two together , know or suspect Lush to be the contriver of her interview with Lydia , and that this be the reason why her first request be for his banishment . but the bent of a woman 's inference on mixed subject which excite mixed passion be not determine by her capacity for simple addition ; and here Grandcourt lack the only organ of thinking that could have save he from mistake namely , some experience of the mixed passion concern . he have correctly divine one - half of Gwendolen 's dread all that relate to her personal pride , and her perception that his will must conquer her ; but the remorseful half , even if he have know of her broken promise , be as much out of his imagination as the other side of the moon . what he believe she to feel about Lydia be solely a tongue - tie jealousy , and what he believe Lydia to have write with the jewel be the fact that she have once be use to wear they , with other amenity such as he impute to the intercourse with jealous woman . he have the triumphant certainty that he could aggravate the jealousy and yet smite it with a more absolute dumbness . his object be to engage all his wife 's egoism on the same side as his own , and in his employment of Lush he do not intend an insult to she : she ought to understand that he be the only possible envoy . Grandcourt 's view of thing be considerably fence in by his general sense , that what suit he other must put up with . there be no escape the fact that want of sympathy condemn we to correspond stupidity . mephistophele throw upon real life , and oblige to manage his own plot , would inevitably make blunder . 

 one morning he go to Gwendolen in the boudoir beyond the back drawing - room , hat and glove in hand , and say with his well - temper , most persuasive drawl , stand before she and look down on she as she sit with a book on her lap 

 " A Gwendolen , there be some business about property to be explain . I have tell Lush to come and explain it to you . he know all about these thing . I be go out . he can come up now . he be the only person who can explain . I suppose you will not mind . " 

 " you know that I do mind , " say Gwendolen , angrily , start up . " I shall not see he . " she show the intention to dart away to the door . Grandcourt be before she , with his back toward it . he be prepare for her anger , and show none in return , say , with the same sort of remonstrant tone that he might have use about an objection to din out 

 " it be no use make a fuss . there be plenty of brute in the world that one have to talk to . People with any savoir vivre do not   make a fuss about such thing . some business must be do . you can not   expect agreeable people to do it . if I employ Lush , the proper thing for you be to take it as a matter of course . not to make a fuss about it . not to toss your head and bite your lip about people of that sort . " 

 the drawling and the pause with which this speech be utter give time for crowd reflection in Gwendolen , quell her resistance . what be there to be tell she about property ? this word have certain dominant association for she , first with her mother , then with Mrs. Glasher and her child . what would be the use if she refuse to see Lush ? could she ask Grandcourt to tell she himself ? that might be intolerable , even if he consent , which it be certain he would not , if he have make up his mind to the contrary . the humiliation of stand an obvious prisoner , with her husband bar the door , be not to be bear any long , and she turn away to lean against a cabinet , while Grandcourt again move toward she . 

 " I have arrange for Lush to come up now , while I be out , " he say , after a long organ stop , during which Gwendolen make no sign . " shall I tell he he may come ? " 

 yet another pause before she could say " yes " her face turn obliquely and her eye cast down . 

 " I shall come back in time to ride , if you like to get ready , " say Grandcourt . no answer . " she be in a desperate rage , " think he . but the rage be silent , and therefore not disagreeable to he . it follow that he turn her chin and kiss she , while she still keep her eyelid down , and she do not move they until he be on the other side of the door . 

 what be she to do ? search where she would in her consciousness , she find no plea to justify a plaint . any romantic illusion she have have in marry this man have turn on her power of use he as she like . he be use she as he like . 

 she sit await the announcement of Lush as a sort of searing operation that she have to go through . the fact that gall she gather a burn power when she think of their lying in his mind . it be all a part of that new gambling , in which the losing be not simply a minus , but a terrible plus that have never enter into her reckoning . 

 Lush be neither quite pleased nor quite displeased with his task . Grandcourt have say to he by way of conclusion , " do not   make yourself more disagreeable than nature oblige you . " 

 " that depend , " think Lush . but he say , " I will write a brief abstract for Mrs. Grandcourt to read . " he do not suggest that he should make the whole communication in writing , which be a proof that the interview do not wholly displease he . 

 some provision be be make for himself in the will , and he have no reason to be in a bad humor , even if a bad humor have be common with he . he be perfectly convinced that he have penetrate all the secret of the situation ; but he have no diabolical delight in it . he have only the small movement of gratified self - love resentment in discern that this marriage have fulfil his own foresight in not be as satisfactory as the supercilious young lady have expect it to be , and as Grandcourt wish to feign that it be . he have no persistent spite much strong than what give the seasoning of ordinary scandal to those who repeat it and exaggerate it by their conjecture . with no active compassion or good - will , he have just as little active malevolence , be chiefly occupy in like his particular pleasure , and not dislike anything but what hinder those pleasure everything else rank with the last murder and the last opťra bouffe , under the head of thing to talk about . nevertheless , he be not indifferent to the prospect of be treat uncivilly by a beautiful woman , or to the counter - balancing fact that his present commission put into his hand an official power of humiliate she . he do not mean to use it needlessly ; but there be some person so gifted in relation to we that their " how do you do ? " seem charge with offense . 

 by the time that Mr. Lush be announce , Gwendolen have brace herself to a bitter resolve that he should not witness the slight betrayal of her feeling , whatever he might have to tell . she invite he to sit down with stately quietude . after all , what be this man to she ? he be not in the least like her husband . her power of hat a coarse , familiar - mannered man , with clumsy hand , be now relax by the intensity with which she hat his contrast . 

 he hold a small paper fold in his hand while he speak . 

 " I need hardly say that I should not have present myself if Mr. Grandcourt have not express a strong wish to that effect as no doubt he have mention to you . " 

 from some voice that speech might have sound entirely reverential , and even timidly apologetic . Lush have no intention to the contrary , but to Gwendolen 's ear his word have as much insolence in they as his prominent eye , and the pronoun " you " be too familiar . he ought to have address the folding - screen , and speak of she as Mrs. Grandcourt . she give the small sign of a bow , and Lush go on , with a little awkwardness , get entangle in what be elegantly call tautology . 

 " my have be in Mr. Grandcourt 's confidence for fifteen year or more since he be a youth , in fact of course give I a peculiar position . he can speak to I of affair that he could not mention to any one else ; and , in fact , he could not have employ any one else in this affair . I have accept the task out of friendship for he . which be my apology for accept the task if you would have prefer some one else . " 

 he pause , but she make no sign , and Lush , to give himself a countenance in an apology which meet no acceptance , open the fold paper , and look at it vaguely before he begin to speak again . 

 " this paper contain some information about Mr. Grandcourt 's will , an abstract of a part he wish you to know if you will be good enough to cast your eye over it . but there be something I have to say by way of introduction which I hope you will pardon I for , if it be not quite agreeable . " Lush find that he be behave well than he have expect , and have no idea how insulting he make himself with his " not quite agreeable . " 

 " say what you have to say without apologize , please , " say Gwendolen , with the air she might have bestow on a dog - stealer come to claim a reward for find the dog he have steal . 

 " I have only to remind you of something that occur before your engagement to Mr. Grandcourt , " say Lush , not without the rise of some willing insolence in exchange for her scorn . " you meet a lady in Cardell Chase , if you remember , who speak to you of her position with regard to Mr. Grandcourt . she have child with her one a very fine boy . " 

 Gwendolen 's lip be almost as pale as her cheek ; her passion have no weapon word be no well than chip . this man 's speech be like a sharp knife - edge draw across her skin : but even her indignation at the employment of Lush be get merge in a crowd of other feeling , dim and alarming as a crowd of ghost . 

 " Mr. Grandcourt be aware that you be acquaint with this unfortunate affair beforehand , and he think it only right that his position and intention should be make quite clear to you . it be an affair of property and prospect ; and if there be any objection you have to make , if you would mention it to I it be a subject which of course he would rather not speak about himself if you will be good enough just to read this . " with the last word Lush rise and present the paper to she . 

 when Gwendolen resolve that she would betray no feeling in the presence of this man , she have not prepare herself to hear that her husband know the silent consciousness , the silently accept term on which she have marry he . she dare not raise her hand to take the paper , least it should visibly tremble . for a moment Lush stand hold it toward she , and she feel his gaze on she as ignominy , before she could say even with low - toned haughtiness 

 " lay it on the table . and go into the next room , please . " 

 Lush obey , think as he take an easy - chair in the back drawing - room , " my lady wince considerably . she do not   know what would be the charge for that superfine article , Henleigh Grandcourt . " but it seem to he that a penniless girl have do well than she have any right to expect , and that she have be uncommonly know for her year and opportunity : her word to Lydia mean nothing , and she run away have probably be part of her adroitness . it have turn out a master - stroke . 

 meanwhile Gwendolen be rally her nerve to the reading of the paper . she must read it . her whole be pride , long for rebellion , dream of freedom , remorseful conscience , dread of fresh visitation all make one need to know what the paper contain . but at first it be not easy to take in the meaning of the word . when she have succeed , she find that in the case of there be no son as issue of her marriage , Grandcourt have make the small Henleigh his heir ; that be all she care to extract from the paper with any distinctness . the other statement as to what provision would be make for she in the same case , she hurry over , get only a confused perception of thousand and Gadsmere . it be enough . she could dismiss the man in the next room with the defiant energy which have revive in she at the idea that this question of property and inheritance be mean as a finish to her humiliation and her thraldom . 

 she thrust the paper between the leaf of her book , which she take in her hand , and walk with her stateliest air into the next room , where Lush immediately arise , await her approach . when she be four yard from he , it be hardly an instant that she pause to say in a high tone , while she sweep he with her eyelash 

 " tell Mr. Grandcourt that his arrangement be just what I desire " pass on without haste , and leave Lush time to mingle some admiration of her graceful back with that half - amuse sense of her spirit and impertinence , which he express by raise his eyebrow and just thrust his tongue between his tooth . he really do not want she to be bad punish , and he be glad to think that it be time to go and lunch at the club , where he mean to have a lobster salad . 

 what do Gwendolen look forward to ? when her husband return he find she equipped in her riding - dress , ready to ride out with he . she be not again go to be hysterical , or take to her bed and say she be ill . that be the implicit resolve adjust her muscle before she could have frame it in word , as she walk out of the room , leave Lush behind she . she be go to act in the spirit of her message , and not to give herself time to reflect . she ring the bell for she maid , and go with the usual care through her change of toilet . doubtless her husband have mean to produce a great effect on she : by - and - by perhaps she would let he see an effect the very opposite of what he intend ; but at present all that she could show be a defiant satisfaction in what have be presume to be disagreeable . it come as an instinct rather than a thought , that to show any sign which could be interpret as jealousy , when she have just be insultingly remind that the condition be what she have accept with her eye open , would be the bad self - humiliation . she say to herself that she have not time to - day to be clear about her future action ; all she could be clear about be that she would match her husband in ignore any ground for excitement . she not only ride , but go out with he to dine , contribute nothing to alter their mutual manner , which be never that of rapid interchange in discourse ; and curiously enough she reject a handkerchief on which her maid have by mistake put the wrong scent a scent that Grandcourt have once object to . Gwendolen would not have like to be an object of disgust to this husband whom she hat : she like all disgust to be on her side . 

 but to defer thought in this way be something like try to talk without sing in her own ear . the thought that be bind up with our passion be as penetrative as air everything be porous to it ; bow , smile , conversation , repartee , be mere honeycomb where such thought rush freely , not always with a taste of honey . and without shut herself up in any solitude , Gwendolen seem at the end of nine or ten hour to have go through a labyrinth of reflection , in which already the same succession of prospect have be repeat , the same fallacious outlet reject , the same shrinking from the necessity of every course . already she be undergo some harden effect from feel that she be under eye which see her past action solely in the light of her low motif . she live back in the scene of her courtship , with the new bitter consciousness of what have be in Grandcourt 's mind certain now , with her present experience of he , that he have a peculiar triumph in conquer her dumb repugnance , and that ever since their marriage he have have a cold exultation in know her fancied secret . her imagination exaggerate every tyrannical impulse he be capable of . " I will insist on be separate from he " be her first dart determination ; then , " I will leave he whether he consent or not . if this boy become his heir , I have make an atonement . " but neither in darkness nor in daylight could she imagine the scene which must carry out those determination with the courage to feel they endurable . how could she run away to her own family carry distress among they , and render herself an object of scandal in the society she have leave behind she ? what future lie before she as Mrs. Grandcourt go back to her mother , who would be make destitute again by the rupture of the marriage for which one chief excuse have be that it have bring that mother a maintenance ? she have lately be see her uncle and Anna in London , and though she have be save from any difficulty about invite they to stay in Grosvenor Square by their wish to be with Rex , who would not risk a meeting with she , the transient visit she have have from they help now in give strong color to the picture of what it would be for she to take refuge in her own family . what could she say to justify her flight ? her uncle would tell she to go back . her mother would cry . her aunt and Anna would look at she with wonder alarm . her husband would have power to compel she . she have absolutely nothing that she could allege against he in judicious or judicial ear . and to " insist on separation ! " that be an easy combination of word ; but consider as an action to be execute against Grandcourt , it would be about as practicable as to give he a pliant disposition and a dread of other people 's unwillingness . how be she to begin ? what be she to say that would not be a condemnation of herself ? " if I be to have misery anyhow , " be the bitter refrain of her rebellious dream , " I have well have the misery that I can keep to myself . " moreover , her capability of rectitude tell she again and again that she have no right to complain of her contract , or to withdraw from it . 

 and always among the image that drive she back to submission be Deronda . the idea of herself separate from her husband , give Deronda a change , perturb , painful place in her consciousness : instinctively she feel that the separation would be from he too , and in the prospective vision of herself as a solitary , dubiously - regard woman , she feel some tingling bashfulness at the remembrance of her behavior towards he . the association of Deronda with a dubious position for herself be intolerable . and what would he say if he know everything ? probably that she ought to bear what she have bring on herself , unless she be sure that she could make herself a well woman by take any other course . and what sort of woman be she to be solitary , sicken of life , look at with a suspicious kind of pity ? even if she could dream of success in get that dreary freedom . Mrs. Grandcourt " run away " would be a more pitiable creature than Gwendolen Harleth condemn to teach the bishop 's daughter , and to be inspect by Mrs. Mompert . 

 one characteristic trait in her conduct be worth mention . she would not look a second time at the paper Lush have give she ; and before ring for she maid she lock it up in a travel - desk which be at hand , proudly resolve against curiosity about what be allot to herself in connection with Gadsmere feel herself brand in the mind of her husband and his confidant with the meanness that would accept marriage and wealth on any condition , however dishonorable and humiliating . 

 Day after day the same pattern of thinking be repeat . there come nothing to change the situation no new element in the sketch only a recurrence which engrave it . the May week go on into June , and still Mrs. Grandcourt be outwardly in the same place , present herself as she be expect to do in the accustomed scene , with the accustomed grace , beauty , and costume ; from church at one end of the week , through all the scale of desirable reception , to opera at the other . Church be not markedly distinguished in her mind from the other form of self - presentation , for marriage have include no instruction that enable she to connect liturgy and sermon with any large order of the world than that of unexplained and perhaps inexplicable social fashion . while a laudable zeal be labor to carry the light of spiritual law up the alley where law be chiefly know as the policeman , the brilliant Mrs. Grandcourt , condescend a little to a fashionable rector and conscious of a feminine advantage over a learn dean , be , so far as pastoral care and religious fellowship be concern , in as complete a solitude as a man in a lighthouse . 

 can we wonder at the practical submission which hide her constructive rebellion ? the combination be common enough , as we know from the number of person who make we aware of it in their own case by a clamorous unwearied statement of the reason against their submit to a situation which , on inquiry , we discover to be the least disagreeable within their reach . Poor Gwendolen have both too much and too little mental power and dignity to make herself exceptional . no wonder that Deronda now mark some hardening in a look and manner which be school daily to the suppression of feeling . 

 for example . one morning , rid in Rotten Row with Grandcourt by her side , she see stand against the railing at the turn , just face they , a dark - eyed lady with a little girl and a blonde boy , whom she at once recognize as the being in all the world the most painful for she to behold . she and Grandcourt have just slacken their pace to a walk ; he be on the outer side be the nearer to the unwelcome vision , and Gwendolen have not presence of mind to do anything but glance away from the dark eye that meet hers piercingly toward Grandcourt , who wheel past the group with an unmoved face , give no sign of recognition . 

 immediately she feel a rise rage against he mingle with her shame for herself , and the word , " you might at least have raise your hat to she , " fly impetuously to her lip but do not pass they . if as her husband , in her company , he choose to ignore these creature whom she herself have exclude from the place she be fill , how could she be the person to reproach he ? she be dumb . 

 it be not chance , but her own design , that have bring Mrs. Glasher there with her boy . she have come to town under the pretext of make purchase really want educational apparatus for her child , and have have interview with Lush in which she have not refuse to soothe her uneasy mind by represent the probability as all on the side of her ultimate triumph . let she keep quiet , and she might live to see the marriage dissolve itself in one way or other Lush hint at several way leave the succession assure to her boy . she have have an interview with Grandcourt , too , who have as usual tell she to behave like a reasonable woman , and threaten punishment if she be troublesome ; but have , also as usual , vindicate himself from any wish to be stingy , the money he be receive from Sir Hugo on account of diplow encourage he to be lavish . Lydia , feed on the probability in her favor , devour her helpless wrath along with that pleasanter nourishment ; but she could not let her discretion go entirely without the reward of make a Medusa - apparition before Gwendolen , vindictiveness and jealousy find relief in an outlet of venom , though it be as futile as that of a viper already fling on the other side of the hedge . hence , each day , after find out from Lush the likely time for Gwendolen to be rid , she have watch at that post , dare Grandcourt so far . why should she not take little henleigh into the Park ? 

 the Medusa - apparition be make effective beyond Lydia 's conception by the shock it give Gwendolen actually to see Grandcourt ignore this woman who have once be the near in the world to he , along with the child she have bear he . and all the while the dark shadow thus cast on the lot of a woman destitute of acknowledge social dignity , spread itself over her vision of a future that might be her own , and make part of her dread on her own behalf . she shrink all the more from any lonely action . what possible release could there be for she from this hat vantage ground , which yet she dare not quit , any more than if fire have be rain outside it ? what release , but death ? not her own death . Gwendolen be not a woman who could easily think of her own death as a near reality , or front for herself the dark entrance on the untried and invisible . it seem more possible that Grandcourt should die : and yet not likely . the power of tyranny in he seem a power of live in the presence of any wish that he should die . the thought that his death be the only possible deliverance for she be one with the thought that deliverance would never come the double deliverance from the injury with which other being might reproach she and from the yoke she have bring on her own neck . no ! she foresee he always live , and her own life dominate by he ; the " always " of her young experience not stretch beyond the few immediate year that seem immeasurably long with her passionate weariness . the thought of his dying would not subsist : it turn as with a dream - change into the terror that she should die with his throttling finger on her neck avenge that think . fantasy move within she like ghost , make no break in her more acknowledge consciousness and find no obstruction in it : dark ray do their work invisibly in the broad light . 

 only an evening or two after that encounter in the Park , there be a grand concert at Klesmer 's , who be live rather magnificently now in one of the large house in Grosvenor Place , a patron and prince among musical professor . Gwendolen have look forward to this occasion as one on which she be sure to meet Deronda , and she have be meditate how to put a question to he which , without contain a word that she would feel a dislike to utter , would yet be explicit enough for he to understand it . the struggle of opposite feeling would not let she abide by her instinct that the very idea of Deronda 's relation to she be a discouragement to any desperate step towards freedom . the next wave of emotion be a longing for some word of his to enforce a resolve . the fact that her opportunity of conversation with he have always to be snatch in the doubtful privacy of large party , cause she to live through they many time beforehand , imagine how they would take place and what she would say . the irritation be proportionate when no opportunity come ; and this evening at Klesmer 's she include Deronda in her anger , because he look as calm as possible at a distance from she , while she be in danger of betray her impatience to every one who speak to she . she find she only safety in a chill haughtiness which make Mr. Vandernoodt remark that Mrs. Grandcourt be become a perfect match for her husband . when at last the chance of the evening bring Deronda near she , Sir Hugo and Mrs. Raymond be close by and could hear every word she say . no matter : her husband be not near , and her irritation pass without check into a fit of daring which restore the security of her self - possession . Deronda be there at last , and she would compel he to do what she please . already and without effort rather queenly in her air as she stand in her white lace and green leaf she throw a royal permissiveness into her way of say , " I wish you would come and see I to - morrow between five and six , Mr. Deronda . " 

 there could be but one answer at that moment : " certainly , " with a tone of obedience . 

 afterward it occur to Deronda that he would write a note to excuse himself . he have always avoid make a call at Grandcourt 's . he could not persuade himself to any step that might hurt she , and whether his excuse be take for indifference or for the affectation of indifference it would be equally wound . he keep his promise . Gwendolen have decline to ride out on the plea of not feel well enough have leave her refusal to the last moment when the horse be soon to be at the door not without alarm lest her husband should say that he too would stay at home . become almost superstitious about his power of suspicious divination , she have a glancing forethought of what she would do in that case namely , have herself deny as not well . but Grandcourt accept her excuse without remark , and ride off . 

 nevertheless when Gwendolen find herself alone , and have send down the order that only Mr. Deronda be to be admit , she begin to be alarm at what she have do , and to feel a grow agitation in the thought that he would soon appear , and she should soon be oblige to speak : not of triviality , as if she have no serious motive in ask he to come : and yet what she have be for hour determine to say begin to seem impossible . for the first time the impulse of appeal to he be be check by timidity , and now that it be too late she be shake by the possibility that he might think her invitation unbecoming . if so , she would have sink in his esteem . but immediately she resist this intolerable fear as an infection from her husband 's way of thinking . that he would say she be make a fool of herself be rather a reason why such a judgment would be remote from Deronda 's mind . but that she could not rid herself from this sudden invasion of womanly reticence be manifest in a kind of action which have never occur to she before . in her struggle between agitation and the effort to suppress it , she be walk up and down the length of the two drawing - room , where at one end a long mirror reflect she in her black dress , choose in the early morning with a half - admit reference to this hour . but above this black dress her head on its white pillar of a neck show to advantage . some consciousness of this make her turn hastily and hurry to the boudoir , where again there be a glass , but also , toss over a chair , a large piece of black lace which she snatch and tie over her crown of hair so as completely to conceal her neck , and leave only her face look out from the black frame . in this manifest contempt of appearance , she think it possible to be free from nervousness , but the black lace do not take away the uneasiness from her eye and lip . 

 she be stand in the middle of the room when Deronda be announce , and as he approach she she perceive that he too for some reason be not his usual self . she could not have define the change except by say that he look less happy than usual , and appear to be under some effort in speak to she . and yet the speaking be the slight possible . they both say , " how do you do ? " quite curtly ; and Gwendolen , instead of sit down , move to a little distance , rest her arm slightly on the tall back of a chair , while Deronda stand where he be , both feel it difficult to say any more , though the preoccupation in his mind could hardly have be more remote than it be from Gwendolen 's conception . she naturally see in his embarrassment some reflection of her own . force to speak , she find all her training in concealment and self - command of no use to she and begin with timid awkwardness 

 " you will wonder why I beg you to come . I want to ask you something . you say I be ignorant . that be true . and what can I do but ask you ? " 

 and at this moment she be feel it utterly impossible to put the question she have intend . something new in her nervous manner rouse Deronda 's anxiety lest there might be a new crisis . he say with the sadness of affection in his voice 

 " my only regret be , that I can be of so little use to you . " the word and the tone touch a new spring in she , and she go on with more sense of freedom , yet still not say anything she have design to say , and begin to hurry , that she might somehow arrive at the right word . 

 " I want to tell you that I have always be think of your advice , but be it any use ? I can not   make myself different , because thing about I raise bad feeling and I must go on I can alter nothing it be no use . " 

 she pause an instant , with the consciousness that she be not find the right word , but begin again hurriedly , " but if I go on I shall get bad . I want not to get bad . I should like to be what you wish . there be people who be good and enjoy great thing I know there be . I be a contemptible creature . I feel as if I should get wicked with hat people . I have try to think that I would go away from everybody . but I can not . there be so many thing to hinder I . you think , perhaps , that I do not   mind . but I do mind . I be afraid of everything . I be afraid of get wicked . tell I what I can do . " 

 she have forget everything but that image of her helpless misery which she be try to make present to Deronda in broken allusive speech wish to convey but not express all her need . her eye be tearless , and have a look of smarting in their dilate brilliancy ; there be a subdue sob in her voice which be more and more veiled , till it be hardly above a whisper . she be hurt herself with the jewel that glitter on her tightly - clasp finger press against her heart . 

 the feeling Deronda endure in these moment he afterward call horrible . word seem to have no more rescue in they than if he have be behold a vessel in peril of wreck the poor ship with its many - live anguish beat by the inescapable storm . how could he grasp the long - grow process of this young creature 's wretchedness ? how arrest and change it with a sentence ? he be afraid of his own voice . the word that rush into his mind seem in their feebleness nothing well than despair make audible , or than that insensibility to another 's hardship which apply precept to soothe pain . he feel himself hold a crowd of word imprison within his lip , as if the let they escape would be a violation of awe before the mystery of our human lot . the thought that urge itself foremost be " confess everything to your husband ; have nothing conceal : " the word carry in his mind a vision of reason which would have need much full expression for Gwendolen to apprehend they , but before he have begin those brief sentence , the door open and the husband enter . 

 Grandcourt have deliberately go out and turn back to satisfy a suspicion . what he see be Gwendolen 's face of anguish frame black like a nun 's , and Deronda stand three yard from she with a look of sorrow such as he might have bend on the last struggle of life in a beloved object . without any show of surprise Grandcourt nod to Deronda , give a second look at Gwendolen , pass on , and seat himself easily at a little distance cross his leg , take out his handkerchief and trifle with it elegantly . 

 Gwendolen have shrink and change her attitude on see he , but she do not turn or move from her place . it be not a moment in which she could feign anything , or manifest any strong revulsion of feeling : the passionate movement of her last speech be still too strong within she . what she feel beside be a dull despairing sense that her interview with Deronda be at an end : a curtain have fall . but he , naturally , be urge into self - possession and effort by susceptibility to what might follow for she from be see by her husband in this betrayal of agitation ; and feel that any pretence of ease in prolong his visit would only exaggerate Grandcourt 's possible conjecture of duplicity , he merely say 

 " I will not stay long now . good bye . " 

 he put out his hand , and she let he press her poor little chill finger ; but she say no good - bye . 

 when he have leave the room , Gwendolen throw herself into a seat , with an expectation as dull as her despair the expectation that she be go to be punish . but Grandcourt take no notice : he be satisfied to have let she know that she have not deceive he , and to keep a silence which be formidable with omniscience . he go out that evening , and her plea of feel ill be accept without even a sneer . 

 the next morning at breakfast he say , " I be go yacht to the 
 Mediterranean . " 
 " when ? " say Gwendolen , with a leap of heart which have hope in it . 

 " the day after to - morrow . the yacht be at Marseilles . Lush be go to get everything ready . " 

 " shall I have mamma to stay with I , then ? " say Gwendolen , the new sudden possibility of peace and affection fill her mind like a burst of morning light . 

 " no ; you will go with I . " 

 CHAPTER XLIX . 

  ever in his soul 
  that large justice which make gratitude 
  triumph above resentment . ' tis the mark 
  of regal nature , with the wide life . 
  and full capability of joy : 
  not wit exultant in the strong len 
  to show you goodness vanish into pulp 
  never worth " thank you " they be the devil 's friar , 
  vow to be poor as he in love and trust , 
  yet must go beg of a world that keep 
  some human property . 
 Deronda , in part from Gwendolen , have abstain from say , " I shall not see you again for a long while : I be go away , " lest Grandcourt should understand he to imply that the fact be of importance to she . 

 he be actually go away under circumstance so momentous to himself that when he set out to fulfill his promise of call on she , he be already under the shadow of a solemn emotion which revive the deep experience of his life . 

 Sir Hugo have send for he to his chamber with the note " come immediately . something have happen : " a preparation that cause he some relief when , on enter the baronet 's study , he be receive with grave affection instead of the distress which he have apprehend . 

 " it be nothing to grieve you , sir ? " say Deronda , in a tone rather of restore confidence than question , as he take the hand hold out to he . there be an unusual meaning in Sir Hugo 's look , and a subdue emotion in his voice , as he say 

 " no , Dan , no . sit down . I have something to say . " 

 Deronda obey , not without presentiment . it be extremely rare for Sir 
 Hugo to show so much serious feeling . 
 " not to grieve I , my boy , no . at least , if there be nothing in it that will grieve you too much . but I hardly expect that this just this would ever happen . there have be reason why I have never prepare you for it . there have be reason why I have never tell you anything about your parentage . but I have strive in every way not to make that an injury to you . " 

 Sir Hugo pause , but Deronda could not speak . he could not say , " I have never feel it an injury . " even if that have be true , he could not have trust his voice to say anything . far more than any one but himself could know of be hang on this moment when the secrecy be to be break . Sir Hugo have never see the grand face he delight in so pale the lip press together with such a look of pain . he go on with a more anxious tenderness , as if he have a new fear of wound . 

 " I have act in obedience to your mother 's wish . the secrecy be her wish . but now she desire to remove it . she desire to see you . I will put this letter into your hand , which you can look at by - and - by . it will merely tell you what she wish you to do , and where you will find she . " 

 Sir Hugo hold out a letter write on foreign paper , which Deronda thrust into his breast - pocket , with a sense of relief that he be not call on to read anything immediately . the emotion on Daniel 's face have gain on the baronet , and be visibly shake his composure . Sir Hugo find it difficult to say more . and Deronda 's whole soul be possess by a question which be the hard in the world to utter . yet he could not bear to delay it . this be a sacramental moment . if he let it pass , he could not recover the influence under which it be possible to utter the word and meet the answer . for some moment his eye be cast down , and it seem to both as if thought be in the air between they . but at last Deronda look at Sir Hugo , and say , with a tremulous reverence in his voice dread to convey indirectly the reproach that affection have for year be stifle 

 " be my father also live ? " 

 the answer come immediately in a low emphatic tone " no . " 

 in the mingled emotion which follow that answer it be impossible to distinguish joy from pain . 

 some new light have fall on the past for Sir Hugo too in this interview . after a silence in which Deronda feel like one whose creed be go before he have religiously embrace another , the baronet say , in a tone of confession 

 " perhaps I be wrong , Dan , to undertake what I do . and perhaps I like it a little too well have you all to myself . but if you have have any pain which I might have help , I ask you to forgive I . " 

 " the forgiveness have long be there , " say Deronda " the chief pain have always be on account of some one else whom I never know whom I be now to know . it have not hinder I from feel an affection for you which have make a large part of all the life I remember . " 

 it seem one impulse that make the two man clasp each other 's hand for a moment . 

 BOOK VII . the MOTHER and the son 

 CHAPTER L. 

  " if some mortal , bear too soon , 
  be lay away in some great trance the age 
  come and go all the while till dawn 
  his true time 's advent ; and could then record 
  the word they speak who keep watch by his bed , 
  then I might tell more of the breath so light 
  upon my eyelid , and the finger warm 
  among my hair . youth be confuse ; yet never 
  so dull be I but , when that spirit pass , 
  I turn to he , scarce consciously , as turn 
  a water - snake when fairy cross his sleep . " 
  BROWNING : Paracelsus . 
 this be the letter which Sir Hugo put into Deronda 's hand : 

 to MY SON , DANIEL DERONDA . 

 my good friend and your , Sir Hugo Mallinger , will have tell you that I wish to see you . my health be shake , and I desire there should be no time lose before I deliver to you what I have long withhold . let nothing hinder you from be at the Albergo dell ' Italia in Genoa by the fourteenth of this month . wait for I there . I be uncertain when I shall be able to make the journey from Spezia , where I shall be stay . that will depend on several thing . wait for I the Princess Halm - Eberstein . bring with you the diamond ring that Sir Hugo give you . I shall like to see it again . your unknown mother , 

 LEONORA halm - eberstein . 

 this letter with its colorless wording give Deronda no clue to what be in reserve for he ; but he could not do otherwise than accept Sir Hugo 's reticence , which seem to imply some pledge not to anticipate the mother 's disclosure ; and the discovery that his life - long conjecture have be mistake check far surmise . Deronda could not hinder his imagination from take a quick flight over what seem possibility , but he refuse to contemplate any of they as more likely than another , lest he should be nurse it into a dominant desire or repugnance , instead of simply prepare himself with resolve to meet the fact bravely , whatever it might turn out to be . 

 in this state of mind he could not have communicate to any one the reason for the absence which in some quarter he be oblige to mention beforehand , least of all to Mordecai , whom it would affect as powerfully as it do himself , only in rather a different way . if he be to say , " I be go to learn the truth about my birth , " Mordecai 's hope would gather what might prove a painful , dangerous excitement . to exclude supposition , he speak of his journey as be undertake by Sir Hugo 's wish , and throw as much indifference as he could into his manner of announce it , say he be uncertain of its duration , but it would perhaps be very short . 

 " I will ask to have the child Jacob to stay with I , " say Mordecai , comfort himself in this way , after the first mournful glance . 

 " I will drive round and ask Mrs. Cohen to let he come , " say Mirah . 

 " the grandmother will deny you nothing , " say Deronda . " I be glad you be a little wrong as well as I , " he add , smile at Mordecai . " you think that old Mrs. Cohen would not bear to see Mirah . " 

 " I undervalue her heart , " say Mordecai . " she be capable of rejoice that another 's plant bloom though her own be wither . " 

 " oh , they be dear good people ; I feel as if we all belong to each other , " say Mirah , with a tinge of merriment in her smile . 

 " what should you have feel if that Ezra have be your brother ? " say Deronda , mischievously a little provoke that she have take kindly at once to people who have cause he so much prospective annoyance on her account . 

 Mirah look at he with a slight surprise for a moment , and then say , " he be not a bad man I think he would never forsake any one . " but when she utter the word she blush deeply , and glance timidly at Mordecai , turn away to some occupation . her father be in her mind , and this be a subject on which she and her brother have a painful mutual consciousness . " if he should come and find we ! " be a thought which to Mirah sometimes make the street daylight as shadowy as a haunted forest where each turn screen for she an imaginary apparition . 

 Deronda feel what be her involuntary allusion , and understand the blush . how could he be slow to understand feeling which now seem near than ever to his own ? for the word of his mother 's letter imply that his filial relation be not to be free from painful condition ; indeed , singularly enough that letter which have bring his mother nearer as a living reality have throw she into more remoteness for his affection . the tender yearning after a be whose life might have be the bad for not have his care and love , the image of a mother who have not have all her due , whether of reverence or compassion , have long be secretly present with he in his observation of all the woman he have come near . but it seem now that this picturing of his mother might fit the fact no well than his former conception about Sir Hugo . he wonder to find that when this mother 's very hand - writing have come to he with word hold her actual feeling , his affection have suddenly shrink into a state of comparative neutrality toward she . a veiled figure with enigmatic speech have thrust away that image which , in spite of uncertainty , his clinging thought have gradually model and make the possessor of his tenderness and duteous longing . when he set off to Genoa , the interest really uppermost in his mind have hardly so much relation to his mother as to Mordecai and Mirah . 

 " God bless you , Dan ! " Sir Hugo have say , when they shake hand . " whatever else change for you , it can not   change my be the old friend you have know , and the one who have all along feel the most for you . I could not   have love you well if you have be my own - only I should have be well pleased with thinking of you always as the future master of the Abbey instead of my fine nephew ; and then you would have see it necessary for you to take a political line . however thing must be as they may . " it be a defensive movement of the baronet 's to mingle purposeless remark with the expression of serious feeling . 

 when Deronda arrive at the Italia in Genoa , no Princess Halm - Eberstein be there ; but on the second day there be a letter for he , say that her arrival might happen within a week , or might be defer a fortnight and more ; she be under circumstance which make it impossible for she to fix her journey more precisely , and she entreat he to wait as patiently as he could . 

 with this indefinite prospect of suspense on matter of supreme moment to he , Deronda set about the difficult task of seek amusement on philosophic ground , as a means of quiet excited feeling and give patience a lift over a weary road . his former visit to the superb city have be only cursory , and leave he much to learn beyond the prescribed round of sight - seeing , by spend the cool hour in observant wander about the street , the quay , and the environ ; and he often take a boat that he might enjoy the magnificent view of the city and harbor from the sea . all sight , all subject , even the expect meeting with his mother , find a central union in Mordecai and Mirah , and the idea immediately associate with they ; and among the thought that most fill his mind while his boat be push about within view of the grand harbor be that of the multitudinous Spanish Jews century ago drive destitute from their spanish home , suffer to land from the crowded ship only for a brief rest on this grand quay of Genoa , overspread it with a pall of famine and plague die mother and die child at their breast father and son a - gaze at each other 's haggardness , like group from a hundred hunger - tower turn out beneath the midday sun . inevitably dreamy construction of a possible ancestry for himself would weave themselves with historic memory which have begin to have a new interest for he on his discovery of Mirah , and now , under the influence of Mordecai , have become irresistibly dominant . he would have seal his mind against such construction if it have be possible , and he have never yet fully admit to himself that he wish the fact to verify Mordecai 's conviction : he inwardly repeat that he have no choice in the matter , and that wish be folly nay , on the question of parentage , wish seem part of that meanness which disown kinship : it be a disowning by anticipation . what he have to do be simply to accept the fact ; and he have really no strong presumption to go upon , now that he be assure of his mistake about Sir Hugo . there have be a resolve concealment which make all inference untrustworthy , and the very name he bear might be a false one . if Mordecai be wrong if he , the so - call Daniel Deronda , be hold by tie entirely aloof from any such course as his friend 's pathetic hope have mark out ? he would not say " I wish " ; but he could not help feel on which side the sacrifice lay . 

 across these two importunate thought , which he resist as much as one can resist anything in that unstrung condition which belong to suspense , there come continually an anxiety which he make no effort to banish dwelling on it rather with a mournfulness , which often seem to we the good atonement we can make to one whose need we have be unable to meet . the anxiety be for Gwendolen . in the wonderful mixture of our nature there be a feeling distinct from that exclusive passionate love of which some man and woman   by no means all   be capable , which yet be not the same with friendship , nor with a merely benevolent regard , whether admire or compassionate : a man , say for it be a man who be here concern hardly represent to himself this shade of feeling toward a woman more nearly than in word , " I should have love she , if " : the " if " cover some prior growth in the inclination , or else some circumstance which have make an inward prohibitory law as a stay against the emotion ready to quiver out of balance . the " if " in Deronda 's case carry reason of both kind ; yet he have never throughout his relation with Gwendolen be free from the nervous consciousness that there be something to guard against not only on her account but on his own some precipitancy in the manifestation of impulsive feeling some ruinous inroad of what be but momentary on the permanent choose treasure of the heart some spoil of her trust , which work upon he now as if it have be the retreat cry of a creature snatch and carry out of his reach by swift horseman or swifter wave , while his own strength be only a strong sense of weakness . how could his feeling for Gwendolen ever be exactly like his feeling for other woman , even when there be one by whose side he desire to stand apart from they ? strangely the figure enter into the picture of his present and future ; strangely   and now it seem sadly   their two lot have come in contact , her narrowly personal , his charge with far - reach sensibility , perhaps with durable purpose , which be hardly more present to she than the reason why man migrate be present to the bird that come as usual for the crumb and find they no more . not that Deronda be too ready to imagine himself of supreme importance to a woman ; but her word of insistance that he must " remain near she must not forsake she " continually recur to he with the clearness and importunity of imagine sound , such as Dante have say pierce we like arrow whose point carry the sharpness of pity 

  " Lamenti saettaron I diversi 
  can che di piefermti avean gli strali ? " 
 Day after day pass , and the very air of Italy seem to carry the consciousness that war have be declare against Austria , and every day be a hurrying march of crowded Time toward the world - change battle of Sadowa . meanwhile , in Genoa , the noon be get hot , the converging outer road get deep with white dust , the oleander in the tub along the wayside garden look more and more like fatigued holiday - maker , and the sweet evening change her office scatter abroad those whom the midday have send under shelter , and sow all path with happy social sound , little tinkling of mule - bell and whirring of thrumbed string , light footstep and voice , if not leisurely , then with the hurry of pleasure in they ; while the encircle height , crown with fort , skirt with fine dwelling and garden , seem also to come forth and gaze in fullness of beauty after their long siesta , till all strong color melt in the stream of moonlight which make the Streets a new spectacle with shadow , both still and move , on cathedral step and against the faáade of massive palace ; and then slowly with the descend moon all sink in deep night and silence , and nothing shine but the port light of the great Lanterna in the blackness below , and the glimmer star in the blackness above . Deronda , in his suspense , watch this revolving of the day as he might have watch a wonderful clock where the striking of the hour be make solemn with antique figure advance and retreat in monitory procession , while he still keep his ear open for another kind of signal which would have its solemnity too : he be begin to sicken of occupation , and find himself contemplate all activity with the aloofness of a prisoner await ransom . in his letter to Mordecai and Hans , he have avoid writing about himself , but he be really get into that state of mind to which all subject become personal ; and the few book he have bring to make he a refuge in study be become unreadable , because the point of view that life would make for he be in that agitate moment of uncertainty which be close upon decision . 

 many night be watch through by he in gaze from the open window of his room on the double , faintly pierce darkness of the sea and the heaven ; often in struggle under the oppressive skepticism which represent his particular lot , with all the importance he be allow Mordecai to give it , as of no more lasting effect than a dream a set of change which make passion to he , but beyond his consciousness be no more than an imperceptible difference of mass and shadow ; sometimes with a reaction of emotive force which give even to sustained disappointment , even to the fulfilled demand of sacrifice , the nature of a satisfied energy , and spread over his young future , whatever it might be , the attraction of devoted service ; sometimes with a sweet irresistible hopefulness that the very good of human possibility might befall he the blending of a complete personal love in one current with a large duty ; and sometimes again in a mood of rebellion   what human creature escape it ?   against thing in general because they be thus and not otherwise , a mood in which Gwendolen and her equivocal fate move as busy image of what be amiss in the world along with the concealment which he have feel as a hardship in his own life , and which be act in he now under the form of an afflict doubtfulness about the mother who have announce herself coldly and still keep away . 

 but at last she be come . one morning in his third week of wait there be a new kind of knock at the door . a servant in Chasseurs livery enter and deliver in French the verbal message that , the Princess Halm - Eberstein have arrive , that she be go to rest during the day , but would be oblige if Monsieur would dine early , so as to be at liberty at seven , when she would be able to receive he . 

 CHAPTER LI . 

  she hold the spindle as she sit , 
  Errina with the thick - coil mat 
  of raven hair and deep agate eye , 
  gaze with a sad surprise 
  at surge vision of her destiny 
  to spin the byssus drearily 
  in insect - labor , while the throng 
  of god and man work deed that poet work in song . 
 when Deronda present himself at the door of his mother 's apartment in the Italia he feel some revival of his boyhood with its premature agitation . the two servant in the antechamber look at he markedly , a little surprised that the doctor their lady have come to consult be this strike young gentleman whose appearance give even the severe line of an evening dress the credit of adornment . but Deronda could notice nothing until , the second door be open , he find himself in the presence of a figure which at the other end of the large room stand await his approach . 

 she be cover , except as to her face and part of her arm , with black lace hang loosely from the summit of her whiten hair to the long train stretch from her tall figure . her arm , naked to the elbow , except for some rich bracelet , be fold before she , and the fine poise of her head make it look handsomer than it really be . but Deronda feel no interval of observation before he be close in front of she , hold the hand she have put out and then raise it to his lip . she still keep she hand in his and look at he examiningly ; while his chief consciousness be that her eye be pierce and her face so mobile that the next moment she might look like a different person . for even while she be examine he there be a play of the brow and nostril which make a tacit language . Deronda dare no movement , not able to conceive what sort of manifestation her feeling demand ; but he feel himself change color like a girl , and yet wonder at his own lack of emotion ; he have live through so many ideal meeting with his mother , and they have seem more real than this ! he could not even conjecture in what language she would speak to he . he imagine it would not be English . suddenly , she let fall his hand , and place both her on his shoulder , while her face give out a flash of admiration in which every worn line disappear and seem to leave a restore youth . 

 " you be a beautiful creature ! " she say , in a low melodious voice , with syllable which have what might be call a foreign but agreeable outline . " I know you would be . " then she kiss he on each cheek , and he return the kiss . but it be something like a greeting between royalty . 

 she pause a moment while the line be come back into her face , and then say in a cold tone , " I be your mother . but you can have no love for I . " 

 " I have think of you more than of any other be in the world , " say 
 Deronda , his voice tremble nervously . 
 " I be not like what you think I be , " say the mother decisively , withdraw her hand from his shoulder , and fold her arm as before , look at he as if she invite he to observe she . he have often picture her face in his imagination as one which have a likeness to his own : he see some of the likeness now , but amidst more striking difference . she be a remarkable look be . what be it that give her son a painful sense of aloofness ? her wear beauty have a strangeness in it as if she be not quite a human mother , but a Melusina , who have tie with some world which be independent of our . 

 " I use to think that you might be suffer , " say Deronda , anxious above all not to wound she . " I use to wish that I could be a comfort to you . " 

 " I be suffer . but with a suffering that you can not   comfort , " say the Princess , in a hard voice than before , move to a sofa where cushion have be carefully arrange for she . " sit down . " she point to a seat near she ; and then discern some distress in Deronda 's face , she add , more gently , " I be not suffer at this moment . I be at ease now . I be able to talk . " 

 Deronda seat himself and wait for she to speak again . it seem as if he be in the presence of a mysterious fate rather than of the long - for mother . he be begin to watch she with wonder , from the spiritual distance to which she have throw he . 

 " no , " she begin : " I do not send for you to comfort I . I could not know beforehand I do not   know now what you will feel toward I . I have not the foolish notion that you can love I merely because I be your mother , when you have never see or hear of I in all your life . but I think I choose something well for you than be with I . I do not think I deprive you of anything worth have . " 

 " you can not wish I to believe that your affection would not have be worth have , " say Deronda , find that she pause as if she expect he to make some answer . 

 " I do not   mean to speak ill of myself , " say the princess , with proud impetuosity , " but I have not much affection to give you . I do not want affection . I have be stifle with it . I want to live out the life that be in I , and not to be hamper with other life . you wonder what I be . I be no princess then . " she rise with a sudden movement , and stand as she have do before . Deronda immediately rise too ; he feel breathless . 

 " no princess in this tame life that I live in now . I be a great singer , and I act as well as I sing . all the rest be poor beside I . man follow I from one country to another . I be live a myriad life in one . I do not want a child . " 

 there be a passionate self - defence in her tone . she have cast all precedent out of her mind . Precedent have no excuse for she and she could only seek a justification in the intense word she could find for her experience . she seem to fle out the last word against some possible reproach in the mind of her son , who have to stand and hear they clutch his coat - collar as if he be keep himself above water by it , and feel his blood in the sort of commotion that might have be excited if he have see she go through some strange rite of a religion which give a sacredness to crime . what else have she to tell he ? she go on with the same intensity and a sort of pale illumination in her face . 

 " I do not want to marry . I be force into marry your father force , I mean , by my father 's wish and command ; and besides , it be my good way of get some freedom . I could rule my husband , but not my father . I have a right to be free . I have a right to seek my freedom from a bondage that I hat . " 

 she seat herself again , while there be that subtle movement in her eye and close lip which be like the suppress continuation of speech . Deronda continue stand , and after a moment or two she look up at he with a less defiant pleading as she say 

 " and the bondage I hat for myself I want to keep you from . what well could the most love mother have do ? I relieve you from the bondage of have be bear a Jew . " 

 " then I be a Jew ? " Deronda burst out with a deep - voice energy that make his mother shrink a little backward against her cushion . " my father be a Jew , and you be a Jewess ? " 

 " yes , your father be my cousin , " say the mother , watch he with a change in her look , as if she see something that she might have to be afraid of . 

 " I be glad of it , " say Deronda , impetuously , in the veiled voice of passion . he could not have imagine beforehand how he would have come to say that which he have never hitherto admit . he could not have dream that it would be in impulsive opposition to his mother . he be shake by a mixed anger which no reflection could come soon enough to check , against this mother who it seem have bear he unwillingly , have willingly make herself a stranger to he , and perhaps be now make herself know unwillingly . this last suspicion seem to flash some explanation over her speech . 

 but the mother be equally shake by an anger differently mixed , and her frame be less equal to any repression . the shake with she be visibly physical , and her eye look the large for her pallid excitement as she say violently 

 " why do you say you be glad ? you be an english gentleman . I secure you that . " 

 " you do not know what you secure I . how could you choose my birthright for I ? " say Deronda , throw himself sideways into his chair again , almost unconsciously , and lean his arm over the back , while he look away from his mother . 

 he be fire with an intolerance that seem foreign to he . but he be now try hard to master himself and keep silence . a horror have sweep in upon his anger lest he should say something too hard in this moment which make an epoch never to be recall . there be a pause before his mother speak again , and when she speak her voice have become more firmly resistant in its finely varied tone : 

 " I choose for you what I would have choose for myself . how could I know that you would have the spirit of my father in you ? how could I know that you would love what I hat ? if you really love to be a Jew . " the last word have such bitterness in they that any one overhearing might have suppose some hatred have arise between the mother and son . 

 but Deronda have recover his fuller self . he be recall his sensibility to what life have be and actually be for she whose good year be go , and who with the sign of suffer in her frame be now exert herself to tell he of a past which be not his alone but also her . his habitual shame at the acceptance of event as if they be his only , help he even here . as he look at his mother silently after her last word , his face regain some of its penetrative calm ; yet it seem to have a strangely agitate influence over she : her eye be fix on he with a sort of fascination , but not with any repose of maternal delight . 

 " forgive I , if I speak hastily , " he say , with diffident gravity . " why have you resolve now on disclose to I what you take care to have I bring up in ignorance of ? why since you seem angry that I should be glad ? " 

 " oh the reason of our action ! " say the Princess , with a ring of something like sarcastic scorn . " when you be as old as I be , it will not seem so simple a question ' why do you do this ? ' People talk of their motif in a cut and dry way . every woman be suppose to have the same set of motif , or else to be a monster . I be not a monster , but I have not feel exactly what other woman feel or say they feel , for fear of be think unlike other . when you reproach I in your heart for send you away from I , you mean that I ought to say I feel about you as other woman say they feel about their child . I do not feel that . I be glad to be free from you . but I do well for you , and I give you your father 's fortune . do I seem now to be revoke everything ? well , there be reason . I feel many thing that I can not understand . a fatal illness have be grow in I for a year . I shall very likely not live another year . I will not deny anything I have do . I will not pretend to love where I have no love . but shadow be rise round I . Sickness make they . if I have wrong the dead I have but little time to do what I leave undo . " 

 the varied transition of tone with which this speech be deliver be as perfect as the most accomplished actress could have make they . the speech be in fact a piece of what may be call sincere acting ; this woman 's nature be one in which all feeling and all the more when it be tragic as well as real immediately become matter of conscious representation : experience immediately pass into drama , and she act her own emotion . in a minor degree this be nothing uncommon , but in the Princess the acting have a rare perfection of physiognomy , voice , and gesture . it would not be true to say that she feel less because of this double consciousness : she feel that is , her mind go through all the more , but with a difference ; each nucleus of pain or pleasure have a deep atmosphere of the excitement or spiritual intoxication which at once exalt and deaden . but Deronda make no reflection of this kind . all his thought hang on the purport of what his mother be say ; her tone and her wonderful face enter into his agitation without be note . what he long for with an awed desire be to know as much as she would tell he of the strange mental conflict under which it seem he have be bring into the world ; what his compassionate nature make the control idea within he be the suffering and the confession that breathe through her later word , and these forbid any further question , when she pause and remain silent , with her brow knit , her head turn a little away from he , and her large eye fix as if on something incorporeal . he must wait for she to speak again . she do so with strange abruptness , turn her eye upon he suddenly , and say more quickly 

 " Sir Hugo have write much about you . he tell I you have a wonderful mind you comprehend everything you be wise than he be with all his sixty year . you say you be glad to know that you be bear a Jew . I be not go to tell you that I have change my mind about that . your feeling be against mine . you do not   thank I for what I do . shall you comprehend your mother , or only blame she ? " 

 " there be not a fibre within I but make I wish to comprehend she , " say Deronda , meet her sharp gaze solemnly . " it be a bitter reversal of my longing to think of blame she . what I have be most try to do for fifteen year be to have some understanding of those who differ from myself . " 

 " then you have become unlike your grandfather in that . " say the mother , " though you be a young copy of he in your face . he never comprehend I , or if he do , he only think of fetter I into obedience . I be to be what he call ' the jewish woman ' under pain of his curse . I be to feel everything I do not feel , and believe everything I do not believe . I be to feel awe for the bit of parchment in the mezuza over the door ; to dread lest a bit of butter should touch a bit of meat ; to think it beautiful that man should bind the tephillin on they , and woman not , to adore the wisdom of such law , however silly they might seem to I . I be to love the long prayer in the ugly synagogue , and the howling , and the gabbling , and the dreadful fast , and the tiresome feast , and my father 's endless discoursing about our people , which be a thunder without mean in my ear . I be to care forever about what Israel have be ; and I do not care at all . I care for the wide world , and all that I could represent in it . I hat live under the shadow of my father 's strictness . teaching , teach for everlaste ' this you must be , ' ' that you must not be ' press on I like a frame that get tight and tight as I grow . I want to live a large life , with freedom to do what every one else do , and be carry along in a great current , not oblige to care . ah ! " here her tone change to one of a more bitter incisiveness " you be glad to have be bear a Jew . you say so . that be because you have not be bring up as a Jew . that separateness seem sweet to you because I save you from it . " 

 " when you resolve on that , you mean that I should never know my origin ? " say Deronda , impulsively . " you have at least change in your feeling on that point . " 

 " yes , that be what I mean . that be what I persevere in . and it be not true to say that I have change . thing have change in spite of I . I be still the same Leonora " she point with her forefinger to her breast " here within I be the same desire , the same will , the same choice , but " she spread out her hand , palm upward , on each side of she , as she pause with a bitter compression of her lip , then let her voice fall into muffled , rapid utterance " event come upon we like evil enchantment : and thought , feeling , apparition in the darkness be event be they not ? I do not   consent . we only consent to what we love . I obey something tyrannic " she spread out her hand again " I be force to be wither , to feel pain , to be die slowly . do I love that ? well , I have be force to obey my dead father . I have be force to tell you that you be a Jew , and deliver to you what he command I to deliver . " 

 " I beseech you to tell I what move you when you be young , I mean to take the course you do , " say Deronda , try by this reference to the past to escape from what to he be the heart - rend piteousness of this mingled suffering and defiance . " I gather that my grandfather oppose your bent to be an artist . though my own experience have be quite different , I enter into the painfulness of your struggle . I can imagine the hardship of an enforce renunciation . " 

 " no , " say the Princess , shake her head and fold her arm with an air of decision . " you be not a woman . you may try but you can never imagine what it be to have a man 's force of genius in you , and yet to suffer the slavery of be a girl . to have a pattern cut out ' this be the jewish woman ; this be what you must be ; this be what you be want for ; a woman 's heart must be of such a size and no large , else it must be press small , like chinese foot ; her happiness be to be make as cake be , by a fix receipt . ' that be what my father want . he wish I have be a son ; he care for I as a make - shift link . his heart be set on his Judaism . he hat that jewish woman should be think of by the christian world as a sort of ware to make public singer and actress of . as if we be not the more enviable for that ! that be a chance of escape from bondage . " 

 " be my grandfather a learn man ? " say Deronda , eager to know particular that he fear his mother might not think of . 

 she answer impatiently , put up her hand , " oh , yes , and a clever physician and good : I do not   deny that he be good . a man to be admire in a play grand , with an iron will . like the old Foscari before he pardon . but such man turn their wife and daughter into slave . they would rule the world if they could ; but not rule the world , they throw all the weight of their will on the neck and soul of woman . but nature sometimes thwart they . my father have no other child than his daughter , and she be like himself . " 

 she have fold her arm again , and look as if she be ready to face some impending attempt at mastery . 

 " your father be different . unlike I all lovingness and affection . I know I could rule he ; and I make he secretly promise I , before I marry he , that he would put no hindrance in the way of my be an artist . my father be on his deathbed when we be marry : from the first he have fix his mind on my marry my cousin Ephraim . and when a woman 's will be as strong as the man 's who want to govern she , half her strength must be concealment . I mean to have my will in the end , but I could only have it by seem to obey . I have an awe of my father always I have have an awe of he : it be impossible to help it . I hat to feel awed I wish I could have defy he openly ; but I never could . it be what I could not imagine : I could not act it to myself that I should begin to defy my father openly and succeed . and I never would risk failure . " 

 this last sentence be utter with an abrupt emphasis , and she pause after it as if the word have raise a crowd of remembrance which obstruct speech . her son be listen to she with feeling more and more highly mixed ; the first sense of be repel by the frank coldness which have replace all his preconception of a mother 's tender joy in the sight of he ; the first impulse of indignation at what shock his most cherished emotion and principle all these busy element of collision between they be subside for a time , and make more and more room for that effort at just allowance and that admiration of a forcible nature whose error lie along high pathway , which he would have feel if , instead of be his mother , she have be a stranger who have appeal to his sympathy . still it be impossible to be dispassionate : he tremble lest the next thing she have to say would be more repugnant to he than what have go before : he be afraid of the strange cožrcion she seem to be under to lay her mind bare : he almost wish he could say , " tell I only what be necessary , " and then again he feel the fascination which make he watch she and listen to she eagerly . he try to recall she to particular by ask 

 " where be my grandfather 's home ? " 

 " here in Genoa , where I be marry ; and his family have live here generation ago . but my father have be in various country . " 

 " you must surely have live in England ? " 

 " my mother be English a Jewess of portuguese descent . my father marry she in England . certain circumstance of that marriage make all the difference in my life : through that marriage my father thwart his own plan . my mother 's sister be a singer , and afterward she marry the english partner of a merchant 's house here in Genoa , and they come and live here eleven year . my mother die when I be eight year old , and my father allow I to be continually with my Aunt Leonora and be teach under her eye , as if he have not mind the danger of she encourage my wish to be a singer , as she have be . but this be it I see it again and again in my father : he do not guard against consequence , because he feel sure he could hinder they if he like . before my aunt leave Genoa , I have have enough teaching to bring out the bear singer and actress within I : my father do not know everything that be do ; but he know that I be teach music and singing he know my inclination . that be nothing to he : he mean that I should obey his will . and he be resolve that I should marry my cousin Ephraim , the only one leave of my father 's family that he know . I want not to marry . I think of all plan to resist it , but at last I find that I could rule my cousin , and I consent . my father die three week after we be marry , and then I have my way ! " she utter these word almost exultantly ; but after a little pause her face change , and she say in a biting tone , " it have not last , though . my father be get his way now . " 

 she begin to look more contemplatively again at her son , and presently say 

 " you be like he but milder there be something of your own father in you ; and he make it the labor of his life to devote himself to I : wound up his money - change and banking , and live to wait upon I he go against his conscience for I . as I love the life of my art , so he love I . let I look at your hand again : the hand with the ring on . it be your father 's ring . " 

 he draw his chair nearer to she and give she his hand . we know what kind of a hand it be : her own , very much small , be of the same type . as he feel the small hand hold his , as he see near to he the face that hold the likeness of his own , age not by time but by intensity , the strong bent of his nature toward a reverential tenderness assert itself above every other impression and in his most fervent tone he say 

 " Mother ! take we all into your heart the living and the dead . forgive every thing that hurt you in the past . take my affection . " 

 she look at he admiringly rather than lovingly , then kiss he on the brow , and say sadly , " I reject nothing , but I have nothing to give , " she release his hand and sink back on her cushion . Deronda turn pale with what seem always more of a sensation than an emotion the pain of repulsed tenderness . she notice the expression of pain , and say , still with melodious melancholy in her tone 

 " it be well so . we must part again soon and you owe I no duty . I do not wish you to be bear . I part with you willingly . when your father die I resolve that I would have no more tie , but such as I could free myself from . I be the Alcharisi you have hear of : the name have magic wherever it be carry . man court I . Sir Hugo Mallinger be one who wish to marry I . he be madly in love with I . one day I ask he , ' be there a man capable of do something for love of I , and expect nothing in return ? ' he say : ' what be it you want do ? ' I say , ' take my boy and bring he up as an Englishman , and never let he know anything about his parent . ' you be little more than two year old , and be sit on his foot . he declare that he would pay money to have such a boy . I have not meditate much on the plan beforehand , but as soon as I have speak about it , it take possession of I as something I could not rest without do . at first he think I be not serious , but I convince he , and he be never surprised at anything . he agree that it would be for your good , and the fine thing for you . a great singer and actress be a queen , but she give no royalty to her son . all that happen at Naples . and afterward I make Sir Hugo the trustee of your fortune . that be what I do ; and I have a joy in do it . my father have tyrannize over I he care more about a grandson to come than he do about I : I count as nothing . you be to be such a Jew as he ; you be to be what he want . but you be my son , and it be my turn to say what you should be . I say you should not know you be a Jew . " 

 " and for month event have be prepare I to be glad that I be a Jew , " say Deronda , his opposition rouse again . the point touch the quick of his experience . " it would always have be well that I should have know the truth . I have always be rebel against the secrecy that look like shame . it be no shame to have jewish parent the shame be to disown it . " 

 " you say it be a shame to I , then , that I use that secrecy , " say his mother , with a flash of new anger . " there be no shame attach to I . I have no reason to be ashamed . I rid myself of the jewish tatter and gibberish that make people nudge each other at sight of we , as if we be tattoo under our clothe , though our face be as whole as theirs . I deliver you from the pelt contempt that pursue jewish separateness . I be not ashamed that I do it . it be the well for you . " 

 " then why have you now undo the secrecy ? no , not undone it the effect will never be undo . but why have you now send for I to tell I that I be a Jew ? " say Deronda , with an intensity of opposition in feeling that be almost bitter . it seem as if her word have call out a latent obstinacy of race in he . 

 " why ? ah , why ? " say the Princess , rise quickly and walk to the other side of the room , where she turn round and slowly approach he , as he , too , stand up . then she begin to speak again in a more veiled voice . " I can not   explain ; I can only say what be . I do not   love my father 's religion now any more than I do then . before I marry the second time I be baptize ; I make myself like the people I live among . I have a right to do it ; I be not like a brute , oblige to go with my own herd . I have not repent ; I will not say that I have repent . but yet " here she have come near to her son , and pause ; then again retreat a little and stand still , as if resolute not to give way utterly to an imperious influence ; but , as she go on speak , she become more and more unconscious of anything but the awe that subdue her voice . " it be illness , I do not   doubt that it have be gather illness my mind have go back : more than a year ago it begin . you see my gray hair , my worn look : it have all come fast . sometimes I be in an agony of pain I dare say I shall be to - night . then it be as if all the life I have choose to live , all thought , all will , forsook I and leave I alone in spot of memory , and I can not   get away : my pain seem to keep I there . my childhood my girlhood the day of my marriage the day of my father 's death there seem to be nothing since . then a great horror come over I : what do I know of life or death ? and what my father call ' right ' may be a power that be lay hold of I that be clutch I now . well , I will satisfy he . I can not go into the darkness without satisfy he . I have hide what be his . I think once I would burn it . I have not burn it . I thank God I have not burn it ! " 

 she throw herself on her cushion again , visibly fatigue . Deronda , move too strongly by her suffering for other impulse to act within he , draw near she , and say , entreatingly 

 " will you not spare yourself this evening ? let we leave the rest till to - morrow . " 

 " no , " she say decisively . " I will confess it all , now that I have come up to it . often when I be at ease it all fade away ; my whole self come quite back ; but I know it will sink away again , and the other will come the poor , solitary , forsake remain of self , that can resist nothing . it be my nature to resist , and say , ' I have a right to resist . ' well , I say so still when I have any strength in I . you have hear I say it , and I do not   withdraw it . but when my strength go , some other right force itself upon I like iron in an inexorable hand ; and even when I be at ease , it be begin to make ghost upon the daylight . and now you have make it bad for I , " she say , with a sudden return of impetuosity ; " but I shall have tell you everything . and what reproach be there against I , " she add bitterly , ' since I have make you glad to be a Jew ? Joseph Kalonymos reproach I : he say you have be turn into a proud Englishman , who resent be touch by a Jew . I wish you have ! " she end , with a new marvelous alternation . it be as if her mind be break into several , one jar the other into impulsive action . 

 " who be Joseph Kalonymos ? " say Deronda , with a dart recollection of that Jew who touch his arm in the Frankfort synagogue . 

 " ah ! some vengeance send he back from the East , that he might see you and come to reproach I . he be my father 's friend . he know of your birth : he know of my husband 's death , and once , twenty year ago , after he have be away in the Levant , he come to see I and inquire about you . I tell he that you be dead : I mean you to be dead to all the world of my childhood . if I have say that your be live , he would have interfere with my plan : he would have take on he to represent my father , and have try to make I recall what I have do . what could I do but say you be dead ? the act be do . if I have tell he of it there would have be trouble and scandal and all to conquer I , who would not have be conquer . I be strong then , and I would have have my will , though there might have be a hard fight against I . I take the way to have it without any fight . I feel then that I be not really deceive : it would have come to the same in the end ; or if not to the same , to something bad . he believe I and beg that I would give up to he the chest that my father have charge I and my husband to deliver to our eld son . I know what be in the chest thing that have be din in my ear since I have have any understand thing that be thrust on my mind that I might feel they like a wall around my life my life that be grow like a tree . once , after my husband die , I be go to burn the chest . but it be difficult to burn ; and burn a chest and paper look like a shameful act . I have commit no shameful act except what Jews would call shameful . I have keep the chest , and I give it to Joseph Kalonymos . he go away mournful , and say , ' if you marry again , and if another grandson be bear to he who be depart , I will deliver up the chest to he . ' I bow in silence . I mean not to marry again no more than I mean to be the shattered woman that I be now . " 

 she cease speak , and her head sink back while she look vaguely before she . her thought be travel through the year , and when she begin to speak again her voice have lose its argumentative spirit , and have fall into a veiled tone of distress . 

 " but month ago this Kalonymos see you in the synagogue at Frankfort . he see you enter the hotel , and he go to ask your name . there be nobody else in the world to whom the name would have tell anything about I . " 

 " then it be not my real name ? " say Deronda , with a dislike even to this trifle part of the disguise which have be throw round he . 

 " oh , as real as another , " say his mother , indifferently . " the Jews have always be change their name . my father 's family have keep the name of Charisi : my husband be a Charisi . when I come out as a singer , we make it alcharisi . but there have be a branch of the family my father have lose sight of who call themselves Deronda , and when I want a name for you , and Sir Hugo say , ' let it be a foreign name , ' I think of Deronda . but Joseph Kalonymos have hear my father speak of the Deronda branch , and the name confirm his suspicion . he begin to suspect what have be do . it be as if everything have be whisper to he in the air . he find out where I be . he take a journey into Russia to see I ; he find I weak and shatter . he have come back again , with his white hair , and with rage in his soul against I . he say I be go down to the grave clothe in falsehood and robbery falsehood to my father and robbery of my own child . he accuse I of have keep the knowledge of your birth from you , and have bring you up as if you have be the son of an english gentleman . well , it be true ; and twenty year before I would have maintain that I have a right to do it . but I can maintain nothing now . no faith be strong within I . my father may have God on his side . this man 's word be like lion 's tooth upon I . my father 's threat eat into I with my pain . if I tell everything if I deliver up everything what else can be demand of I ? I can not make myself love the people I have never love be it not enough that I lose the life I do love ? " 

 she have lean forward a little in her low - toned pleading , that seem like a smother cry : her arm and hand be stretch out at full length , as if strain in beseech , Deronda 's soul be absorb in the anguish of compassion . he could not mind now that he have be repulse before . his pity make a flood of forgiveness within he . his single impulse be to kneel by she and take her hand gently , between his palm , while he say in that exquisite voice of soothe which express oneness with the sufferer 

 " Mother , take comfort ! " 

 she do not seem inclined to repulse he now , but look down at he and let he take both her hand to fold between his . gradually tear gather , but she press her handkerchief against her eye and then lean her cheek against his brow , as if she wish that they should not look at each other . 

 " be it not possible that I could be near you often and comfort you ? " say Deronda . he be under that stress of pity that propel we on sacrifice . 

 " no , not possible , " she answer , lift up her head again and withdraw her hand as if she wish he to move away . " I have a husband and five child . none of they know of your existence . " 

 Deronda feel painfully silence . he rise and stand at a little distance . 

 " you wonder why I marry , " she go on presently , under the influence of a newly - recur thought . " I mean never to marry again . I mean to be free and to live for my art . I have part with you . I have no bond . for nine year I be a queen . I enjoy the life I have long for . but something befall I . it be like a fit of forgetfulness . I begin to sing out of tune . they tell I of it . another woman be thrust herself in my place . I could not endure the prospect of failure and decline . it be horrible to I . " she start up again , with a shudder , and lift screen hand like one who dread missile . " it drive I to marry . I make believe that I prefer be the wife of a russian noble to be the great lyric actress of Europe ; I make believe I act that part . it be because I feel my greatness sink away from I , as I feel my life sink now . I would not wait till man say , ' she have well go . ' " 

 she sink into her seat again , and look at the evening sky as she go on : " I repent . it be a resolve take in desperation . that sing out of tune be only like a fit of illness ; it go away . I repent ; but it be too late . I could not go back . all thing hinder , I all thing . " 

 a new haggardness have come in her face , but her son refrain from again urge she to leave further speech till the morrow : there be evidently some mental relief for she in an outpouring such as she could never have allow herself before . he stand still while she maintain silence long than she know , and the light be perceptibly fade . at last she turn to he and say 

 " I can bear no more now . " she put out her hand , but then quickly withdraw it say , " stay . how do I know that I can see you again ? I can not bear to be see when I be in pain . " 

 she draw forth a pocket - book , and take out a letter say , " this be address to the banking - house in Mainz , where you be to go for your grandfather 's chest . it be a letter write by Joseph Kalonymos : if he be not there himself , this order of his will be obey . " 

 when Deronda have take the letter , she say , with effort but more gently than before , " kneel again , and let I kiss you . " 

 he obey , and hold his head between her hand , she kiss he solemnly on the brow . " you see , I have no life leave to love you with , " she say , in a low murmur . " but there be more fortune for you . Sir Hugo be to keep it in reserve . I give you all your father 's fortune . they can never accuse I of robbery there . " 

 " if you have need anything I would have work for you , " say Deronda , conscious of disappointed yearn a shutting out forever from long early vista of affectionate imagination . 

 " I need nothing that the skill of man can give I , " say his mother , still hold his head , and peruse his feature . " but perhaps now I have satisfy my father 's will , your face will come instead of his your young , love face . " 

 " but you will see I again ? " say Deronda , anxiously . 

 " yes perhaps . wait , wait . leave I now . " 

 CHAPTER LII . 

 " La meme fermetť qui sert a rťsister a l'amour sert aussi a le rendre violent et durable ; et les personne faible qui sont toujour agitťes des passion n'en sont presque jamais vťritablement remplie . " LA ROCHEFOUCAULD . 

 among Deronda 's letter the next morning be one from Hans Meyrick of four quarto page , in the small , beautiful handwriting which run in the Meyrick family . 

 MY DEAR DERONDA , in return for your sketch of italian movement and your view of the world 's affair generally , I may say that here at home the most judicious opinion go as to the effect of present cause be that " time will show . " as to the present cause of past effect , it be now see that the late swindle telegram account for the last year 's cattle plague which be a refutation of philosophy falsely so call , and justify the compensation to the farmer . my own idea that a murrain will shortly break out in the commercial class , and that the cause will subsequently disclose itself in the ready sale of all reject picture , have be call an unsound use of analogy ; but there be mind that will not hesitate to rob even the neglect painter of his solace . to my feeling there be great beauty in the conception that some bad judge might give a high price for my Berenice series , and that the man in the city would have already be punish for my ill - merit luck . 

 meanwhile I be console myself for your absence by find my advantage in it shin like Hesperus when Hyperion have depart ; sit with our Hebrew prophet , and make a study of his head , in the hour when he use to be occupy with you get credit with he as a learn young Gentile , who would have be a Jew if he could and agree with he in the general principle , that whatever be good be for that reason jewish . I never hold it my forte to be a severe reasoner , but I can see that if whatever be good be A , and b happen to be good , b must be A , however little you might have expect it beforehand . on that principle I could see the force of a pamphlet I once read to prove that all good art be protestant . however , our prophet be an uncommonly interesting sitter a well model than Rembrandt have for his Rabbi and I never come away from he without a new discovery . for one thing , it be a constant wonder to I that , with all his fiery feeling for his race and their tradition , he be no straight - laced Jew , spit after the word Christian , and enjoy the prospect that the Gentile mouth will water in vain for a slice of the roasted Leviathan , while Israel will be send up plate for more , ad libitum ,   you perceive that my study have teach I what to expect from the orthodox Jew .   I confess that I have always hold lightly by your account of Mordecai , as apologetic , and merely part of your disposition to make an antedeluvian point of view lest you should do injustice to the megatherium . but now I have give ear to he in his proper person , I find he really a sort of philosophical - allegorical - mystical believer , and yet with a sharp dialectic point , so that any argumentative rattler of pea in a bladder might soon be prick in silence by he . the mixture may be one of the jewish prerogative , for what I know . in fact , his mind seem so broad that I find my own correct opinion lie in it quite commodiously , and how they be to be bring into agreement with the vast remainder be his affair , not mine . I leave it to he to settle our basis , never yet have see a basis which be not a world - support elephant , more or less powerful and expensive to keep . my mean will not allow I to keep a private elephant . I go into mystery instead , as cheap and more lasting a sort of gas which be likely to be continually supply by the decomposition of the elephant . and if I like the look of an opinion , I treat it civilly , without suspicious inquiry . I have quite a friendly feeling toward Mordecai 's notion that a whole Christian be three - fourth a Jew , and that from the alexandrian time downward the most comprehensive mind have be jewish ; for I think of point out to Mirah that , arabic and other incident of life apart , there be really little difference between I and Maimonides . but I have lately be find out that it be your shallow lover who can not   help make a declaration . if Mirah 's way be less distract , and it be less of a heaven to be in her presence and watch she , I must long ago have fling myself at her foot , and request she to tell I , with less indirectness , whether she wish I to blow my brain out . I have a knack of hoping , which be as good as an estate in reversion , if one can keep from the temptation of turn it into certainty , which may spoil all . my Hope wander among the orchard blossom , feel the warm snow fall on it through the sunshine , and be in doubt of nothing ; but , catch sight of Certainty in the distance , see an ugly Janus - face deity , with a dubious wink on the hither side of he , and turn quickly away . but you , with your supreme reasonableness , and self - nullification , and preparation for the bad you know nothing about Hope , that immortal , delicious maiden forever court forever propitious , whom fool have call deceitful , as if it be Hope that carry the cup of disappointment , whereas it be her deadly enemy , Certainty , whom she only escape by transformation .   you observe my new vein of allegory ?   seriously , however , I must be permit to allege that truth will prevail , that prejudice will melt before it , that diversity , accompany by merit , will make itself feel as fascination , and that no virtuous aspiration will be frustrate all which , if I mistake not , be doctrine of the school , and they imply that the Jewess I prefer will prefer I . any blockhead can cite generality , but the mind - master discern the particular case they represent . 

 I be less convinced that my society make amend to Mordecai for your absence , but another substitute occasionally come in the form of Jacob Cohen . it be worth while to catch our prophet 's expression when he have that remarkable type of young Israel on his knee , and pour forth some semitic inspiration with a sublime look of melancholy patience and devoutness . sometimes it occur to Jacob that Hebrew will be more edify to he if he stop his ear with his palm , and imitate the venerable sound as hear through that muffle medium . when Mordecai gently draw down the little fist and hold they fast , Jacob 's feature all take on an extraordinary activity , very much as if he be walk through a menagerie and try to imitate every animal in turn , succeed well with the owl and the peccary . but I dare say you have see something of this . he treat I with the easy familiarity , and seem in general to look at I as a second - hand christian commodity , likely to come down in price ; remark on my disadvantage with a frankness which seem to imply some thought of future purchase . it be pretty , though , to see the change in he if Mirah happen to come in . he turn child suddenly his age usually strike one as be like the israelitish garment in the desert , perhaps near forty , yet with an air of recent production . but , with Mirah , he remind I of the dog that have be bring up by woman , and remain manageable by they only . still , the dog be fond of Mordecai too , and bring sugar - plum to share with he , fill his own mouth to rather an embarrassing extent , and watch how Mordecai deal with a small supply . judge from this modern Jacob at the age of six , my astonishment be that his race have not buy we all up long ago , and pocket our feebler generation in the form of stock and scrip , as so much slave property . there be one Jewess I should not mind be slave to . but I wish I do not imagine that Mirah get a little sad , and try all the while to hide it . it be natural enough , of course , while she have to watch the slow death of this brother , whom she have take to worship with such look of love devoutness that I be ready to wish myself in his place . 

 for the rest , we be a little merry than usual . Rex Gascoigne you remember a head you admire among my sketch , a fellow with a good upper lip , read law have get some room in town now not far off we , and have have a neat sister   upper lip also good   stay with he the last fortnight . I have introduce they both to my mother and the girl , who have find out from Miss Gascoigne that she be cousin to your Vandyke duchess ! ! ! I put the note of exclamation to mark the surprise that the information at first produce on my feeble understanding . on reflection I discover that there be not the least ground for surprise , unless I have beforehand believe that nobody could be anybody 's cousin without my know it . this sort of surprise , I take it , depend on a liveliness of the spine , with a more or less constant nullity of brain . there be a fellow I use to meet at Rome who be in an effervescence of surprise at contact with the simple information . tell he what you would that you be fond of easy boot he would always say , " no ! be you ? " with the same energy of wonder : the very fellow of whom pastoral Browne write prophetically 

  " a wretch so empty that if e'er there be 
  in nature find the least vacuity 
  ' twill be in he . " 
 I have account for it all he have a lively spine . 

 however , this cousinship with the duchess come out by chance one day that Mirah be with they at home and they be talk about the mallinger . apropo ; I be get so important that I have rival invitation . Gascoigne want I to go down with he to his father 's rectory in August and see the country round there . but I think self - interest well understand will take I to Topping Abbey , for Sir Hugo have invite I , and propose God bless he for his rashness ! that I should make a picture of his three daughter sit on a bank as he say , in the Gainsborough style . he come to my studio the other day and recommend I to apply myself to portrait . of course I know what that mean . " my good fellow , your attempt at the historic and poetic be simply pitiable . your brush be just that of a successful portrait - painter it have a little truth and a great facility in falsehood your idealism will never do for god and goddess and heroic story , but it may fetch a high price as flattery . Fate , my friend , have make you the hinder wheel rota posterior curra , et in axe secundo run behind , because you can not   help it . " what great effort it evidently cost our friend to give we these candid opinion ! I have even know a man to take the trouble to call , in order to tell I that I have irretrievably expose my want of judgment in treat my subject , and that if I have ask he we would have lend I his own judgment . such be my ingratitude and my readiness at composition , that even while he be speak I inwardly sketch a last Judgment with that candid friend 's physiognomy on the left . but all this be away from Sir Hugo , whose manner of imply that one 's gift be not of the high order be so exceedingly good - natured and comfortable that I begin to feel it an advantage not to be among those poor fellow at the tip - top . and his kindness to I taste all the well because it come out of his love for you , old boy . his chat be uncommonly amusing . by the way , he tell I that your Vandyke duchess be go with her husband yacht to the Mediterranean . I bethink I that it be possible to land from a yacht , or to be take on to a yacht from the land . shall you by chance have an opportunity of continue your theological discussion with the fair Supralapsarian I think you say her tenet be of that complexion ? be Duke Alphonso also theological ? perhaps an Arian who object to triplicity .   stage direction . while D. be read , a profound scorn gather in his face till at the last word he fling down the letter , grasp his coat - collar in a statuesque attitude and so remain with a look generally tremendous , throughout the following soliloquy , " o night , o blackness , etc . , etc . " 

 excuse the brevity of this letter . you be not use to more from I than a bare statement of fact , without comment or digression . one fact I have omit that the Klesmers on the eve of departure have behave magnificently , shin forth as might be expect from the planet of genius and fortune in conjunction . Mirah be rich with their oriental gift . 

 what luck it will be if you come back and present yourself at the Abbey while I be there ! I be go to behave with consummate discretion and win golden opinion , but I shall run up to town now and then , just for a peep into Gad Eden . you see how far I have get in Hebrew lore up with my Lord Bolingbroke , who know no Hebrew , but " understand that sort of learn and what be writ about it . " if Mirah command , I would go to a depth below the tri - literal root . already it make no difference to I whether the point be there or not . but while her brother 's life last I suspect she would not listen to a lover , even one whose " hair be like a flock of goat on Mount Gilead " and I flatter myself that few head would bear that try comparison well than mine . so I stay with my hope among the orchard - blossom . 

 your devoted , 

 HANS MEYRICK . 

 some month before , this letter from Hans would have divide Deronda 's thought irritatingly : its romancing , about Mirah would have have an unpleasant edge , scarcely anoint with any commiseration for his friend 's probable disappointment . but thing have alter since March . Mirah be no long so critically place with regard to the Meyricks , and Deronda 's own position have be undergo a change which have just be crown by the revelation of his birth . the new opening toward the future , though he would not trust in any definite vision , inevitably shed new light , and influence his mood toward past and present ; hence , what Hans call his hope now seem to Deronda , not a mischievous unreasonableness which rouse his indignation , but an unusually persistent bird - dance of an extravagant fancy , and he would have feel quite able to pity any consequent suffering of his friend 's , if he have believe in the suffering as probable . but some of the busy thought fill that long day , which pass without his receive any new summon from his mother , be give to the argument that Hans Meyrick 's nature be not one in which love could strike the deep root that turn disappointment into sorrow : it be too restless , too readily excitable by novelty , too ready to turn itself into imaginative material , and wear its grief as a fantastic costume . " already he be begin to play at love : he be take the whole affair as a comedy , " say Deronda to himself ; " he know very well that there be no chance for he . just like he never open his eye on any possible objection I could have to receive his outpouring about Mirah . poor old Hans ! if we be under a fiery hail together he would howl like a Greek , and if I do not howl too it would never occur to he that I be as badly off as he . and yet he be tender - hearted and affectionate in intention , and I can not   say that he be not active in imagine what go on in other people but then he always imagine it to fit his own inclination . " 

 with this touch of causticity Deronda get rid of the slight heat at present raise by Hans 's naive expansiveness . the nonsense about Gwendolen , convey the fact that she be go yacht with her husband , only suggest a disturbing sequel to his own strange parting with she . but there be one sentence in the letter which raise a more immediate , active anxiety . Hans 's suspicion of a hide sadness in Mirah be not in the direction of his wish , and hence , instead of distrust his observation here , Deronda begin to conceive a cause for the sadness . be it some event that have occur during his absence , or only the grow fear of some event ? be it something , perhaps alterable , in the new position which have be make for she ? or have Mordecai , against his habitual resolve , communicate to she those peculiar cherish hope about he , Deronda , and have she quickly sensitive nature be hurt by the discovery that her brother 's will or tenacity of visionary conviction have act coercively on their friendship be hurt by the fear that there be more of pity self - suppression than of equal regard in Deronda 's relation to he ? for amidst all Mirah 's quiet renunciation , the evident thirst of soul with which she receive the tribute of equality imply a correspond pain if she find that what she have take for a purely reverential regard toward her brother have its mixture of condescension . 

 in this last conjecture of Deronda 's he be not wrong as to the quality in Mirah 's nature on which he be found the latent protest against the treatment she have all her life be subject to until she meet he . for that gratitude which would not let she pass by any notice of their acquaintance without insist on the depth of her debt to he , take half its fervor from the keen comparison with what other have think enough to render to she . Deronda 's affinity in feel enable he to penetrate such secret . but he be not near the truth in admit the idea that Mordecai have break his characteristic reticence . to no soul but Deronda himself have he yet breathe the history of their relation to each other , or his confidence about his friend 's origin : it be not only that these subject be for he too sacred to be speak of without weighty reason , but that he have discern Deronda 's shrinking at any mention of his birth ; and the severity of reserve which have hinder Mordecai from answer a question on a private affair of the Cohen family tell yet more strongly here . 

 " Ezra , how be it ? " Mirah one day say to he " I be continually go to speak to Mr. Deronda as if he be a Jew ? " 

 he smile at she quietly , and say , " I suppose it be because he treat we as if he be our brother . but he love not to have the difference of birth dwelt upon . " 

 " he have never live with his parent , Mr. Hans , say , " continue Mirah , to whom this be necessarily a question of interest about every one for whom she have a regard . 

 " seek not to know such thing from Mr. Hans , " say Mordecai , gravely , lay his hand on her curl , as he be will not . " what Daniel Deronda wish we to know about himself be for he to tell we . " 

 and Mirah feel herself rebuke , as Deronda have do . but to be rebuke in this way by Mordecai make she rather proud . 

 " I see no one so great as my brother , " she say to Mrs. Meyrick one day that she call at the Chelsea house on her way home , and , accord to her hope , find the little mother alone . " it be difficult to think that he belong to the same world as those people I use to live amongst . I tell you once that they make life seem like a madhouse ; but when I be with Ezra he make I feel that his life be a great good , though he have suffer so much ; not like I , who want to die because I have suffer a little , and only for a little while . his soul be so full , it be impossible for he to wish for death as I do . I get the same sort of feeling from he that I get yesterday , when I be tired , and come home through the park after the sweet rain have fall and the sunshine lie on the grass and flower . everything in the sky and under the sky look so pure and beautiful that the weariness and trouble and folly seem only a small part of what be , and I become more patient and hopeful . " 

 a dove - like note of melancholy in this speech cause Mrs. Meyrick to look at Mirah with new examination . after lay down her hat and push her curl flat , with an air of fatigue , she place herself on a chair opposite her friend in her habitual attitude , her foot and hand just cross ; and at a distance she might have seem a colored statue of serenity . but Mrs. Meyrick discern a new look of suppress suffering in her face , which correspond to the hint that to be patient and hopeful require some extra influence . 

 " be there any fresh trouble on your mind , my dear ? " say Mrs. Meyrick , give up her needlework as a sign of concentrated attention . 

 Mirah hesitate before she say , " I be too ready to speak of trouble , I think . it seem unkind to put anything painful into other people 's mind , unless one be sure it would hinder something bad . and perhaps I be too hasty and fearful . " 

 " oh , my dear , mother be make to like pain and trouble for the sake of their child . be it because the singing lesson be so few , and be likely to fall off when the season come to an end ? success in these thing can not   come all at once . " Mrs. Meyrick do not believe that she be touch the real grief ; but a guess that could be correct would make an easy channel for confidence . 

 " no , not that , " say Mirah , shake her head gently . " I have be a little disappointed because so many lady say they want I to give they or their daughter lesson , and then I never hear of they again , but perhaps after the holiday I shall teach in some school . besides , you know , I be as rich as a princess now . I have not touch the hundred pound that Mrs. Klesmer give I ; and I should never be afraid that Ezra would be in want of anything , because there be Mr. Deronda , " and he say , ' it be the chief honor of my life that your brother will share anything with I . ' oh , no ! Ezra and I can have no fear for each other about such thing as food and clothing . " 

 " but there be some other fear on your mind , " say Mrs. Meyrick not without divination " a fear of something that may disturb your peace ; do not   be forecast evil , dear child , unless it be what you can guard against . anxiety be good for nothing if we can not   turn it into a defense . but there be no defense against all the thing that might be . have you any more reason for be anxious now than you have a month ago ? " 

 " yes , I have , " say Mirah . " I have keep it from Ezra . I have not dare to tell he . pray forgive I that I can not   do without tell you . I have more reason for be anxious . it be five day ago now . I be quite sure I see my father . " 

 Mrs. Meyrick shrink into a small space , pack her arm across her chest and lean forward to hinder herself from pelt that father with her bad epithet . 

 " the year have change he , " Mirah go on . " he have already be much alter and wear in the time before I leave he . you remember I say how he use sometimes to cry . he be always excited one way or the other . I have tell Ezra everything that I tell you , and he say that my father have take to gambling , which make people easily distress , and then again exalt . and now it be only a moment that I see he his face be more haggard , and his clothe be shabby . he be with a much worse - look man , who carry something , and they be hurry along after an omnibus . " 

 " well , child , he do not see you , I hope ? " 

 " no . I have just come from Mrs. Raymond 's , and I be wait to cross near the Marble Arch . soon he be on the omnibus and go out of sight . it be a dreadful moment . my old life seem to have come back again , and it be bad than it have ever be before . and I could not help feel it a new deliverance that he be go out of sight without know that I be there . and yet it hurt I that I be feel so it seem hateful in I almost like word I once have to speak in a play , that ' I have warm my hand in the blood of my kindre . ' for where might my father be go ? what may become of he ? and his have a daughter who would own he in spite of all , might have hinder the bad . be there any pain like see what ought to be the good thing in life turn into the bad ? all those opposite feeling be meet and press against each other , and take up all my strength . no one could act that . acting be slow and poor to what we go through within . I do not   know how I call a cab . I only remember that I be in it when I begin to think , ' I can not tell Ezra ; he must not know . ' " 

 " you be afraid of grieve he ? " Mrs. Meyrick ask , when Mirah have pause a little . 

 " yes and there be something more , " say Mirah , hesitatingly , as if she be examine she feeling before she would venture to speak of it . " I want to tell you ; I can not tell any one else . I could not have tell my own mother : I should have close it up before she . I feel shame for my father , and it be perhaps strange but the shame be great before Ezra than before any one else in the world . he desire I to tell he all about my life , and I obey he . but it be always like a smart to I to know that those thing about my father be in Ezra 's mind . and can you believe it ? when the thought haunt I how it would be if my father be to come and show himself before we both , what seem as if it would scorch I most be see my father shrink before Ezra . that be the truth . I do not   know whether it be a right feeling . but I can not   help think that I would rather try to maintain my father in secret , and bear a great deal in that way , if I could hinder he from meet my brother . " 

 " you must not encourage that feeling , Mirah , " say Mrs. Meyrick , hastily . " it would be very dangerous ; it would be wrong . you must not have concealment of that sort . " 

 " but ought I now to tell Ezra that I have see my father ? " say Mirah , with deprecation in her tone . 

 " no , " Mrs. Meyrick answer , dubitatively . " I do not   know that it be necessary to do that . your father may go away with the bird . it be not clear that he come after you ; you may never see he again . and then your brother will have be spar a useless anxiety . but promise I that if your father see you get hold of you in any way again and you will let we all know . promise I that solemnly , Mirah . I have a right to ask it . " 

 Mirah reflect a little , then lean forward to put her hand in Mrs. Meyrick 's , and say , " since you ask it , I do promise . I will bear this feeling of shame . I have be so long use to think that I must bear that sort of inward pain . but the shame for my father burn I more when I think of his meeting Ezra . " she be silent a moment or two , and then say , in a new tone of yearn compassion , " and we be his child and he be once young like we and my mother love he . oh ! I can not help see it all close , and it hurt I like a cruelty . " 

 Mirah shed no tear : the discipline of her whole life have be against indulgence in such manifestation , which soon fall under the control of strong motif ; but it seem that the more intense expression of sorrow have enter into her voice . Mrs. Meyrick , with all her quickness and love insight , do not quite understand that filial feeling in Mirah which have active root deep below her indignation for the bad offense . she could conceive that a mother would have a cling pity and shame for a reprobate son , but she be out of patience with what she hold an exaggerated susceptibility on behalf of this father , whose reappearance incline she to wish he under the care of a turnkey . Mirah 's promise , however , be some security against her weakness . 

 that incident be the only reason that Mirah herself could have state for the hidden sadness which Hans have divine . of one element in her change mood she could have give no definite account : it be something as dim as the sense of approach weather - change , and have extremely slight external prompting , such as we be often ashamed to find all we can allege in support of the busy construction that go on within we , not only without effort , but even against it , under the influence of any blind emotional stirring . perhaps the first leaven of uneasiness be lay by Gwendolen 's behavior on that visit which be entirely superfluous as a means of engage Mirah to sing , and could have no other motive than the excited and strange questioning about Deronda . Mirah have instinctively keep the visit a secret , but the active remembrance of it have raise a new susceptibility in she , and make she alive as she have never be before to the relation Deronda must have with that society which she herself be get frequent glimpse of without belong to it . her peculiar life and education have produce in she an extraordinary mixture of unworldliness , with knowledge of the world 's evil , and even this knowledge be a strange blending of direct observation with the effect of reading and theatrical study . her memory be furnish with abundant passionate situation and intrigue , which she never make emotionally her own , but feel a repel aloofness from , as she have do from the actual life around she . some of that imaginative knowledge begin now to weave itself around Mrs. Grandcourt ; and though Mirah would admit no position likely to affect her reverence for Deronda , she could not avoid a new painfully vivid association of his general life with a world away from her own , where there might be some involvement of his feeling and action with a woman like Gwendolen , who be increasingly repugnant to she increasingly , even after she have cease to see she ; for like and disliking can grow in meditation as fast as in the more immediate kind of presence . any disquietude consciously due to the idea that Deronda 's deep care might be for something remote not only from herself but even from his friendship for her brother , she would have check with rebuke question : what be she but one who have share his generous kindness with many other ? and his attachment to her brother , be it not begin late to be soon end ? other tie have come before , and other would remain after this have be cut by swift - come death . but her uneasiness have not reach that point of self - recognition in which she would have be ashamed of it as an indirect , presumptuous claim on Deronda 's feeling . that she or any one else should think of he as her possible lover be a conception which have never enter her mind ; indeed it be equally out of the question with Mrs. Meyrick and the girl , who with Mirah herself regard his intervention in her life as something exceptional , and be so impressed by his mission as her deliverer and guardian that they would have hold it an offense to he at his hold any other relation toward she : a point of view which Hans also have readily adopt . it be a little hard upon some man that they appear to sink for we in become lover . but precisely to this innocence of the Meyricks be owe the disturbance of Mirah 's unconsciousness . the first occasion could hardly have be more trivial , but it prepare her emotive nature for a deep effect from what happen afterward . 

 it be when Anna Gascoigne , visit the Meyricks ; be lead to speak of her cousinship with Gwendolen . the visit have be arrange that Anna might see Mirah ; the three girl be at home with their mother , and there be naturally a flux of talk among six feminine creature , free from the presence of a distort male standard . Anna Gascoigne feel herself much at home with the Meyrick girl , who know what it be to have a brother , and to be generally regard as of minor importance in the world ; and she have tell Rex that she think the University very nice , because brother make friend there whose family be not rich and grand , and yet   like the University   be very nice . the Meyricks seem to she almost alarmingly clever , and she consult they much on the good mode of teach Lotta , confide to they that she herself be the least clever of her family . Mirah have lately come in , and there be a complete bouquet of young face around the tea - table Hafiz , seat a little aloft with large eye on the alert , regard the whole scene as an apparatus for supply his allowance of milk . 

 " think of our surprise , Mirah , " say Kate . " we be speak of Mr. Deronda and the Mallingers , and it turn out that Miss Gascoigne know they . " 

 " I only know about they , " say Anna , a little flushed with excitement , what she have hear and now see of the lovely Jewess be an almost startling novelty to she . " I have not even see they . but some month ago , my cousin marry Sir Hugo Mallinger 's nephew , Mr. Grandcourt , who live in Sir Hugo 's place at diplow , near we . " 

 " there ! " exclaim Mab , clasp her hand . " something must come of that . Mrs. Grandcourt , the Vandyke duchess , be your cousin ? " 

 " oh , yes ; I be she bridesmaid , " say Anna . " her mamma and mine be sister . my aunt be much rich before last year , but then she and mamma lose all their fortune . Papa be a clergyman , you know , so it make very little difference to we , except that we keep no carriage , and have no dinner party and I like it well . but it be very sad for poor aunt davilow , for she could not live with we , because she have four daughter besides Gwendolen ; but then , when she marry Mr. Grandcourt , it do not signify so much , because of his be so rich . " 

 " oh , this find out relationship be delightful ! " say Mab . " it be like a chinese puzzle that one have to fit together . I feel sure something wonderful may be make of it , but I can not   tell what . " 

 " dear I , Mab , " say Amy , " relationship must branch out . the only difference be , that we happen to know some of the people concern . such thing be go on every day . " 

 " and pray , Amy , why do you insist on the number nine be so wonderful ? " say Mab . " I be sure that be happen every day . never mind , Miss Gascoigne ; please go on . and Mr. Deronda ? have you never see Mr. Deronda ? you must bring he in . " 

 " no , I have not see he , " say Anna ; " but he be at Diplow before my cousin be marry , and I have hear my aunt speak of he to papa . she say what you have be say about he only not so much : I mean , about Mr. Deronda live with Sir Hugo Mallinger , and be so nice , she think . we talk a great deal about every one who come near Pennicote , because it be so seldom there be any one new . but I remember , when I ask Gwendolen what she think of Mr. Deronda , she say , ' do not   mention it , Anna : but I think his hair be dark . ' that be her droll way of answer : she be always so lively . it be really rather wonderful that I should come to hear so much about he , all through Mr. Hans know Rex , and then my have the pleasure of know you , " Anna end , look at Mrs. Meyrick with a shy grace . 

 " the pleasure be on our side too ; but the wonder would have be , if you have come to this house without hearing of Mr. Deronda would not   it , Mirah ? " say Mrs. Meyrick . 

 Mirah smile acquiescently , but have nothing to say . a confused discontent take possession of she at the mingling of name and image to which she have be listen . 

 " my son call Mrs. Grandcourt the Vandyke duchess , " continue Mrs. Meyrick , turn again to Anna ; " he think she so striking and picturesque . " 

 " yes , " say Anna . " Gwendolen be always so beautiful people fall dreadfully in love with she . I think it a pity , because it make they unhappy . " 

 " and how do you like Mr. Grandcourt , the happy lover ? " say Mrs. Meyrick , who , in her way , be as much interested as Mab in the hint she have be hear of vicissitude in the life of a widow with daughter . 

 " Papa approve of Gwendolen 's accept he , and my aunt say he be very generous , " say Anna , begin with a virtuous intention of repress her own sentiment ; but then , unable to resist a rare occasion for speak they freely , she go on " else I should have think he be not very nice rather proud , and not at all lively , like Gwendolen . I should have think some one young and more lively would have suit she well . but , perhaps , have a brother who seem to we well than any one make we think bad of other . " 

 " wait till you see Mr. Deronda , " say Mab , nod significantly . 
 " nobody 's brother will do after he . " 
 " our brother must do for people 's husband , " say Kate , curtly , " because they will not get Mr. Deronda . no woman will do for he to marry . " 

 " no woman ought to want he to marry he , " say Mab , with indignation . " I never should . Fancy find out that he have a tailor 's bill , and use boot - hook , like Hans . who ever think of his marrying ? " 

 " I have , " say Kate . " when I draw a wedding for a frontispiece to ' Hearts and Diamonds , ' I make a sort of likeness to he for the bridegroom , and I go about look for a grand woman who would do for his countess , but I see none that would not be poor creature by the side of he . " 

 " you should have see this Mrs. Grandcourt then , " say Mrs. Meyrick . " Hans say that she and Mr. Deronda set each other off when they be side by side . she be tall and fair . but you know she , Mirah you can always say something descriptive . what do you think of Mrs. Grandcourt ? " 

 " I think she be the Princess of Eboli in Don Carlos , " say Mirah , with a quick intensity . she be pursue an association in her own mind not intelligible to her hearer an association with a certain actress as well as the part she represent . 

 " your comparison be a riddle for I , my dear , " say Mrs. Meyrick , smile . 

 " you say that Mrs. Grandcourt be tall and fair , " continue Mirah , slightly pale . " that be quite true . " 

 Mrs. Meyrick 's quick eye and ear detect something unusual , but immediately explain it to herself . fine lady have often wound Mirah by caprice of manner and intention . 

 " Mrs. Grandcourt have think of have lesson of Mirah , " she say turn to Anna . " but many have talk of have lesson , and then have find no time . fashionable lady have too much work to do . " 

 and the chat go on without further insistance on the Princess of Eboli . that comparison escape Mirah 's lip under the urgency of a pang unlike anything she have feel before . the conversation from the beginning have revive unpleasant impression , and Mrs. Meyrick 's suggestion of Gwendolen 's figure by the side of Deronda 's have the stinging effect of a voice outside she , confirm her secret conviction that this tall and fair woman have some hold on his lot . for a long while afterward she feel as if she have have a jarring shock through her frame . 

 in the evening , put she cheek against her brother 's shoulder as she be sit by he , while he sit prop up in bed under a new difficulty of breathing , she say 

 " Ezra , do it ever hurt your love for Mr. Deronda that so much of his life be all hide away from you that he be amongst person and care about person who be all so unlike we I mean unlike you ? " 

 " no , assuredly no , " say Mordecai . " rather it be a precious thought to I that he have a preparation which I lack , and be an accomplished egyptian . " then , recollect that his word have reference which his sister must not yet understand , he add . " I have the more to give he , since his treasure differ from mine . that be a blessedness in friendship . " 

 Mirah muse a little . 

 " still , " she say , " it would be a trial to your love for he if that other part of his life be like a crowd in which he have get entangle , so that he be carry away from you I mean in his thought , and not merely carry out of sight as he be now and not merely for a little while , but continually . how should you bear that ! our religion command we to bear . but how should you bear it ? " 

 " not well , my sister not well ; but it will never happen , " say Mordecai , look at she with a tender smile . he think that her heart need comfort on his account . 

 Mirah say no more . she muse over the difference between her own state of mind and her brother 's , and feel her comparative pettiness . why could she not be completely satisfied with what satisfy his large judgment ? she give herself no full reason than a painful sense of unfitness in what ? airy possibility to which she could give no outline , but to which one name and one figure give the wandering persistency of a blot in her vision . here lie the vague source of the hide sadness render noticeable to Hans by some diminution of that sweet ease , that ready joyousness of response in her speech and smile , which have come with the new sense of freedom and safety , and have make her presence like the freshly - open daisy and clear bird - note after the rain . she herself regard her uneasiness as a sort of ingratitude and dullness of sensibility toward the great thing that have be give she in her new life ; and whenever she throw more energy than usual into her singing , it be the energy of indignation against the shallowness of her own content . in that mood she once say , " shall I tell you what be the difference between you and I , Ezra ? you be a spring in the drought , and I be an acorn - cup ; the water of heaven fill I , but the least little shake leave I empty . " 

 " why , what have shake thee ? " say Mordecai . he fall into this antique form of speech habitually in talk to his sister and to the Cohen child . 

 " thought , " say Mirah ; " thought that come like the breeze and shake I bad people , wrong thing , misery and how they might touch our life . " 

 " we must take our portion , Mirah . it be there . on whose shoulder would we lay it , that we might be free ? " 

 the one voluntary sign she make of her inward care be this distant allusion . 

 CHAPTER LIII . 

  " my desolation do begin to make 
  a well life . " 
  SHAKESPEARE : Antony and Cleopatra . 
 before Deronda be summon to a second interview with his mother , a day have pass in which she have only send he a message to say that she be not yet well enough to receive he again ; but on the third morning he have a note say , " I leave to - day . come and see I at once . " 

 he be show into the same room as before ; but it be much darken with blind and curtain . the Princess be not there , but she presently enter , dress in a loose wrap of some soft silk , in color a dusky orange , her head again with black lace float about it , her arm show themselves bare from under her wide sleeve . her face seem even more impressive in the sombre light , the eye large , the line more vigorous . you might have imagine she a sorceress who would stretch forth her wonderful hand and arm to mix youth - potion for other , but scorn to mix they for herself , have have enough of youth . 

 she put her arm on her son 's shoulder at once , and kiss he on both cheek , then seat herself among her cushion with an air of assured firmness and dignity unlike her fitfulness in their first interview , and tell Deronda to sit down by she . he obey , say , " you be quite relieved now , I trust ? " 

 " yes , I be at ease again . be there anything more that you would like to ask I ? " she say , with the matter of a queen rather than of a mother . 

 " can I find the house in Genoa where you use to live with my grandfather ? " say Deronda . 

 " no , " she answer , with a deprecating movement of her arm , " it be pull down not to be find . but about our family , and where my father live at various time you will find all that among the paper in the chest , well than I can tell you . my father , I tell you , be a physician . my mother be a Morteira . I use to hear all those thing without listen . you will find they all . I be bear amongst they without my will . I banish they as soon as I could . " 

 Deronda try to hide his pained feeling , and say , " anything else that I should desire to know from you could only be what it be some satisfaction to your own feeling to tell I . " 

 " I think I have tell you everything that could be demand of I , " say the Princess , look coldly meditative . it seem as if she have exhaust her emotion in their former interview . the fact be , she have say to herself , " I have do it all . I have confess all . I will not go through it again . I will save myself from agitation . " and she be act out that scheme . 

 but to Deronda 's nature the moment be cruel ; it make the filial yearning of his life a disappointed pilgrimage to a shrine where there be no long the symbol of sacredness . it seem that all the woman lack in she be present in he , as he say , with some tremor in his voice 

 " then be we to part and I never be anything to you ? " 

 " it be well so , " say the Princess , in a soft , mellower voice . " there could be nothing but hard duty for you , even if it be possible for you to take the place of my son . you would not love I . do not   deny it , " she say , abruptly , put up her hand . " I know what be the truth . you do not   like what I do . you be angry with I . you think I rob you of something . you be on your grandfather 's side , and you will always have a condemnation of I in your heart . " 

 Deronda feel himself under a ban of silence . he rise from his seat by she , prefer to stand , if he have to obey that imperious prohibition of any tenderness . but his mother now look up at he with a new admiration in her glance , say 

 " you be wrong to be angry with I . you be the well for what I do . " after pause a little , she add , abruptly , " and now tell I what you shall do ? " 

 " do you mean now , immediately , " say Deronda ; " or as to the course of my future life ? " 

 " I mean in the future . what difference will it make to you that I have tell you about your birth ? " 

 " a very great difference , " say Deronda , emphatically . " I can hardly think of anything that would make a great difference . " 

 " what shall you do then ? " say the Princess , with more sharpness . " make yourself just like your grandfather be what he wish you turn yourself into a Jew like he ? " 

 " that be impossible . the effect of my education can never be do away with . the christian sympathy in which my mind be rear can never die out of I , " say Deronda , with increase tenacity of tone . " but I consider it my duty it be the impulse of my feeling to identify myself , as far as possible , with my hereditary people , and if I can see any work to be do for they that I can give my soul and hand to I shall choose to do it . " 

 his mother have her eye fix on he with a wonder speculation , examine his face as if she think that by close attention she could read a difficult language there . he bear her gaze very firmly , sustain by a resolute opposition , which be the expression of his full self . she bend toward he a little , and say , with a decisive emphasis 

 " you be in love with a Jewess . " 

 Deronda color and say , " my reason would be independent of any such fact . " 

 " I know well . I have see what man be , " say the Princess , peremptorily . " tell I the truth . she be a Jewess who will not accept any one but a Jew . there be a few such , " she add , with a touch of scorn . 

 Deronda have that objection to answer which we all have know in speak to those who be too certain of their own fix interpretation to be enlighten by anything we may say . but besides this , the point immediately in question be one on which he feel a repugnance either to deny or affirm . he remain silent , and she presently say 

 " you love she as your father love I , and she draw you after she as I draw he . " 

 those word touch Deronda 's filial imagination , and some tenderness in his glance be take by his mother as an assent . she go on with rise passion : " but I be lead he the other way . and now your grandfather be get his revenge . " 

 " Mother , " say Deronda , remonstrantly , " do not   let we think of it in that way . I will admit that there may come some benefit from the education you choose for I . I prefer cherish the benefit with gratitude , to dwell with resentment on the injury . I think it would have be right that I should have be bring up with the consciousness that I be a Jew , but it must always have be a good to I to have as wide an instruction and sympathy as possible . and now , you have restore I my inheritance event have bring a full restitution than you could have make you have be save from rob my people of my service and I of my duty : can you not bring your whole soul to consent to this ? " 

 Deronda pause in his pleading : his mother look at he listeningly , as if the cadence of his voice be take her ear , yet she shake her head slowly . he begin again , even more urgently . 

 " you have tell I that you seek what you hold the good for I : open your heart to relent and love toward my grandfather , who seek what he hold the good for you . " 

 " not for I , no , " she say , shake her head with more absolute denial , and fold her arm tightly . " I tell you , he never think of his daughter except as an instrument . because I have want outside his purpose , I be to be put in a frame and torture . if that be the right law for the world , I will not say that I love it . if my act be wrong if it be God who be exact from I that I should deliver up what I withhold who be punish I because I deceive my father and do not warn he that I should contradict his trust well , I have tell everything . I have do what I could . and your soul consent . that be enough . I have after all be the instrument my father want . ' I desire a grandson who shall have a true jewish heart . every Jew should rear his family as if he hop that a Deliverer might spring from it . ' " 

 in utter these last sentence the Princess narrow her eye , wave her head up and down , and speak slowly with a new kind of chest - voice , as if she be quote unwillingly . 

 " be those my grandfather 's word ? " say Deronda . 

 " yes , yes ; and you will find they write . I want to thwart he , " say the Princess , with a sudden outburst of the passion she have show in the former interview . then she add more slowly , " you would have I love what I have hat from the time I be so high " here she hold her left hand a yard from the floor . " that can never be . but what do it matter ? his yoke have be on I , whether I love it or not . you be the grandson he want . you speak as man do as if you feel yourself wise . what do it all mean ? " 

 her tone be abrupt and scornful . Deronda , in his pained feeling , and under the solemn urgency of the moment , have to keep a clutching remembrance of their relationship , lest his word should become cruel . he begin in a deep entreating tone : 

 " Mother , do not   say that I feel myself wise . we be set in the midst of difficulty . I see no other way to get any clearness than by be truthful not by keep back fact which may which should carry obligation within they which should make the only guidance toward duty . no wonder if such fact come to reveal themselves in spite of concealment . the effect prepare by generation be likely to triumph over a contrivance which would bend they all to the satisfaction of self . your will be strong , but my grandfather 's trust which you accept and do not fulfill what you call his yoke be the expression of something strong , with deep , far - spread root , knit into the foundation of sacredness for all man . you renounce I you still banish I as a son " there be an involuntary movement of indignation in Deronda 's voice " but that strong something have determine that I shall be all the more the grandson whom also you willed to annihilate . " 

 his mother be watch he fixedly , and again her face gather admiration . after a moment 's silence she say , in a low , persuasive tone 

 " sit down again , " and he obey , place himself beside she . she lay her hand on his shoulder and go on 

 " you rebuke I . well I be the loser . and you be angry because I banish you . what could you do for I but weary your own patience ? your mother be a shattered woman . my sense of life be little more than a sense of what be except when the pain be present . you reproach I that I part with you . I have joy enough without you then . now you be come back to I , and I can not make you a joy . have you the cursing spirit of the Jew in you ? be you not able to forgive I ? shall you be glad to think that I be punish because I be not a jewish mother to you ? " 

 " how can you ask I that ? " say Deronda , remonstrantly . " have I not besought you that I might now at least be a son to you ? my grief be that you have declare I helpless to comfort you . I would give up much that be dear for the sake of soothe your anguish . " 

 " you shall give up nothing , " say his mother , with the hurry of agitation . " you shall be happy . you shall let I think of you as happy . I shall have do you no harm . you have no reason to curse I . you shall feel for I as they feel for the dead whom they say prayer for you shall long that I may be free from all suffer from all punishment . and I shall see you instead of always see your grandfather . will any harm come to I because I break his trust in the daylight after he be go into darkness ? I can not tell : if you think Kaddish will help I say it , say it . you will come between I and the dead . when I be in your mind , you will look as you do now always as if you be a tender son always as if I have be a tender mother . " 

 she seem resolve that her agitation should not conquer she , but he feel her hand tremble on his shoulder . deep , deep compassion hem in all word . with a face of beseech he put his arm around she and press her head tenderly under his . they sit so for some moment . then she lift her head again and rise from her seat with a great sigh , as if in that breath she be dismiss a weight of thought . Deronda , stand in front of she , feel that the parting be near . but one of her swift alternation have come upon his mother . 

 " be she beautiful ? " she say , abruptly . 

 " who ? " say Deronda , change color . 

 " the woman you love . " 

 it be not a moment for deliberate explanation . he be oblige to say , 
 " yes . " 
 " not ambitious ? " 

 " no , I think not . " 

 " not one who must have a path of her own ? " 

 " I think her nature be not give to make great claim . " 

 " she be not like that ? " say the Princess , take from her wallet a miniature with jewel around it , and hold it before her son . it be her own in all the fire of youth , and as Deronda look at it with admire sadness , she say , " have I not a rightful claim to be something more than a mere daughter and mother ? the voice and the genius match the face . whatever else be wrong , acknowledge that I have a right to be an artist , though my father 's will be against it . my nature give I a charter . " 

 " I do acknowledge that , " say Deronda , look from the miniature to her face , which even in its worn pallor have an expression of live force beyond anything that the pencil could show . 

 " will you take the portrait ? " say the Princess , more gently . " if she be a kind woman , teach she to think of I kindly . " 

 " I shall be grateful for the portrait , " say Deronda , " but I ought to say , I have no assurance that she whom I love will have any love for I . I have keep silence . " 

 " who and what be she ? " say the mother . the question seem a command . 

 " she be bring up as a singer for the stage , " say Deronda , with inward reluctance . " her father take she away early from her mother , and her life have be unhappy . she be very young only twenty . her father wish to bring she up in disregard even in dislike of her jewish origin , but she have clung with all her affection to the memory of her mother and the fellowship of her people . " 

 " ah , like you . she be attach to the Judaism she know nothing of , " say the Princess , peremptorily . " that be poetry fit to last through an opera night . be she fond of her artist 's life be her sing worth anything ? " 

 " her singing be exquisite . but her voice be not suit to the stage . I think that the artist 's life have be make repugnant to she . " 

 " why , she be make for you then . Sir Hugo say you be bitterly against be a singer , and I can see that you would never have let yourself be merge in a wife , as your father be . " 

 " I repeat , " say Deronda , emphatically " I repeat that I have no assurance of her love for I , of the possibility that we can ever be unite . other thing painful issue may lie before I . I have always feel that I should prepare myself to renounce , not cherish that prospect . but I suppose I might feel so of happiness in general . whether it may come or not , one should try and prepare one 's self to do without it . " 

 " do you feel in that way ? " say his mother , lay her hand on his shoulder , and peruse his face , while she speak in a low meditative tone , pause between her sentence . " poor boy ! I wonder how it would have be if I have keep you with I whether you would have turn your heart to the old thing against mine and we should have quarrel your grandfather would have be in you and you would have hamper my life with your young growth from the old root . " 

 " I think my affection might have last through all our quarreling , " say Deronda , sadden more and more , " and that would not have hamper surely it would have enrich your life . " 

 " not then , not then I do not want it then I might have be glad of it now , " say the mother , with a bitter melancholy , " if I could have be glad of anything . " 

 " but you love your other child , and they love you ? " say Deronda , anxiously . 

 " oh , yes , " she answer , as to a question about a matter of course , while she fold her arm again . " but , " she add in a deep tone , " I be not a love woman . that be the truth . it be a talent to love I lack it . other have love I and I have act their love . I know very well what love make of man and woman it be subjection . it take another for a large self , enclose this one , " she point to her own bosom . " I be never willingly subject to any man . man have be subject to I . " 

 " perhaps the man who be subject be the happy of the two , " say Deronda not with a smile , but with a grave , sad sense of his mother 's privation . 

 " perhaps but I be happy for a few year I be happy . if I have not be afraid of defeat and failure , I might have go on . I miscalculate . what then ? it be all over . another life ! man talk of ' another life , ' as if it only begin on the other side of the grave . I have long enter on another life . " with the last word she raise her arm till they be bare to the elbow , her brow be contract in one deep fold , her eye be closed , her voice be smother : in her dusky flame - color garment , she look like a dream visitant from some region of depart mortal . 

 Deronda 's feeling be work to a pitch of acuteness in which he be no long quite master of himself . he give an audible sob . his mother , open her eye , and let her hand again rest on his shoulder , say 

 " good - bye , my son , good - bye . we shall hear no more of each other . kiss I . " 

 he clasp his arm round her neck , and they kiss each other . 

 Deronda do not know how he get out of the room . he feel an old man . all his boyish yearning and anxiety about his mother have vanish . he have go through a tragic experience which must forever solemnize his life and deepen the significance of the act by which he bind himself to other . 

 CHAPTER LIV . 

  " the unwilling brain 
  feign often what it would not ; and we trust 
  Imagination with such phantasy 
  as the tongue dare not fashion into word ; 
  which have no word , their horror make they dim 
  to the mind 's eye . " 
  SHELLEY . 
 Madonna Pia , whose husband , feel himself injure by she , take she to his castle amid the swampy flat of the Maremma and get rid of she there , make a pathetic figure in Dante 's Purgatory , among the sinner who repent at the last and desire to be remember compassionately by their fellow - countryman . we know little about the ground of mutual discontent between the siennese couple , but we may infer with some confidence that the husband have never be a very delightful companion , and that on the flat of the Maremma his disagreeable manner have a background which throw they out remarkably ; whence in his desire to punish his wife to the unmost , the nature of thing be so far against he that in relieve himself of she he could not avoid make the relief mutual . and thus , without any hardness to the poor tuscan lady , who have her deliverance long ago , one may feel warrant in thinking of she with a less sympathetic interest than of the well know Gwendolen who , instead of be deliver from her error or earth and cleanse from their effect in purgatory , be at the very height of her entanglement in those fatal mesh which be weave within more closely than without , and often make the inward torture disproportionate to what be discernable as outward cause . 

 in take his wife with he on a yachting expedition , Grandcourt have no intention to get rid of she ; on the contrary , he want to feel more securely that she be his to do as he like with , and to make she feel it also . moreover , he be himself very fond of yachting : its dreamy do - nothing absolutism , unmoleste by social demand , suit his disposition , and he do not in the least regard it as an equivalent for the dreariness of the Maremma . he have his reason for carry Gwendolen out of reach , but they be not reason that can seem black in the mere statement . he suspect a grow spirit of opposition in she , and his feeling about the sentimental inclination she betray for Deronda be what in another man he would have call jealously . in himself it seem merely a resolution to put an end to such foolery as must have be go on in that prearrange visit of Deronda 's which he have divine and interrupt . 

 and Grandcourt might have plead that he be perfectly justify in take care that his wife should fulfill the obligation she have accept . her marriage be a contract where all the ostensible advantage be on her side , and it be only of those advantage that her husband should use his power to hinder she from any injurious self committal or unsuitable behavior . he know quite well that she have not marry he have not overcome her repugnance to certain fact out of love to he personally ; he have win she by the rank and luxury he have to give she , and these she have get : he have fulfil his side of the contract . 

 and Gwendolen , we know , be thoroughly aware of the situation . she could not excuse herself by say that there have be a tacit part of the contract on her side namely , that she mean to rule and have her own way . with all her early indulgence in the disposition to dominate , she be not one of the narrow - brain woman who through life regard all their own selfish demand as right , and every claim upon themselves as an injury . she have a root of conscience in she , and the process of purgatory have begin for she on the green earth : she know that she have be wrong . 

 but now enter into the soul of this young creature as she find herself , with the blue Mediterranean divide she from the world , on the tiny plank - island of a yacht , the domain of the husband to whom she feel that she have sell herself , and have be pay the strict price nay , pay more than she have dare to ask in the handsome maintenance of her mother : the husband to whom she have sell her truthfulness and sense of justice , so that he hold they throttle into silence , collar and drag behind he to witness what he would , without remonstrance . 

 what have she to complain of ? the yacht be of the prettiest ; the cabin fit up to perfection , smell of cedar , soft - cushion , hang with silk , expand with mirror ; the crew such as suit an elegant toy , one of they have even ringlet , as well as a bronze complexion and fine tooth ; and Mr. Lush be not there , for he have take his way back to England as soon as he have see all and everything on board . moreover , Gwendolen herself like the sea : it do not make she ill ; and to observe the rigging of the vessel and forecast the necessary adjustment be a sort of amusement that might have gratify her activity and enjoyment of imaginary rule ; the weather be fine , and they be coast southward , where even the rain - furrow , heat - crack clay become gem - like with purple shadow , and where one may float between blue and blue in an open - eyed dream that the world have do with sorrow . 

 but what can still that hunger of the heart which sicken the eye for beauty , and make sweet - scented ease an oppression ? what sort of Moslem paradise would quiet the terrible fury of moral repulsion and cow resistance which , like an eat pain intensify into torture , concentrate the mind in that poisonous misery ? while Gwendolen , throne on her cushion at evening , and behold the glory of sea and sky soften as if with boundless love around she , be hop that Grandcourt in his march up and down be not go to pause near she , not go to look at she or speak to she , some woman , under a smoky sky , oblige to consider the price of egg in arrange her dinner , be listen for the music of a footstep that would remove all risk from her foretaste of joy ; some couple , bend cheek by cheek , over a bit of work do by the one and delighted in by the other , be reckon the earning that would make they rich enough for a holiday among the furze and heather . 

 have Grandcourt the least conception of what be go on in the breast of his wife ? he conceive that she do not love he ; but be that necessary ? she be under his power , and he be not accustomed to soothe himself , as some cheerfully - dispose person be , with the conviction that he be very generally and justly beloved . but what lie quite away from his conception be , that she could have any special repulsion for he personally . how could she ? he himself know what personal repulsion be nobody well ; his mind be much furnish with a sense of what brute his fellow - creature be , both masculine and feminine ; what odious familiarity they have , what smirk , what mode of flourish their handkerchief , what costume , what lavender water , what bulge eye , and what foolish notion of make themselves agreeable by remark which be not want . in this critical view of mankind there be an affinity between he and Gwendolen before their marriage , and we know that she have be attractingly work upon by the refined negation he present to she . hence he understand her repulsion for Lush . but how be he to understand or conceive her present repulsion for Henleigh Grandcourt ? some man bring themselves to believe , and not merely maintain , the non - existence of an external world ; a few other believe themselves object of repulsion to a woman without be tell so in plain language . but Grandcourt do not belong to this eccentric body of thinker . he have all his life have reason to take a flattering view of his own attractiveness , and to place himself in fine antithesis to the man who , he see at once , must be revolt to a woman of taste . he have no idea of moral repulsion , and could not have believe , if he have be tell it , that there may be a resentment and disgust which will gradually make beauty more detestable than ugliness , through exasperation at that outward virtue in which hateful thing can flaunt themselves or find a supercilious advantage . 

 how , then , could Grandcourt divine what be go on in Gwendolen 's breast ? 

 for their behavior to each other scandalize no observer not even the foreign maid , warrant against sea - sickness ; nor Grandcourt 's own experienced valet : still less the picturesque crew , who regard they as a model couple in high life . their companionship consist chiefly in a well - breed silence . Grandcourt have no humorous observation at which Gwendolen could refuse to smile , no chit - chat to make small occasion of dispute . he be perfectly polite in arrange an additional garment over she when needful , and in hand she any object that he perceive she to need , and she could not fall into the vulgarity of accept or reject such politeness rudely . 

 Grandcourt put up his telescope and say , " there be a plantation of sugar - cane at the foot of that rock ; should you like to look ? " 

 Gwendolen say , " yes , please , " remember that she must try and interest herself in sugar - cane as something outside her personal affair . then Grandcourt would walk up and down and smoke for a long while , pause occasionally to point out a sail on the horizon , and at last would seat himself and look at Gwendolen with his narrow immovable gaze , as if she be part of the complete yacht ; while she , conscious of be look at be exert her ingenuity not to meet his eye . at dinner he would remark that the fruit be get stale , and they must put in somewhere for more ; or , observe that she do not drink the wine , he ask she if she would like any other kind well . a lady be oblige to respond to these thing suitably ; and even if she have not shrink from quarrel on other ground , quarrel with Grandcourt be impossible ; she might as well have make angry remark to a dangerous serpent ornamentally coil in her cabin without invitation . and what sort of dispute could a woman of any pride and dignity begin on a yacht ? 

 Grandcourt have intense satisfaction in lead his wife captive after this fashion ; it give their life on a small scale a royal representation and publicity in which every thing familiar be get rid of , and every body must do what be expect of they whatever might be their private protest the protest   keep strictly private   add to the piquancy of despotism . 

 to Gwendolen , who even in the freedom of her maiden time , have have very faint glimpse of any heroism or sublimity , the medium that now thrust itself everywhere before her view be this husband and her relation to he . the being close to we , whether in love or hate , be often virtually our interpreter of the world , and some feather - head gentleman or lady whom in pass we regret to take as legal tender for a human being , may be act as a melancholy theory of life in the mind of those who live with they like a piece of yellow and wavy glass that distort form and make color an affliction . their trivial sentence , their petty standard , their low suspicion , their loveless ennui , may be make somebody else 's life no well than a promenade through a pantheon of ugly idol . Gwendolen have that kind of window before she , affect the distant equally with the near . some unhappy wife be soothe by the possibility that they may become mother ; but Gwendolen feel that to desire a child for herself would have be a consenting to the completion of the injury she have be guilty of . she be reduce to dread lest she should become a mother . it be not the image of a new sweetly - bud life that come as a vision of deliverance from the monotony of distaste : it be an image of another sort . in the irritable , fluctuate stage of despair , gleams of hope come in the form of some possible accident . to dwell on the benignity of accident be a refuge from bad temptation . 

 the embitterment of hatred be often as unaccountable to onlooker as the growth of devoted love , and it not only seem but be really out of direct relation with any outward cause to be allege . passion be of the nature of seed , and find nourishment within , tend to a predominance which determine all current toward itself , and make the whole life its tributary . and the intense form of hatred be that root in fear , which compel to silence and drive vehemence into a constructive vindictiveness , an imaginary annihilation of the detest object , something like the hide rite of vengeance with which the persecute have make a dark vent for their rage , and soothe their suffering into dumbness . such hidden rite go on in the secrecy of Gwendolen 's mind , but not with soothe effect rather with the effect of a struggle terror . side by side with the dread of her husband have grow the self - dread , which urge she to flee from the pursuing image work by her pen - up impulse . the vision of her past wrong - doing , and what it have bring on she , come with a pale ghastly illumination over every imagined deed that be a rash effort at freedom , such as she have make in her marriage . moreover , she have learn to see all her act through the impression they would make on Deronda : whatever relief might come to she , she could not sever it from the judgment of she that would be create in his mind . not one word of flattery , of indulgence , of dependence on her favor , could be fasten on by she in all their intercourse , to weaken his restraining power over she   in this way Deronda 's effort over himself be repay ; and amid the dreary uncertainty of her spoiled life the possible remedy that lie in his mind , nay , the remedy that lie in her feeling for he , make she only hope . he seem to she a terrible - browed angel , from whom she could not think of conceal any deed so as to win an ignorant regard from he : it belong to the nature of their relation that she should be truthful , for his power over she have begin in the raising of a self - discontent which could be satisfied only by genuine change . but in no concealment have she now any confidence : her vision of what she have to dread take more decidedly than ever the form of some fiercely impulsive deed , commit as in a dream that she would instantaneously wake from to find the effect real though the image have be false : to find death under her hand , but instead of darkness , daylight ; instead of satisfied hatred , the dismay of guilt ; instead of freedom , the palsy of a new terror a white dead face from which she be forever try to flee and forever hold back . she remember Deronda 's word : they be continually recur in her thought 

 " turn your fear into a safeguard . keep your dread fix on the idea of increase your remorse .        take your fear as a safeguard . it be like quickness of hearing . it may make consequence passionately present to you . " 

 and so it be . in Gwendolen 's consciousness temptation and dread meet and star like two pale phantom , each see itself in the other each obstruct by its own image ; and all the while her full self beheld the apparition and sob for deliverance from they . 

 inarticulate prayer , no more definite than a cry , often sweep out from she into the vast silence , unbroken except by her husband 's breathing or the plash of the wave or the creaking of the mast ; but if ever she think of definite help , it take the form of Deronda 's presence and word , of the sympathy he might have for she , of the direction he might give she . it be sometimes after a white - lipped fierce - eyed temptation with murder finger have make its demon - visit that these good moment of inward cry and cling for rescue would come to she , and she would lie with wide - open eye in which the rise tear seem a blessing , and the thought , " I will not mind if I can keep from get wicked , " seem an answer to the indefinite prayer . 

 so the day pass , take with they light breeze beyond and about the Balearic Isles , and then to Sardinia , and then with gentle change persuade they northward again toward Corsica . but this float , gentle - waft existence , with its apparently peaceful influence , be become as bad as a nightmare to Gwendolen . 

 " how long be we to be yacht ? " she venture to ask one day after they have be touch at Ajaccio , and the mere fact of change in go ashore have give she a relief from some of the thought which seem now to cling about the very rigging of the vessel , mix with the air in the red silk cabin below , and make the smell of the sea odious . 

 " what else should we do ? " say Grandcourt . " I be not tired of it . I do not   see why we should not   stay out any length of time . there be less to bore one in this way . and where would you go to ? I be sick of foreign place . and we shall have enough of ryeland . would you rather be at Ryeland 's ? " 

 " oh , no , " say Gwendolen , indifferently , find all place alike undescribable as soon as she imagine herself and her husband in they . " I only wonder how long you would like this . " 

 " I like yacht long than anything else , " say Grandcourt ; " and I have none last year . I suppose you be begin to tire of it . woman be so confoundedly whimsical . they expect everything to give way to they . " 

 " oh , dear , no ! " say Gwendolen , let out her scorn in a flute - like tone . " I never expect you to give way . " 

 " why should I ? " say Grandcourt , with his inward voice , look at she , and then choose an orange for they be at table . 

 she make up her mind to a length of yatching that she could not see beyond ; but the next day , after a squall which have make she rather ill for the first time , he come down to she and say 

 " there be be the devil 's own work in the night . the skipper say we shall have to stay at Genoa for a week while thing be set right . " 

 " do you mind that ? " say Gwendolen , who lie look very white amidst her white drapery . 

 " I should think so . who want to be broil at Genoa ? " 

 " it will be a change , " say Gwendolen , make a little incautious by her languor . 

 " I do not   want any change . besides , the place be intolerable ; and one can not   move along the road . I shall go out in a boat , as I use to do , and manage it myself . one can get a few hour every day in that way instead of strive in a damnable hotel . " 

 here be a prospect which hold hope in it . Gwendolen think of hour when she would be alone , since Grandcourt would not want to take she in the said boat , and in her exultation at this unlooke - for relief , she have wild , contradictory fancy of what she might do with her freedom that " run away " which she have already innumerable time see to be a bad evil than any actual endurance , now find new argument as an escape from her bad self . also , visionary relief on a par with the fancy of a prisoner that the night wind may blow down the wall of his prison and save he from desperate device , insinuate itself as a well alternative , lawful to wish for . 

 the fresh current of expectation revive her energy , and enable she to take all thing with an air of cheerfulness and alacrity that make a change mark enough to be notice by her husband . she watch through the evening light to the sinking of the moon with less of awed loneliness than be habitual to her nay , with a vague impression that in this mighty frame of thing there might be some preparation of rescue for she . why not ? since the weather have just be on her side . this possibility of hop , after her long fluctuation amid fear , be like a first return of hunger to the long - languish patient . 

 she be wake the next morning by the casting of the anchor in the port of Genoa wake from a strangely - mixed dream in which she feel herself escape over the Mont Cenis , and wonder to find it warm even in the moonlight on the snow , till suddenly she meet Deronda , who tell she to go back . 

 in an hour or so from that dream she actually meet Deronda . but it be on the palatial staircase of the Italia , where she be feel warm in her light woolen dress and straw hat ; and her husband be by her side . 

 there be a start of surprise in Deronda before he could raise his hat and pass on . the moment do not seem to favor any close greeting , and the circumstance under which they have last part make he doubtful whether Grandcourt would be civilly inclined to he . 

 the doubt might certainly have be change into a disagreeable certainty , for Grandcourt on this unaccountable appearance of Deronda at Genoa of all place , immediately try to conceive how there could have be an arrangement between he and Gwendolen . it be true that before they be well in their room , he have see how difficult it be to shape such an arrangement with any probability , be too cool - headed to find it at once easily credible that Gwendolen have not only while in London hasten to inform Deronda of the yachting project , but have post a letter to he from Marseilles or Barcelona , advise he to travel to Genoa in time for the chance of meet she there , or of receive a letter from her telling of some other destination all which must have imply a miraculous foreknowledge in she , and in Deronda a bird - like facility in fly about and perch idly . still he be there , and though Grandcourt would not make a fool of himself by fabrication that other might call preposterous , he be not , for all that , dispose to admit fully that Deronda 's presence be , so far as Gwendolen be concern , a mere accident . it be a disgusting fact ; that be enough ; and no doubt she be well pleased . a man out of temper do not wait for proof before feel toward all thing animate and inanimate as if they be in a conspiracy against he , but at once threshe his horse or kick his dog in consequence . Grandcourt feel toward Gwendolen and Deronda as if he know they to be in a conspiracy against he , and here be an event in league with they . what he take for clearly certain and so far he divine the truth be that Gwendolen be now count on an interview with Deronda whenever her husband 's back be turn . 

 as he sit take his coffee at a convenient angle for observe she , he discern something which he feel sure be the effect of a secret delight some fresh ease in move and speak , some peculiar meaning in her eye , whatever she look on . certainly her trouble have not mar her beauty . Mrs. Grandcourt be handsomer than Gwendolen Harleth : her grace and expression be inform by a great variety of inward experience , give new play to her feature , new attitude in movement and repose ; her whole person and air have the nameless something which often make a woman more interesting after marriage than before , less confident that all thing be accord to her opinion , and yet with less of deer - like shyness more fully a human being . 

 this morning the benefit of the voyage seem to be suddenly reveal themselves in a new elasticity of mien . as she rise from the table and put she two heavily - jewel hand on each side of her neck , accord to she will not , she have no art to conceal that sort of joyous expectation which make the present more bearable than usual , just as when a man mean to go out he find it easy to be amiable to the family for a quarter of an hour beforehand . it be not impossible that a terri whose pleasure be concern would perceive those amiable sign and know their meaning know why his master stand in a peculiar way , talk with alacrity , and even have a peculiar gleam in his eye , so that on the least movement toward the door , the terri would scuttle to be in time . and , in dog fashion , Grandcourt discern the sign of Gwendolen 's expectation , interpret they with the narrow correctness which leave a world of unknown feeling behind . 

 " a just ring , please , and tell Gibbs to order some dinner for we at three , " say Grandcourt , as he too rise , take out a cigar , and then stretch his hand toward the hat that lie near . " I be go to send Angus to find a little sailing - boat for we to go out in ; one that I can manage , with you at the tiller . it be uncommonly pleasant these fine evening the least boring of anything we can do . " 

 Gwendolen turn cold . there be not only the cruel disappointment ; there be the immediate conviction that her husband have determine to take she because he would not leave she out of his sight ; and probably this dual solitude in a boat be the more attractive to he because it would be wearisome to she . they be not on the plank - island ; she feel it the more possible to begin a contest . but the gleam content have die out of she . there be a change in she like that of a glacier after sunset . 

 " I would rather not go in the boat , " she say . " take some one else with you . " 

 " very well ; if you do not   go , I shall not go , " say Grandcourt . " we shall stay suffocate here , that be all . " 

 " I can not   bear to go in a boat , " say Gwendolen , angrily . 

 " that be a sudden change , " say Grandcourt , with a slight sneer . " but , since you decline , we shall stay indoor . " 

 he lay down his hat again , light his cigar , and walk up and down the room , pause now and then to look out of the window . Gwendolen 's temper tell she to persist . she know very well now that Grandcourt would not go without she ; but if he must tyrannize over she , he should not do it precisely in the way he would choose . she would oblige he to stay in the hotel . without speak again , she pass into the adjoining bedroom and throw herself into a chair with her anger , see no purpose or issue only feel that the wave of evil have rush back upon she , and drag she away from her momentary breathing - place . 

 presently Grandcourt come in with his hat on , but throw it off and sit down sideways on a chair nearly in front of she , say , in his superficial drawl 

 " have you come round yet ? or do you find it agreeable to be out of temper . you make thing uncommonly pleasant for I . " 

 " why do you want to make they unpleasant for I ? " say Gwendolen , get helpless again , and feel the hot tear rise . 

 " now , will you be good enough to say what it be you have to complain of ? " say Grandcourt , look into her eye , and use his most inward voice . " be it that I stay indoor when you stay ? " 

 she could give no answer . the sort of truth that make any excuse for her anger could not be utter . in the conflict of despair and humiliation she begin to sob , and the tear roll down her cheek a form of agitation which she have never show before in her husband 's presence . 

 " I hope this be useful , " say Grandcourt , after a moment or two . " all I can say be , it be most confoundedly unpleasant . what the devil woman can see in this kind of thing , I do not   know . you see something to be get by it , of course . all I can see be , that we shall be shut up here when we might have be have a pleasant sail . " 

 " let we go , then , " say Gwendolen , impetuously . " perhaps we shall be drown . " she begin to sob again . 

 this extraordinary behavior , which have evidently some relation to Deronda , give more definiteness to Grandcourt 's conclusion . he draw his chair quite close in front of she , and say , in a low tone , " just be quiet and listen , will you ? " 

 there seem to be a magical effect in this close vicinity . Gwendolen shrink and cease to sob . she keep her eyelid down and clasp her hand tightly . 

 " let we understand each other , " say Grandcourt , in the same tone . " I know very well what this nonsense mean . but if you suppose I be go to let you make a fool of I , just dismiss that notion from your mind . what be you look forward to , if you can not   behave properly as my wife ? there be disgrace for you , if you like to have it , but I do not   know anything else ; and as to Deronda , it be quite clear that he hang back from you . " 

 " it be all false ! " say Gwendolen , bitterly . " you do not   in the least imagine what be in my mind . I have see enough of the disgrace that come in that way . and you have well leave I at liberty to speak with any one I like . it will be well for you . " 

 " you will allow I to judge of that , " say Grandcourt , rise and move to a little distance toward the window , but stand there play with his whisker as if he be await something . 

 Gwendolen 's word have so clear and tremendous a meaning for herself that she think they must have express it to Grandcourt , and have no soon utter they than she dread their effect . but his soul be garrison against presentiment and fear : he have the courage and confidence that belong to domination , and he be at that moment feel perfectly satisfied that he hold his wife with bit and bridle . by the time they have be marry a year she would cease to be restive . he continue stand with his air of indifference , till she feel her habitual stifle consciousness of have an immovable obstruction in her life , like the nightmare of behold a single form that serve to arrest all passage though the wide country lie open . 

 " what decision have you come to ? " he say , presently look at she . 
 " what order shall I give ? " 
 " oh , let we go , " say Gwendolen . the wall have begin to be an imprisonment , and while there be breath in this man he would have the mastery over she . his word have the power of thumb - screw and the cold touch of the rock . to resist be to act like a stupid animal unable to measure result . 

 so the boat be order . she even go down to the quay again with he to see it before midday . Grandcourt have recover perfect quietude of temper , and have a scornful satisfaction in the attention give by the nautical group to the milord , owner of the handsome yacht which have just put in for repair , and who be an Englishman be naturally so at home on the sea that he could manage a sail with the same ease that he could manage a horse . the sort of exultation he have discern in Gwendolen this morning she now think that she discern in he ; and it be true that he have set his mind on this boating , and carry out his purpose as something that people might not expect he to do , with the gratified impulse of a strong will which have nothing well to exert itself upon . he have remarkable physical courage , and be proud of it or rather he have a great contempt for the coarser , bulkier man who generally have less . moreover , he be rule that Gwendolen should go with he . 

 and when they come down again at five o'clock , equip for their boating , the scene be as good as a theatrical representation for all beholder . this handsome , fair - skin English couple , manifest the usual eccentricity of their nation , both of they proud , pale , and calm , without a smile on their face , move like creature who be fulfil a supernatural destiny it be a thing to go out and see , a thing to paint . the husband 's chest , back , and arm , show very well in his close - fit dress , and the wife be declare to be a statue . 

 some suggestion be proffer concern a possible change in the breeze , and the necessary care in put about , but Grandcourt 's manner make the speaker understand that they be too officious , and that he know well than they . 

 Gwendolen , keep her impassable air , as they move away from the strand , feel her imagination obstinately at work . she be not afraid of any outward danger she be afraid of her own wish which be take shape possible and impossible , like a cloud of demon - face . she be afraid of her own hatred , which under the cold iron touch that have compel she to - day have gather a fierce intensity . as she sit guide the tiller under her husband 's eye , do just what he tell she , the strife within she seem like her own effort to escape from herself . she cling to the thought of Deronda : she persuade herself that he would not go away while she be there he know that she need help . the sense that he be there would save she from act out the evil within . and yet quick , quick , come image , plan of evil that would come again and seize she in the night , like fury prepare the deed that they would straightway avenge . 

 they be take out of the port and carry eastward by a gentle breeze . some cloud temper the sunlight , and the hour be always deepen toward the supreme beauty of evening . sail large and smaller change their aspect like sensitive thing , and make a cheerful companionship , alternately near and far . the grand city shine more vaguely , the mountain look out above it , and there be stillness as in an island sanctuary . yet suddenly Gwendolen let her hand fall , and say in a scarcely audible tone , " God help I ! " 

 " what be the matter ? " say Grandcourt , not distinguish the word . 

 " oh , nothing , " say Gwendolen , rouse herself from her momentary forgetfulness and resume the rope . 

 " do not   you find this pleasant ? " say Grandcourt . 

 " very . " 

 " you admit now we could not   have do anything well ? " 

 " no I see nothing well . I think we shall go on always , like the 
 Flying Dutchman , " say Gwendolen wildly . 
 Grandcourt give she one of his narrow examining glance , and then say , " if you like , we can go to Spezia in the morning , and let they take we up there . " 

 " no ; I shall like nothing well than this . " 

 " very well : we will do the same to - morrow . but we must be turn in soon . I shall put about . " 

 CHAPTER LV . 

  " Ritorna a tua scienza 
  Che vuoi , quanto la cosa e piu perfetta 
  Piu senta if bene , e cosi la doglienza . " 
  DANTE . 
 when Deronda meet Gwendolen and Grandcourt on the staircase , his mind be seriously preoccupy . he have just be summon to the second interview with his mother . 

 in two hour after his parting from she he know that the Princess Halm - Eberstein have leave the hotel , and so far as the purpose of his journey to Genoa be concern , he might himself have set off on his way to Mainz , to deliver the letter from Joseph Kalonymos , and get possession of the family chest . but mixed mental condition , which do not resolve themselves into definite reason , hinder he from departure . long after the farewell he be keep passive by a weight of retrospective feeling . he live again , with the new keenness of emotive memory , through the exciting scene which seem past only in the sense of preparation for their actual presence in his soul . he allow himself in his solitude to sob , with perhaps more than a woman 's acuteness of compassion , over that woman 's life so near to his , and yet so remote . he behold the world change for he by the certitude of tie that alter the poise of hope and fear , and give he a new sense of fellowship , as if under cover of the night he have join the wrong band of wanderer , and find with the rise of morning that the tent of his kindre be group far off . he have a quiver imaginative sense of close relation to the grandfather who have be animate by strong impulse and beloved thought , which be now perhaps be rouse from their slumber within himself . and through all this passionate meditation Mordecai and Mirah be always present , as being who clasp hand with he in sympathetic silence . 

 of such quick , responsive fibre be Deronda make , under that mantle of self - control reserve into which early experience have throw so much of his young strength . 

 when the persistent ringing of a bell as a signal remind he of the hour he think of look into Bradshaw , and make the brief necessary preparation for start by the next train thought of it , but make no movement in consequence . wish go to Mainz and what he be to get possession of there to London and the being there who make the strong attachment of his life ; but there be other wish that clung in these moment to Genoa , and they keep he where he be by that force which urge we to linger over an interview that carry a presentiment of final farewell or of overshadow sorrow . Deronda do not formally say , " I will stay over to - night , because it be Friday , and I should like to go to the evening service at the synagogue where they must all have go ; and besides , I may see the Grandcourts again . " but simply , instead of pack and ring for his bill , he sit do nothing at all , while his mind go to the synagogue and see face there probably little different from those of his grandfather 's time , and hear the spanish - Hebrew liturgy which have last through the season of wander generation like a plant with wander seed , that give the far - off land a kinship to the exile 's home while , also , his mind go toward Gwendolen , with anxious remembrance of what have be , and with a half - admit impression that it would be hardness in he willingly to go away at once without make some effort , in spite of Grandcourt 's probable dislike , to manifest the continuance of his sympathy with she since their abrupt parting . 

 in this state of mind he defer departure , eat his dinner without sense of flavor , rise from it quickly to find the synagogue , and in pass the porter ask if Mr. and Mrs. Grandcourt be still in the hotel , and what be the number of their apartment . the porter give he the number , but add that they be go out boat . that information have somehow power enough over Deronda to divide his thought with the memory waken among the sparse talithim and keen dark face of worshipper whose way of take awful prayer and invocation with the easy familiarity which might be call Hebrew dye Italian , make he reflect that his grandfather , accord to the Princess 's hint of his character , must have be almost as exceptional a Jew as Mordecai . but be not man of ardent zeal and far - reach hope everywhere exceptional ? the man who have the vision which , as Mordecai say , be the creator and feeder of the world moulding and feed the more passive life which without they would dwindle and shrivel into the narrow tenacity of insect , unshaken by thought beyond the reach of their antennae . something of a mournful impatience perhaps add itself to the solicitude about Gwendolen   a solicitude that have room to grow in his present release from immediate care   as an incitement to hasten from the synagogue and choose to take his evening walk toward the quay , always a favorite haunt with he , and just now attractive with the possibility that he might be in time to see the Grandcourts come in from their boating . in this case , he resolve that he would advance to greet they deliberately , and ignore any ground that the husband might have for wish he elsewhere . 

 the sun have set behind a bank of cloud , and only a faint yellow light be give its farewell kiss to the wave , which be agitate by an active breeze . Deronda , saunter slowly within sight of what take place on the strand , observe the group there concentrate their attention on a sailing - boat which be advance swiftly landward , be row by two man . amidst the clamorous talk in various language , Deronda hold it the surer mean of get information not to ask question , but to elbow his way to the foreground and be an unobstructed witness of what be occur . telescope be be use , and loud statement make that the boat hold somebody who have be drown . one say it be the milord who have go out in a sailing boat ; another maintain that the prostrate figure he discern be miladi ; a Frenchman who have no glass would rather say that it be milord who have probably take his wife out to drown she , accord to the national practice a remark which an English skipper immediately comment on in our native idiom   as nonsense which have undergo a mining operation , and far dismiss by the decision that the reclining figure be a woman . for Deronda , terribly excited by fluctuate fear , the stroke of the oar as he watch they be divide by swift vision of event , possible and impossible , which might have bring about this issue , or this break - off fragment of an issue , with a bad half undisclosed if this woman apparently snatch from the water be really Mrs. Grandcourt . 

 but soon there be no long any doubt : the boat be be pull to land , and he see Gwendolen half raise herself on her hand , by her own effort , under her heavy covering of tarpaulin and pea - jacket pale as one of the sheeted dead , shiver , with wet hair streaming , a wild amazed consciousness in her eye , as if she have wake up in a world where some judgment be impending , and the being she see around be come to seize she . the first rower who jump to land be also wet through , and run off ; the sailor , close about the boat , hinder Deronda from advance , and he could only look on while Gwendolen give scared glance , and seem to shrink with terror as she be carefully , tenderly help out , and lead on by the strong arm of those rough , bronzed man , her wet clothe cling about her limb , and add to the impediment of her weakness . suddenly her wander eye fall on Deronda , stand before she , and immediately , as if she have be expect he and look for he , she try to stretch out her arm , which be hold back by her supporter , say , in a muffled voice 

 " it be come , it be come ! he be dead ! " 

 " hush , hush ! " say Deronda , in a tone of authority ; " quiet yourself . " then to the man who be assist she , " I be a connection of this lady 's husband . if you will get she on to the Italia as quickly as possible , I will undertake everything else . " 

 he stay behind to hear from the remain boatman that her husband have go down irrecoverably , and that his boat be leave float empty . he and his comrade have hear a cry , have come up in time to see the lady jump in after her husband , and have get she out fast enough to save she from much damage . 

 after this , Deronda hasten to the hotel to assure himself that the good medical help would be provide ; and be satisfied on this point , he telegraph the event to Sir Hugo , beg he to come forthwith , and also to Mr. Gascoigne , whose address at the rectory make his near know way of get the information to Gwendolen 's mother . certain word of Gwendolen 's in the past have come back to he with the effectiveness of an inspiration : in moment of agitated confession she have speak of her mother 's presence , as a possible help , if she could have have it . 

 CHAPTER LVI . 

  " the pang , the curse with which they die , 
  have never pass away : 
  I could not draw my eye from theirs , 
  nor lift they up to pray . " 
  COLERIDGE . 
 Deronda do not take off his clothe that night . Gwendolen , after insist on see he again before she would consent to be undressed , have be perfectly quiet , and have only ask he , with a whispering , repressed eagerness , to promise that he would come to she when she send for he in the morning . still , the possibility that a change might come over she , the danger of a supervene feverish condition , and the suspicion that something in the late catastrophe be have an effect which might betray itself in excited word , act as a foreboding within he . he mention to her attendant that he should keep himself ready to be call if there be any alarming change of symptom , make it understand by all concerned that he be in communication with her friend in England , and feel bind meanwhile to take all care on her behalf a position which it be the easy for he to assume , because he be well know to Grandcourt 's valet , the only old servant who have come on the late voyage . 

 but when fatigue from the strangely various emotion of the day at last send Deronda to sleep , he remain undisturbed except by the morning dream , which come as a tangled web of yesterday 's event , and finally wake he , with an image draw by his press anxiety . 

 still , it be morning , and there have be no summon an augury which cheer he while he make his toilet , and reflect that it be too early to send inquiry . later , he learn that she have pass a too wakeful night , but have show no violent sign of agitation , and be at last sleeping . he wonder at the force that dwelt in this creature , so alive to dread ; for he have an irresistible impression that even under the effect of a severe physical shock she be master herself with a determination of concealment . for his own part , he think that his sensibility have be blunt by what he have be go through in the meeting with his mother : he seem to himself now to be only fulfil claim , and his more passionate sympathy be in abeyance . he have lately be live so keenly in an experience quite apart from Gwendolen 's lot , that his present care for she be like a revisiting of scene familiar in the past , and there be not yet a complete revival of the inward response to they . 

 meanwhile he employ himself in get a formal , legally recognize statement from the fisherman who have rescue Gwendolen . few detail come to light . the boat in which Grandcourt have go out have be find drift with its sail loose , and have be tow in . the fisherman think it likely that he have be knock overboard by the flapping of the sail while put about , and that he have not know how to swim ; but , though they be near , their attention have be first arrest by a cry which seem like that of a man in distress , and while they be hasten with their oar , they hear a shriek from the lady , and see her jump in . 

 on re - enter the hotel , Deronda be tell that Gwendolen have rise , and be desire to see he . he be show into a room darken by blind and curtain , where she be seat with a white shawl wrap round she , look toward the opening door like one wait uneasily . but her long hair be gather up and coil carefully , and , through all , the blue star in her ear have keep their place : as she start impulsively to her full height , sheathe in her white shawl , her face and neck not less white , except for a purple line under her eye , her lip a little apart with the peculiar expression of one accuse and helpless , she look like the unhappy ghost of that Gwendolen Harleth whom Deronda have see turn with firm lip and proud self - possession from her loss at the gaming table . the sight pierce he with pity , and the effect of all their past relation begin to revive within he . 

 " I beseech you to rest not to stand , " say Deronda , as he approach she ; and she obey , fall back into her chair again . 

 " will you sit down near I ? " she say . " I want to speak very low . " 

 she be in a large arm - chair , and he draw a small one near to her side . 
 the action seem to touch she peculiarly : turn her pale face full 
 upon his , which be very near , she say , in the low audible tone , 
 " you know I be a guilty woman ? " 
 Deronda himself turn pale as he say , " I know nothing . " he do not dare to say more . 

 " he be dead . " she utter this with the same undertoned decision . 

 " yes , " say Deronda , in a mournful suspense which make he reluctant to speak . 

 " his face will not be see above the water again , " say Gwendolen , in a tone that be not loud , but of a suppress eagerness , while she hold both her hand clench . 

 " no . " 

 " not by any one else only by I a dead face I shall never get away from it . " 

 it be with an inward voice of desperate self - repression that she speak these last word , while she look away from Deronda toward something at a distance from she on the floor . she be see the whole event her own act include through an exaggerate medium of excitement and horror ? be she in a state of delirium into which there enter a sense of concealment and necessity for self - repression ? such thought glance through Deronda as a sort of hope . but imagine the conflict of feeling that keep he silent . she be bent on confession , and he dread hear her confession . against his well will he shrink from the task that be lay on he : he wish , and yet rebuke the wish as cowardly , that she could bury her secret in her own bosom . he be not a priest . he dread the weight of this woman 's soul fling upon his own with implore dependence . but she speak again , hurriedly , look at he 

 " you will not say that I ought to tell the world ? you will not say that I ought to be disgrace ? I could not do it . I could not bear it . I can not have my mother know . not if I be dead . I could not have she know . I must tell you ; but you will not say that any one else should know . " 

 " I can say nothing in my ignorance , " say Deronda , mournfully , " except that I desire to help you . " 

 " I tell you from the beginning as soon as I could I tell you I be afraid of myself . " there be a piteous pleading in the low murmur in which Deronda turn his ear only . her face afflict he too much . " I feel a hatred in I that be always work like an evil spirit contrive thing . everything I could do to free myself come into my mind ; and it get bad all thing get bad . that be why I ask you to come to I in town . I think then I would tell you the bad about myself . I try . but I could not tell everything . and he come in . " 

 she pause , while a shudder pass through she ; but soon go on . 

 " I will tell you everything now . do you think a woman who cry , and pray , and struggle to be save from herself , could be a murderess ? " 

 " Great God ! " say Deronda , in a deep , shake voice , " do not   torture I needlessly . you have not murder he . you throw yourself into the water with the impulse to save he . tell I the rest afterward . this death be an accident that you could not have hinder . " 

 " do not   be impatient with I . " the tremor , the childlike beseech in these word compel Deronda to turn his head and look at her face . the poor quivering lip go on . " you say you use to say you feel more for those who have do something wicked and be miserable ; you say they might get well they might be scourge into something well . if you have not speak in that way , everything would have be bad . I do remember all you say to I . it come to I always . it come to I at the very last that be the reason why I but now , if you can not bear with I when I tell you everything if you turn away from I and forsake I , what shall I do ? be I bad than I be when you find I and want to make I well ? all the wrong I have do be in I then and more and more if you have not come and be patient with I . and now will you forsake I ? " 

 her hand , which have be so tightly clench some minute before , be now helplessly relax and tremble on the arm of her chair . her quivering lip remain part as she cease speak . Deronda could not answer ; he be oblige to look away . he take one of her hand , and clasp it as if they be go to walk together like two child : it be the only way in which he could answer , " I will not forsake you . " and all the while he feel as if he be put his name to a blank paper which might be fill up terribly . their attitude , his adverted face with its expression of a suffering which he be solemnly resolve to undergo , might have tell half the truth of the situation to a beholder who have suddenly enter . 

 that grasp be an entirely new experience to Gwendolen : she have never before have from any man a sign of tenderness which her own being have need , and she interpret its powerful effect on she into a promise of inexhaustible patience and constancy . the stream of renew strength make it possible for she to go on as she have begin with that fitful , wander confession where the sameness of experience seem to nullify the sense of time or of order in event . she begin again in a fragmentary way 

 " all sort of contrivance in my mind but all so difficult . and I fight against they I be terrify at they I see his dead face " here her voice sink almost to a whisper close to Deronda 's ear " ever so long ago I see it and I wish he to be dead . and yet it terrify I . I be like two creature . I could not speak I want to kill it be as strong as thirst and then directly I feel beforehand I have do something dreadful , unalterable that would make I like an evil spirit . and it come it come . " 

 she be silent a moment or two , as if her memory have lose itself in a web where each mesh draw all the rest . 

 " it have all be in my mind when I first speak to you when we be at the Abbey . I have do something then . I could not tell you that . it be the only thing I do toward carry out my thought . they go about over everything ; but they all remain like dreadful dream all but one . I do one act and I never undo it it be there still as long ago as when we be at ryeland . there it be something my finger long for among the beautiful toy in the cabinet in my boudoir small and sharp like a long willow leaf in a silver sheath . I lock it in the drawer of my dressing - case . I be continually haunt with it and how I should use it . I fancy myself put it under my pillow . but I never do . I never look at it again . I dare not unlock the drawer : it have a key all to itself ; and not long ago , when we be in the yacht , I drop the key into the deep water . it be my wish to drop it and deliver myself . after that I begin to think how I could open the drawer without the key : and when I find we be to stay at Genoa , it come into my mind that I could get it open privately at the hotel . but then , when we be go up the stair , I meet you ; and I think I should talk to you alone and tell you this everything I could not tell you in town ; and then I be force to go out in the boat . " 

 a sob have for the first time rise with the last word , and she sink back in her chair . the memory of that acute disappointment seem for the moment to efface what have come since . Deronda do not look at she , but he say , insistently 

 " and it have all remain in your imagination . it have go on only in your thought . to the last the evil temptation have be resist ? " 

 there be silence . the tear have roll down her cheek . she press her handkerchief against they and sit upright . she be summon her resolution ; and again , lean a little toward Deronda 's ear , she begin in a whisper 

 " no , no ; I will tell you everything as God know it . I will tell you no falsehood ; I will tell you the exact truth . what should I do else ? I use to think I could never be wicked . I think of wicked people as if they be a long way off I . since then I have be wicked . I have feel wicked . and everything have be a punishment to I all the thing I use to wish for it be as if they have be make red - hot . the very daylight have often be a punishment to I . because you know I ought not to have marry . that be the beginning of it . I wrong some one else . I break my promise . I mean to get pleasure for myself , and it all turn to misery . I want to make my gain out of another 's loss you remember ? it be like roulette and the money burn into I . and I could not complain . it be as if I have pray that another should lose and I should win . and I have win , I know it all I know I be guilty . when we be on the sea , and I lay awake at night in the cabin , I sometimes feel that everything I have do lie open without excuse nothing be hide how could anything be know to I only ? it be not my own knowledge , it be God 's that have enter into I , and even the stillness everything hold a punishment for I everything but you . I always think that you would not want I to be punish you would have try and help I to be well . and only thinking of that help I . you will not change you will not want to punish I now ? " 

 again a sob have rise . 

 " God forbid ! " groan Deronda . but he sit motionless . 

 this long wander with the conscious - stricken one over her past be difficult to bear , but he dare not again urge she with a question . he must let her mind follow its own need . she unconsciously leave interval in her retrospect , not clearly distinguish between what she say and what she have only an inward vision of . her next word come after such an interval . 

 " that all make it so hard when I be force to go in the boat . because when I see you it be an unexpected joy , and I think I could tell you everything about the lock - up drawer and what I have not tell you before . and if I have tell you , and know it be in your mind , it would have less power over I . I hop and trust in that . for after all my struggle and my crying , the hatred and rage , the temptation that frighten I , the longing , the thirst for what I dread , always come back . and that disappointment when I be quite shut out from speak to you , and be drive to go in the boat bring all the evil back , as if I have be lock in a prison with it and no escape . oh , it seem so long ago now since I step into that boat ! I could have give up everything in that moment , to have the fork lightning for a weapon to strike he dead . " 

 some of the compressed fierceness that she be recall seem to find its way into her undertoned utterance . after a little silence she say , with agitated hurry 

 " if he be here again , what should I do ? I can not wish he here and yet I can not bear his dead face . I be a coward . I ought to have bear contempt . I ought to have go away go and wander like a beggar rather than to stay to feel like a fiend . but turn where I would there be something I could not bear . sometimes I think he would kill I if I resist his will . but now his dead face be there , and I can not bear it . " 

 suddenly loose Deronda 's hand , she start up , stretch her arm to their full length upward , and say with a sort of moan 

 " I have be a cruel woman ! what can I do but cry for help ? I be sink . die die you be forsake go down , go down into darkness . forsake no pity I shall be forsake . " 

 she sink in her chair again and break into sob . even Deronda have no place in her consciousness at that moment . he be completely unmanned . instead of find , as he have imagine , that his late experience have dull his susceptibility to fresh emotion , it seem that the lot of this young creature , whose swift travel from her bright rash girlhood into this agony of remorse he have have to behold in helplessness , pierce he the deep because it come close upon another sad revelation of spiritual conflict : he be in one of those moment when the very anguish of passionate pity make we ready to choose that we will know pleasure no more , and live only for the stricken and afflict . he have rise from his seat while he watch that terrible outburst which seem the more awful to he because , even in this supreme agitation , she keep the suppress voice of one who confess in secret . at last he feel impel to turn his back toward she and walk to a distance . 

 but presently there be stillness . her mind have open to the sense that he have go away from she . when Deronda turn round to approach she again , he see her face bent toward he , her eye dilate , her lip part . she be an image of timid forlorn beseech too timid to entreat in word while he keep himself aloof from she . be she forsake by he now already ? but his eye meet hers sorrowfully meet her for the first time fully since she have say , " you know I be a guilty woman , " and that full glance in its intense mournfulness seem to say , " I know it , but I shall all the less forsake you . " he sit down by her side again in the same attitude without turn his face toward she and without again take her hand . 

 once more Gwendolen be pierce , as she have be by his face of sorrow at the Abbey , with a compunction less egoistic than that which urge she to confess , and she say , in a tone of love regret 

 " I make you very unhappy . " 

 Deronda give an indistinct " oh , " just shrink together and change his attitude a little . then he have gather resolution enough to say clearly , " there be no question of be happy or unhappy . what I most desire at this moment be what will most help you . tell I all you feel it a relief to tell . " 

 devote as these word be , they widen his spiritual distance from she , and she feel it more difficult to speak : she have a vague need of get near to that compassion which seem to be regard she from a halo of superiority , and the need turn into an impulse to humble herself more . she be ready to throw herself on her knee before he ; but no her wonderfully mixed consciousness hold check on that impulse , and she be keep silent and motionless by the pressure of oppose need . her stillness make Deronda at last say 

 " perhaps you be too weary . shall I go away , and come again whenever you wish it ? " 

 " no , no , " say Gwendolen the dread of his leave she bring back her power of speech . she go on with her low - toned eagerness , " I want to tell you what it be that come over I in that boat . I be full of rage at be oblige to go full of rage and I could do nothing but sit there like a galley slave . and then we get away out of the port into the deep and everything be still and we never look at each other , only he speak to order I and the very light about I seem to hold I a prisoner and force I to sit as I do . it come over I that when I be a child I use to fancy sailing away into a world where people be not force to live with any one they do not like I do not like my father - in - law to come home . and now , I think , just the opposite have come to I . I have step into a boat , and my life be a sailing and sail away glide on and no help always into solitude with he , away from deliverance . and because I feel more helpless than ever , my thought go out over bad thing I long for bad thing I have cruel wish I fancy impossible way of I do not want to die myself ; I be afraid of our being drown together . if it have be any use I should have pray I should have pray that something might befall he . I should have pray that he might sink out of my sight and leave I alone . I know no way of kill he there , but I do , I do kill he in my thought . " 

 she sink into silence for a minute , submerge by the weight of memory which no word could represent . 

 " but yet , all the while I feel that I be get more wicked . and what have be with I so much , come to I just then what you once say about dread to increase my wrong - doing and my remorse I should hope for nothing then . it be all like a writing of fire within I . get wicked be misery be shut out forever from know what you what well life be . that have always be come back to I then but yet with a despair a feeling that it be no use evil wish be too strong . I remember then let go the tiller and say ' God help I ! ' but then I be force to take it again and go on ; and the evil longing , the evil prayer come again and blot everything else dim , till , in the midst of they I do not   know how it be he be turn the sail there be a gust he be strike I know nothing I only know that I see my wish outside I . " 

 she begin to speak more hurriedly , and in more of a whisper . 

 " I see he sink , and my heart give a leap as if it be go out of I . I think I do not move . I keep my hand tight . it be long enough for I to be glad , and yet to think it be no use he would come up again . and he be come far off the boat have move . it be all like lightning . ' the rope ! ' he call out in a voice not his own I hear it now and I stoop for the rope I feel I must I feel sure he could swim , and he would come back whether or not , and I dread he . that be in my mind he would come back . but he be go down again , and I have the rope in my hand no , there he be again his face above the water and he cry again and I hold my hand , and my heart say , ' die ! ' and he sink ; and I feel ' it be do I be wicked , I be lose ! and I have the rope in my hand I do not   know what I think I be leap away from myself I would have save he then . I be leap from my crime , and there it be close to I as I fall there be the dead face dead , dead . it can never be alter . that be what happen . that be what I do . you know it all . it can never be alter . " 

 she sink back in her chair , exhaust with the agitation of memory and speech . Deronda feel the burden on his spirit less heavy than the forego dread . the word " guilty " have hold a possibility of interpretation bad than the fact ; and Gwendolen 's confession , for the very reason that her conscience make her dwell on the determine power of her evil thought , convince he the more that there have be throughout a counterbalance struggle of her well will . it seem almost certain that her murderous thought have have no outward effect that , quite apart from it , the death be inevitable . still , a question as to the outward effectiveness of a criminal desire dominant enough to impel even a momentary act , can not alter our judgment of the desire ; and Deronda shrink from put that question forward in the first instance . he hold it likely that Gwendolen 's remorse aggravate her inward guilt , and that she give the character of decisive action to what have be an inappreciably instantaneous glance of desire . but her remorse be the precious sign of a recoverable nature ; it be the culmination of that self - disapproval which have be the awakening of a new life within she ; it mark she off from the criminal whose only regret be failure in secure their evil wish . Deronda could not utter one word to diminish that sacred aversion to her bad self that thorn - pressure which must come with the crowning of the sorrowful well , suffer because of the bad . all this mingled thought and feeling keep he silent ; speech be too momentous to be venture on rashly . there be no word of comfort that do not carry some sacrilege . if he have open his lip to speak , he could only have echo , " it can never be alter it remain unaltered , to alter other thing . " but he be silent and motionless he do not know how long before he turn to look at she , and see she sink back with closed eye , like a lost , weary , storm - beat white doe , unable to rise and pursue its unguided way . he rise and stand before she . the movement touch her consciousness , and she open her eye with a slight quivering that seem like fear . 

 " you must rest now . try to rest : try to sleep . and may I see you again this evening to - morrow when you have have some rest ? let we say no more now . " 

 the tear come , and she could not answer except by a slight movement of the head . Deronda ring for attendance , speak urgently of the necessity that she should be get to rest , and then leave she . 

 CHAPTER LVII . 

  " the unripe grape , the ripe , and the dry . all thing be change , 
  not into nothing , but into that which be not at present . " marcu 
  aureliu . 
  deed be the pulse of Time , his beat life , 
  and righteous or unrighteous , be do , 
  must throb in after - throb till Time itself 
  be lay in darkness , and the universe 
  Quiver and breathe upon no mirror more . 
 in the evening she send for he again . it be already near the hour at which she have be bring in from the sea the evening before , and the light be subdue enough with blind draw up and window open . she be seat gaze fixedly on the sea , rest her cheek on her hand , look less shattered than when he have leave she , but with a deep melancholy in her expression which as Deronda approach she pass into an anxious timidity . she do not put out her hand , but say , " how long ago it be ! " then , " will you sit near I again a little while ? " 

 he place himself by her side as he have do before , and see that she turn to he with that indefinable expression which imply a wish to say something , he wait for she to speak . but again she look toward the window silently , and again turn with the same expression , which yet do not issue in speech . there be some fear hinder she , and Deronda , wish to relieve her timidity , avert his face . presently he hear her cry imploringly 

 " you will not say that any one else should know ? " 

 " most decidedly not , " say Deronda . " there be no action that ought to be take in consequence . there be no injury that could be right in that way . there be no retribution that any mortal could apportion justly . " 

 she be so still during a pause that she seem to be hold her breath before she say 

 " but if I have not have that murderous will that moment if I have throw the rope on the instant perhaps it would have hinder death ? " 

 " no I think not , " say Deronda , slowly . " if it be true that he could swim , he must have be seize with cramp . with your quick , utmost effort , it seem impossible that you could have do anything to save he . that momentary murderous will can not , I think , have alter the course of event . its effect be confine to the motif in your own breast . within ourselves our evil will be momentous , and soon or later it work its way outside we it may be in the vitiation that breed evil act , but also it may be in the self - abhorrence that sting we into well strive . " 

 " I be save from rob other there be other they will have everything they will have what they ought to have . I know that some time before I leave town . you do not suspect I of wrong desire about those thing ? " she speak hesitatingly . 

 " I have not think of they , " say Deronda ; " I be think too much of the other thing . " 

 " perhaps you do not   quite know the beginning of it all , " say Gwendolen , slowly , as if she be overcome her reluctance . " there be some one else he ought to have marry . and I know it , and I tell she I would not hinder it . and I go away that be when you first see I . but then we become poor all at once , and I be very miserable , and I be tempt . I think , ' I shall do as I like and make everything right . ' I persuade myself . and it be all different . it be all dreadful . then come hatred and wicked thought . that be how it all come . I tell you I be afraid of myself . and I do what you tell I I do try to make my fear a safeguard . I think of what would be if I I feel what would come how I should dread the morning wish it would be always night and yet in the darkness always see something see death . if you do not know how miserable I be , you might but now it have all be no use . I can care for nothing but save the rest from know poor mamma , who have never be happy . " 

 there be silence again before she say with a repressed sob " you can not bear to look at I any more . you think I be too wicked . you do not believe that I can become any well worth anything worthy enough I shall always be too wicked to " the voice break off helpless . 

 Deronda 's heart be pierce . he turn his eye on her poor beseech face and say , " I believe that you may become worthy than you have ever yet be worthy to lead a life that may be a blessing . no evil doom we hopelessly except the evil we love , and desire to continue in , and make no effort to escape from . you have make effort you will go on make they . " 

 " but you be the beginning of they . you must not forsake I , " say Gwendolen , lean with her clasp hand on the arm of her chair and look at he , while her face bear piteous trace of the life - experience concentrate in the twenty - four hour that new terrible life lie on the other side of the deed which fulfill a criminal desire . " I will bear any penance . I will lead any life you tell I . but you must not forsake I . you must be near . if you have be near I if I could have say everything to you , I should have be different . you will not forsake I ? " 

 " it could never be my impulse to forsake you , " say Deronda promptly , with that voice which , like his eye , have the unintentional effect of make his ready sympathy seem more personal and special than it really be . and in that moment he be not himself quite free from a foreboding of some such self - commit effect . his strong feeling for this stricken creature could not hinder rushing image of future difficulty . he continue to meet her appeal eye as he speak , but it be with the painful consciousness that to she ear his word might carry a promise which one day would seem unfulfilled : he be make an indefinite promise to an indefinite hope . anxiety , both immediate and distant , crowded on his thought , and it be under their influence that , after a moment 's silence , he say 

 " I expect Sir Hugh Mallinger to arrive by to - morrow night at least ; and I be not without hope that Mrs. Davilow may shortly follow he . her presence will be the great comfort to you it will give you a motive to save she from unnecessary pain ? " 

 " yes , yes I will try . and you will not go away ? " 

 " not till after Sir Hugo have come . " 

 " but we shall all go to England ? " 

 " as soon as possible , " say Deronda , not wish to enter into particular . 

 Gwendolen look toward the window again with an expression which seem like a gradual awakening to new thought . the twilight be perceptibly deepen , but Deronda could see a movement in her eye and hand such as accompany a return of perception in one who have be stun . 

 " you will always be with Sir Hugo now ! " she say presently , look at he . " you will always live at the Abbey or else at diplow ? " 

 " I be quite uncertain where I shall live , " say Deronda , color . 

 she be warn by his change color that she have speak too rashly , and fall silent . after a little while she begin , again look away 

 " it be impossible to think how my life will go on . I think now it would be well for I to be poor and oblige to work . " 

 " new prompting will come as the day pass . when you be among your friend again , you will discern new duty , " say Deronda . " make it a task now to get as well and calm as much like yourself as you can , before " he hesitate . 

 " before my mother come , " say Gwendolen . " ah ! I must be change . I have not look at myself . should you have know I , " she add , turn toward he , " if you have meet I now ? should you have know I for the one you see at Leubronn ? " 

 " yes , I should have know you , " say Deronda , mournfully . " the outside change be not great . I should have see at once that it be you , and that you have go through some great sorrow . " 

 " do not   wish now that you have never see I ; do not   wish that , " say 
 Gwendolen , imploringly , while the tear gather . 
 " I should despise myself for wish it , " say Deronda . " how could I know what I be wish ? we must find our duty in what come to we , not in what we imagine might have be . if I take to foolish wishing of that sort , I should wish not that I have never see you , but that I have be able to save you from this . " 

 " you have save I from bad , " say Gwendolen , in a sob voice . " I should have be bad if it have not be for you . if you have not be good , I should have be more wicked than I be . " 

 " it will be well for I to go now , " say Deronda , wear in spirit by the perpetual strain of this scene . " remember what we say of your task to get well and calm before other friend come . " 

 he rise as he speak , and she give he her hand submissively . but when he have leave she she sink on her knee , in hysterical crying . the distance between they be too great . she be a banished soul behold a possible life which she have sin herself away from . 

 she be find in this way , crush on the floor . such grief seem natural in a poor lady whose husband have be drown in her presence . 

 BOOK VIII . fruit and seed . 

 CHAPTER LVIII . 

  " much adoe there be , God wot ; 
  he wold love and she wold not . " 
  NICHOLAS BRETON . 
 extension , we know , be a very imperfect measure of thing ; and the length of the sun 's journeying can no more tell we how life have advance than the acreage of a field can tell we what growth may be active within it . a man may go south , and , stumble over a bone , may meditate upon it till he have find a new starting - point for anatomy ; or eastward , and discover a new key to language tell a new story of race ; or he may head an expedition that open new continental pathway , get himself maim in body , and go through a whole heroic poem of resolve and endurance ; and at the end of a few month he may come back to find his neighbor grumble at the same parish grievance as before , or to see the same elderly gentleman tread the pavement in discourse with himself , shake his head after the same percussive butcher 's boy , and pause at the same shop - window to look at the same print . if the swift thinking have about the pace of a greyhound , the slow must be suppose to move , like the limpet , by an apparent sticking , which after a good while be discern to be a slight progression . such difference be manifest in the variable intensity which we call human experience , from the revolutionary rush of change which make a new inner and outer life , to that quiet recurrence of the familiar , which have no other epoch than those of hunger and the heaven . 

 something of this contrast be see in the year 's experience which have turn the brilliant , self - confident Gwendolen Harleth of the Archery Meeting into the crush penitent impel to confess her unworthiness where it would have be her happiness to be hold worthy ; while it have leave her family in Pennicote without deep change than that of some outward habit , and some adjustment of prospect and intention to reduce income , few visit , and fainter compliment . the rectory be as pleasant a home as before : and the red and pink peony on the lawn , the row of hollyhock by the hedge , have bloom as well this year as last : the rector maintain his cheerful confidence in the good will of patron and his resolution to deserve it by diligence in the fulfillment of his duty , whether patron be likely to hear of it or not ; do nothing solely with an eye to promotion except , perhaps , the writing of two ecclesiastical article , which have no signature , be attribute to some one else , except by the patron who have a special copy send they , and these certainly know the author but do not read the article . the rector , however , chew no poisonous cud of suspicion on this point : he make marginal note on his own copy to render they a more interesting loan , and be gratify that the Archdeacon and other authority have nothing to say against the general tenor of his argument . peaceful authorship ! live in the air of the field and down , and not in the thrice - breathe breath of criticism bring no dantesque leanness ; rather , assist nutrition by complacency , and perhaps give a more suffusive sense of achievement than the production of a whole Divina Commedia . then there be the father 's recovered delight in his favorite son , which be a happiness outweigh the loss of eighteen hundred a year . of whatever nature might be the hidden change work in Rex by the disappointment of his first love , it be apparently quite secondary to that evidence of more serious ambition which date from the family misfortune ; indeed , Mr. Gascoigne be inclined to regard the little affair which have cause he so much anxiety the year before as an evaporation of superfluous moisture , a kind of finish to the baking process which the human dough demand . Rex have lately come down for a summer visit to the rectory , bring Anna home , and while he show nearly the old liveliness with his brother and sister , he continue in his holiday the habit of the eager student , rise early in the morning and shut himself up early in the evening to carry on a fix course of study . 

 " you do not   repent the choice of the law as a profession , Rex ? " say his father . 

 " there be no profession I would choose before it , " say Rex . " I should like to end my life as a first - rate judge , and help to draw up a code . I reverse the famous dictum . I should say , ' give I something to do with make the law , and let who will make the song . ' " 

 " you will have to stow in an immense amount of rubbish , I suppose that be the bad of it , " say the rector . 

 " I do not   see that law - rubbish be bad than any other sort . it be not so bad as the rubbishy literature that people choke their mind with . it do not   make one so dull . our witty man have often be lawyer . any orderly way of look at thing as case and evidence seem to I well than a perpetual wash of odd and end bear on nothing in particular . and then , from a high point of view , the foundation and the growth of law make the most interesting aspect of philosophy and history . of course there will be a good deal that be troublesome , drudge , perhaps exasperate . but the great prize in life can not   be win easily I see that . " 

 " well , my boy , the good augury of a man 's success in his profession be that he think it the fine in the world . but I fancy it so with most work when a man go into it with a will . Brewitt , the blacksmith , say to I the other day that his ' prentice have no mind to his trade ; ' and yet , sir , ' say Brewitt , ' what would a young fellow have if he do not   like the blacksmithing ? " 

 the rector cherish a fatherly delight , which he allow to escape he only in moderation . Warham , who have go to India , he have easily bear part with , but Rex be that romance of later life which a man sometimes find in a son whom he recognize as superior to himself , picture a future eminence for he accord to a variety of famous example . it be only to his wife that he say with decision : " Rex will be a distinguished man , Nancy , I be sure of it as sure as Paley 's father be about his son . " 

 " be Paley an old bachelor ? " say Mrs. Gascoigne . 

 " that be hardly to the point , my dear , " say the rector , who do not remember that irrelevant detail . and Mrs. Gascoigne feel that she have speak rather weakly . 

 this quiet trotting of time at the rectory be share by the group who have exchange the fade dignity of Offendene for the low white house not a mile off , well enclose with evergreen , and know to the villager , as " Jodson 's . " Mrs. Davilow 's delicate face show only a slight deepening of its mild melancholy , her hair only a few more silver line , in consequence of the last year 's trial ; the four girl have bloom out a little from be less in the shade ; and the good Jocosa preserve her serviceable neutrality toward the pleasure and glory of the world as thing make for those who be not " in a situation . " 

 the low narrow drawing - room , enlarge by two quaint project window , with lattice wide open on a July afternoon to the scent of monthly rose , the faint murmur of the garden , and the occasional rare sound of hoof and wheel seem to clarify the succeed silence , make rather a crowd , lively scene , Rex and Anna be add to the usual group of six . Anna , always a favorite with her young cousin , have much to tell of her new experience , and the acquaintance she have make in London , and when on her first visit she come alone , many question be ask she about Gwendolen 's house in Grosvenor Square , what Gwendolen herself have say , and what any one else have say about Gwendolen . have Anna be to see Gwendolen after she have know about the yacht ? no : an answer which leave speculation free concern everything connect with that interesting unknown vessel beyond the fact that Gwendolen have write just before she set out to say that Mr. Grandcourt and she be go yacht on the Mediterranean , and again from Marseilles to say that she be sure to like the yachting , the cabin be very elegant , and she would probably not send another letter till she have write quite a long diary fill with ditto . also , this movement of Mr. and Mrs. Grandcourt have be mention in " the newspaper ; " so that altogether this new phase of Gwendolen 's exalted life make a striking part of the sister ' romance , the book - devour Isabel throwing in a corsair or two to make an adventure that might end well . 

 but when Rex be present , the girl , accord to instruction , never start this fascinating topic , and to - day there have only be animate description of the Meyricks and their extraordinary jewish friend , which cause some astonished questioning from mind to which the idea of live Jews , out of a book , suggest a difference deep enough to be almost zoological , as of a strange race in Pliny 's Natural history that might sleep under the shade of its own ear . Bertha could not imagine what Jews believe now ; and she have a dim idea that they reject the Old Testament since it prove the New ; Miss Merry think that Mirah and her brother could " never have be properly argue with , " and the amiable Alice do not mind what the Jews believe , she be sure she " could not   bear they . " Mrs. Davilow correct she by say that the great jewish family who be in society be quite what they ought to be both in London and Paris , but admit that the commoner unconverted Jews be objectionable ; and Isabel ask whether Mirah talk just as they do , or whether you might be with she and not find out that she be a Jewess . 

 Rex , who have no partisanship with the Israelites , have make a troublesome acquaintance with the minutia of their ancient history in the form of " cram , " be amuse himself by playfully exaggerate the notion of each speaker , while Anna beg they all to understand that he be only joke , when the laughter be interrupt by the bringing in of a letter for Mrs. Davilow . a messenger have run with it in great haste from the rectory . it enclose a telegram , and as Mrs. Davilow read and re - read it in silence and agitation , all eye be turn on she with anxiety , but no one dare to speak . look up at last and see the young face " paint with fear , " she remember that they might be imagine something bad than the truth , something like her own first dread which make she unable to understand what be write , and she say , with a sob which be half relief 

 " my dear , Mr. Grandcourt " she pause an instant , and then begin again , " Mr. Grandcourt be drown . " 

 Rex start up as if a missile have be suddenly throw into the room . he could not help himself , and Anna 's first look be at he . but then , gather some self - command while Mrs. Davilow be read what the rector have write on the enclose paper , he say 

 " can I do anything , aunt ? can I carry any word to my father from you ? " 

 " yes , dear . tell he I will be ready he be very good . he say he will go with I to Genoa he will be here at half - past six . Jocosa and Alice , help I to get ready . she be safe Gwendolen be safe but she must be ill . I be sure she must be very ill . Rex , dear Rex and Anna go and and tell your father I will be quite ready . I would not for the world lose another night . and bless he for be ready so soon . I can travel night and day till we get there . " 

 Rex and Anna hurry away through the sunshine which be suddenly solemn to they , without utter a word to each other : she chiefly possess by solicitude about any reopening of his wound , he struggle with a tumultuary crowd of thought that be an offence against his well will . the tumult be undiminishe when they be at the rectory gate , he say 

 " Nannie , I will leave you to say everything to my father . if he want I immediately , let I know . I shall stay in the shrubbery for ten minute only ten minute . " 

 who have be quite free from egoistic escape of the imagination , picture desirable consequence on his own future in the presence of another 's misfortune , sorrow , or death ? the expect promotion or legacy be the common type of a temptation which make speech and even prayer a severe avoidance of the most insistent thought , and sometimes raise an inward shame , a self - distaste that be bad than any other form of unpleasant companionship . in Rex 's nature the shame be immediate , and overspread like an ugly light all the hurrying image of what might come , which thrust themselves in with the idea that Gwendolen be again free overspread they , perhaps , the more persistently because every phantasm of a hope be quickly nullify by a more substantial obstacle . before the vision of " Gwendolen free " rise the impassable vision of " Gwendolen rich , exalted , court ; " and if in the former time , when both their life be fresh , she have turn from his love with repugnance , what ground be there for suppose that her heart would be more open to he in the future ? 

 these thought , which he want to master and suspend , be like a tumultuary ring of oppose chime that he could not escape from by run . during the last year he have bring himself into a state of calm resolve , and now it seem that three word have be enough to undo all that difficult work , and cast he back into the wretched fluctuation of a longing which he recognize as simply perturb and hopeless . and at this moment the activity of such longing have an untimeliness that make it repulsive to his well self . excuse poor Rex ; it be not much more than eighteen month since he have be lay low by an archer who sometimes touch his arrow with a subtle , linger poison . the disappointment of a youthful passion have effect as incalculable as those of small - pox which may make one person plain and a genius , another less plain and more foolish , another plain without detriment to his folly , and leave perhaps the majority without obvious change . everything depend not on the mere fact of disappointment , but on the nature affect and the force that stir it . in Rex 's well - endow nature , brief as the hope have be , the passionate stirring have go deep , and the effect of disappointment be revolutionary , though fraught with a beneficent new order which retain most of the old virtue ; in certain respect he believe that it have finally determine the bias and color of his life . now , however , it seem that his inward peace be hardly more than that of republican Florence , and his heart no well than the alarm - bell that make work slack and tumult busy . 

 Rex 's love have be of that sudden , penetrate , cling sort which the ancient know and sung , and in singing make a fashion of talk for many modern whose experience have by no mean a fiery , demonic character . to have the consciousness suddenly steep with another 's personality , to have the strong inclination possess by an image which retain its dominance in spite of change and apart from worthiness nay , to feel a passion which cling fast for the tragic pang inflict by a cruel , reorganize unworthiness be a phase of love which in the feeble and common - minded have a repulsive likeness to his blind animalism insensible to the high sway of moral affinity or heaven - light admiration . but when this attach force be present in a nature not of brutish unmodifiableness , but of a human dignity that can risk itself safely , it may even result in a devotedness not unfit to be call divine in a high sense than the ancient . phlegmatic rationality stare and shake its head at these unaccountable prepossession , but they exist as undeniably as the wind and wave , determine here a wreck and there a triumphant voyage . 

 this sort of passion have nest in the sweet - natured , strong Rex , and he have make up his mind to its companionship , as if it have be an object supremely dear , stricken dumb and helpless , and turn all the future of tenderness into a shadow of the past . but he have also make up his mind that his life be not to be pauperize because he have have to renounce one sort of joy ; rather , he have begin life again with a new counting - up of the treasure that remain to he , and he have even feel a release of power such as may come from cease to be afraid of your own neck . 

 and now , here he be pace the shrubbery , angry with himself that the sense of irrevocableness in his lot , which ought in reason to have be as strong as ever , have be shake by a change of circumstance that could make no change in relation to he . he tell himself the truth quite roughly 

 " she would never love I ; and that be not the question I could never approach she as a lover in her present position . I be exactly of no consequence at all , and be not likely to be of much consequence till my head be turn gray . but what have that to do with it ? she would not have I on any term , and I would not ask she . it be a meanness to be think about it now no well than lurk about the battle - field to strip the dead ; but there never be more gratuitous sinning . I have nothing to gain there absolutely nothing . then why can not   I face the fact , and behave as they demand , instead of leave my father to suppose that there be matter he can not   speak to I about , though I might be useful in they ? " 

 the last thought make one wave with the impulse that send Rex walk firmly into the house and through the open door of the study , where he see his father pack a travel - desk . 

 " can I be of any use , sir ? " say Rex , with rally courage , as his father look up at he . 

 " yes , my boy ; when I be go , just see to my letter , and answer where necessary , and send I word of everything . dymock will manage the parish very well , and you will stay with your mother , or , at least , go up and down again , till I come back , whenever that may be . " 

 " you will hardly be very long , sir , I suppose , " say Rex , begin to strap a railway rug . " you will perhaps bring my cousin back to England ? " he force himself to speak of Gwendolen for the first time , and the rector notice the epoch with satisfaction . 

 " that depend , " he answer , take the subject as a matter - of - course between they . " perhaps her mother may stay there with she , and I may come back very soon . this telegram leave we in ignorance which be rather anxious . but no doubt the arrangement of the will lately make be satisfactory , and there may possibly be an heir yet to be bear . in any case , I feel confident that Gwendolen will be liberally I should expect , splendidly provide for . " 

 " it must have be a great shock for she , " say Rex , get more resolute after the first twinge have be bear . " I suppose he be a devoted husband . " 

 " no doubt of it , " say the rector , in his most decide manner . " few man of his position would have come forward as he do under the circumstance . " 

 Rex have never see Grandcourt , have never be speak to about he by any one of the family , and know nothing of Gwendolen 's flight from her suitor to Leubronn . he only know that Grandcourt , be very much in love with she , have make she an offer in the first week of her sudden poverty , and have behave very handsomely in provide for her mother and sister . that be all very natural and what Rex himself would have like to do . Grandcourt have be a lucky fellow , and have have some happiness before he get drown . yet Rex wonder much whether Gwendolen have be in love with the successful suitor , or have only forborne to tell he that she hat be make love to . 

 CHAPTER LIX . 

  " I count myself in nothing else so happy 
  as in a soul remember my good friend . " 
  SHAKESPEARE . 
 Sir Hugo Mallinger be not so prompt in start for Genoa as Mr. Gascoigne have be , and Deronda on all account would not take his departure until he have see the baronet . there be not only Grandcourt 's death , but also the late crisis in his own life to make reason why his old friend would desire to have the unrestrained communication of speech with he , for in writing he have not feel able to give any detail concern the mother who have come and go like an apparition . it be not till the fifth evening that Deronda , accord to telegram , wait for Sir Hugo at the station , where he be to arrive between eight and nine ; and while he be look forward to the sight of the kind , familiar face , which be part of his early memory , something like a smile , in spite of his late tragic experience , might have be detect in his eye and the curve of his lip at the idea of Sir Hugo 's pleasure in be now master of his estate , able to leave they to his daughter , or at least accord to a view of inheritance which have just be strongly impressed on Deronda 's imagination to take makeshift feminine offspring as intermediate to a satisfactory heir in a grandson . we should be churlish creature if we could have no joy in our fellow - mortal ' joy , unless it be in agreement with our theory of righteous distribution and our high ideal of human good : what sour corner our mouth would get our eye , what frozen glance ! and all the while our own possession and desire would not exactly adjust themselves to our ideal . we must have some comradeship with imperfection ; and it be , happily , possible to feel gratitude even where we discern a mistake that may have be injurious , the vehicle of the mistake be an affectionate intention prosecute through a life - time of kindly office . Deronda 's feeling and judgment be strongly against the action of Sir Hugo in make himself the agent of a falsity yes , a falsity : he could give no milder name to the concealment under which he have be rear . but the baronet have probably have no clear knowledge concern the mother 's breach of trust , and with his light , easy way of take life , have hold it a reasonable preference in she that her son should be make an english gentleman , see that she have the eccentricity of not care to part from her child , and be to he as if she be not . Daniel 's affectionate gratitude toward Sir Hugo make he wish to find ground of excuse rather than blame ; for it be as possible to be rigid in principle and tender in blame , as it be to suffer from the sight of thing hang awry , and yet to be patient with the hanger who see amiss . if Sir Hugo in his bachelorhood have be beguile into regard child chiefly as a product intend to make life more agreeable to the full - grown , whose convenience alone be to be consult in the disposal of they why , he have share an assumption which , if not formally avow , be massively act on at that date of the world 's history ; and Deronda , with all his keen memory of the painful inward struggle he have go through in his boyhood , be able also to remember the many sign that his experience have be entirely shut out from Sir Hugo 's conception . ignorant kindness may have the effect of cruelty ; but to be angry with it as if it be direct cruelty would be an ignorant un kindness , the most remote from Deronda 's large imaginative lenience toward other . and perhaps now , after the search scene of the last ten day , in which the curtain have be lift for he from the secret of life unlike his own , he be more than ever disposed to check that rashness of indignation or resentment which have an unpleasant likeness to the love of punish . when he see Sir Hugo 's familiar figure descend from the railway carriage , the life - long affection which have be well accustomed to make excuse , flow in and submerge all new knowledge that might have seem fresh ground for blame . 

 " well , Dan , " say Sir Hugo , with a serious fervor , grasp Deronda 's hand . he utter no other word of greeting ; there be too strong a rush of mutual consciousness . the next thing be to give order to the courier , and then to propose walk slowly in , the mild evening , there be no hurry to get to the hotel . 

 " I have take my journey easily , and be in excellent condition , " he say , as he and Deronda come out under the starlight , which be still faint with the linger sheen of day . " I do not   hurry in set off , because I want to inquire into thing a little , and so I get sight of your letter to Lady Mallinger before I start . but now , how be the widow ? " 

 " get calm , " say Deronda . " she seem to be escape the bodily illness that one might have fear for she , after her plunge and terrible excitement . her uncle and mother come two day ago , and she be be well take care of . " 

 " any prospect of an heir be bear ? " 

 " from what Mr. Gascoigne say to I , I conclude not . he speak as if it be a question whether the widow would have the estate for her life . " 

 " it will not be much of a wrench to her affection , I fancy , this loss of the husband ? " say Sir Hugo , look round at Deronda . 

 " the suddenness of the death have be a great blow to she , " say 
 Deronda , quietly evade the question . 
 " I wonder whether Grandcourt give she any notion what be the provision of his will ? " say Sir Hugo . 

 " do you know what they be , sir ? " parry Deronda . 

 " yes , I do , " say the baronet , quickly . " Gad ! if there be no prospect of a legitimate heir , he have leave everything to a boy he have by a Mrs. Glasher ; you know nothing about the affair , I suppose , but she be a sort of wife to he for a good many year , and there be three old child girl . the boy be to take his father 's name ; he be Henleigh already , and he be to be Henleigh Mallinger Grandcourt . the Mallinger will be of no use to he , I be happy to say ; but the young dog will have more than enough with his fourteen year ' minority no need to have have hole fill up with my fifty thousand for Diplow that he have no right to : and meanwhile my beauty , the young widow , be to put up with a poor two thousand a year and the house at Gadsmere a nice kind of banishment for she if she choose to shut herself up there , which I do not   think she will . the boy 's mother have be live there of late year . I be perfectly disgusted with Grandcourt . I do not   know that I be oblige to think the well of he because he be drown , though , so far as my affair be concern , nothing in his life become he like the leave it . " 

 " in my opinion he do wrong when he marry this wife not in leave his estate to the son , " say Deronda , rather dryly . 

 " I say nothing against his leave the land to the lad , " say Sir Hugo ; " but since he have marry this girl he ought to have give she a handsome provision , such as she could live on in a style fit to the rank he have raise she to . she ought to have have four or five thousand a year and the London house for her life ; that be what I should have do for she . I suppose , as she be penniless , her friend could not   stand out for a settlement , else it be ill trusting to the will a man may make after he be marry . even a wise man generally let some folly ooze out of he in his will my father do , I know ; and if a fellow have any spite or tyranny in he , he be likely to bottle off a good deal for keep in that sort of document . it be quite clear Grandcourt mean that his death should put an extinguisher on his wife , if she bear he no heir . " 

 " and , in the other case , I suppose everything would have be reverse illegitimacy would have have the extinguisher ? " say Deronda , with some scorn . 

 " Precisely Gadsmere and the two thousand . it be queer . one nuisance be that Grandcourt have make I an executor ; but see he be the son of my only brother , I can not   refuse to act . and I shall mind it less if I can be of any use to the widow . Lush think she be not in ignorance about the family under the rose , and the purport of the will . he hint that there be no very good understanding between the couple . but I fancy you be the man who know most about what Mrs. Grandcourt feel or do not feel eh , Dan ? " Sir Hugo do not put this question with his usual jocoseness , but rather with a lower tone of interested inquiry ; and Deronda feel that any evasion would be misinterpret . he answer gravely 

 " she be certainly not happy . they be unsuited to each other . but as to the disposal of the property from all I have see of she , I should predict that she will be quite content with it . " 

 " then she be not much like the rest of her sex ; that be all I can say , " say Sir Hugo , with a slight shrug . " however , she ought to be something extraordinary , for there must be an entanglement between your horoscope and hers eh ? when that tremendous telegram come , the first thing Lady Mallinger say be , ' how very strange that it should be Daniel who send it ! ' but I have have something of the same sort in my own life . I be once at a foreign hotel where a lady have be leave by her husband without money . when I hear of it , and come forward to help she , who should she be but an early flame of mine , who have be fool enough to marry an austrian baron with a long mustache and short affection ? but it be an affair of my own that call I there nothing to do with knight - errantry , any more than you come to Genoa have to do with the Grandcourts . " 

 there be silence for a little while . Sir Hugo have begin to talk of the Grandcourts as the less difficult subject between himself and Deronda ; but they be both wish to overcome a reluctance to perfect frankness on the event which touch their relation to each other . Deronda feel that his letter , after the first interview with his mother , have be rather a thickening than a breaking of the ice , and that he ought to wait for the first opening to come from Sir Hugo . just when they be about to lose sight of the port , the baronet turn , and pause as if to get a last view , say in a tone of more serious feeling " and about the main business of your come to Genoa , Dan ? you have not be deeply pain by anything you have learn , I hope ? there be nothing that you feel need change your position in any way ? you know , whatever happen to you must always be of importance to I . " 

 " I desire to meet your goodness by perfect confidence , sir , " say Deronda . " but I can not   answer those question truly by a simple yes or no . much that I have hear about the past have pain I . and it have be a pain to meet and part with my mother in her suffering state , as I have be compel to do , but it be no pain it be rather a clearing up of doubt for which I be thankful , to know my parentage . as to the effect on my position , there will be no change in my gratitude to you , sir , for the fatherly care and affection you have always show I . but to know that I be bear a Jew , may have a momentous influence on my life , which I be hardly able to tell you of at present . " 

 Deronda speak the last sentence with a resolve that overcome some diffidence . he feel that the difference between Sir Hugo 's nature and his own would have , by - and - by , to disclose themselves more markedly than have ever yet be needful . the baronet give he a quick glance , and turn to walk on . after a few moment ' silence , in which he have review all the material in his memory which would enable he to interpret Deronda 's word , he say 

 " I have long expect something remarkable from you , Dan ; but , for God 's sake , do not   go into any eccentricity ! I can tolerate any man 's difference of opinion , but let he tell it I without get himself up as a lunatic . at this stage of the world , if a man want to be take seriously , he must keep clear of melodrama . do not   misunderstand I . I be not suspect you of set up any lunacy on your own account . I only think you might easily be lead arm in arm with a lunatic , especially if he want defend . you have a passion for people who be pelt , Dan . I be sorry for they too ; but so far as company go , it be a bad ground of selection . however , I do not   ask you to anticipate your inclination in anything you have to tell I . when you make up your mind to a course that require money , I have some sixteen thousand pound that have be accumulate for you over and above what you have be have the interest of as income . and now I be come , I suppose you want to get back to England as soon as you can ? " 

 " I must go first to Mainz to get away a chest of my grandfather 's , and perhaps to see a friend of his , " say Deronda . " although the chest have be lie there these twenty year , I have an unreasonable sort of nervous eagerness to get it away under my care , as if it be more likely now than before that something might happen to it . and perhaps I be the more uneasy , because I linger after my mother leave , instead of set out immediately . yet I can not   regret that I be here else Mrs. Grandcourt would have have none but servant to act for she . " 

 " yes , yes , " say Sir Hugo , with a flippancy which be an escape of some vexation hide under his more serious speech ; " I hope you be not go to set a dead Jew above a live Christian . " 

 Deronda color , and repress a retort . they be just turn into the Italia . 

 CHAPTER LX . 

 " but I shall say no more of this at this time ; for this be to be feel and not to be talk of ; and they who never touch it with their finger may secretly perhaps laugh at it in their heart and be never the wiser . " JEREMY TAYLOR . 

 the Roman Emperor in the legend put to death ten learn Israelites to avenge the sale of Joseph by his brother . and there have always be enough of his kidney , whose piety lie in punish who can see the justice of grudge but not of gratitude . for you shall never convince the strong feeling that it hath not the strong reason , or incline he who hath no love to believe that there be good ground for love . as we may learn from the order of word - making , wherein love precedeth lovable . 

 when Deronda present his letter at the banking - house in the Schuster Strasse at Mainz , and ask for Joseph Kalonymos , he be presently show into an inner room , where , seat at a table arrange open letter , be the white - bearded man whom he have see the year before in the synagogue at Frankfort . he wear his hat it seem to be the same old feel hat as before and near he be a packed portmanteau with a wrap and overcoat upon it . on see Deronda enter he rise , but do not advance or put out his hand . look at he with small penetrate eye which glitter like black gem in the midst of his yellowish face and white hair , he say in german 

 " good ! it be now you who seek I , young man . " 

 " yes ; I seek you with gratitude , as a friend of my grandfather 's , " say 
 Deronda , " and I be under an obligation to you for give yourself much 
 trouble on my account . " he speak without difficulty in that liberal 
 german tongue which take many strange accent to its maternal bosom . 
 Kalonymos now put out his hand and say cordially , " so you be no long angry at be something more than an Englishman ? " 

 " on the contrary . I thank you heartily for help to save I from remain in ignorance of my parentage , and for take care of the chest that my grandfather leave in trust for I . " 

 " sit down , sit down , " say Kalonymos , in a quick undertone , seat himself again , and point to a chair near he . then deliberately lay aside his hat and show a head thickly cover , with white hair , he stroke and clutch his beard while he look examiningly at the young face before he . the moment work strongly on Deronda 's imaginative susceptibility : in the presence of one link still in zealous friendship with the grandfather whose hope have yearn toward he when he be unborn , and who , though dead , be yet to speak with he in those write memorial which , say Milton , " contain a potency of life in they to be as active as that soul whose progeny they be , " he seem to himself to be touch the electric chain of his own ancestry ; and he bear the scrutinize look of Kalonymos with a delighted awe , something like what one feel in the solemn commemoration of act do long ago but still tell markedly on the life of to - day . impossible for man of duller , fibre man whose affection be not ready to diffuse itself through the wide travel of imagination , to comprehend , perhaps even to credit this sensibility of Deronda 's ; but it subsist , like their own dullness , notwithstanding their lack of belief in it and it give his face an expression which seem very satisfactory to the observer . 

 he say in Hebrew , quote from one of the fine hymn in the Hebrew liturgy , " as thy goodness have be great to the former generation , even so may it be to the latter . " then after pause a little he begin , " young man , I rejoice that I be not yet set off again on my travel , and that you be come in time for I to see the image of my friend as he be in his youth no long pervert from the fellowship of your people no long shrink in proud wrath from the touch of he who seem to be claim you as a Jew . you come with thankfulness yourself to claim the kindred and heritage that wicked contrivance would have rob you of . you come with a willing soul to declare , ' I be the grandson of Daniel Charisi . ' be it not so ? " 

 " assuredly it be , " say Deronda . " but let I say that I should at no time have be incline to treat a Jew with incivility simply because he be a Jew . you can understand that I shrink from say to a stranger , ' I know nothing of my mother . ' " 

 " a sin , a sin ! " say Kalonymos , put up his hand and close his eye in disgust . " a robbery of our people as when our youth and maiden be rear for the Roman Edom . but it be frustrate . I have frustrate it . when Daniel Charisi may his Rock and his Redeemer guard he ! when Daniel Charisi be a stripling and I be a lad little above his shoulder , we make a solemn vow always to be friend . he say , ' let we bind ourselves with duty , as if we be son of the same mother . ' that be his bent from first to last as he say , to fortify his soul with bond . it be a saying of his , ' let we bind love with duty ; for duty be the love of law ; and law be the nature of the Eternal . ' so we bind ourselves . and though we be much apart in our later life , the bond have never be break . when he be dead , they seek to rob he ; but they could not rob he of I . I rescue that remainder of he which he have prize and preserve for his offspring . and I have restore to he the offspring they have rob he of . I will bring you the chest forthwith . " 

 Kalonymos leave the room for a few minute , and return with a clerk who carry the chest , set it down on the floor , draw off a leather cover , and go out again . it be not very large , but be make heavy by ornamental bracer and handle of gilt iron . the wood be beautifully incise with arabic lettering . 

 " so ! " say Kalonymos , return to his seat . " and here be the curious key , " he add , take it from a small leathern bag . " bestow it carefully . I trust you be methodic and wary . " he give Deronda the monitory and slightly suspicious look with which age be apt to commit any object to the keeping of youth . 

 " I shall be more careful of this than of any other property , " say Deronda , smile and put the key in his breast - pocket . " I never before possess anything that be a sign to I of so much cherished hope and effort . and I shall never forget that the effort be partly yours . have you time to tell I more of my grandfather ? or shall I be trespass in stay long ? " 

 " stay yet a while . in an hour and eighteen minute I start for Trieste , " say Kalonymos , look at his watch , " and presently my son will expect my attention . will you let I make you known to they , so that they may have the pleasure of show hospitality to my friend 's grandson ? they dwell here in ease and luxury , though I choose to be a wanderer . " 

 " I shall be glad if you will commend I to their acquaintance for some future opportunity , " say Deronda . " there be press claim call I to England friend who may be much in need of my presence . I have be keep away from they too long by unexpected circumstance . but to know more of you and your family would be motive enough to bring I again to Mainz . " 

 " good ! I you will hardly find , for I be beyond my threescore year and ten , and I be a wanderer , carry my shroud with I . but my son and their child dwell here in wealth and unity . the day be change for we since Karl the great fetch my ancestor from Italy to bring some tincture of knowledge to our rough german brother . I and my contemporary have have to fight for it too . our youth fall on evil day ; but this we have win ; we increase our wealth in safety , and the learning of all Germany be feed and fatten by jewish brain though they keep not always their jewish heart . have you be leave altogether ignorant of your people 's life , young man ? " 

 " no , " say Deronda , " I have lately , before I have any true suspicion of my parentage , be lead to study everything belong to their history with more interest than any other subject . it turn out that I have be make myself ready to understand my grandfather a little . " he be anxious less the time should be consume before this circuitous course of talk could lead they back to the topic he most care about . age do not easily distinguish between what it need to express and what youth need to know - distance seeming to level the object of memory ; and keenly active as Joseph Kalonymos show himself , an inkstand in the wrong place would have hinder his imagination from get to beyrout : he have be use to unite restless travel with punctilious observation . but Deronda 's last sentence answer its purpose . 

 " so - you would perhaps have be such a man as he if your education have not hinder ; for you be like he in feature : yet not altogether , young man . he have an iron will in his face : it brace up everybody about he . when he be quite young he have already get one deep upright line in his brow . I see none of that in you . Daniel Charisi use to say , ' well , a wrong will than a wavering ; well a steadfast enemy than an uncertain friend ; well a false belief than no belief at all . ' what he despise most be indifference . he have long reason than I can give you . " 

 " yet his knowledge be not narrow ? " say Deronda , with a tacit reference to the usual excuse for indecision that it come from know too much . 

 " narrow ? no , " say Kalonymos , shake his head with a compassionate smile " from his childhood upward , he drink in learn as easily as the plant suck up water . but he early take to medicine and theory about life and health . he travel to many country , and spend much of his substance in see and know . what he use to insist on be that the strength and wealth of mankind depend on the balance of separateness and communication , and he be bitterly against our people lose themselves among the gentile ; ' it be no well , ' say he , ' than the many sort of grain go back from their variety into sameness . ' he mingle all sort of learn ; and in that he be like our arabic writer in the golden time . we study together , but he go beyond I . though we be bosom friend , and he pour himself out to I , we be as different as the inside and outside of the bowl . I stand up for two notion of my own : I take Charisi 's saying as I take the shape of the tree : they be there , not to be dispute about . it come to the same thing in both of we ; we be both faithful Jews , thankful not to be Gentiles . and since I be a ripe man , I have be what I be now , for all but age - love to wander , love transaction , love to behold all thing , and care nothing about hardship . Charisi thought continually of our people 's future : he go with all his soul into that part of our religion : I , not . so we have freedom , I be content . our people wander before they be drive . young man when I be in the East , I lie much on deck and watch the great star . the sight of they satisfy I . I know they as they rise , and hunger not to know more . Charisi be satisfied with no sight , but piece it out with what have be before and what would come after . yet we love each other , and as he say , he bind our love with duty ; we solemnly pledge ourselves to help and defend each other to the last . I have fulfil my pledge . " here Kalonymos rise , and Deronda , rise also , say 

 " and in be faithful to he you have cause justice to be do to I . it would have be a robbery of I too that I should never have know of the inheritance he have prepare for I . I thank you with my whole soul . " 

 " be worthy of he , young man . what be your vocation ? " this question be put with a quick abruptness which embarrass Deronda , who do not feel it quite honest to allege his law - reading as a vocation . he answer 

 " I can not say that I have any . " 

 " get one , get one . the Jew must be diligent . you will call yourself a Jew and profess the faith of your father ? " say Kalonymos , put his hand on Deronda 's shoulder and look sharply in his face . 

 " I shall call myself a Jew , " say Deronda , deliberately , become slightly pale under the pierce eye of his questioner . " but I will not say that I shall profess to believe exactly as my father have believe . our father themselves change the horizon of their belief and learn of other race . but I think I can maintain my grandfather 's notion of separateness with communication . I hold that my first duty be to my own people , and if there be anything to be do toward restore or perfect their common life , I shall make that my vocation . " 

 it happen to Deronda at that moment , as it have often happen to other , that the need for speech make an epoch in resolve . his respect for the questioner would not let he decline to answer , and by the necessity to answer he find out the truth for himself . 

 " ah , you argue and you look forward you be Daniel Charisi 's grandson , " say Kalonymos , add a benediction in Hebrew . 

 with that they part ; and almost as soon as Deronda be in London , the aged man be again on shipboard , greet the friendly star without any eager curiosity . 

 CHAPTER LXI . 

  " within the gentle heart Love shelter he , 
  as bird within the green shade of the grove . 
  before the gentle heart , in Nature 's scheme , 
  Love be not , nor the gentle heart ere Love . " 
  GUIDO GUNICELLI   Rossetti 's translation . 
 there be another house besides the white house at Pennicote , another breast besides Rex Gascoigne 's , in which the news of Grandcourt 's death cause both strong agitation and the effort to repress it . 

 it be Hans Meyrick 's habit to send or bring in the Times for his mother 's reading . she be a great reader of news , from the widest - reach politic to the list of marriage ; the latter , she say , give she the pleasant sense of finish the fashionable novel without have read they , and see the hero and heroine happy without know what poor creature they be . on a Wednesday , there be reason why Hans always choose to bring the paper , and to do so about the time that Mirah have nearly end give Mab her weekly lesson , avow that he come then because he want to hear Mirah sing . but on the particular Wednesday now in question , after enter the house as quietly as usual with his latch - key , he appear in the parlor , shake the Times aloft with a crackling noise , in remorseless interruption of Mab 's attempt to render Lascia ch'io pianga with a remote imitation of her teacher . piano and song cease immediately ; Mirah , who have be play the accompaniment , involuntarily start up and turn round , the crackling sound , after the occasional trick of sound , have seem to she something thunderous ; and Mab say 

 " O - o - o , Hans ! why do you bring a more horrible noise than my singing ? " 

 " what on earth be the wonderful news ? " say Mrs. Meyrick , who be the only other person in the room . " anything about Italy anything about the Austrians give up Venice ? " 

 " nothing about Italy , but something from Italy , " say Hans , with a peculiarity in his tone and manner which set his mother interpret . imagine how some of we feel and behave when an event , not disagreeable seem to be confirm and carry out our private construction . we say , " what do you think ? " in a pregnant tone to some innocent person who have not embark his wisdom in the same boat with ours , and find our information flat . 

 " nothing bad ? " say Mrs. Meyrick anxiously , think immediately of Deronda ; and Mirah 's heart have be already clutch by the same thought . 

 " not bad for anybody we care much about , " say Hans , quickly ; " rather uncommonly lucky , I think . I never know anybody die conveniently before . consider what a dear gazelle I be , I be constantly wonder to find myself alive . " 

 " oh I , Hans ! " say Mab , impatiently , " if you must talk of yourself , let it be behind your own back . what be it that have happen ? " 

 " Duke Alfonso be drown , and the Duchess be alive , that be all , " say Hans , put the paper before Mrs. Meyrick , with his finger against a paragraph . " but more than all be Deronda be at Genoa in the same hotel with they , and he see she bring in by the fisherman who have get she out of the water time enough to save she from any harm . it seem they see her jump in after her husband , which be a less judicious action than I should have expect of the Duchess . however Deronda be a lucky fellow in be there to take care of she . " 

 Mirah have sink on the music stool again , with her eyelid down and her hand tightly clasp ; and Mrs. Meyrick , give up the paper to Mab , say 

 " poor thing ! she must have be fond of her husband to jump in after he . " 

 " it be an inadvertence a little absence of mind , " say Hans , crease his face roguishly , and throw himself into a chair not far from Mirah . " who can be fond of a jealous baritone , with freeze glance , always sing aside ? that be the husband 's rŰle , depend upon it . nothing can be neater than his getting drown . the Duchess be at liberty now to marry a man with a fine head of hair , and glance that will melt instead of freeze she . and I shall be invite to the wedding . " 

 here Mirah start from her sitting posture , and fix her eye on Hans , with an angry gleam in they , she say , in a deeply - shake voice of indignation 

 " Mr. Hans , you ought not to speak in that way . Mr. Deronda would not like you to speak so . why will you say he be lucky why will you use word of that sort about life and death when what be life to one be death to another ? how do you know it would be lucky if he love Mrs. Grandcourt ? it might be a great evil to he . she would take he away from my brother I know she would . Mr. Deronda would not call that lucky to pierce my brother 's heart . " 

 all three be strike with the sudden transformation . Mirah 's face , with a look of anger that might have suit Ithuriel , pale , even to the lip that be usually so rich of tint , be not far from poor Hans , who sit transfix , blush under it as if he have be a girl , while he say , nervously 

 " I be a fool and a brute , and I withdraw every word . I will go and hang myself like Judas if it be allowable to mention he . " even in Hans 's sorrowful moment , his improvise word have inevitably some drollery . 

 but Mirah 's anger be not appease : how could it be ? she have burst into indignant speech as creature in intense pain bite and make their tooth meet even through their own flesh , by way of make their agony bearable . she say no more , but , seat herself at the piano , press the sheet of music before she , as if she think of begin to play again . 

 it be Mab who speak , while Mrs. Meyrick 's face seem to reflect some of Hans ' discomfort . 

 " Mirah be quite right to scold you , Hans . you be always take Mr. Deronda 's name in vain . and it be horrible , joke in that way about his marry Mrs. Grandcourt . man 's mind must be very black , I think , " end Mab , with much scorn . 

 " quite true , my dear , " say Hans , in a low tone , rise and turn on his heel to walk toward the back window . 

 " we have well go on , Mab ; you have not give your full time to the lesson , " say Mirah , in a high tone than usual . " will you sing this again , or shall I sing it to you ? " 

 " oh , please sing it to I , " say Mab , rejoice to take no more notice of what have happen . 

 and Mirah immediately sing Lascia ch'io pianga , give forth its melodious sob and cry with new fullness and energy . Hans pause in his walk and lean against the mantel - piece , keep his eye carefully away from his mother 's . when Mirah have sing she last note and touch the last chord , she rise and say , " I must go home now . Ezra expect I . " 

 she give her hand silently to Mrs. Meyrick and hang back a little , not dare to look at she , instead of kiss she , as usual . but the little mother draw Mirah 's face down to her , and say , soothingly , " God bless you , my dear . " Mirah feel that she have commit an offense against Mrs. Meyrick by angrily rebuke Hans , and mix with the rest of her suffering be the sense that she have show something like a proud ingratitude , an unbecoming assertion of superiority . and her friend have divine this compunction . 

 meanwhile Hans have seize his wide - awake , and be ready to open the door . 

 " now , Hans , " say Mab , with what be really a sister 's tenderness cunningly disguise , " you be not go to walk home with Mirah . I be sure she would rather not . you be so dreadfully disagreeable to - day . " 

 " I shall go to take care of she , if she do not forbid I , " say Hans , open the door . 

 Mirah say nothing , and when he have open the outer door for she and close it behind he , he walk by her side unforbidden . she have not the courage to begin speak to he again conscious that she have perhaps be unbecomingly severe in her word to he , yet find only severer word behind they in her heart . besides , she be press upon by a crowd of thought thrust themselves forward as interpreter of that consciousness which still remain unaltered to herself . 

 han , on his side , have a mind equally busy . Mirah 's anger have wake in he a new perception , and with it the unpleasant sense that he be a dolt not to have have it before . suppose Mirah 's heart be entirely preoccupy with Deronda in another character than that of her own and her brother 's benefactor ; the supposition be attend in Hans 's mind with anxiety which , to do he justice , be not altogether selfish . he have a strong persuasion , which only direct evidence to the contrary could have dissipate , and that be that there be a serious attachment between Deronda and Mrs. Grandcourt ; he have piece together many fragment of observation , and gradually gather knowledge , complete by what his sister have hear from Anna Gascoigne , which convince he not only that Mrs. Grandcourt have a passion for Deronda , but also , notwithstanding his friend 's austere self - repression , that Deronda 's susceptibility about she be the sign of conceal love . some man , have such a conviction , would have avoid allusion that could have rouse that susceptibility ; but Hans 's talk naturally flutter toward mischief , and he be give to a form of experiment on live animal which consist in irritate his friend playfully . his experiment have end in satisfy he that what he think likely be true . 

 on the other hand , any susceptibility Deronda have manifest about a lover 's attention be show to Mirah , Hans take to be sufficiently account for by the allege reason , namely , her dependent position ; for he credit his friend with all possible unselfish anxiety for those whom he could rescue and protect . and Deronda 's insistence that Mirah would never marry one who be not a Jew necessarily seem to exclude himself , since Hans share the ordinary opinion , which he know nothing to disturb , that Deronda be the son of Sir Hugo Mallinger . 

 thus he feel himself in clearness about the state of Deronda 's affection ; but now , the event which really strike he as concur toward the desirable union with Mrs. Grandcourt , have call forth a flash of revelation from Mirah a betrayal of her passionate feeling on this subject which have make he melancholy on her account as well as his own yet on the whole less melancholy than if he have imagine Deronda 's hope fix on she . it be not sublime , but it be common , for a man to see the beloved object unhappy because his rival love another , with more fortitude and a milder jealousy than if he see she entirely happy in his rival . at least it be so with the mercurial Hans , who fluctuate between the contradictory state of feeling , wound because Mirah be wound , and of be almost oblige to Deronda for love somebody else . it be impossible for he to give Mirah any direct sign of the way in which he have understand her anger , yet he long that his speechless companionship should be eloquent in a tender , penitent sympathy which be an admissible form of woo a bruised heart . 

 thus the two go side by side in a companionship that yet seem an agitated communication , like that of two chord whose quick vibration lie outside our hearing . but when they reach the door of Mirah 's home , and Hans say " good - bye , " put out his hand with an appealing look of penitence , she meet the look with melancholy gentleness , and say , " will you not come in and see my brother ? " 

 Hans could not but interpret this invitation as a sign of pardon . he have not enough understanding of what Mirah 's nature have be work into by her early experience , to divine how the very strength of her late excitement have make it pass more quickly into the resolute acceptance of pain . when he have say , " if you will let I , " and they go in together , half his grief be go , and he be spin a little romance of how his devotion might make he indispensable to Mirah in proportion as Deronda give his devotion elsewhere . this be quite fair , since his friend be provide for accord to his own heart ; and on the question of Judaism Hans feel thoroughly fortify : who ever hear in tale or history that a woman 's love go in the track of her race and religion ? Moslem and jewish damsel be always attract toward Christians , and now if Mirah 's heart have go forth too precipitately toward Deronda , here be another case in point . Hans be will not to make merry with his own argument , to call himself a Giaour , and antithesis the sole clue to event ; but he believe a little in what he laugh at . and thus his bird - like hope , construct on the light principle , soar again in spite of heavy circumstance . 

 they find Mordecai look singularly happy , hold a closed letter in his hand , his eye glow with a quiet triumph which in his emaciated face give the idea of a conquest over assail death . after the greeting between he and Hans , Mirah put her arm round her brother 's neck and look down at the letter in his hand , without the courage to ask about it , though she feel sure that it be the cause of his happiness . 

 " a letter from Daniel Deronda , " say Mordecai , answer her look . " brief only say that he hop soon to return . unexpected claim have detain he . the promise of see he again be like the bow in the cloud to I , " continue Mordecai , look at Hans ; " and to you it must be a gladness . for who have two friend like he ? " 

 while Hans be answer Mirah slip away to her own room ; but not to indulge in any outburst of the passion within she . if the angel , once suppose to watch the toilet of woman , have enter the little chamber with she and let she shut the door behind they , they would only have see she take off her hat , sit down and press her hand against her temple as if she have suddenly reflect that her head ache ; then rise to dash cold water on her eye and brow and hair till her backward curl be full of crystal bead , while she have dry her brow and look out like a freshly - open flower from among the dewy tress of the woodland ; then give deep sigh of relief , and put on her little slipper , sit still after that action for a couple of minute , which seem to she so long , so full of thing to come , that she rise with an air of recollection , and go down to make tea . 

 something of the old life have return . she have be use to remember that she must learn her part , must go to rehearsal , must act and sing in the evening , must hide her feeling from her father ; and the more painful her life grow , the more she have be use to hide . the force of her nature have long find its chief action in resolute endurance , and to - day the violence of feeling which have cause the first jet of anger have quickly transform itself into a steady facing of trouble , the well - know companion of her young year . but while she move about and speak as usual , a close observer might have discern a difference between this apparent calm , which be the effect of restrain energy , and the sweet genuine calm of the month when she first feel a return of her infantine happiness . 

 those who have be indulge by fortune and have always think of calamity as what happen to other , feel a blind incredulous rage at the reversal of their lot , and half believe that their wild cry will alter the course of the storm . Mirah feel no such surprise when familiar Sorrow come back from brief absence , and sit down with she accord to the old use and will not . and this habit of expect trouble rather than joy , hinder she from have any persistent belief in opposition to the probability which be not merely suggest by Hans , but be support by her own private knowledge and long - grow presentiment . an attachment between Deronda and Mrs. Grandcourt , to end in their future marriage , have the aspect of a certainty for her feeling . there have be no fault in he : fact have order themselves so that there be a tie between he and this woman who belong to another world than hers and Ezra 's nay , who seem another sort of be than Deronda , something foreign that would be a disturbance in his life instead of blend with it . well , well but if it could have be defer so as to make no difference while Ezra be there ! she do not know all the momentousness of the relation between Deronda and her brother , but she have see , and instinctively feel enough to forebode its be incongruous with any close tie to Mrs. Grandcourt ; at least this be the clothing that Mirah first give to her mortal repugnance . but in the still , quick action of her consciousness , thought go on like change state of sensation unbroken by her habitual act ; and this inward language soon say distinctly that the mortal repugnance would remain even if Ezra be secure from loss . 

 " what I have read about and sing about and see act , be happen to I this that I be feel be the love that make jealousy ; " so impartially Mirah sum up the charge against herself . but what difference could this pain of hers make to any one else ? it must remain as exclusively her own , and hide , as her early yearning and devotion to her lost mother . but unlike that devotion , it be something that she feel to be a misfortune of her nature a discovery that what should have be pure gratitude and reverence have sink into selfish pain , that the feeling she have hitherto delighted to pour out in word be degrade into something she be ashamed to betray an absurd longing that she who have receive all and give nothing should be of importance where she be of no importance an angry feeling toward another woman who possess the good she want . but what notion , what vain reliance could it be that have lie darkly within she and be now burn itself into sight as disappointment and jealousy ? it be as if her soul have be steep in poisonous passion by forget dream of deep sleep , and now flame out in this unaccountable misery . for with her wake reason she have never entertain what seem the wildly unfit thought that Deronda could love she . the uneasiness she have feel before have be comparatively vague and easily explain as part of a general regret that he be only a visitant in she and her brother 's world , from which the world where his home lay be as different as a portico with light and lacquey be different from the door of a tent , where the only splendor come from the mysterious inaccessible star . but her feeling be no long vague : the cause of her pain the image of Mrs. Grandcourt by Deronda 's side , draw he far and far into the distance , be as definite as pincer on her flesh . in the Psyche - mould of Mirah 's frame there rest a fervid quality of emotion , sometimes rashly suppose to require the bulk of a Cleopatra ; her impression have the thoroughness and tenacity that give to the first selection of passionate feel the character of a lifelong faithfulness . and now a selection have declare itself , which give love a cruel heart of jealousy : she have be use to a strong repugnance toward certain object that surround she , and to walk inwardly aloof from they while they touch her sense . and now her repugnance concentrate itself on Mrs. Grandcourt , of whom she involuntarily conceive more evil than she know . " I could bear everything that use to be but this be bad this be bad , I use not to have horrible feeling ! " say the poor child in a loud whisper to her pillow . strange that she should have to pray against any feeling which concern Deronda ! 

 but this conclusion have be reach through an evening spend in attend to Mordecai , whose exaltation of spirit in the prospect of see his friend again , dispose he to utter many thought aloud to Mirah , though such communication be often interrupt by interval apparently fill with an inward utterance that animate his eye and give an occasional silent action to his lip . one thought especially occupy he . 

 " Seest thou , Mirah , " he say once , after a long silence , " the Shemah , wherein we briefly confess the divine Unity , be the chief devotional exercise of the Hebrew ; and this make our religion the fundamental religion for the whole world ; for the divine Unity embrace as its consequence the ultimate unity of mankind . see , then the nation which have be scoff at for its separateness , have give a bind theory to the human race . now , in complete unity a part possess the whole as the whole possess every part : and in this way human life be tend toward the image of the Supreme Unity : for as our life become more spiritual by capacity of thought , and joy therein , possession tend to become more universal , be independent of gross material contact ; so that in a brief day the soul of man may know in full volume the good which have be and be , nay , be to come , than all he could possess in a whole life where he have to follow the creep path of the sens . in this moment , my sister , I hold the joy of another 's future within I : a future which these eye will not see , and which my spirit may not then recognize as mine . I recognize it now , and love it so , that I can lay down this poor life upon its altar and say : ' burn , burn indiscernibly into that which shall be , which be my love and not I . ' dost thou understand , Mirah ? " 

 " a little , " say Mirah , faintly , " but my mind be too poor to have feel it . " 

 " and yet , " say Mordecai , rather insistently , " woman be specially frame for the love which feel possession in renouncing , and be thus a fit image of what I mean . somewhere in the later Midrash , I think , be the story of a jewish maiden who love a Gentile king so well , that this be what she do : she enter into prison and change clothe with the woman who be belove by the king , that she might deliver that woman from death by die in her stead , and leave the king to be happy in his love which be not for she . this be the surpass love , that lose self in the object of love . " 

 " no , Ezra , no , " say Mirah , with low - toned intensity , " that be not it . she want the king when she be dead to know what she have do , and feel that she be well than the other . it be her strong self , want to conquer , that make she die . " 

 Mordecai be silent a little , and then argue 

 " that might be , Mirah . but if she act so , believe the king would never know . " 

 " you can make the story so in your mind , Ezra , because you be great , and like to fancy the great that could be . but I think it be not really like that . the jewish girl must have have jealousy in her heart , and she want somehow to have the first place in the king 's mind . that be what she would die for . " 

 " my sister , thou hast read too many play , where the writer delight in show the human passion as indwell demon , unmixe with the relent and devout element of the soul . Thou judgest by the play , and not by thy own heart , which be like our mother 's . " 

 Mirah make no answer . 

 CHAPTER LXII . 

  " Das Gluck ist eine leichte Dirne , 
  und weilt nicht gern be selben Ort ; 
  Sie streicht das Haar dir von der Stirn 
  Und kusst dich rasch und flattert fort 
  Frau Ungluck hat I m gegentheile 
  Dich liebefest an 's Herz gedruckt ; 
  Sie sagt , sie habe keine eile , 
  setzt sich zu dir an Bett und strickt . " 
  HEINE . 
 something which Mirah have lately be watch for as the fulfilment of a threat , seem now the continue visit of that familiar sorrow which have lately come back , bring abundant luggage . 

 turn out of Knightsbridge , after sing at a charitable morning concert in a wealthy house , where she have be recommend by Klesmer , and where there have be the usual group outside to see the depart company , she begin to feel herself dog by footstep that keep an even pace with her own . her concert dress be simple black , over which she have throw a dust cloak , could not make she an object of unpleasant attention , and render walk an imprudence ; but this reflection do not occur to Mirah : another kind of alarm lie uppermost in her mind . she immediately think of her father , and could no more look round than if she have feel herself track by a ghost . to turn and face he would be voluntarily to meet the rush of emotion which beforehand seem intolerable . if it be her father he must mean to claim recognition , and he would oblige she to face he . she must wait for that compulsion . she walk on , not quicken her pace of what use be that ? but picture what be about to happen as if she have the full certainty that the man behind she be her father ; and along with her picturing go a regret that she have give her word to Mrs. Meyrick not to use any concealment about he . the regret at last urge she , at least , to try and hinder any sudden betrayal that would cause her brother an unnecessary shock . under the pressure of this motive , she resolve to turn before she reach her own door , and firmly will the encounter instead of merely submit to it . she have already reach the entrance of the small square where her home lay , and have make up her mind to turn , when she feel she embody presentiment get close to she , then slip to her side , grasp her wrist , and say , with a persuasive curl of accent , " Mirah ! " 

 she pause at once without any start ; it be the voice she expect , and she be meet the expected eye . her face be as grave as if she have be look at her executioner , while his be adjust to the intention of soothe and propitiate she . once a handsome face , with bright color , it be now sallow and deep - line , and have that peculiar impress of impudent suavity which come from court favor while accept disrespect . he be lightly make and active , with something of youth about he which make the sign of age seem a disguise ; and in reality he be hardly fifty - seven . his dress be shabby , as when she have see he before . the presence of this unreverend father now , more than ever , affect Mirah with the mingled anguish of shame and grief , repulsion and pity more than ever , now that her own world be change into one where there be no comradeship to fence he from scorn and contempt . 

 slowly , with a sad , tremulous voice , she say , " it be you , father . " 

 " why do you run away from I , child ? " he begin with rapid speech which be mean to have a tone of tender remonstrance , accompany with various quick gesture like an abbreviate finger - language . " what be you afraid of ? you know I never make you do anything against your will . it be for your sake I break up your engagement in the Vorstadt , because I see it do not   suit you , and you repay I by leave I to the bad time that come in consequence . I have make an easy engagement for you at the Vorstadt Theater in Dresden : I do not   tell you , because I want to take you by surprise . and you leave I plant there oblige to make myself scarce because I have break contract . that be hard line for I , after I have give up everything for the sake of get you an education which be to be a fortune to you . what father devote himself to his daughter more than I do to you ? you know how I bear that disappointment in your voice , and make the good of it : and when I have nobody besides you , and be get break , as a man must who have have to fight his way with his brain you choose that time to leave I . who else be it you owe everything to , if not to I ? and where be your feeling in return ? for what my daughter care , I might have die in a ditch . " 

 Lapidoth stop short here , not from lack of invention , but because he have reach a pathetic climax , and give a sudden sob , like a woman 's , take out hastily an old yellow silk handkerchief . he really feel that his daughter have treat he ill a sort of sensibility which be naturally strong in unscrupulous person , who put down what be owe to they , without any per contra . Mirah , in spite of that sob , have energy enough not to let he suppose that he deceive she . she answer more firmly , though it be the first time she have ever use accuse word to he . 

 " you know why I leave you , father ; and I have reason to distrust you , because I feel sure that you have deceive my mother . if I could have trust you , I would have stay with you and work for you . " 

 " I never mean to deceive your mother , Mirah , " say Lapidoth , put back his handkerchief , but begin with a voice that seem to struggle against further sobbing . " I mean to take you back to she , but chance hinder I just at the time , and then there come information of her death . it be well for you that I should stay where I be , and your brother could take care of himself . nobody have any claim on I but you . I have word of your mother 's death from a particular friend , who have undertake to manage thing for I , and I send he over money to pay expense . there be one chance to be sure " Lapidoth have quickly conceive that he must guard against something unlikely , yet possible " he may have write I lie for the sake of get the money out of I . " 

 Mirah make no answer ; she could not bear to utter the only true one " I do not   believe one word of what you say " and she simply show a wish that they should walk on , feel that their standing still might draw down unpleasant notice . even as they walk along , their companionship might well have make a passer - by turn back to look at they . the figure of Mirah , with her beauty set off by the quiet , careful dress of an english lady , make a strange pendant to this shabby , foreign - look , eager , and gesticulate man , who withal have an ineffaceable jauntiness of air , perhaps due to the bushy curl of his grizzle hair , the smallness of his hand and foot , and his light walk . 

 " you seem to have do well for yourself , Mirah ? you be in no want , 
 I see , " say the father , look at she with emphatic examination . 
 " good friend who find I in distress have help I to get work , " say Mirah , hardly know what she actually say , from be occupy with what she would presently have to say . " I give lesson . I have sing in private house . I have just be sing at a private concert . " she pause , and then add , with significance , " I have very good friend , who know all about I . " 

 " and you would be ashamed they should see your father in this plight ? no wonder . I come to England with no prospect , but the chance of find you . it be a mad quest ; but a father 's heart be superstitious feel a loadstone draw it somewhere or other . I might have do very well , stay abroad : when I have not   you to take care of , I could have roll or settle as easily as a ball ; but it be hard be lonely in the world , when your spirit 's beginning to break . and I think my little Mirah would repent leave her father when she come to look back . I have   have a sharp pinch to work my way ; I do not   know what I shall come down to next . talent like mine be no use in this country . when a man 's get out at elbow nobody will believe in he . I could not   get any decent employ with my appearance . I have   be oblige to get pretty low for a shilling already . " 

 Mirah 's anxiety be quick enough to imagine her father 's sinking into a further degradation , which she be bind to hinder if she could . but before she could answer his string of inventive sentence , deliver with as much glibness as if they have be learn by rote , he add promptly 

 " where do you live , Mirah ? " 

 " here , in this square . we be not far from the house . " 

 " in lodging ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " any one to take care of you ? " 

 " yes , " say Mirah again , look full at the keen face which be turn toward her " my brother . " 

 the father 's eyelid flutter as if the lightning have come across they , and there be a slight movement of the shoulder . but he say , after a just perceptible pause : " Ezra ? how do you know how do you find he ? " 

 " that would take long to tell . here we be at the door . my brother would not wish I to close it on you . " 

 Mirah be already on the doorstep , but have her face turn toward her father , who stand below she on the pavement . her heart have begin to beat fast with the prospect of what be come in the presence of Ezra ; and already in this attitude of give leave to the father whom she have be use to obey in this sight of he stand below she , with a perceptible shrinking from the admission which he have be indirectly ask for , she have a pang of the peculiar , sympathetic humiliation and shame the stabbed heart of reverence which belong to a nature intensely filial . 

 " stay a minute , Liebchen , " say Lapidoth , speak in a lowered tone ; " what sort of man have Ezra turn out ? " 

 " a good man a wonderful man , " say Mirah , with slow emphasis , try to master the agitation which make her voice more tremulous as she go on . she feel urge to prepare her father for the complete penetration of himself which await he . " but he be very poor when my friend find he for I a poor workman . once twelve year ago he be strong and happy , go to the East , which he love to think of ; and my mother call he back because because she have lose I . and he go to she , and take care of she through great trouble , and work for she till she die die in grief . and Ezra , too , have lose his health and strength . the cold have seize he come back to my mother , because she be forsake . for year he have be get weak always poor , always work but full of knowledge , and great - minded . all who come near he honor he . to stand before he be like stand before a prophet of God " Mirah end with difficulty , her heart throb " falsehood be no use . " 

 she have cast down her eye that she might not see her father while she speak the last word unable to bear the ignoble look of frustration that gather in his face . but he be none the less quick in invention and decision . 

 " Mirah , Liebchen , " he say , in the old caressing way , ' should not   you like I to make myself a little more respectable before my son see I ? if I have a little sum of money , I could fit myself out and come home to you as your father ought , and then I could offer myself for some decent place . with a good shirt and coat on my back , people would be glad enough to have I . I could offer myself for a courier , if I do not   look like a break - down mountebank . I should like to be with my child , and forget and forgive . but you have never see your father look like this before . if you have ten pound at hand or I could appoint you to bring it I somewhere I could fit myself out by the day after to - morrow . " 

 Mirah feel herself under a temptation which she must try to overcome . 
 she answer , oblige herself to look at he again 
 " I do not   like to deny you what you ask , father ; but I have give a promise not to do thing for you in secret . it be hard to see you look needy ; but we will bear that for a little while ; and then you can have new clothe , and we can pay for they . " her practical sense make she see now what be Mrs. Meyrick 's wisdom in exact a promise from she . 

 Lapidoth 's good humor give way a little . he say , with a sneer , " you be a hard and fast young lady you have be learn useful virtue keep promise not to help your father with a pound or two when you be get money to dress yourself in silk your father who make an idol of you , and give up the good part of his life to provide for you . " 

 " it seem cruel I know it seem cruel , " say Mirah , feel this a bad moment than when she mean to drown herself . her lip be suddenly pale . " but , father , it be more cruel to break the promise people trust in . that break my mother 's heart it have break Ezra 's life . you and I must eat now this bitterness from what have be . bear it . Bear to come in and be care for as you be . " 

 " to - morrow , then , " say Lapidoth , almost turn on his heel away from this pale , tremble daughter , who seem now to have get the inconvenient world to back she ; but he quickly turn on it again , with his hand feel about restlessly in his pocket , and say , with some return to his appeal tone , " I be a little cut up with all this , Mirah . I shall get up my spirit by to - morrow . if you have   a little money in your pocket , I suppose it be not   against your promise to give I a trifle to buy a cigar with . " 

 Mirah could not ask herself another question could not do anything else than put her cold trembling hand in her pocket for her portemonnaie and hold it out . Lapidoth grasp it at once , press her finger the while , say , " good - bye , my little girl to - morrow then ! " and leave she . he have not take many step before he look carefully into all the fold of the purse , find two half - sovereign and odd silver , and , paste against the folding cover , a bit of paper on which Ezra have inscribe , in a beautiful hebrew character , the name of his mother , the day of her birth , marriage , and death , and the prayer , " may Mirah be deliver from evil . " it be Mirah 's like to have this little inscription on many article that she use . the father read it , and have a quick vision of his marriage day , and the bright , unblamed young fellow he be at that time ; teach many thing , but expect by - and - by to get money more easily by writing ; and very fond of his beautiful bride Sara cry when she expect he to cry , and reflect every phase of her feeling with mimetic susceptibility . Lapidoth have travel a long way from that young self , and think of all that this inscription signify with an unemotional memory , which be like the ocular perception of a touch to one who have lose the sense of touch , or like morsel on an untasting palate , have shape and grain , but no flavor . among the thing we may gamble away in a lazy selfish life be the capacity for ruth , compunction , or any unselfish regret which we may come to long for as one in slow death long to feel laceration , rather than be conscious of a widen margin where consciousness once be . Mirah 's purse be a handsome one a gift to she , which she have be unable to reflect about give away and Lapidoth presently find himself outside of his reverie , consider what the purse would fetch in addition to the sum it contain , and what prospect there be of his be able to get more from his daughter without submit to adopt a penitential form of life under the eye of that formidable son . on such a subject his susceptibility be still lively . 

 meanwhile Mirah have enter the house with her power of reticence overcome by the cruelty of her pain . she find her brother quietly read and sift old manuscript of his own , which he mean to consign to Deronda . in the reaction from the long effort to master herself , she fall down before he and clasp his knee , sobbing , and cry , " Ezra , Ezra ! " 

 he do not speak . his alarm for her spend itself on conceive the cause of her distress , the more striking from the novelty in she of this violent manifestation . but Mirah 's own longing be to be able to speak and tell he the cause . presently she raise her hand , and still sob , say brokenly 

 " Ezra , my father ! our father ! he follow I . I want he to come in . I say you would let he come in . and he say no , he would not not now , but to - morrow . and he beg for money from I . and I give he my purse , and he go away . " 

 Mirah 's word seem to herself to express all the misery she feel in they . her brother find they less grievous than his preconception , and say gently , " wait for calm , Mirah , and then tell I all , " put off her hat and lay his hand tenderly on her head . she feel the soothe influence , and in a few minute tell he as exactly as she could all that have happen . 

 " he will not come to - morrow , " say Mordecai . neither of they say to the other what they both think , namely , that he might watch for Mirah 's outgoing and beg from she again . 

 " Seest thou , " he presently add , " our lot be the lot of Israel . the grief and the glory be mingle as the smoke and the flame . it be because we child have inherit the good that we feel the evil . these thing be wed for we , as our father be wed to our mother . " 

 the surrounding be of Brompton , but the voice might have come from a Rabbi transmit the sentence of an elder time to be register in Babli by which   to our ear   affectionate - sound diminutive be mean the voluminous babylonian Talmud . " the Omnipresent , " say a Rabbi , " be occupy in make marriage . " the levity of the saying lie in the ear of he who hear it ; for by marriage the speaker mean all the wondrous combination of the universe whose issue make our good and evil . 

 CHAPTER LXIII . 

 " Moses , trotz seiner Bafeindung der Kunst , dennoch selber ein gross K nstler war und den wahren K nstlergeist besass . Nur war dieser K nstlergeist bei ihm , wie bei seinen šgyptischen Landsleuteu , nurauf das Colossale und Unverwustliche gerichtet . Aber nicht vie die Aegypter formirte er seine Kunstwerke aus Backstem und Granit , sondern er baute menchen - pyramiden , er meisselte Menschen Obelisken , ernahm einen arman Hirtenstamm und schuf daraus ein Volk , das ebenfall den Jahrhahunderten , trotzen sollte        er Schuf Israel . " HEINE : Gestandnisse . 

 imagine the difference in Deronda 's state of mind when he leave England and when he return to it . he have set out for Genoa in total uncertainty how far the actual bent of his wish and affection would be encourage how far the claim reveal to he might draw he into new path , far away from the track his thought have lately be pursue with a consent of desire which uncertainty make dangerous . he come back with something like a discover charter warrant the inherit right that his ambition have begin to yearn for : he come back with what be well than freedom with a duteous bond which his experience have be prepare he to accept gladly , even if it have be attend with no promise of satisfy a secret passionate longing never yet allow to grow into a hope . but now he dare avow to himself the hidden selection of his love . since the hour when he leave the house at Chelsea in full - hearted silence under the effect of Mirah 's farewell look and word their exquisite appealingness stir in he that deep - lay care for womanhood which have begin when his own lip be like a girl 's her hold on his feeling have help he to be blameless in word and deed under the difficult circumstance we know of . there seem no likelihood that he could ever woo this creature who have become dear to he amidst association that forbid wooing ; yet she have take her place in his soul as a beloved type reduce the power of other fascination and make a difference in it that become deficiency . the influence have be continually strengthen . it have lain in the course of poor Gwendolen 's lot that her dependence on Deronda tend to rouse in he the enthusiasm of self - martyr pity rather than of personal love , and his less constrain tenderness flow with the full stream toward an indwelling image in all thing unlike Gwendolen . still more , his relation to Mordecai have bring with it a new nearness to Mirah which be not the less agitate because there be no apparent change in his position toward she ; and she have inevitably be bind up in all the thought that make he shrink from an issue disappointing to her brother . this process have not go on unconsciously in Deronda : he be conscious of it as we be of some covetousness that it would be well to nullify by encourage other thought than to give it the insistency of confession even to ourselves : but the jealous fire have leap out at Hans 's pretension , and when his mother accuse he of be in love with a Jewess any evasion suddenly seem an infidelity . his mother have compel he to a decisive acknowledgment of his love , as Joseph Kalonymos have compel he to a definite expression of his resolve . this new state of decision work on Deronda with a force which surprise even himself . there be a release of all the energy which have long be spend in self - checking and suppression because of doubtful condition ; and he be ready to laugh at his own impetuosity when , as he near England on his way from Mainz , he feel the remain distance more and more of an obstruction . it be as if he have find an add soul in find his ancestry his judgment no long wander in the maze of impartial sympathy , but choose , with that partiality which be man 's good strength , the close fellowship that make sympathy practical exchanging that bird 's eye reasonableness which soar to avoid preference and lose all sense of quality for the generous reasonableness of draw shoulder to shoulder with man of like inheritance . he want now to be again with Mordecai , to pour forth instead of restrain his feeling , to admit agreement and maintain dissent , and all the while to find Mirah 's presence without the embarrassment of obviously seek it , to see she in the light of a new possibility , to interpret her look and word from a new starting - point . he be not greatly alarmed about the effect of Hans 's attention , but he have a presentiment that her feel toward himself have from the first lain in a channel from which it be not likely to be divert into love . to astonish a woman by turn into her lover when she have be think of you merely as a Lord Chancellor be what a man naturally shrink from : he be anxious to create an easy transition . 

 what wonder that Deronda see no other course than to go straight from the London railway station to the lodging in that small square in Brompton ? every argument be in favor of his lose no time . he have promise to run down the next day to see Lady Mallinger at the Abbey , and it be already sunset . he wish to deposit the precious chest with Mordecai , who would study its content , both in his absence and in company with he ; and that he should pay this visit without pause would gratify Mordecai 's heart . hence , and for other reason , it gratify Deronda 's heart . the strong tendency of his nature be rush in one current the fervent affectionateness which make he delight in meet the wish of being near to he , and the imaginative need of some far - reach relation to make the horizon of his immediate , daily act . it have to be admit that in this classical , romantic , world - historic position of his , bring as it be from its hiding - place his hereditary armor , he wear but so , one must suppose , do the most ancient hero , whether Semitic or Japhetic the summer costume of his contemporary . he do not reflect that the drab tint be become to he , for he rarely go to the expense of such thinking ; but his own depth of coloring , which make the becomingness , get an add radiance in the eye , a fleeting and return glow in the skin , as he enter the house wonder what exactly he should find . he make his entrance as noiseless as possible . 

 it be the evening of that same afternoon on which Mirah have have the interview with her father . Mordecai , penetrate by her grief , and also the sad memory which the incident have awaken , have not resume his task of sifting paper : some of they have fall scatter on the floor in the first moment of anxiety , and neither he nor Mirah have think of lay they in order again . they have sit perfectly still together , not know how long ; while the clock tick on the mantelpiece , and the light be fade , Mirah , unable to think of the food that she ought to have be take , have not move since she have throw off her dust - cloak and sit down beside Mordecai with her hand in his , while he have lay his head backward , with closed eye and difficult breathing , look , Mirah think , as he would look when the soul within he could no long live in its straiten home . the thought that his death might be near be continually visit she when she see his face in this way , without its vivid animation ; and now , to the rest of her grief , be add the regret that she have be unable to control the violent outburst which have shake he . she sit watch he her oval cheek pallid , her eye with the sorrowful brilliancy leave by young tear , her curl in as much disorder as a just - awaken child be watch that emaciated face , where it might have be imagine that a veil have be draw never to be lift , as if it be her dead joy which have leave she strong enough to live on in sorrow . and life at that moment stretch before Mirah with more than a repetition of former sadness . the shadow of the father be there , and more than that , a double bereavement of one live as well as one dead . 

 but now the door be open , and while none enter , a well - know voice say : " Daniel Deronda may he come in ? " 

 " Come ! come ! " say Mordecai , immediately rise with an irradiated face and open eye apparently as little surprised as if he have see Deronda in the morning , and expect this evening visit ; while Mirah start up blush with confused , half - alarm expectation . 

 yet when Deronda enter , the sight of he be like the clearness after rain : no cloud to come could hinder the cherish beam of that moment . as he hold out his right hand to Mirah , who be close to her brother 's left , he lay his other hand on Mordecai 's right shoulder , and stand so a moment , hold they both at once , utter no word , but read their face , till he say anxiously to Mirah , " have anything happen ? any trouble ? " 

 " talk not of trouble now , " say Mordecai , save she from the need to answer . " there be joy in your face let the joy be ours . " 

 Mirah think , " it be for something he can not tell we . " but they all sit down , Deronda draw a chair close in front of Mordecai . 

 " that be true , " he say , emphatically . " I have a joy which will remain to we even in the bad trouble . I do not tell you the reason of my journey abroad , Mordecai , because never mind I go to learn my parentage . and you be right . I be a Jew . " 

 the two man clasp hand with a movement that seem part of the flash from Mordecai 's eye , and pass through Mirah like an electric shock . but Deronda go on without pause , speak from Mordecai 's mind as much as from his own 

 " we have the same people . our soul have the same vocation . we shall not be separate by life or by death . " 

 Mordecai 's answer be utter in Hebrew , and in no more than a loud whisper . it be in the liturgical word which express the religious bond : " our God and the God of our father . " 

 the weight of feel press too strongly on that ready - wing speech which usually move in quick adaptation to every stirring of his fervor . 

 Mirah fall on her knee by her brother 's side , and look at his now illuminated face , which have just before be so deathly . the action be an inevitable outlet of the violent reversal from despondency to a gladness which come over she as solemnly as if she have be behold a religious rite . for the moment she think of the effect on her own life only through the effect on her brother . 

 " and it be not only that I be a Jew , " Deronda go on , enjoy one of those rare moment when our yearning and our act can be completely one , and the real we behold be our ideal good ; " but I come of a strain that have ardently maintain the fellowship of our race a line of spanish Jews that have bear many student and man of practical power . and I possess what will give we a sort of communion with they . my grandfather , Daniel Charisi , preserve manuscript , family record stretch far back , in the hope that they would pass into the hand of his grandson . and now his hope be fulfil , in spite of attempt to thwart it by hide my parentage from I . I possess the chest contain they , with his own paper , and it be down below in this house . I mean to leave it with you , Mordecai , that you may help I to study the manuscript . some of they I can read easily enough those in spanish and italian . other be in Hebrew , and , I think , Arabic ; but there seem to be latin translation . I be only able to look at they cursorily while I stay at Mainz . we will study they together . " 

 Deronda end with that bright smile which , beam out from the habitual gravity of his face , seem a revelation   the reverse of the continual smile that discredit all expression . but when this happy glance pass from Mordecai to rest on Mirah , it act like a little too much sunshine , and make she change her attitude . she have kneel under an impulse with which any personal embarrassment be incongruous , and especially any thought about how Mrs. Grandcourt might stand to this new aspect of thing thought which make her color under Deronda 's glance , and rise to take her seat again in her usual posture of crossed hand and foot , with the effort to look as quiet as possible . Deronda , equally sensitive , imagine that the feeling of which he be conscious , have enter too much into his eye , and have be repugnant to she . he be ready enough to believe that any unexpected manifestation might spoil her feeling toward he and then his precious relation to brother and sister would be mar . if Mirah could have no love for he , any advance of love on his part would make she wretched in that continual contact with he which would remain inevitable . 

 while such feeling be pulsate quickly in Deronda and Mirah , Mordecai , see nothing in his friend 's presence and word but a blessed fulfillment , be already speak with his old sense of enlargement in utterance 

 " Daniel , from the first , I have say to you , we know not all the pathway . have there not be a meeting among they , as of the operation in one soul , where an idea be bear and breathing draw the element toward it , and be feed and glow ? for all thing be bind together in that omnipresence which be the place and habitation of the world , and event be of a glass wherethrough our eye see some of the pathway . and if it seem that the err and unloving will of man have help to prepare you , as Moses be prepare , to serve your people the well , that depend on another order than the law which must guide our footstep . for the evil will of man make not a people 's good except by stir the righteous will of man ; and beneath all the cloud with which our thought encompass the Eternal , this be clear that a people can be bless only by have counsellor and a multitude whose will move in obedience to the law of justice and love . for see , now , it be your love will that make a chief pathway , and resist the effect of evil ; for , by perform the duty of brotherhood to my sister , and seek out her brother in the flesh , your soul have be prepare to receive with gladness this message of the Eternal , ' behold the multitude of your brother . ' " 

 " it be quite true that you and Mirah have be my teacher , " say Deronda . " if this revelation have be make to I before I know you both , I think my mind would have rebel against it . perhaps I should have feel then ' if I could have choose , I would not have be a Jew . ' what I feel now be that my whole being be a consent to the fact . but it have be the gradual accord between your mind and mine which have bring about that full consent . " 

 at the moment Deronda be speak , that first evening in the book - shop be vividly in his remembrance , with all the struggle aloofness he have then feel from Mordecai 's prophetic confidence . it be his nature to delight in satisfy to the utmost the eagerly - expectant soul , which seem to be look out from the face before he , like the long - endure watcher who at last see the mountain signal - flame ; and he go on with full fervor 

 " it be through your inspiration that I have discern what may be my life 's task . it be you who have give shape to what , I believe , be an inherit yearn the effect of brooding , passionate thought in many ancestor thought that seem to have be intensely present in my grandfather . suppose the steal offspring of some mountain tribe bring up in a city of the plain , or one with an inherit genius for painting , and bear blind the ancestral life would lie within they as a dim longing for unknown object and sensation , and the spell - bind habit of their inherit frame would be like a cunningly - work musical instrument , never play on , but quiver throughout in uneasy mysterious meaning of its intricate structure that , under the right touch , give music . something like that , I think , have be my experience . since I begin to read and know , I have always long for some ideal task , in which I might feel myself the heart and brain of a multitude some social captainship , which would come to I as a duty , and not be strive for as a personal prize . you have raise the image of such a task for I to bind our race together in spite of heresy . you have say to I ' our religion unite we before it divide we it make we a people before it make Rabbanites and Karaites . ' I mean to try what can be do with that union I mean to work in your spirit . failure will not be ignoble , but it would be ignoble for I not to try . " 

 " even as my brother that feed at the breast of my mother , " say Mordecai , fall back in his chair with a look of exultant repose , as after some finish labor . 

 to estimate the effect of this ardent outpouring from Deronda we must remember his former reserve , his careful avoidance of premature assent or delusive encouragement , which give to this decide pledge of himself a sacramental solemnity , both for his own mind and Mordecai 's . on Mirah the effect be equally strong , though with a difference : she feel a surprise which have no place in her brother 's mind , at Deronda 's suddenly reveal sense of nearness to they : there seem to be a breaking of day around she which might show her other fact unlike her foreboding in the darkness . but after a moment 's silence Mordecai speak again 

 " it have begin already the marriage of our soul . it wait but the pass away of this body , and then they who be betroth shall unite in a strict bond , and what be mine shall be thine . call nothing mine that I have write , Daniel ; for though our master deliver rightly that everything should be quote in the name of he that say it and their rule be good yet it do not exclude the willing marriage which melt soul into soul , and make thought full as the clear water be make full , where the fullness be inseparable and the clearness be inseparable . for I have judge what I have write , and I desire the body that I give my thought to pass away as this fleshly body will pass ; but let the thought be bear again from our full soul which shall be call your . " 

 " you must not ask I to promise that , " say Deronda , smile . " I must be convince first of special reason for it in the writing themselves . and I be too backward a pupil yet . that blent transmission must go on without any choice of our ; but what we can not   hinder must not make our rule for what we ought to choose . I think our duty be faithful tradition where we can attain it . and so you would insist for any one but yourself . do not   ask I to deny my spiritual parentage , when I be find the clue of my life in the recognition of natural parentage . " 

 " I will ask for no promise till you see the reason , " say Mordecai . " you have say the truth : I would obey the Master 's rule for another . but for year my hope , nay , my confidence , have be , not that the imperfect image of my thought , which be an ill - shape work of the youthful carver who have see a heavenly pattern , and tremble in imitate the vision not that this should live , but that my vision and passion should enter into yours yea , into your ; for he whom I long for afar , be he not you whom I discern as mine when you come near ? nevertheless , you shall judge . for my soul be satisfied . " Mordecai pause , and then begin in a change tone , revert to previous suggestion from Deronda 's disclosure : " what move your parent ? " but he immediately check himself , and add , " Nay , I ask not that you should tell I aught concern other , unless it be your pleasure . " 

 " some time gradually you will know all , " say Deronda . " but now tell I more about yourself , and how the time have pass since I go away . I be sure there have be some trouble . Mirah have be in distress about something . " 

 he look at Mirah , but she immediately turn to her brother , appeal to he to give the difficult answer . she hop he would not think it necessary to tell Deronda the fact about her father on such an evening as this . just when Deronda have bring himself so near , and identify himself with her brother , it be cut to she that he should hear of this disgrace cling about they , which seem to have become partly his . to relieve herself she rise to take up her hat and cloak , think she would go to her own room : perhaps they would speak more easily when she have leave they . but meanwhile Mordecai say 

 " to - day there have be a grief . a duty which seem to have go far into the distance , have come back and turn its face upon we , and raise no gladness have raise a dread that we must submit to . but for the moment we be deliver from any visible yoke . let we defer speak of it as if this evening which be deepen about we be the beginning of the festival in which we must offer the first fruit of our joy , and mingle no mourning with they . " 

 Deronda divine the hint grief , and leave it in silence , rise as he see Mirah rise , and say to she , " be you go ? I must leave almost immediately when I and Mrs. Adam have mount the precious chest , and I have deliver the key to Mordecai no , Ezra , may I call he Ezra now ? I have learn to think of he as Ezra since I have hear you call he so . " 

 " please call he Ezra , " say Mirah , faintly , feel a new timidity under Deronda 's glance and near presence . be there really something different about he , or be the difference only in her feeling ? the strangely various emotion of the last few hour have exhaust she ; she be faint with fatigue and want of food . Deronda , observe her pallor and tremulousness , long to show more feeling , but dare not . she put out her hand with an effort to smile , and then he open the door for she . that be all . 

 a man of refined pride shrink from make a lover 's approach to a woman whose wealth or rank might make they appear presumptuous or low - motive ; but Deronda be find a more delicate difficulty in a position which , superficially take , be the reverse of that though to an ardent reverential love , the love woman have always a kind of wealth and rank which make a man keenly susceptible about the aspect of his address . Deronda 's difficulty be what any generous man might have feel in some degree ; but it affect he peculiarly through his imaginative sympathy with a mind in which gratitude be strong . Mirah , he know , feel herself bind to he by deep obligation , which to her sensibility might give every wish of his the aspect of a claim ; and an inability to fulfill it would cause she a pain continually revive by their inevitable communion in care of Ezra . here be fear not of pride only , but of extreme tenderness . altogether , to have the character of a benefactor seem to Deronda 's anxiety an insurmountable obstacle to confess himself a lover , unless in some inconceivable way it could be reveal to he that Mirah 's heart have accept he beforehand . and the agitation on his own account , too , be not small . 

 even a man who have practise himself in love - making till his own glibness have render he sceptical , may at last be overtake by the lover 's awe may tremble , stammer , and show other sign of recover sensibility no more in the range of his acquire talent than pin and needle after numbness : how much more may that energetic timidity possess a man whose inward history have cherish his susceptibility instead of dull they , and have keep all the language of passion fresh and rooted as the lovely leafage about the hill - side spring ! 

 as for Mirah her dear head lie on its pillow that night with its former suspicion throw out of shape but still present , like an ugly story which have be discredit but not therefore dissipate . all that she be certain of about Deronda seem to prove that he have no such fetter upon he as she have be allow herself to believe in . his whole manner as well as his word imply that there be no hidden bond remain to have any effect in determine his future . but notwithstanding this plainly reasonable inference , uneasiness still clung about Mirah 's heart . Deronda be not to blame , but he have an importance for Mrs. Grandcourt which must give she some hold on he . and the thought of any close confidence between they stir the little bite snake that have long lain curled and harmless in Mirah 's gentle bosom . 

 but do she this evening feel as completely as before that her jealousy be no less remote from any possibility for herself personally than if her human soul have be lodge in the body of a fawn that Deronda have save from the archer ? hardly . something indefinable have happen and make a difference . the soft warm rain of blossom which have fall just where she be do it really come because she be there ? what spirit be there among the bough ? 

 CHAPTER LXIV . 

  " Questa montagna e tale , 
  Che sempre al cominciar di sotto a grave . 
  E quanto uom piu va su e man fa male . " 
  DANTE : Il Purgatorio . 
 it be not many day after her mother 's arrival that Gwendolen would consent to remain at Genoa . her desire to get away from that gem of the sea , help to rally her strength and courage . for what place , though it be the flowery vale of Enna , may not the inward sense turn into a circle of punishment where the flower be no well than a crop of flame - tongue burn the sol of our foot ? 

 " I shall never like to see the Mediterranean again , " say Gwendolen , to her mother , who think that she quite understand her child 's feeling even in her tacit prohibition of any express reference to her late husband . 

 Mrs. Davilow , indeed , though compel formally to regard this time as one of severe calamity , be virtually enjoy her life more than she have ever do since her daughter 's marriage . it seem that her darling be bring back to she not merely with all the old affection , but with a conscious cherishing of her mother 's nearness , such as we give to a possession that we have be on the brink of lose . 

 " be you there , mamma ? " cry Gwendolen , in the middle of the night   a bed have be make for her mother in the same room with hers , very much as she would have do in her early girlhood , if she have feel frightened in lie awake . 

 " yes , dear ; can I do anything for you ? " 

 " no , thank you ; only I like so to know you be there . do you mind my wake you ? "   this question would hardly have be Gwendolen 's in her early girlhood . 

 " I be not asleep , darling . " 

 " it seem not real that you be with I . I want to make it real . I can bear thing if you be with I . but you must not lie awake , anxious about I . you must be happy now . you must let I make you happy now at last else what shall I do ? " 

 " God bless you , dear ; I have the good happiness I can have , when you make much of I . " 

 but the next night , hear that she be sigh and restless Mrs. 
 Davilow say , " let I give you your sleeping - draught , Gwendolen . " 
 " no , mamma , thank you ; I do not   want to sleep . " 

 " it would be so good for you to sleep more , my darling . " 

 " do not   say what would be good for I , mamma , " Gwendolen answer , impetuously . " you do not   know what would be good for I . you and my uncle must not contradict I and tell I anything be good for I when I feel it be not good . " 

 Mrs. Davilow be silent , not wonder that the poor child be irritable . presently Gwendolen say 

 " I be always naughty to you , mamma . " 

 " no , dear , no . " 

 " yes , I be , " say Gwendolen insistently . " it be because I be always wicked that I be miserable now . " 

 she burst into sob and cry . the determination to be silent about all the fact of her married life and its close , react in these escape of enigmatic excitement . 

 but dim light of interpretation be break on the mother 's mind through the information that come from Sir Hugo to Mr. Gascoigne , and , with some omission , from Mr. Gascoigne to herself . the good - natured baronet , while he be attend to all decent measure in relation to his nephew 's death , and the possible washing ashore of the body , think it the kind thing he could do to use his present friendly intercourse with the rector as an opportunity for communicate with he , in the mild way , the purport of Grandcourt 's will , so as to save he the additional shock that would be in store for he if he carry his illusion all the way home . perhaps Sir Hugo would have be communicable enough without that kind motive , but he really feel the motive . he break the unpleasant news to the rector by degree : at first he only imply his fear that the widow be not so splendidly provide for as Mr. Gascoigne , nay , as the baronet himself have expect ; and only at last , after some previous vague reference to large claim on Grandcourt , he disclose the prior relation which , in the unfortunate absence of a legitimate heir , have determine all the splendor in another direction . 

 the rector be deeply hurt , and remember , more vividly than he have ever do before , how offensively proud and repel the manner of the deceased have be toward he remember also that he himself , in that interesting period just before the arrival of the new occupant at diplow , have receive hint of former entangle dissipation , and an undue addiction to pleasure , though he have not foresee that the pleasure which have probably , so to speak , be sweep into private rubbish - heap , would ever present itself as an array of live caterpillar , disastrous to the green meat of respectable people . but he do not make these retrospective thought audible to Sir Hugo , or lower himself by express any indignation on merely personal ground , but behave like a man of the world who have become a conscientious clergyman . his first remark be 

 " when a young man make his will in health , he usually count on live a long while . probably Mr. Grandcourt do not believe that this will would ever have its present effect . " after a moment , he add , " the effect be painful in more way than one . female morality be likely to suffer from this marked advantage and prominence be give to illegitimate offspring . " 

 " well , in point of fact , " say Sir Hugo , in his comfortable way , ' since the boy be there , this be really the good alternative for the disposal of the estate . Grandcourt have nobody near than his cousin . and it be a chilling thought that you go out of this life only for the benefit of a cousin . a man get a little pleasure in make his will , if it be for the good of his own curly head ; but it be a nuisance when you be give the bequeathing to a use - up fellow like yourself , and one you do not   care two straw for . it be the next bad thing to have only a life interest in your estate . no ; I forgive Grandcourt for that part of his will . but , between ourselves , what I do not   forgive he for , be the shabby way he have provide for your niece our niece , I will say no well a position than if she have be a doctor 's widow . nothing grate on I more than that posthumous grudgingness toward a wife . a man ought to have some pride and fondness for his widow . I should , I know . I take it as a test of a man , that he feel the easy about his death when he can think of his wife and daughter be comfortable after it . I like that story of the fellow in the Crimean war , who be ready to go to the bottom of the sea if their widow be provide for . " 

 " it have certainly take I by surprise , " say Mr. Gascoigne , " all the more because , as the one who stand in the place of father to my niece , I have show my reliance on Mr. Grandcourt 's apparent liberality in money matter by make no claim for she beforehand . that seem to I due to he under the circumstance . probably you think I blamable . " 

 " not blamable exactly . I respect a man for trust another . but take my advice . if you marry another niece , though it may be to the Archbishop of Canterbury , bind he down . your niece can not   be marry for the first time twice over . and if he be a good fellow , he will wish to be bind . but as to Mrs. Grandcourt , I can only say that I feel my relation to she all the nearer because I think that she have not be well treat . and I hope you will urge she to rely on I as a friend . " 

 thus spake the chivalrous Sir Hugo , in his disgust at the young and beautiful widow of a Mallinger Grandcourt be leave with only two thousand a year and a house in a coal - mining district . to the rector that income naturally appear less shabby and less accompany with mortifying privation ; but in this conversation he have devour a much keener sense than the baronet 's of the humiliation cast over his niece , and also over her near friend , by the conspicuous publishing of her husband 's relation to Mrs. Glasher . and like all man who be good husband and father , he feel the humiliation through the mind of the woman who would be chiefly affect by it ; so that the annoyance of first hear the fact be far slighter than what he feel in communicate they to Mrs. Davilow , and in anticipate Gwendolen 's feeling whenever her mother see fit to tell she of they . for the good rector have an innocent conviction that his niece be unaware of Mrs. Glasher 's existence , argue with masculine soundness from what maiden and wife be likely to know , do , and suffer , and have have a most imperfect observation of the particular maiden and wife in question . not so Gwendolen 's mother , who now think that she see an explanation of much that have be enigmatic in her child 's conduct and word before and after her engagement , conclude that in some inconceivable way Gwendolen have be inform of this left - handed marriage and the existence of the child . she trust to opportunity that would arise in moment of affectionate confidence before and during their journey to England , when she might gradually learn how far the actual state of thing be clear to Gwendolen , and prepare she for anything that might be a disappointment . but she be spar from device on the subject . 

 " I hope you do not   expect that I be go to be rich and grand , mamma , " say Gwendolen , not long after the rector 's communication ; " perhaps I shall have nothing at all . " 

 she be dress , and have be sit long in quiet meditation . Mrs. 
 Davilow be startle , but say , after a moment 's reflection 
 " oh yes , dear , you will have something . Sir Hugo know all about the will . " 

 " that will not decide , " say Gwendolen , abruptly . 

 " surely , dear : Sir Hugo say you be to have two thousand a year and the house at Gadsmere . " 

 " what I have will depend on what I accept , " say Gwendolen . " you and my uncle must not attempt to cross I and persuade I about this . I will do everything I can do to make you happy , but in anything about my husband I must not be interfere with . be eight hundred a year enough for you , mamma ? " 

 " More than enough , dear . you must not think of give I so much . " Mrs. Davilow pause a little , and then say , " do you know who be to have the estate and the rest of the money ? " 

 " yes , " say Gwendolen , wave her hand in dismissal of the subject . " I know everything . it be all perfectly right , and I wish never to have it mention . " 

 the mother be silent , look away , and rise to fetch a fan - screen , with a slight flush on her delicate cheek . wonder , imagine , she do not like to meet her daughter 's eye , and sit down again under a sad constraint . what wretchedness her child have perhaps go through , which yet must remain as it always have be , lock away from their mutual speech . but Gwendolen be watch her mother with that new divination which experience have give she ; and in tender relenting at her own peremptoriness , say , " come and sit near to I , mamma , and do not   be unhappy . " 

 Mrs. Davilow do as she be tell , but bit her lip in the vain attempt to hinder smarting tear . Gwendolen lean toward her caressingly and say , " I mean to be very wise ; I do , really . and good oh , so good to you , dear , old , sweet mamma , you will not   know I . only you must not cry . " 

 the resolve that Gwendolen have in her mind be that she would ask Deronda whether she ought to accept any of her husband 's money whether she might accept what would enable she to provide for her mother . the poor thing feel strong enough to do anything that would give she a high place in Deronda 's mind . 

 an invitation that Sir Hugo press on she with kind urgency be that she and Mrs. Davilow should go straight with he to Park Lane , and make his house their abode as long as mourning and other detail need attend to in London . Town , he insist , be just then the most retired of place ; and he propose to exert himself at once in get all article belong to Gwendolen away from the house in Grosvenor Square . no proposal could have suit she well than this of stay a little while in Park Lane . it would be easy for she there to have an interview with Deronda , if she only know how to get a letter into his hand , ask he to come to she . during the journey , Sir Hugo , have understand that she be acquaint with the purport of her husband 's will , venture to talk before she and to she about her future arrangement , refer here and there to mildly agreeable prospect as matter of course , and otherwise shed a decorous cheerfulness over her widow position . it seem to he really the more graceful course for a widow to recover her spirit on find that her husband have not deal as handsomely by she as he might have do ; it be the testator 's fault if he compromise all her grief at his departure by give a testamentary reason for it , so that she might be suppose to look sad , not because he have leave she , but because he have leave she poor . the baronet , have his kindliness doubly fan by the favorable wind on his fortune and by compassion for Gwendolen , have become quite fatherly in his behavior to she , call she " my dear , " and in mention Gadsmere to Mr. Gascoigne , with its various advantage and disadvantage , speak of what " we " might do to make the good of that property . Gwendolen sit by in pale silence while Sir Hugo , with his face turn toward Mrs. Davilow or Mr. Gascoigne , conjecture that Mrs. Grandcourt might perhaps prefer let Gadsmere to reside there during any part of the year , in which case he think that it might be lease on capital term to one of the fellow engage with the coal : Sir Hugo have see enough of the place to know that it be as comfortable and picturesque a box as any man need desire , provide his desire be circumscribe within a coal area . 

 " I should not   mind about the soot myself , " say the baronet , with that dispassionateness which belong to the potential mood . " nothing be more healthy . and if one 's business lie there , Gadsmere would be a paradise . it make quite a feature in Scrogg 's history of the county , with the little tower and the fine piece of water the prettiest print in the book . " 

 " a more important place than Offendene , I suppose ? " say Mr. Gascoigne . 

 " much , " say the baronet , decisively . " I be there with my poor brother it be more than a quarter of a century ago , but I remember it very well . the room may not be large , but the ground be on a different scale . " 

 " our poor dear Offendene be empty after all , " say Mrs. Davilow . " when it come to the point , Mr. Haynes declare off , and there have be no one to take it since . I might as well have accept Lord Brackenshaw 's kind offer that I should remain in it another year rent - free : for I should have keep the place air and warm . " 

 " I hope you have   something snug instead , " say Sir Hugo . 

 " a little too snug , " say Mr. Gascoigne , smile at his sister - in - law . 
 " you be rather thick upon the ground . " 
 Gwendolen have turn with a change glance when her mother speak of Offendene be empty . this conversation pass during one of the long unaccountable pause often experience in foreign train at some country station . there be a dreamy , sunny stillness over the hedgeless field stretch to the boundary of poplar ; and to Gwendolen the talk within the carriage seem only to make the dreamland large with an indistinct region of coal - pit , and a purgatorial Gadsmere which she would never visit ; till at her mother 's word , this mingle , dozing view seem to dissolve and give way to a more wakeful vision of Offendene and Pennicote under their cool light . she see the gray shoulder of the down , the cattle - speck field , the shadowy plantation with rut lane where the bark timber lie for a wayside seat , the neatly - clip hedge on the road from the parsonage to Offendene , the avenue where she be gradually discern from the window , the hall - door opening , and her mother or one of the troublesome sister come out to meet she . all that brief experience of a quiet home which have once seem a dullness to be flee from , now come back to she as a restful escape , a station where she find the breath of morning and the unreproache voice of bird after follow a lure through a long satanic masquerade , which she have enter on with an intoxicated belief in its disguise , and have see the end of in shriek fear lest she herself have become one of the evil spirit who be drop their human mummery and hiss around she with serpent tongue . 

 in this way Gwendolen 's mind pause over Offendene and make it the scene of many thought ; but she give no far outward sign of interest in this conversation , any more than in Sir Hugo 's opinion on the telegraphic cable or her uncle 's view of the Church Rate Abolition Bill . what subject will not our talk embrace in leisurely day - journeying from Genoa to London ? even stranger , after glance from China to Peru and open their mental store with a liberality threaten a mutual impression of poverty on any future meeting , be liable to become excessively confidential . but the baronet and the rector be under a still strong pressure toward cheerful communication : they be like acquaintance compel to a long drive in a mourning - coach who have first remark that the occasion be a melancholy one , naturally proceed to enliven it by the most miscellaneous discourse . " I do not   mind tell you , " say Sir Hugo to the rector , in mention some private detail ; while the rector , without say so , do not mind tell the baronet about his son , and the difficulty of place they in the world . by the dint of discuss all person and thing within driving - reach of Diplow , Sir Hugo get himself work to a pitch of interest in that former home , and of conviction that it be his pleasant duty to regain and strengthen his personal influence in the neighborhood , that make he declare his intention of take his family to the place for a month or two before the autumn be over ; and Mr. Gascoigne cordially rejoice in that prospect . altogether , the journey be continue and end with mutual liking between the male fellow - traveller . 

 meanwhile Gwendolen sit by like one who have visit the spirit - world and be full to the lip of an unutterable experience that throw a strange unreality over all the talk she be hear of her own and the world 's business ; and Mrs. Davilow be chiefly occupy in imagine what her daughter be feel , and in wonder what be signify by she hint doubt whether she would accept her husband 's bequest . Gwendolen in fact have before she the unsealed wall of an immediate purpose shut off every other resolution . how to scale the wall ? she want again to see and consult Deronda , that she might secure herself against any act he would disapprove . would her remorse have maintain its power within she , or would she have feel absolve by secrecy , if it have not be for that outer conscience which be make for she by Deronda ? it be hard to say how much we could forgive ourselves if we be secure from judgment by another whose opinion be the breathing - medium of all our joy who bring to we with close pressure and immediate sequence that judgment of the invisible and Universal which self - flattery and the world 's tolerance would easily melt and disperse . in this way our brother may be in the stead of God to we , and his opinion which have pierce even to the joint and marrow , may be our virtue in the making . that mission of Deronda to Gwendolen have begin with what she have feel to be his judgment of she at the gaming - table . he might easily have spoil it : much of our life be spend in mar our own influence and turn other ' belief in we into a widely conclude unbelief which they call knowledge of the world , while it be really disappointment in you or I . Deronda have not spoil his mission . 

 but Gwendolen have forget to ask he for his address in case she want to write , and her only way of reach he be through Sir Hugo . she be not in the least blind to the construction that all witness might put on her give sign of dependence on Deronda , and she seek he more than he seek she : Grandcourt 's rebuke have sufficiently enlighten her pride . but the force , the tenacity of her nature have throw itself into that dependence , and she would no more let go her hold on Deronda 's help , or deny herself the interview her soul need , because of witness , than if she have be in prison in danger of be condemn to death . when she be in Park Lane and know that the baronet would be go down to the Abbey immediately   just to see his family for a couple of day and then return to transact needful business for Gwendolen , she say to he without any air of hesitation , while her mother be present 

 " Sir Hugo , I wish to see Mr. Deronda again as soon as possible . I do not   know his address . will you tell it I , or let he know that I want to see he ? " 

 a quick thought pass across Sir Hugo 's face , but make no difference to the ease with which he say , " upon my word , I do not   know whether he be at his chamber or the Abbey at this moment . but I will make sure of he . I will send a note now to his chamber tell he to come , and if he be at the Abbey I can give he your message and send he up at once . I be sure he will want to obey your wish , " the baronet end , with grave kindness , as if nothing could seem to he more in the appropriate course of thing than that she should send such a message . 

 but he be convince that Gwendolen have a passionate attachment to Deronda , the seed of which have be lay long ago , and his former suspicion now recur to he with more strength than ever , that her feeling be likely to lead she into imprudence in which kind - hearted Sir Hugo be determined to screen and defend she as far as lie in his power . to he it be as pretty a story as need be that this fine creature and his favorite Dan should have turn out to be form for each other , and that the unsuitable husband should have make his exit in such excellent time . Sir Hugo like that a charming woman should be make as happy as possible . in truth , what most vex his mind in this matter at present be a doubt whether the too lofty and inscrutable Dan have not get some scheme or other in his head , which would prove to be dearer to he than the lovely Mrs. Grandcourt , and put that neatly - prepare marriage with she out of the question . it be among the usual paradox of feeling that Sir Hugo , who have give his fatherly caution to Deronda against too much tenderness in his relation with the bride , should now feel rather irritated against he by the suspicion that he have not fall in love as he ought to have do . of course all this thinking on Sir Hugo 's part be eminently premature , only a fortnight or so after Grandcourt 's death . but it be the trick of think to be either premature or behind - hand . 

 however , he send the note to Deronda 's chamber , and it find he there . 

 CHAPTER LXV . 

  " o , welcome , pure - eyed faith , white - handed Hope , 
  thou hover angel , girt with golden wing ! " 
  MILTON . 
 Deronda do not obey Gwendolen 's new summon without some agitation . not his vanity , but his keen sympathy make he susceptible to the danger that another 's heart might feel large demand on he than he would be able to fulfill ; and it be no long a matter of argument with he , but of penetrate consciousness , that Gwendolen 's soul clung to his with a passionate need . we do not argue the existence of the anger or the scorn that thrill through we in a voice ; we simply feel it , and it admit of no disproof . Deronda feel this woman 's destiny hang on his over a precipice of despair . any one who know he can not wonder at his inward confession , that if all this have happen little more than a year ago , he would hardly have ask himself whether he love she ; the impetuous determine impulse which would have move he would have be to save she from sorrow , to shelter her life forevermore from the danger of loneliness , and carry out to the last the rescue he have begin in that monitory redemption of the necklace . but now , love and duty have throw other bond around he , and that impulse could no long determine his life ; still , it be present in he as a compassionate yearning , a painful quivering at the very imagination of have again and again to meet the appeal of her eye and word . the very strength of the bond , the certainty of the resolve , that keep he asunder from she , make he gaze at her lot apart with the more aching pity . 

 he await she come in the back drawing - room part of that white and crimson space where they have sit together at the musical party , where Gwendolen have say for the first time that her lot depend on his not forsake she , and her appeal have seem to melt into the melodic cry per pieta non dirmi addio . but the melody have come from Mirah 's dear voice . 

 Deronda walk about this room , which he have for year know by heart , with a strange sense of metamorphosis in his own life . the familiar object around he , from Lady Mallinger 's gently smile portrait to the also human and urbane face of the lion on the pilaster of the chimney - piece , seem almost to belong to a previous state of existence which he be revisit in memory only , not in reality ; so deep and transforming have be the impression he have lately experience , so new be the condition under which he find himself in the house he have be accustom to think of as a home stand with his hat in his hand await the entrance of a young creature whose life have also be undergo a transformation a tragic transformation toward a wavering result , in which he feel with apprehensiveness that his own action be still bind up . 

 but Gwendolen be come in , look change ; not only by her mourning dress , but by a more satisfied quietude of expression than he have see in her face at Genoa . her satisfaction be that Deronda be there ; but there be no smile between they as they meet and clasp hand ; each be full of remembrance full of anxious prevision . she say , " it be good of you to come . let we sit down , " immediately seat herself in the near chair . he place himself opposite to she . 

 " I ask you to come because I want you to tell I what I ought to do , " she begin , at once . " do not   be afraid of tell I what you think be right , because it seem hard . I have make up my mind to do it . I be afraid once of be poor ; I could not bear to think of be under other people ; and that be why I do something why I marry . I have bear bad thing now . I think I could bear to be poor , if you think I ought . do you know about my husband 's will ? " 

 " yes , Sir Hugo tell I , " say Deronda , already guess the question she have to ask . 

 " ought I to take anything he have leave I ? I will tell you what I have be think , " say Gwendolen , with a more nervous eagerness . " perhaps you may not quite know that I really do think a good deal about my mother when I marry . I be selfish , but I do love she , and feel about her poverty ; and what comfort I most at first , when I be miserable , be she be well off because I have marry . the thing that would be hard to I now would be to see she in poverty again ; and I have be think that if I take enough to provide for she , and no more nothing for myself it would not be wrong ; for I be very precious to my mother and he take I from she and he mean and if she have know " 

 Gwendolen break off . she have be prepare herself for this interview by think of hardly anything else than this question of right toward her mother ; but the question have carry with it thought and reason which it be impossible for she to utter , and these perilous remembrance swarm between her word , make her speech more and more agitated and tremulous . she look down helplessly at her hand , now unladen of all ring except her wedding - ring . 

 " do not hurt yourself by speak of that , " say Deronda , tenderly . " there be no need ; the case be very simple . I think I can hardly judge wrongly about it . you consult I because I be the only person to whom you have confide the most painful part of your experience : and I can understand your scruple . " he do not go on immediately , wait for she to recover herself . the silence seem to Gwendolen full of the tenderness that she hear in his voice , and she have courage to lift up her eye and look at he as he say , " you be conscious of something which you feel to be a crime toward one who be dead . you think that you have forfeit all claim as a wife . you shrink from take what be his . you want to keep yourself from profit by his death . your feeling even urge you to some self - punishment some scourging of the self that disobey your well will the will that struggle against temptation . I have know something of that myself . do I understand you ? " 

 " yes at least , I want to be good not like what I have be , " say Gwendolen . " I will try to bear what you think I ought to bear . I have try to tell you the bad about myself . what ought I to do ? " 

 " if no one but yourself be concern in this question of income , " say Deronda , " I should hardly dare to urge you against any remorseful prompting ; but I take as a guide now , your feeling about Mrs. Davilow , which seem to I quite just . I can not think that your husband 's due even to yourself be nullify by any act you have commit . he voluntarily enter into your life , and affect its course in what be always the most momentous way . but set that aside , it be due from he in his position that he should provide for your mother , and he of course understand that if this will take effect she would share the provision he have make for you . " 

 " she have have eight hundred a year . what I think of be to take that and leave the rest , " say Gwendolen . she have be so long inwardly argue for this as a permission , that her mind could not at once take another attitude . 

 " I think it be not your duty to fix a limit in that way , " say Deronda . " you would be make a painful enigma for Mrs. Davilow ; an income from which you shut yourself out must be embitter to she . and your own course would become too difficult . we agree at Genoa that the burden on your conscience be one what no one ought to be admit to the knowledge of . the future beneficence of your life will be well further by your save all other from the pain of that knowledge . in my opinion you ought simply to abide by the provision of your husband 's will , and let your remorse tell only on the use that you will make of your monetary independence . " 

 in utter the last sentence Deronda automatically take up his hat which he have lay on the floor beside he . Gwendolen , sensitive to his slight movement , feel her heart give a great leap , as if it too have a consciousness of its own , and would hinder he from go : in the same moment she rise from her chair , unable to reflect that the movement be an acceptance of his apparent intention to leave she ; and Deronda , of course , also rise , advance a little . 

 " I will do what you tell I , " say Gwendolen , hurriedly ; " but what else shall I do ? " no other than these simple word be possible to she ; and even these be too much for she in a state of emotion where her proud secrecy be disenthrone : as the child - like sentence fall from her lip they re - act on she like a picture of her own helplessness , and she could not check the sob which send the large tear to her eye . Deronda , too , feel a crush pain ; but imminent consequence be visible to he , and urge he to the utmost exertion of conscience . when she have press her tear away , he say , in a gently question tone 

 " you will probably be soon go with Mrs. Davilow into the country . " 

 " yes , in a week or ten day . " Gwendolen wait an instant , turn her eye vaguely toward the window , as if look at some imagine prospect . " I want to be kind to they all they can be happy than I can . be that the good I can do ? " 

 " I think so . it be a duty that can not be doubtful , " say Deronda . he pause a little between his sentence , feel a weight of anxiety on all his word . " other duty will spring from it . look at your life as a debt may seem the dreary view of thing at a distance ; but it can not really be so . what make life dreary be the want of motive : but once begin to act with that penitential , love purpose you have in your mind , there will be unexpected satisfaction there will be newly - opening need continually come to carry you on from day to day . you will find your life grow like a plant . " 

 Gwendolen turn her eye on he with the look of one athirst toward the sound of unseen water . Deronda feel the look as if she have be stretch her arm toward he from a forsaken shore . his voice take an affectionate imploringness when he say 

 " this sorrow , which have cut down to the root , have come to you while you be so young try to think of it not as a spoiling of your life , but as a preparation for it . let it be a preparation " any one overhear his tone would have think he be entreat for his own happiness . " see ! you have be save from the bad evil that might have come from your marriage , which you feel be wrong . you have have a vision of injurious , selfish action a vision of possible degradation ; think that a severe angel , see you along the road of error , grasp you by the wrist and show you the horror of the life you must avoid . and it have come to you in your spring - time . think of it as a preparation . you can , you will , be among the good of woman , such as make other glad that they be bear . " 

 the word be like the touch of a miraculous hand to Gwendolen . Mingled emotion stream through her frame with a strength that seem the beginning of a new existence , have some new power or other which stir in her vaguely . so pregnant be the divine hope of moral recovery with the energy that fulfill it . so potent in we be the infuse action of another soul , before which we bow in complete love . but the new existence seem inseparable from Deronda : the hope seem to make his presence permanent . it be not her thought , that he love she , and would cling to she a thought would have totter with improbability ; it be her spiritual breath . for the first time since that terrible moment on the sea a flush rose and spread over her cheek , brow and neck , deepen an instant or two , and then gradually disappear . she do not speak . 

 Deronda advance and put out his hand , say , " I must not weary you . " 

 she be startle by the sense that he be go , and put her hand in his , still without speak . 

 " you look ill yet unlike yourself , " he add , while he hold her hand . 

 " I can not   sleep much , " she answer , with some return of her dispirit manner . " thing repeat themselves in I so . they come back they will all come back , " she end , shudderingly , a chill fear threaten she . 

 " by degree they will be less insistent , " say Deronda . he could not drop her hand or move away from she abruptly . 

 " Sir Hugo say he shall come to stay at diplow , " say Gwendolen , snatch at previously intend word which have slip away from she . " you will come too . " 

 " probably , " say Deronda , and then feel that the word be cold , he add , correctively , " yes , I shall come , " and then release her hand , with the final friendly pressure of one who have virtually say good - bye . 

 " and not again here , before I leave town ? " say Gwendolen , with timid sadness , look as pallid as ever . 

 what could Deronda say ? " if I can be of any use if you wish I certainly I will . " 

 " I must wish it , " say Gwendolen , impetuously ; " you know I must wish it . what strength have I ? who else be there ? " again a sob be rise . 

 Deronda feel a pang , which show itself in his face . he look miserable as he say , " I will certainly come . " 

 Gwendolen perceive the change in his face ; but the intense relief of expect he to come again could not give way to any other feeling , and there be a recovery of the inspire hope and courage in she . 

 " do not   be unhappy about I , " she say , in a tone of affectionate assurance . " I shall remember your word every one of they . I shall remember what you believe about I ; I shall try . " 

 she look at he firmly , and put out her hand again as if she have forget what have pass since those word of his which she promise to remember . but there be no approach to a smile on her lip . she have never smile since her husband 's death . when she stand still and in silence , she look like a melancholy statue of the Gwendolen whose laughter have once be so ready when other be grave . 

 it be only by remember the search anguish which have change the aspect of the world for she that we can understand her behavior to Deronda the unreflecte openness , nay , the importunate plead , with which she express her dependence on he . consideration such as would have fill the mind of indifferent spectator could not occur to she , any more than if flame have be mount around she , and she have fling herself into his open arm and clung about his neck that he might carry she into safety . she identify he with the struggle regenerative process in she which have begin with his action . be it any wonder that she see her own necessity reflect in his feeling ? she be in that state of unconscious reliance and expectation which be a common experience with we when we be preoccupy with our own trouble or our own purpose . we diffuse our feeling over other , and count on their acting from our motif . her imagination have not be turn to a future union with Deronda by any other than the spiritual tie which have be continually strengthen ; but also it have not be turn toward a future separation from he . love - making and marriage how could they now be the imagery in which poor Gwendolen 's deep attachment could spontaneously clothe itself ? Mighty Love have lay his hand upon she ; but what have he demand of she ? acceptance of rebuke the hard task of self - change confession endurance . if she cry toward he , what then ? she cry as the child cry whose little foot have fall backward cry to be take by the hand , lest she should lose herself . 

 the cry pierce Deronda . what position could have be more difficult for a man full of tenderness , yet with clear foresight ? he be the only creature who know the real nature of Gwendolen 's trouble : to withdraw himself from any appeal of hers would be to consign she to a dangerous loneliness . he could not reconcile himself to the cruelty of apparently reject her dependence on he ; and yet in the nearer or farth distance he see a come wrench , which all present strengthening of their bond would make the hard . 

 he be oblige to risk that . he go once and again to Park Lane before Gwendolen leave ; but their interview be in the presence of Mrs. Davilow , and be therefore less agitate . Gwendolen , since she have determine to accept her income , have conceive a project which she like to speak of : it be , to place her mother and sister with herself in Offendene again , and , as she say , piece back her life unto that time when they first go there , and when everything be happiness about she , only she do not know it . the idea have be mention to Sir Hugo , who be go to exert himself about the letting of Gadsmere for a rent which would more than pay the rent of Offendene . all this be tell to Deronda , who willingly dwelt on a subject that seem to give some soothe occupation to Gwendolen . he say nothing and she ask nothing , of what chiefly occupy himself . her mind be fix on his come to Diplow before the autumn be over ; and she no more thought of the Lapidoths the little Jewess and her brother as likely to make a difference in her destiny , than of the ferment political and social leaven which be make a difference in the history of the world . in fact poor Gwendolen 's memory have be stun , and all outside the lava - light track of her troubled conscience , and her effort to get deliverance from it , lie for she in dim forgetfulness . 

 CHAPTER LXVI . 

  " one day still fierce ' mid many a day strike calm . " 
  BROWNING : the King and the Book . 
 meanwhile Ezra and Mirah , whom Gwendolen do not include in her thinking about Deronda , be have their relation to he draw close and bring into full light . 

 the father Lapidoth have quit his daughter at the doorstep , rule by that possibility of stake something in play or bet which present itself with the handling of any sum beyond the price of stay actual hunger , and leave no care for alternative prospect or resolution . until he have lose everything he never consider whether he would apply to Mirah again or whether he would brave his son 's presence . in the first moment he have shrink from encounter Ezra as he would have shrink from any other situation of disagreeable constraint ; and the possession of Mirah 's purse be enough to banish the thought of future necessity . the gambling appetite be more absolutely dominant than bodily hunger , which can be neutralize by an emotional or intellectual excitation ; but the passion for watch chance the habitual suspensive poise of the mind in actual or imaginary play nullifie the susceptibility of other excitation . in its final , imperious stage , it seem the unjoyous dissipation of demon , seek diversion on the burn marl of perdition . 

 but every form of selfishness , however abstract and unhuman , require the support of at least one meal a day ; and though Lapidoth 's appetite for food and drink be extremely moderate , he have slip into a shabby , unfriendly form of life in which the appetite could not be satisfied without some ready money . when , in a brief visit at a house which announce " pyramid " on the window - blind , he have first double and treble and finally lose Mirah 's thirty shilling , he go out with her empty purse in his pocket , already balance in his mind whether he should get another immediate stake by pawn the purse , or whether he should go back to she give himself a good countenance by restore the purse , and declare that he have use the money in pay a score that be stand against he . besides , among the sensibility still leave strong in Lapidoth be the sensibility to his own claim , and he appear to himself to have a claim on any property his child might possess , which be strong than the justice of his son 's resentment . after all , to take up his lodging with his child be the good thing he could do ; and the more he think of meet Ezra the less he wince from it , his imagination be more wrought on by the chance of his get something into his pocket with safety and without exertion , than by the threat of a private humiliation . Luck have be against he lately ; he expect it to turn and might not the turn begin with some opening of supply which would present itself through his daughter 's affair and the good friend she have speak of ? Lapidoth count on the fascination of his cleverness an old habit of mind which early experience have sanction : and it be not only woman who be unaware of their diminished charm , or imagine that they can feign not to be wear out . 

 the result of Lapidoth 's rapid balancing be that he go toward the little square in Brompton with the hope that , by walk about and watch , he might catch sight of Mirah go out or return , in which case his entrance into the house would be make easy . but it be already even the evening of the day next to that which he have first see she ; and after a little waiting , weariness make he reflect that he might ring , and if she be not at home he might ask the time at which she be expect . but on come near the house he know that she be at home : he hear her singing . 

 Mirah , seat at the piano , be pour forth " Herz , mein Herz , " while Ezra be listen with his eye shut , when Mrs. Adam open the door , and say in some embarrassment 

 " a gentleman below say he be your father , miss . " 

 " I will go down to he , " say Mirah , start up immediately and look at her brother . 

 " no , Mirah , not so , " say Ezra , with decision . " let he come up , Mrs. 
 Adam . " 
 Mirah stand with her hand pinch each other , and feel sick with anxiety , while she continue look at Ezra , who have also rise , and be evidently much shake . but there be an expression in his face which she have never see before ; his brow be knit , his lip seem harden with the same severity that gleam from his eye . 

 when Mrs. Adam open the door to let in the father , she could not help cast a look at the group , and after glance from the young man to the elder , say to herself as she close the door , " Father , sure enough . " the likeness be that of outline , which be always most striking at the first moment ; the expression have be work into the strong contrast by such hidden or inconspicuous difference as can make the genius of a Cromwell within the outward type of a father who be no more than a respectable parishioner . 

 Lapidoth have put on a melancholy expression beforehand , but there be some real wincing in his frame as he say 

 " well , Ezra , my boy , you hardly know I after so many year . " 

 " I know you too well father , " say Ezra , with a slow bite solemnity which make the word father a reproach . 

 " ah , you be not pleased with I . I do not   wonder at it . appearance have be against I . when a man get into strait he can not   do just as he would by himself or anybody else , I have   suffer enough , I know , " say Lapidoth , quickly . in speak he always recover some glibness and hardihood ; and now turn toward Mirah , he hold out her purse , say , " here be your little purse , my dear . I think you would be anxious about it because of that bit of writing . I have   empty it , you will see , for I have a score to pay for food and lodging . I know you would like I to clear myself , and here I stand without a single farthing in my pocket at the mercy of my child . you can turn I out if you like , without get a policeman . say the word , Mirah ; say , ' Father , I have   have enough of you ; you make a pet of I , and spend your all on I , when I could not   have do without you ; but I can do well without you now , ' say that , and I be go out like a spark . I shall not   spoil your pleasure again . " the tear be in his voice as usual , before he have finish . 

 " you know I could never say it , father , " answer Mirah , with not the less anguish because she feel the falsity of everything in his speech except the imply wish to remain in the house . 

 " Mirah , my sister , leave we ! " say Ezra , in a tone of authority . 

 she look at her brother falteringly , beseechingly in awe of his decision , yet unable to go without make a plea for this father who be like something that have grow in her flesh with pain . she go close to her brother , and put her hand in his , say , in a low voice , but not so low as to be unheard by Lapidoth , " remember , Ezra you say my mother would not have shut he out . " 

 " trust I , and go , " say Ezra . 

 she leave the room , but after go a few step up the stair , sit down with a palpitating heart . if , because of anything her brother say to he , he go away - 

 Lapidoth have some sense of what be be prepare for he in his son 's mind , but he be begin to adjust himself to the situation and find a point of view that would give he a cool superiority to any attempt at humiliate he . this haggard son , speak as from a sepulchre , have the incongruity which selfish levity learn to see in suffering , and until the unrelenting pincer of disease clutch its own flesh . whatever preach he might deliver must be take for a matter of course , as a man find shelter from hail in an open cathedral might take a little religious howling that happen to be go on there . 

 Lapidoth be not bear with this sort of callousness : he have achieve it . 

 " this home that we have here , " Ezra begin , " be maintain partly by the generosity of a beloved friend who support I , and partly by the labor of my sister , who support herself . while we have a home we will not shut you out from it . we will not cast you out to the mercy of your vice . for you be our father , and though you have break your bond , we acknowledge ours . but I will never trust you . you abscond with money , leave your debt unpaid ; you forsook my mother ; you rob she of her little child and break her heart ; you have become a gambler , and where shame and conscience be there sit an insatiable desire ; you be ready to sell my sister you have sell she , but the price be deny you . the man who have do these thing must never expect to be trust any more . we will share our food with you you shall have a bed , and clothing . we will do this duty to you , because you be our father . but you will never be trust . you be an evil man : you make the misery of our mother . that such a man be our father be a brand on our flesh which will not cease smart . but the Eternal have lay it upon we ; and though human justice be to flog you for crime , and your body fall helpless before the public scorn , we would still say , ' this be our father ; make way , that we may carry he out of your sight . ' " 

 Lapidoth , in adjust himself to what be come , have not be able to foresee the exact intensity of the lightning or the exact course it would take that it would not fall outside his frame but through it . he could not foresee what be so new to he as this voice from the soul of his son . it touch that spring of hysterical excitability which Mirah use to witness in he when he sit at home and sob . as Ezra end , Lapidoth throw himself into a chair and cry like a woman , bury his face against the table and yet , strangely , while this hysterical crying be an inevitable reaction in he under the stress of his son 's word , it be also a conscious resource in a difficulty ; just as in early life , when he be a bright - faced curly young man , he have be use to avail himself of this subtly - poise physical susceptibility to turn the edge of resentment or disapprobation . 

 Ezra sit down again and say nothing exhaust by the shock of his own irrepressible utterance , the outburst of feeling which for year he have bear in solitude and silence . his thin hand tremble on the arm of the chair ; he would hardly have find voice to answer a question ; he feel as if he have take a step toward beckon death . meanwhile Mirah 's quick expectant ear detect a sound which her heart recognize : she could not stay out of the room any long . but on open the door her immediate alarm be for Ezra , and it be to his side that she go , take his trembling hand in her , which he press and find support in ; but he do not speak or even look at she . the father with his face bury be conscious that Mirah have enter , and presently lift up his head , press his handkerchief against his eye , put out his hand toward she , and say with plaintive hoarseness , " good - bye , Mirah ; your father will not trouble you again . he deserve to die like a dog by the roadside , and he will . if your mother have live , she would have forgive I thirty - four year ago I put the ring on her finger under the Chuppa , and we be make one . she would have forgive I , and we should have spend our old age together . but I have not   deserve it . good - bye . " 

 he rise from the chair as he say the last " good - bye . " Mirah have put her hand in his and hold he . she be not tearful and grieving , but frighten and awe - strike , as she cry out 

 " no , father , no ! " then turn to her brother , " Ezra , you have not forbid he ? Stay , father , and leave off wrong thing . Ezra , I can not bear it . how can I say to my father , ' go and die ! ' " 

 " I have not say it , " Ezra answer , with great effort . " I have say , stay and be shelter . " 

 " then you will stay , father and be take care of and come with I , " say Mirah , draw he toward the door . 

 this be really what Lapidoth want . and for the moment he feel a sort of comfort in recover his daughter 's dutiful attendance , that make a change of habit seem possible to he . she lead he down to the parlor below , and say 

 " this be my sitting - room when I be not with Ezra , and there be a bed - room behind which shall be yours . you will stay and be good , father . think that you be come back to my mother , and that she have forgive you she speak to you through I . " Mirah 's tone be implore , but she could not give one of her former caress . 

 Lapidoth quickly recover his composure , begin to speak to Mirah of the improvement in her voice , and other easy subject , and when Mrs. Adam come to lay out his supper , enter into converse with she in order to show she that he be not a common person , though his clothe be just now against he . 

 but in his usual wakefulness at night , he fall to wonder what money Mirah have by she , and go back over old continental hour at Roulette , reproduce the method of his play , and the chance that have frustrate it . he have have his reason for come to England , but for most thing it be a cursed country . 

 these be the strong vision of the night with Lapidoth , and not the worn frame of his ireful son utter a terrible judgment . Ezra do pass across the gaming - table , and his word be audible ; but he pass like an insubstantial ghost , and his word have the heart eat out of they by number and movement that seem to make the very tissue of Lapidoth 's consciousness . 

 CHAPTER LXVII . 

  the godhead in we wrings our noble deed 
  from our reluctant self . 
 it be an unpleasant surprise to Deronda when he return from the Abbey to find the undesirable father instal in the lodging at Brompton . Mirah have feel it necessary to speak of Deronda to her father , and even to make he as fully aware as she could of the way in which the friendship with Ezra have begin , and of the sympathy which have cement it . she pass more lightly over what Deronda have do for she , omit altogether the rescue from drown , and speak of the shelter she have find in Mrs. Meyrick 's family so as to leave her father to suppose that it be through these friend Deronda have become acquainted with she . she could not persuade herself to more completeness in her narrative : she could not let the breath of her father 's soul pass over her relation to Deronda . and Lapidoth , for reason , be not eager in his questioning about the circumstance of her flight and arrival in England . but he be much interested in the fact of his child have a beneficent friend apparently high in the world . 

 it be the brother who tell Deronda of this new condition add to their life . " I be become calm in behold he now , " Ezra end , " and I try to think it possible that my sister 's tenderness , and the daily taste a life of peace , may win he to remain aloof from temptation . I have enjoin she , and she have promise , to trust he with no money . I have convince she that he will buy with it his own destruction . " 

 Deronda first come on the third day from Ladipoth 's arrival . the new clothe for which he have be measure be not yet ready , and wish to make a favorable impression , he do not choose to present himself in the old one . he watch for Deronda 's departure , and , get a view of he from the window , be rather surprised at his youthfulness , which Mirah have not mention , and which he have somehow think out of the question in a personage who have take up a grave friendship and hoary study with the sepulchral Ezra . Lapidoth begin to imagine that Deronda 's real or chief motive must be that he be in love with Mirah . and so much the well ; for a tie to Mirah have more promise of indulgence for her father than a tie to Ezra : and Lapidoth be not without the hope of recommend himself to Deronda , and of soften any hard prepossession . he be behave with much amiability , and try in all way at his command to get himself into easy domestication with his child enter into Mirah 's music , show himself docile about smoking , which Mrs. Adam could not tolerate in her parlor , and walk out in the square with his german pipe , and the tobacco with which Mirah supply he . he be too acute to offer any present remonstrance against the refusal of money , which Mirah tell he that she must persist in as a solemn duty promise to her brother . he be comfortable enough to wait . 

 the next time Deronda come , Lapidoth , equip in his new clothe , and satisfied with his own appearance , be in the room with Ezra , who be teach himself , as a part of his severe duty , to tolerate his father 's presence whenever it be impose . Deronda be cold and distant , the first sight of this man , who have blight the life of his wife and child , create in he a repulsion that be even a physical discomfort . but Lapidoth do not let himself be discourage , ask leave to stay and hear the reading of paper from the old chest , and actually make himself useful in help to decipher some difficult german manuscript . this lead he to suggest that it might be desirable to make a transcription of the manuscript , and he offer his service for this purpose , and also to make copy of any paper in roman character . though Ezra 's young eye he observe be get weak , his own be still strong . Deronda accept the offer , think that Lapidoth show a sign of grace in the willingness to be employ usefully ; and he see a gratified expression in Ezra 's face , who , however , presently say , " let all the writing be do here ; for I can not trust the paper out of my sight , lest there be an accident by burn or otherwise . " Poor Ezra feel very much as if he have a convict on leave under his charge . unless he see his father work , it be not possible to believe that he would work in good faith . but by this arrangement he fasten on himself the burden of his father 's presence , which be make painful not only through his deep , long association , but also through Lapidoth 's restlessness of temperament , which show itself the more as he become familiarized with his situation , and lose any awe he have feel of his son . the fact be , he be put a strong constraint on himself in confine his attention for the sake of win Deronda 's favor ; and like a man in an uncomfortable garment he give himself relief at every opportunity , go out to smoke , or move about and talk , or throw himself back in his chair and remain silent , but incessantly carry on a dumb language of facial movement or gesticulation : and if Mirah be in the room , he would fall into his old habit of talk with she , gossip about their former doing and companion , or repeat quirk and story , and plot of the play he use to adapt , in the belief that he could at will command the vivacity of his early time . all this be a mortal infliction to Ezra ; and when Mirah be at home she try to relieve he , by get her father down into the parlor and keep watch over he there . what duty be make of a single difficult resolve ? the difficulty lie in the daily unflinche support of consequence that mar the blessed return of morning with the prospect of irritation to be suppress or shame to be endure . and such consequence be be bear by these , as by many other heroic child of an unworthy father with the prospect , at least to Mirah , of their stretching onward through the solid part of life . 

 Meanwhile Lapidoth 's presence have raise a new impalpable partition between Deronda and Mirah each of they dread the soil inference of his mind , each of they interpret mistakenly the increase reserve and diffidence of the other . but it be not very long before some light come to Deronda . 

 as soon as he could , after return from his brief visit to the Abbey , he have call at Hans Meyrick 's room , feel it , on more ground than one , a due of friendship that Hans should be at once acquaint with the reason of his late journey , and the change of intention it have bring about . Hans be not there ; he be say to be in the country for a few day ; and Deronda , after leave a note , wait a week , rather expect a note in return . but receive no word , and fear some freak of feeling in the incalculably susceptible Hans , whose propose sojourn at the Abbey he know have be defer , he at length make a second call , and be admit into the painting - room , where he find his friend in a light coat , without a waistcoat , his long hair still wet from a bath , but with a face look wear and wizene anything but country - like . he have take up his palette and brush , and stand before his easel when Deronda enter , but the equipment and attitude seem to have be get up on short notice . 

 as they shake hand , Deronda say , " you do not   look much as if you have be in the country , old fellow . be it Cambridge you have be to ? " 

 " no , " say Hans , curtly , throw down his palette with the air of one who have begin to feign by mistake ; then push forward a chair for Deronda , he throw himself into another , and lean backward with his hand behind his head , while he go on , " I have   be to I - don't -know - where no man 's land and a mortally unpleasant country it be . " 

 " you do not   mean to say you have be drink , Hans , " say Deronda , who have seat himself opposite , in anxious survey . 

 " nothing so good . I have   be smoke opium . I always mean to do it some time or other , to try how much bliss could be get by it ; and have find myself just now rather out of other bliss , I think it judicious to seize the opportunity . but I pledge you my word I shall never tap a cask of that bliss again . it disagree with my constitution . " 

 " what have be the matter ? you be in good spirit enough when you write to I . " 

 " oh , nothing in particular . the world begin to look seedy a sort of cabbage - garden with all the cabbage cut . a malady of genius , you may be sure , " say Hans , crease his face into a smile ; " and , in fact , I be tired of be virtuous without reward , especially in this hot London weather . " 

 " nothing else ? no real vexation ? " say Deronda . 

 Hans shake his head . 

 " I come to tell you of my own affair , but I can not   do it with a good grace if you be to hide your . " 

 " have not   an affair in the world , " say Hans , in a flighty way , " except a quarrel with a bric - a - brac man . besides , as it be the first time in our life that you ever speak to I about your own affair , you be only begin to pay a pretty long debt . " 

 Deronda feel convinced that Hans be behave artificially , but he trust to a return of the old frankness by - and - by if he give his own confidence . 

 " you laugh at the mystery of my journey to Italy , Hans , " he begin . " it be for an object that touch my happiness at the very root . I have never know anything about my parent , and I really go to Genoa to meet my mother . my father have be long dead die when I be an infant . my mother be the daughter of an eminent Jew ; my father be her cousin . many thing have cause I to think of this origin as almost a probability before I set out . I be so far prepared for the result that I be glad of it glad to find myself a Jew . " 

 " you must not expect I to look surprised , Deronda , " say Hans , who have change his attitude , lay one leg across the other and examine the heel of his slipper . 

 " you know it ? " 

 " my mother tell I . she go to the house the morning after you have be there brother and sister both tell she . you may imagine we can not   rejoice as they do . but whatever you be glad of , I shall come to be glad of in the end when exactly the end may be I can not   predict , " say Hans , speak in a low tone , which be as usual with he as it be to be out of humor with his lot , and yet bent on make no fuss about it . 

 " I quite understand that you can not   share my feeling , " say Deronda ; " but I could not let silence lie between we on what cast quite a new light over my future . I have take up some of Mordecai 's idea , and I mean to try and carry they out , so far as one man 's effort can go . I dare say I shall by and by travel to the East and be away for some year . " 

 Hans say nothing , but rise , seize his palette and begin to work his brush on it , stand before his picture with his back to Deronda , who also feel himself at a break in his path embarrass by Hans 's embarrassment . 

 presently Hans say , again speak low , and without turn , " excuse the question , but do Mrs. Grandcourt know of all this ? " 

 " no ; and I must beg of you , Hans , " say Deronda , rather angrily , " to cease joke on that subject . any notion you have be wide of the truth be the very reverse of the truth . " 

 " I be no more inclined to joke than I shall be at my own funeral , " say Hans . " but I be not at all sure that you be aware what be my notion on that subject . " 

 " perhaps not , " say Deronda . " but let I say , once for all , that in relation to Mrs. Grandcourt , I never have have , and never shall have the position of a lover . if you have ever seriously put that interpretation on anything you have observe , you be supremely mistaken . " 

 there be silence a little while , and to each the silence be like an irritate air , exaggerate discomfort . 

 " perhaps I have be mistake in another interpretation , also , " say 
 Hans , presently . 
 " what be that ? " 

 " that you have no wish to hold the position of a lover toward another woman , who be neither wife nor widow . " 

 " I can not   pretend not to understand you , Meyrick . it be painful that our wish should clash . I hope you will tell I if you have any ground for suppose that you would succeed . " 

 " that seem rather a superfluous inquiry on your part , Deronda , " say 
 Hans , with some irritation . 
 " why superfluous ? " 

 " because you be perfectly convinced on the subject and probably have have the very good evidence to convince you . " 

 " I will be more frank with you than you be with I , " say Deronda , still heat by Hans ' show of temper , and yet sorry for he . " I have never have the slight evidence that I should succeed myself . in fact , I have very little hope . " 

 Hans look round hastily at his friend , but immediately turn to his picture again . 

 " and in our present situation , " say Deronda , hurt by the idea that Hans suspect he of insincerity , and give an offended emphasis to his word , " I do not   see how I can deliberately make know my feeling to she . if she could not return it , I should have embitter her good comfort ; for neither she nor I can be part from her brother , and we should have to meet continually . if I be to cause she that sort of pain by an unwilling betrayal of my feeling , I should be no well than a mischievous animal . " 

 " I do not   know that I have ever betray my feeling to she , " say 
 Hans , as if he be vindicate himself . 
 " you mean that we be on a level , then ; you have no reason to envy I . " 

 " oh , not the slight , " say Hans , with bitter irony . " you have measure my conceit and know that it out - top all your advantage . " 

 " I be a nuisance to you , Meyrick . I be sorry , but I can not   help it , " say Deronda , rise . " after what pass between we before , I wish to have this explanation ; and I do not   see that any pretension of mine have make a real difference to you . they be not likely to make any pleasant difference to myself under present circumstance . now the father be there do you know that the father be there ? " 

 " yes . if he be not a Jew I would permit myself to damn he with faint praise , I mean , " say Hans , but with no smile . 

 " she and I meet under great constraint than ever . thing might go on in this way for two year without my get any insight into her feeling toward I . that be the whole state of affair , Hans . neither you nor I have injure the other , that I can see . we must put up with this sort of rivalry in a hope that be likely enough to come to nothing . our friendship can bear that strain , surely . " 

 " no , it can not , " say Hans , impetuously , throw down his tool , thrust his hand into his coat - pocket , and turn round to face Deronda , who draw back a little and look at he with amazement . Hans go on in the same tone 

 " our friendship my friendship can not   bear the strain of behave to you like an ungrateful dastard and grudge you your happiness . for you be the happy dog in the world . if Mirah love anybody well than her brother , you be the man . " 

 Hans turn on his heel and throw himself into his chair , look up at Deronda with an expression the reverse of tender . something like a shock pass through Deronda , and , after an instant , he say 

 " it be a good - natured fiction of your , Hans . " 

 " I be not in a good - natured mood . I assure you I find the fact disagreeable when it be thrust on I all the more , or perhaps all the less , because I believe then that your heart be pledge to the duchess . but now , confound you ! you turn out to be in love in the right place a Jew and everything eligible . " 

 " tell I what convince you there be a good fellow , " say Deronda , distrust a delight that he be unused to . 

 " do not   ask . little mother be witness . the upshot be , that Mirah be jealous of the duchess , and the soon you relieve your mind the well . there ! I have   clear off a score or two , and may be allow to swear at you for get what you deserve which be just the very good luck I know of . " 

 " God bless you , Hans ! " say Deronda , put out his hand , which the other take and wring in silence . 

 CHAPTER LXVIII . 

  " all thought , all passion , all delight , 
  whatever stir this mortal frame , 
  all be but minister of Love , 
  and feed his sacred flame . " 
  COLERIDGE . 
 Deronda 's eagerness to confess his love could hardly have have a strong stimulus than Hans have give it in his assurance that Mirah need relief from jealousy . he go on his next visit to Ezra with the determination to be resolute in use nay , in request an opportunity of private conversation with she . if she accept his love , he feel courageous about all other consequence , and as she betroth husband he would gain a protective authority which might be a desirable defense for she in future difficulty with her father . Deronda have not observe any sign of grow restlessness in Lapidoth , or of diminish desire to recommend himself ; but he have foreboding of some future struggle , some mortification , or some intolerable increase of domestic disquietude in which he might save Ezra and Mirah from be helpless victim . 

 his foreboding would have be strengthen if he have know what be go on in the father 's mind . that amount of restlessness , that desultoriness of attention , which make a small torture to Ezra , be to lapidoth an irksome submission to restraint , only make bearable by his thinking of it as a means of by - and - by secure a well - condition freedom . he begin with the intention of await some really good chance , such as an opening for get a considerable sum from Deronda ; but all the while he be look about curiously , and try to discover where Mirah deposit her money and her key . the imperious gambling desire within he , which carry on its activity through every other occupation , and make a continuous web of imagination that hold all else in its mesh , would hardly have be under the control of a contract purpose , if he have be able to lay his hand on any sum worth capturing . but Mirah , with her practical clear - sightedness , guard against any frustration of the promise she have give to Ezra , by confide all money , except what she be immediately in want of , to Mrs. Meyrick 's care , and Lapidoth feel himself under an irritate completeness of supply in kind as in a lunatic asylum where everything be make safe against he . to have open a desk or drawer of Mirah 's , and pocket any bank - note find there , would have be to his mind a sort of domestic appropriation which have no disgrace in it ; the degree of liberty a man allow himself with other people 's property be often delicately draw , even beyond the boundary where the law begin to lay its hold which be the reason why spoon be a safe investment than mining share . Lapidoth really feel himself injuriously treat by his daughter , and think that he ought to have have what he want of her other earning as he have of her apple - tart . but he remain submissive ; indeed , the indiscretion that most tempt he , be not any insistance with Mirah , but some kind of appeal to Deronda . clever person who have nothing else to sell can often put a good price on their absence , and Lapidoth 's difficult search for device force upon he the idea that his family would find themselves happy without he , and that Deronda would be willing to advance a considerable sum for the sake of get rid of he . but , in spite of well - practice hardihood , Lapidoth be still in some awe of Ezra 's impose friend , and defer his purpose indefinitely . 

 on this day , when Deronda have come full of a gladdened consciousness , which inevitably show itself in his air and speech , Lapidoth be at a crisis of discontent and longing that make his mind busy with scheme of freedom , and Deronda 's new amenity encourage they . this pre - occupation be at last so strong as to interfere with his usual show of interest in what go forward , and his persistence in sit by even when there be read which he could not follow . after sit a little while , he go out to smoke and walk in the square , and the two friend be all the easy . Mirah be not at home , but she be sure to be in again before Deronda leave , and his eye glow with a secret anticipation : he think that when he see she again he should see some sweetness of recognition for himself to which his eye have be seal before . there be an additional playful affectionateness in his manner toward Ezra . 

 " this little room be too close for you , Ezra , " he say , break off his reading . " the week 's heat we sometimes get here be bad than the heat in Genoa , where one sit in the shade coolness of large room . you must have a well home now . I shall do as I like with you , be the strong half . " he smile toward Ezra , who say 

 " I be straiten for nothing except breath . but you , who might be in a spacious palace , with the wide green country around you , find this a narrow prison . nevertheless , I can not say , ' go . ' " 

 " oh , the country would be a banishment while you be here , " say Deronda , rise and walk round the double room , which yet offer no long promenade , while he make a great fan of his handkerchief . " this be the happy room in the world to I . besides , I will imagine myself in the East , since I be get ready to go there some day . only I will not wear a cravat and a heavy ring there , " he end emphatically , pause to take off those superfluity and deposit they on a small table behind Ezra , who have the table in front of he cover with book and paper . 

 " I have be wear my memorable ring ever since I come home , " he go on , as he reseat himself . " but I be such a Sybarite that I constantly put it off as a burden when I be do anything . I understand why the Romans have summer ring if they have they . now then , I shall get on well . " 

 they be soon absorb in their work again . Deronda be read a piece of rabbinical Hebrew under Ezra 's correction and comment , and they take little notice when Lapidoth re - enter and take a seat somewhat in the background . 

 his ramble eye quickly alight on the ring that sparkle on the bit of dark mahogany . during his walk , his mind have be occupy with the fiction of an advantageous opening for he abroad , only require a sum of ready money , which , on be communicate to Deronda in private , might immediately draw from he a question as to the amount of the require sum : and it be this part of his forecast that Lapidoth find the most debatable , there be a danger in ask too much , and a prospective regret in ask too little . his own desire give he no limit , and he be quite without guidance as to the limit of Deronda 's willingness . but now , in the midst of these airy condition preparatory to a receipt which remain indefinite , this ring , which on Deronda 's finger have become familiar to Lapidoth 's envy , suddenly shine detach and within easy grasp . its value be certainly below the small of the imaginary sum that his purpose fluctuate between ; but then it be before he as a solid fact , and his desire at once leap into the thought   not yet an intention   that if he be quietly to pocket that ring and walk away he would have the mean of comfortable escape from present restraint , without trouble , and also without danger ; for any property of Deronda 's   available without his formal consent   be all one with his child 's property , since their father would never be prosecute for take it . the detail of this thinking follow each other so quickly that they seem to rise before he as one picture . Lapidoth have never commit larceny ; but larceny be a form of appropriation for which people be punish by law ; and , take this ring from a virtual relation , who would have be willing to make a much heavy gift , would not come under the head of larceny . still , the heavy gift be to be prefer , if Lapidoth could only make haste enough in ask for it , and the imaginary action of take the ring , which keep repeat itself like an inward tune , sink into a reject idea . he satisfy his urgent longing by resolve to go below , and watch for the moment of Deronda 's departure , when he would ask leave to join he in his walk and boldly carry out his meditate plan . he rise and stand look out of the window , but all the while he see what lie beyond he the brief passage he would have to make to the door close by the table where the ring be . however he be resolve to go down ; but by no distinct change of resolution , rather by a dominance of desire , like the thirst of the drunkard it so happen that in pass the table his finger fall noiselessly on the ring , and he find himself in the passage with the ring in his hand . it follow that he put on his hat and quit the house . the possibility of again throw himself on his child recede into the indefinite distance , and before he be out on the square his sense of haste have concentrate itself on sell the ring and get on shipboard . 

 Deronda and Ezra be just aware of his exit ; that be all . but , by - and - by , Mirah come in and make a real interruption . she have not take off her hat ; and when Deronda rise and advance to shake hand with she , she say , in a confusion at once unaccountable and troublesome to herself 

 " I only come in to see that Ezra have his new draught . I must go directly to Mrs. Meyrick 's to fetch something . " 

 " pray allow I to walk with you , " say Deronda urgently . " I must not tire Ezra any far ; besides my brain be melt . I want to go to Mrs. Meyrick 's : may I go with you ? " 

 " oh , yes , " say Mirah , blush still more , with the vague sense of something new in Deronda , and turn away to pour out Ezra 's draught ; Ezra meanwhile throw back his head with his eye shut , unable to get his mind away from the idea that have be fill it while the reading be go on . Deronda for a moment stand think of nothing but the walk , till Mirah turn round again and bring the draught , when he suddenly remember that he have lay aside his cravat , and say " pray excuse my dishabille I do not mean you to see it , " he go to the little table , take up his cravat , and exclaim with a violent impulse of surprise , " good heaven , where be my ring go ? " begin to search about on the floor . 

 Ezra look round the corner of his chair . Mirah , quick as thought , go to the spot where Deronda be seek , and say , " do you lay it down ? " 

 " yes , " say Deronda , still unvisite by any other explanation than that the ring have fall and be lurk in shadow , indiscernable on the variegate carpet . he be move the bit of furniture near , and search in all possible and impossible place with hand and eye . 

 but another explanation have visit Mirah and take the color from her cheek . she go to Ezra 's ear and whisper " be my father here ? " he bend his head in reply , meet her eye with terrible understanding . she dart back to the spot where Deronda be still cast down his eye in that hopeless exploration which be apt to carry on over a space we have examine in vain . " you have not find it ? " she say , hurriedly . 

 he , meet she frightened gaze , immediately catch alarm from it and answer , " I perhaps put it in my pocket , " profess to feel for it there . 

 she watch he and say , " it be not there ? you put it on the table , " with a penetrate voice that would not let he feign to have find it in his pocket ; and immediately she rush out of the room . Deronda follow she she be go into the sitting - room below to look for her father she open the door of the bedroom to see if he be there she look where his hat usually hang she turn with her hand clasp tight and her lip pale , gaze despairingly out of the window . then she look up at Deronda , who have not dare to speak to she in her white agitation . she look up at he , unable to utter a word the look seem a tacit acceptance of the humiliation she feel in his presence . but he , take her clasp hand between both his , say , in a tone of reverent adoration 

 " Mirah , let I think that he be my father as well as yours that we can have no sorrow , no disgrace , no joy apart . I will rather take your grief to be mine than I would take the bright joy of another woman . say you will not reject I say you will take I to share all thing with you . say you will promise to be my wife say it now . I have be in doubt so long I have have to hide my love so long . say that now and always I may prove to you that I love you with complete love . " 

 the change in Mirah have be gradual . she have not pass at once from anguish to the full , blessed consciousness that , in this moment of grief and shame , Deronda be give she the high tribute man can give to woman . with the first tone and the first word , she have only a sense of solemn comfort , refer this goodness of Deronda 's to his feeling for Ezra . but by degree the rapturous assurance of unhoped - for good take possession of her frame : her face glow under Deronda 's as he bend over she ; yet she look up still with intense gravity , as when she have first acknowledge with religious gratitude that he have think she " worthy of the good ; " and when he have finish , she could say nothing she could only lift up her lip to his and just kiss they , as if that be the simple " yes . " they stand then , only look at each other , he hold her hand between his too happy to move , meet so fully in their new consciousness that all sign would have seem to throw they far apart , till Mirah say in a whisper : " let we go and comfort Ezra . " 

 CHAPTER LXIX . 

  " the human nature unto which I feel 
  that I belong , and reverence with love , 
  be not a punctual presence , but a spirit 
  diffuse through time and space , with aid derive 
  of evidence from monument , erect , 
  Prostrate , or lean toward their common rest 
  in earth , the widely scatter wreck sublime 
  of vanish nation . " 
  WORDSWORTH : the Prelude . 
 Sir Hugo carry out his plan of spend part of the autumn at Diplow , and by the beginning of October his presence be spread some cheerfulness in the neighborhood , among all rank and person concern , from the stately home of Brackenshaw and Quetcham to the respectable shop - parlor in Wanchester . for Sir Hugo be a man who like to show himself and be affable , a Liberal of good lineage , who confide entirely in reform as not likely to make any serious difference in english habit of feeling , one of which undoubtedly be the liking to behold society well fence and adorn with hereditary rank . hence he make Diplow a most agreeable house , extend his invitation to old Wanchester solicitor and young village curate , but also take some care in the combination of the guest , and not feed all the common poultry together , so that they should think their meal no particular compliment . easy - go Lord Brackenshaw , for example , would not mind meet Robinson the attorney , but Robinson would have be naturally pique if he have be ask to meet a set of people who pass for his equal . on all these point Sir Hugo be well informed enough at once to gain popularity for himself and give pleasure to other two result which eminently suit his disposition . the rector of Pennicote now find a reception at Diplow very different from the haughty tolerance he have undergo during the reign of Grandcourt . it be not that the baronet like Mr. Gascoigne ; it be that he desire to keep up a marked relation of friendliness with he on account of Mrs. Grandcourt , for whom Sir Hugo 's chivalry have become more and more engaged . why ? the chief reason be one that he could not fully communicate , even to Lady Mallinger for he would not tell what he think one woman 's secret to another , even though the other be his wife which show that his chivalry include a rare reticence . 

 Deronda , after he have become engaged to Mirah , feel it right to make a full statement of his position and purpose to Sir Hugo , and he choose to make it by letter . he have more than a presentiment that his fatherly friend would feel some dissatisfaction , if not pain , at this turn of his destiny . in read unwelcome news , instead of hear it , there be the advantage that one avoid a hasty expression of impatience which may afterward be repent of . Deronda dread that verbal collision which make otherwise pardonable feeling lastingly offensive . 

 and Sir Hugo , though not altogether surprised , be thoroughly vex . his immediate resource be to take the letter to Lady Mallinger , who would be sure to express an astonishment which her husband could argue against as unreasonable , and in this way divide the stress of his discontent . and in fact when she show herself astonish and distress that all Daniel 's wonderful talent , and the comfort of have he in the house , should have end in his go mad in this way about the Jews , the baronet could say 

 " oh , nonsense , my dear ! depend upon it , Dan will not make a fool of himself . he have large notion about Judaism political view which you can not   understand . no fear but Dan will keep himself head uppermost . " 

 but with regard to the prospective marriage she afford he no counter - irritant . the gentle lady observe , without rancor , that she have little dreamed of what be come when she have Mirah to sing at her musical party and give lesson to Amabel . after some hesitation , indeed , she confess it have pass through her mind that after a proper time Daniel might marry Mrs. Grandcourt because it seem so remarkable that he should be at Genoa just at that time and although she herself be not fond of widow she could not help think that such a marriage would have be well than his go altogether with the Jews . but Sir Hugo be so strongly of the same opinion that he could not correct it as a feminine mistake ; and his ill - humor at the disproof of his disagreeable conclusion on behalf of Gwendolen be leave without vent . he desire Lady Mallinger not to breathe a word about the affair till further notice , say to himself , " if it be an unkind cut to the poor thing   mean Gwendolen , the long she be without know it the well , in her present nervous state . and she will well learn it from Dan himself . " Sir Hugo 's conjecture have work so industriously with his knowledge , that he fancy himself well inform concern the whole situation . 

 meanwhile his residence with his family at Diplow enable he to continue his fatherly attention to Gwendolen ; and in these Lady Mallinger , notwithstanding her small liking for widow , be quite willing to second he . 

 the plan of removal to Offendene have be carry out ; and Gwendolen , in settle there , maintain a calm beyond her mother 's hope . she be experience some of that peaceful melancholy which come from the renunciation of demand for self , and from take the ordinary good of existence , and especially kindness , even from a dog , as a gift above expectation . do one who have be all but lose in a pit of darkness complain of the sweet air and the daylight ? there be a way of look at our life daily as an escape , and take the quiet return of morn and evening still more the star - like out - glowing of some pure fellow - feeling , some generous impulse break our inward darkness as a salvation that reconcile we to hardship . those who have a self - knowledge prompt such self - accusation as Hamlet 's , can understand this habitual feeling of rescue . and it be feel by Gwendolen as she live through and through again the terrible history of her temptation , from their first form of illusory self - pleasing when she struggle away from the hold of conscience , to their late form of an urgent hatred drag she toward its satisfaction , while she pray and cry for the help of that conscience which she have once forsake . she be now dwell on every word of Deronda 's that point to her past deliverance from the bad evil in herself , and the bad infliction of it on other , and on every word that carry a force to resist self - despair . 

 but she be also upborne by the prospect of soon see he again : she do not imagine he otherwise than always within her reach , her supreme need of he blind she to the separateness of his life , the whole scene of which she fill with his relation to her no unique preoccupation of Gwendolen 's , for we be all apt to fall into this passionate egoism of imagination , not only toward our fellow - man , but toward God . and the future which she turn her face to with a willing step be one where she would be continually assimilate herself to some type that he would hold before she . have he not first rise on her vision as a corrective presence which she have recognize in the beginning with resentment , and at last with entire love and trust ? she could not spontaneously think of an end to that reliance , which have become to her imagination like the firmness of the earth , the only condition of her walk . 

 and Deronda be not long before he come to Diplow , which be a more convenient distance from town than the Abbey . he have wish to carry out a plan for take Ezra and Mirah to a mild spot on the coast , while he prepare another home which Mirah might enter as his bride , and where they might unitedly watch over her brother . but Ezra beg not to be remove , unless it be to go with they to the East . all outward solicitation be become more and more of a burden to he ; but his mind dwelt on the possibility of this voyage with a visionary joy . Deronda , in his preparation for the marriage , which he hop might not be defer beyond a couple of month , wish to have full consultation as to his resource and affair generally with Sir Hugo , and here be a reason for not delay his visit to Diplow . but he think quite as much of another reason his promise to Gwendolen . the sense of blessedness in his own lot have yet an ache anxiety at his heart : this may be hold paradoxical , for the beloved lover be always call happy , and happiness be consider as a well - flesh indifference to sorrow outside it . but human experience be usually paradoxical , if that mean incongruous with the phrase of current talk or even current philosophy . it be no treason to Mirah , but a part of that full nature which make his love for she the more worthy , that his joy in she could hold by its side the care for another . for what be love itself , for the one we love well ? an enfolding of immeasurable care which yet be well than any joy outside our love . 

 Deronda come twice to diplow , and see Gwendolen twice and yet he go back to town without have tell she anything about the change in his lot and prospect . he blame himself ; but in all momentous communication likely to give pain we feel dependent on some preparatory turn of word or association , some agreement of the other 's mood with the probable effect of what we have to impart . in the first interview Gwendolen be so absorb in what she have to say to he , so full of question which he must answer , about the arrangement of her life , what she could do to make herself less ignorant , how she could be kind to everybody , and make amend for her selfishness and try to be rid of it , that Deronda utterly shrink from waive her immediate want in order to speak of himself , nay , from inflict a wound on she in these moment when she be lean on he for help in her path . in the second interview , when he go with new resolve to command the conversation into some preparatory track , he find she in a state of deep depression , overmaster by some distasteful miserable memory which force themselves on she as something more real and ample than any new material out of which she could mould her future . she cry hysterically , and say that he would always despise she . he could only seek word of soothe and encouragement : and when she gradually revive under they , with that pathetic look of renew childlike interest which we see in eye where the lash be still bead with tear , it be impossible to lay another burden on she . 

 but time go on , and he feel it a press duty to make the difficult disclosure . Gwendolen , it be true , never recognize his have any affair ; and it have never even occur to she to ask he why he happen to be at Genoa . but this unconsciousness of hers would make a sudden revelation of affair that be determine his course in life all the heavy blow to she ; and if he leave the revelation to be make by different person , she would feel that he have treat she with cruel inconsiderateness . he could not make the communication in writing : his tenderness could not bear to think of she read his virtual farewell in solitude , and perhaps feel his word full of a hard gladness for himself and indifference for she . he go down to Diplow again , feel that every other peril be to be incur rather than that of return and leave she still in ignorance . 

 on this third visit Deronda find Hans Meyrick instal with his easel at Diplow , begin his picture of the three daughter sit on a bank , " in the Gainsborough style , " and vary his work by ramble to Pennicote to sketch the village child and improve his acquaintance with the Gascoignes . Hans appear to have recover his vivacity , but Deronda detect some feigning in it , as we detect the artificiality of a lady 's bloom from its be a little too high - toned and steadily persistent   a " Fluctuating Rouge " not have yet appear among the advertisement . also with all his grateful friendship and admiration for Deronda , Hans could not help a certain irritation against he , such as extremely incautious , open nature be apt to feel when the breaking of a friend 's reserve disclose a state of thing not merely unsuspected but the reverse of what have be hop and ingeniously conjecture . it be true that poor Hans have always care chiefly to confide in Deronda , and have be quite incurious as to any confidence that might have be give in return ; but what outpourer of his own affair be not tempt to think any hint of his friend 's affair be an egotistic irrelevance ? that be no reason why it be not rather a sore reflection to Hans that while he have be all along naively open his heart about Mirah , Deronda have keep secret a feeling of rivalry which now reveal itself as the important determine fact . moreover , it be always at their peril that our friend turn out to be something more than we be aware of . han must be excuse for these prompting of bruised sensibility , since he have not allow they to govern his substantial conduct : he have the consciousness of have do right by his fortunate friend ; or , as he tell himself , " his metal have give a well ring than he would have swear to beforehand . " for Hans have always say that in point of virtue he be a dilettante : which mean that he be very fond of it in other people , but if he meddle with it himself he cut a poor figure . perhaps in reward of his good behavior he give his tongue the more freedom ; and he be too fully possess by the notion of Deronda 's happiness to have a conception of what he be feel about Gwendolen , so that he speak of she without hesitation . 

 " when do you come down , han ? " say Deronda , join he in the ground where he be make a study of the requisite bank and tree . 

 " oh , ten day ago ; before the time Sir Hugo fix . I run down with Rex Gascoigne and stay at the rectory a day or two . I be up in all the gossip of these part ; I know the state of the wheelwright 's interior , and have assist at an infant school examination . Sister Anna , with the good upper lip , escort I , else I should have be mob by three urchin and an idiot , because of my long hair and a general appearance which depart from the pennicote type of the beautiful . altogether , the village be idyllic . its only fault be a dark curate with broad shoulder and broad trouser who ought to have go into the heavy drapery line . the Gascoignes be perfect besides be relate to the Vandyke duchess . I catch a glimpse of she in her black robe at a distance , though she do not   show to visitor . " 

 " she be not stay at the rectory ? " say Deronda . 

 " no ; but I be take to Offendene to see the old house , and as a consequence I see the duchess ' family . I suppose you have be there and know all about they ? " 

 " yes , I have be there , " say Deronda , quietly . 

 " a fine old place . an excellent setting for a widow with romantic fortune . and she seem to have have several romance . I think I have find out that there be one between she and my friend Rex . " 

 " not long before her marriage , then ? " say Deronda , really interested , " for they have only be a year at Offendene . how come you to know anything of it ? " 

 " oh not ignorant of what it be to be a miserable devil , I learn to gloat on the sign of misery in other . I find out that Rex never go to Offendene , and have never see the duchess since she come back ; and Miss Gascoigne let fall something in our talk about charade - act for I go through some of my nonsense to please the young one something that prove to I that Rex be once hover about his fair cousin close enough to get sing . I do not   know what be her part in the affair . perhaps the duke come in and carry she off . that be always the way when an exceptionally worthy young man form an attachment . I understand now why Gascoigne talk of make the law his mistress and remain a bachelor . but these be green resolve . since the duke do not get himself drown for your sake , it may turn out to be for my friend Rex 's sake . who know ? " 

 " be it absolutely necessary that Mrs. Grandcourt should marry again ? " say Deronda , ready to add that Hans 's success in construct her fortune hitherto have not be enough to warrant a new attempt . 

 " you monster ! " retort Hans , " do you want she to wear weed for you all her life burn herself in perpetual suttee while you be alive and merry ? " 

 Deronda could say nothing , but he look so much annoyed that Hans turn the current of his chat , and when he be alone shrug his shoulder a little over the thought that there really have be some strong feeling between Deronda and the duchess than Mirah would like to know of . " why do not   she fall in love with I ? " think Hans , laugh at himself . " she would have have no rival . no woman ever want to discuss theology with I . " 

 no wonder that Deronda wince under that sort of joke with a whip - lash . it touch sensibility that be already quiver with the anticipation of witness some of that pain to which even Hans 's light word seem to give more reality : any sort of recognition by another give emphasis to the subject of our anxiety . and now he have come down with the firm resolve that he would not again evade the trial . the next day he ride to Offendene . he have send word that he intend to call and to ask if Gwendolen could receive he ; and he find she await he in the old drawing - room where some chief crisis of her life have happen . she seem less sad than he have see she since her husband 's death ; there be no smile on her face , but a placid self - possession , in contrast with the mood in which he have last find she . she be all the more alive to the sadness perceptible in Deronda ; and they be no soon seat he at a little distance opposite to she than she say : 

 " you be afraid of come to see I , because I be so full of grief and despair the last time . but I be not so today . I have be sorry ever since . I have be make it a reason why I should keep up my hope and be as cheerful as I can , because I would not give you any pain about I . " 

 there be an unwonted sweetness in Gwendolen 's tone and look as she utter these word that seem to Deronda to infuse the utmost cruelty into the task now lay upon he . but he feel oblige to make his answer a beginning of the task . 

 " I be in some trouble to - day , " he say , look at she rather mournfully ; " but it be because I have thing to tell you which you will almost think it a want of confidence on my part not to have speak of before . they be thing affect my own life my own future . I shall seem to have make an ill return to you for the trust you have place in I never to have give you an idea of event that make great change for I . but when we have be together we have hardly have time to enter into subject which at the moment be really less press to I than the trial you have be go through . " there be a sort of timid tenderness in Deronda 's deep tone , and he pause with a pleading look , as if it have be Gwendolen only who have confer anything in her scene of beseeching and confession . 

 a thrill of surprise be visible in she . such meaning as she find in his word have shake she , but without cause fear . her mind have fly at once to some change in his position with regard to Sir Hugo and Sir Hugo 's property . she say , with a sense of comfort from Deronda 's way of ask her pardon 

 " you never think of anything but what you could do to help I ; and I be so troublesome . how could you tell I thing ? " 

 " it will perhaps astonish you , " say Deronda , " that I have only quite lately know who be my parent . " 

 Gwendolen be not astonish : she feel the more assured that her expectation of what be come be right . Deronda go on without check . 

 " the reason why you find I in Italy be that I have go there to learn that in fact , to meet my mother . it be by her wish that I be bring up in ignorance of my parentage . she part with I after my father 's death , when I be a little creature . but she be now very ill , and she feel that the secrecy ought not to be any long maintain . her chief reason have be that she do not wish I to know I be a Jew . " 

 " a Jew ! " Gwendolen exclaim , in a low tone of amazement , with an utterly frustrated look , as if some confusing potion be creep through her system . 

 Deronda color , and do not speak , while Gwendolen , with her eye fix on the floor , be struggle to find her way in the dark by the aid of various reminiscence . she seem at last to have arrive at some judgment , for she look up at Deronda again and say , as if remonstrate against the mother 's conduct 

 " what difference need that have make ? " 

 " it have make a great difference to I that I have know it , " say Deronda , emphatically ; but he could not go on easily the distance between her idea and his act like a difference of native language , make he uncertain what force his word would carry . 

 Gwendolen meditate again , and then say feelingly , " I hope there be nothing to make you mind . you be just the same as if you be not a Jew . " 

 she mean to assure he that nothing of that external sort could affect the way in which she regard he , or the way in which he could influence she . Deronda be a little help by this misunderstanding . 

 " the discovery be far from be painful to I , " he say , " I have be gradually prepare for it , and I be glad of it . I have be prepare for it by become intimate with a very remarkable Jew , whose idea have attract I so much that I think of devote the good part of my life to some effort at give they effect . " 

 again Gwendolen seem shake again there be a look of frustration , but this time it be mingle with alarm . she look at Deronda with lip childishly part . it be not that she have yet connect his word with Mirah and her brother , but that they have inspire she with a dreadful presentiment of mountainous travel for her mind before it could reach Deronda 's . great idea in general which she have attribute to he seem to make no great practical difference , and be not formidable in the same way as these mysteriously - shadow particular idea . he could not quite divine what be go on within she ; he could only seek the least abrupt path of disclosure . 

 " that be an object , " he say , after a moment , " which will by - and - by force I to leave England for some time for some year . I have purpose which will take I to the East . " 

 here be something clear , but all the more immediately agitate . Gwendolen 's lip begin to tremble . " but you will come back ? " she say , taste her own tear as they fall , before she think of dry they . 

 Deronda could not sit still . he rise , and go to prop himself against the corner of the mantel - piece , at a different angle from her face . but when she have press her handkerchief against her cheek , she turn and look up at he , await an answer . 

 " if I live , " say Deronda ' some time . " 

 they be both silent . he could not persuade himself to say more unless she lead up to it by a question ; and she be apparently meditate something that she have to say . 

 " what be you go to do ? " she ask , at last , very mildly . " can I understand the idea , or be I too ignorant ? " 

 " I be go to the East to become well acquaint with the condition of my race in various country there , " say Deronda , gently anxious to be as explanatory as he could on what be the impersonal part of their separateness from each other . " the idea that I be possess with be that of restore a political existence to my people , make they a nation again , give they a national center , such as the English have , though they too be scatter over the face of the globe . that be a task which present itself to I as a duty ; I be resolve to begin it , however feebly . I be resolve to devote my life to it . at the least , I may awaken a movement in other mind , such as have be awaken in my own . " 

 there be a long silence between they . the world seem get large round poor Gwendolen , and she more solitary and helpless in the midst . the thought that he might come back after go to the East , sink before the bewilder vision of these wild - stretch purpose in which she feel herself reduce to a mere speck . there come a terrible moment to many soul when the great movement of the world , the large destiny of mankind , which have lie aloof in newspaper and other neglect reading , enter like an earthquake into their own life where the slow urgency of grow generation turn into the tread of an invade army or the dire clash of civil war , and gray father know nothing to seek for but the corps of their bloom son , and girl forget all vanity to make lint and bandage which may serve for the shattered limb of their betrothed husband . then it be as if the Invisible Power that have be the object of lip - worship and lip - resignation become visible , accord to the imagery of the hebrew poet , make the flame his chariot , and rid on the wing of the wind , till the mountain smoke and the plain shudder under the rolling fiery visitation . often the good cause seem to lie prostrate under the thunder of relent force , the martyr live revile , they die , and no angel be see hold forth the crown and the palm branch . then it be that the submission of the soul to the Highest be test , and even in the eye of frivolity life look out from the scene of human struggle with the awful face of duty , and a religion show itself which be something else than a private consolation . 

 that be the sort of crisis which be at this moment begin in Gwendolen 's small life : she be for the first time feel the pressure of a vast mysterious movement , for the first time be dislodge from her supremacy in her own world , and get a sense that her horizon be but a dipping onward of an existence with which her own be revolve . all the trouble of her wifehood and widowhood have still leave she with the implicit impression which have accompany she from childhood , that whatever surround she be somehow specially for she , and it be because of this that no personal jealousy have be rouse in her relation to Deronda : she could not spontaneously think of he as rightfully belong to other more than to she . but here have come a shock which go deep than personal jealousy something spiritual and vaguely tremendous that thrust she away , and yet quell all her anger into self - humiliation . 

 there have be a long silence . Deronda have stand still , even thankful for an interval before he need to say more , and Gwendolen have sit like a statue with her wrist lie over each other and her eye fix the intensity of her mental action arrest all other excitation . at length something occur to she that make she turn her face to Deronda and say in a trembling voice 

 " be that all you can tell I ? " 

 the question be like a dart to he . " the Jew whom I mention just now , " he answer , not without a certain tremor in his tone too , " the remarkable man who have greatly influence my mind , have not perhaps be totally unheard of by you . he be the brother of Miss Lapidoth , whom you have often hear sing . " 

 a great wave of remembrance pass through Gwendolen and spread as a deep , painful flush over neck and face . it have come first at the scene of that morning when she have call on Mirah , and hear Deronda 's voice reading , and be tell , without then heed it , that he be read Hebrew with Mirah 's brother . 

 " he be very ill very near death now , " Deronda go on , nervously , and then stop short . he feel that he must wait . would she divine the rest ? 

 " do she tell you that I go to she ? " say Gwendolen , abruptly , look up at he . 

 " no , " say Deronda . " I do not   understand you . " 

 she turn away her eye again , and sit think . slowly the color dry out of face and neck , and she be as pale as before with that almost withered paleness which be see after a painful flush . at last she say without turn toward he in a low , measure voice , as if she be only think aloud in preparation for future speech 

 " but can you marry ? " 

 " yes , " say Deronda , also in a low voice . " I be go to marry . " 

 at first there be no change in Gwendolen 's attitude : she only begin to tremble visibly ; then she look before she with dilated eye , as at something lie in front of she , till she stretch her arm out straight , and cry with a smothered voice 

 " I say I should be forsake . I have be a cruel woman . and I be forsake . " 

 Deronda 's anguish be intolerable . he could not help himself . he seize her outstretche hand and hold they together , and kneel at her foot . she be the victim of his happiness . 

 " I be cruel , too , I be cruel , " he repeat , with a sort of groan , look up at she imploringly . 

 his presence and touch seem to dispel a horrible vision , and she meet his upward look of sorrow with something like the return of consciousness after faint . then she dwelt on it with that grow pathetic movement of the brow which accompany the revival of some tender recollection . the look of sorrow bring back what seem a very far - off moment the first time she have ever see it , in the library at the Abbey . Sobs rise , and great tear fall fast . Deronda would not let her hand go hold they still with one of his , and himself press her handkerchief against her eye . she submit like a half - soothe child , make an effort to speak , which be hinder by struggle sob . at last she succeed in say , brokenly 

 " I say I say it should be well well with I for have know you . " 

 his eye too be large with tear . she wrest one of her hand from his , and return his action , press his tear away . 

 " we shall not be quite part , " he say . " I will write to you always , when I can , and you will answer ? " 

 he wait till she say in a whisper , " I will try . " 

 " I shall be more with you than I use to be , " Deronda say with gentle urgency , release her hand and rise from his kneeling posture . " if we have be much together before , we should have feel our difference more , and seem to get far apart . now we can perhaps never see each other again . but our mind may get near . " 

 Gwendolen say nothing , but rise too , automatically . her withered look of grief , such as the sun often shin on when the blind be draw up after the burial of life 's joy , make he hate his own word : they seem to have the hardness of easy consolation in they . she feel that he be go , and that nothing could hinder it . the sense of it be like a dreadful whisper in her ear , which dull all other consciousness ; and she have not know that she be rise . 

 Deronda could not speak again . he think that they must part in silence , but it be difficult to move toward the parting , till she look at he with a sort of intention in her eye , which help he . he advance to put out his hand silently , and when she have place her within it , she say what her mind have be labor with 

 " you have be very good to I . I have deserve nothing . I will try try to live . I shall think of you . what good have I be ? only harm . do not   let I be harm to you . it shall be the well for I " 

 she could not finish . it be not that she be sob , but that the intense effort with which she speak make she too tremulous . the burden of that difficult rectitude toward he be a weight her frame totter under . 

 she bent forward to kiss his cheek , and he kiss her . then they look at each other for an instant with clasped hand , and he turn away . 

 when he be quite go , her mother come in and find she sit motionless . 

 " Gwendolen , dearest , you look very ill , " she say , bend over she and touch her cold hand . 

 " yes , mamma . but do not   be afraid . I be go to live , " say Gwendolen , burst out hysterically . 

 her mother persuade she to go to bed , and watch by she . through the day and half the night she fall continually into fit of shrieking , but cry in the midst of they to her mother , " do not   be afraid . I shall live . I mean to live . " 

 after all , she sleep ; and when she wake in the morning light , she look up fixedly at her mother and say tenderly , " ah , poor mamma ! you have be sit up with I . do not   be unhappy . I shall live . I shall be well . " 

 CHAPTER LXX . 

 in the checkered area of human experience the season be all mingle as in the golden age : fruit and blossom hang together ; in the same moment the sickle be reap and the seed be sprinkle ; one tend the green cluster and another tread the winepress . Nay , in each of our life harvest and spring - time be continually one , until himself gather we and sow we anew in his invisible field . 

 among the blessing of love there be hardly one more exquisite than the sense that in unite the beloved life to ours we can watch over its happiness , bring comfort where hardship be , and over memory of privation and suffering open the sweetest fountain of joy . Deronda 's love for Mirah be strongly imbue with that bless protectiveness . even with infantine foot she have begin to tread among thorn ; and the first time he have behold her face it have seem to he the girlish image of despair . 

 but now she be glow like a dark - tip yet delicate ivory - tint flower in the warm sunlight of content , think of any possible grief as part of that life with Deronda , which she could call by no other name than good . and he watch the sober gladness which give new beauty to her movement ; and her habitual attitude of repose , with a delight which make he say to himself that it be enough of personal joy for he to save she from pain . she know nothing of Hans 's struggle or of Gwendolen 's pang ; for after the assurance that Deronda 's hidden love have be for she , she easily explain Gwendolen 's eager solicitude about he as part of a grateful dependence on his goodness , such as she herself have know . and all Deronda 's word about Mrs. Grandcourt confirm that view of their relation , though he never touch on it except in the most distant manner . Mirah be ready to believe that he have be a rescue angel to many besides herself . the only wonder be , that she among they all be to have the bliss of be continually by his side . 

 so , when the bridal veil be around Mirah it hide no doubtful tremor only a thrill of awe at the acceptance of a great gift which require great us . and the velvet canopy never cover a more goodly bride and bridegroom , to whom their people might more wisely wish offspring ; more truthful lip never touch the sacrament marriage - wine ; the marriage - blessing never gather strong promise of fulfillment than in the integrity of their mutual pledge . naturally , they be marry accord to the jewish rite . and since no religion seem yet to have demand that when we make a feast we should invite only the high rank of our acquaintance , few , it be to be hop , will be offend to learn that among the guest at Deronda 's little wedding - feast be the entire Cohen family , with the one exception of the baby who carry on she teethe intelligently at home . how could Mordecai have bear that those friend of his adversity should have be shut out from rejoice in common with he ? 

 Mrs. Meyrick so fully understand this that she have quite reconcile herself to meet the jewish pawnbroker , and be there with her three daughter all of they enjoy the consciousness that Mirah 's marriage to Deronda crown a romance which would always make a sweet memory to they . for which of they , mother or girl , have not have a generous part in it give their good in feeling and in act to she who need ? if Hans could have be there , it would have be well ; but Mab have already observe that man must suffer for be so inconvenient ; suppose she , Kate , and Amy have all fall in love with Mr. Deronda ? but be woman they be not so ridiculous . 

 the Meyricks be reward for conquer their prejudice by hear a speech from Mr. Cohen , which have the rare quality among speech of not be quite after the usual pattern . Jacob eat beyond his year , and contribute several small whinnying laugh as a free accompaniment of his father 's speech , not irreverently , but from a lively sense that his family be distinguish itself ; while Adelaide Rebekah , in a new Sabbath frock , maintain throughout a grave air of responsibility . 

 Mordecai 's brilliant eye , sink in their large socket , dwelt on the scene with the cherish benignancy of a spirit already lift into an aloofness which nullify only selfish requirement and leave sympathy alive . but continually , after his gaze have be travel round on the other , it return to dwell on Deronda with a fresh gleam of trust affection . 

 the wedding - feast be humble , but Mirah be not without splendid wedding - gift . as soon as the betrothal have be know , there be friend who have entertain graceful device . Sir Hugo and Lady Mallinger have take trouble to provide a complete equipment for eastern travel , as well as a precious locket contain an inscription " to the bride of our dear Daniel Deronda all blessing . H. and L. M. " the Klesmers send a perfect watch , also with a pretty inscription . 

 but something more precious than gold and gem come to Deronda from the neighborhood of Diplow on the morning of his marriage . it be a letter contain these word : 

 do not think of I sorrowfully on your wedding - day . I have remember your word that I may live to be one of the good of woman , who make other glad that they be bear . I do not yet see how that can be , but you know well than i. if it ever come true , it will be because you help I . I only think of myself , and I make you grieve . it hurt I now to think of your grief . you must not grieve any more for I . it be well it shall be well with I because I have know you . 

 GWENDOLEN grandcourt . 

 the preparation for the departure of all three to the East begin at once ; for Deronda could not deny Ezra 's wish that they should set out on the voyage forthwith , so that he might go with they , instead of detain they to watch over he . he have no belief that Ezra 's life would last through the voyage , for there be symptom which seem to show that the last stage of his malady have set in . but Ezra himself have say , " never mind where I die , so that I be with you . " 

 he do not set out with they . one morning early he say to Deronda , " do not quit I to - day . I shall die before it be end . " 

 he choose to be dress and sit up in his easy chair as usual , Deronda and Mirah on each side of he , and for some hour he be unusually silent , not even make the effort to speak , but look at they occasionally with eye full of some restful meaning , as if to assure they that while this remnant of breathing - time be difficult , he feel an ocean of peace beneath he . 

 it be not till late in the afternoon , when the light be fall , that he take a hand of each in his and say , look at Deronda , " death be come to I as the divine kiss which be both parting and reunion which take I from your bodily eye and give I full presence in your soul . where thou goest , Daniel , I shall go . be it not begin ? have I not breathe my soul into you ? we shall live together . " 

 he pause , and Deronda wait , think that there might be another word for he . but slowly and with effort Ezra , press on their hand , raise himself and utter in Hebrew the confession of the divine Unity , which long for generation have be on the lip of the die Israelite . 

 he sink back gently into his chair , and do not speak again . but it be some hour before he have cease to breathe , with Mirah 's and Deronda 's arm around he . 

  " nothing be here for tear , nothing to wail 
  or knock the breast ; no weakness , no contempt , 
  Dispraise or blame ; nothing but well and fair , 
  and what may quiet we in a death so noble . " 
